Story_ID: 69850
Speaker 1: I'm ready.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright. I'm Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  And sir, would--could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm Floyd, that's F-L-O-Y-D, the middle initial is "D" and that stands for Dean, D-E-A-N, and the last name is Powell, P-O-W-E-L-L.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what is your date of birth?
Speaker 1: My date of birth is 10/28/46 [October 28, 1946].
Speaker 2: And where you born?
Speaker 1: I was born in Crescent, C-R-E-S-C-E-N-T, Oklahoma.
Speaker 2: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 1: My present occupation, I am a manager for the Boeing Company, and I manage what's called medical health services.
Speaker 2: Okay, and your, your past occupation?
Speaker 1: My past occupation actually, I am a retired chief of police for the city of Wichita [Kansas].  And some folks would say that I was the first African American who served as a chief of the city of Wichita.
Speaker 2: And what is today's date?
Speaker 1: Today's date (laughter) is August the 27th, 2002.
Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: Here presently in Wichita, Kansas, at my address, 1315 N. Charlotte, Wichita, Kansas.
Story_ID: 69851
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we get into depth, there are five "People" magazine-ish-type questions I am compelled to ask you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Actually, my favorite food it happens to be at the present time is steak, and of course this is the beef country (laughter), and you need beef.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Basically all year.  My favorite time, obviously, springtime, summertime--like to travel.  Since retiring, that's been real rewarding, and I just kind of travel and see the United States.
Speaker 1: And what's your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I have several of them (laughter), actually, throughout the Midwest and just about--just about any place.  Basically, where there is a gambling casino that's called Harrah's, that's where I (laughter) like to travel, from the Las Vegas [Nevada] to Louisiana, to Minneapolis [Minnesota], to St. Louis [Missouri], to you [Chicago, Illinois], to, to Kansas City [Kansas], to Topeka, Kansas.
Speaker 1: Where there's Harrah's and where-
Speaker 2: Harrah's, yes.
Speaker 1: Did--do you have a favorite phrase or a saying?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I have a favorite phrase or saying, but it's kind of like maybe I treat people the way you wanna be treated.  I, I, I think that has probably followed me because if you do that, they're reciprocate in a very nice way.
Story_ID: 69852
Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us--please give us the names of your parents and dates of birth?  And spell their names for us.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if (laughter)--(unclear) date of birth 'cause I don't have that thing with.  But my dad's name is, is Leslie, L-E-S-L-I-E, L. Powell, P-O-W-E-L-L; that's my dad.  And my mom is, is deceased, and her name was Mattie, that's M-A-T-T-I-E, and it's Mattie Joe; that's J-O-E.  And her date of birth actually is 9/15/24 [September 15, 1924].  And let me go back and tell you that Leslie is--date of birth is 3/26/23 [March 3, 1923].
Speaker 1: Okay, now-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: (Unclear) We were-
Speaker 1: We just finished the parents.
Speaker 2: Yes, okay, now, I did--where was your father born?
Speaker 1: My father was actually born in Tatums, Oklahoma, which was one of the smaller black towns that--where they--people migrated actually up from the Southern parts into Oklahoma during the Gold Rush and you know, run for the, the land, and, and he ended up in Tatums, Oklahoma.
Speaker 2: And your mother?
Speaker 1: My mother was actually born in Tyler, Texas.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 69853
Speaker 1: All right, now did, did your parents pass down stories to you or did your grandparents pass down stories about your ancestors and what they were doing in the--during the slavery period or during Reconstruction and, and this migration?  You know, we're out in the West, and there's probably a story about how they migrated out here.
Speaker 2: Actually, they--my dad doesn't really remember a lot.  And the reason that he didn't--and I'll just kind of tell you the brief story is that his mother was actually--and I'll go back--her name was Savannah.  And Savannah was actually born in, in Wynnewood, Oklahoma (laughter), which is (unclear)--the Oklahoma connection.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: W-H-I-N-N-E-Y (sic)--Wynnewood, Oklahoma, still exists.  But how they came to be there was that her mother, Savannah's mother, was a, a Choctaw Indian.  And her husband actually kidnapped her from the reservation and so and brought her from the reservation to the land rush in Oklahoma.  So, and subsequently, my father was born, but he does not remember all what happened, so I guess they really didn't really, really talk about what all happened-
Speaker 1: Now that's an in-
Speaker 2: --with all of that.
Speaker 1: That's an interesting story now.  I mean, he may not remember all the details.  But his, his mother was a Choctaw Indian.  His father was black?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: His, his--I mean let me, let me back up.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: My dad's mother's mother-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) mother, okay--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Okay, was Choctaw Indian, and she was the one that was kidnapped from the reservation and, and then subsequently migrated into Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay, but her kidnapper I suppose-
Speaker 2: Was black, that's correct.
Speaker 1: Was a black person, but is that person related to you?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I don't remember exactly what his name was.  It's--and dad's kind of real--you try to get him to talk about it, but he's kind of vague.  And, and when you really pin him down, he says well, I just really don't know what all, you know, what all transpired.
Speaker 1: Oklahoma Land Rush, that's around the turn of the century, 19--(unclear) [sic, 1889]-
Speaker 2: Yes, down, down through those things.  And, and then subsequently they went on and ended up in Crescent [Oklahoma] (laughter)--(unclear) when went to Crescent [Oklahoma], and from Crescent to Wichita [Kansas].  That's how dad ended up here.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now which, which parent was born in an all-black town?  Which one was that?
Speaker 2: My dad, Tatums.
Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: In Tatums.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Tatums and, and basically they lived in the, the country in the wooded area and things like that.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)-
Speaker 2: And so, and you, and you found most of 'em really didn't live in the city.  A lot of folks would say they lived in the city, but they actually lived in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay, but that's the closest-
Speaker 2: Yes, and that's how the equated it as such.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--whatever--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: --city-
Speaker 2: That's true, that's true.
Story_ID: 69854
Speaker 1: Okay, now your mother's from Tyler, Texas?
Speaker 2: Tyler, Texas is--and that's where her mother was Ethel Mae Taylor, which was actually--that was her before--that was her name before she passed, but she's actually a Jordon, which would be a relationship to the Barbara Jordan.  And that would be the connection down through that, that ranks.  And, and her name was Ethel, Ethel Taylor, and her maiden name was Ethel Jordan.  And she subsequently passed away also.  And actually, my mother in Crescent was raised by her grandparents because her mother obviously had some things and issues that she wanted to deal with.  And so actually my mother was raised by her grandparents.
Speaker 1: In Tyler [Texas]?
Speaker 2: In, in Crescent [Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: In Crescent [Oklahoma], okay.
Speaker 2: In Crescent [Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: In Crescent [Oklahoma].  In Crescent, was, was raised by the Greens, John and Addie (ph.) Green in, in Crescent, Oklahoma.  And there were, there were two sisters, my mother and her sister; there was two girls.  And they were raised by the grandparents there in Crescent, Oklahoma.  And, and then my dad met my mother in Crescent [Oklahoma], went on, you know, to the service, and fought in the war, and all those things, and, and came back, worked in, in Crescent [Oklahoma] (laughter).  And, and then as the Boeing Company started to hire and things then subsequently moved to Wichita [Kansas].  And there are, there are--actually, there were four children.  There was an older sister that was deceased and lived about, oh, six months, died from pneumonia, which was Ethel Lavonne (ph.).  And she contracted pneumonia because mom and dad were trying to come back and forth on the train to Wichita [Kansas].  And then there's an older brother who lives in Kokomo, Indinana--Indiana; his name is George, and he's three years older than I am.  And then I have a younger sister who lives in Mansfield, Texas, and her name is Betty Joe; that's J-O-E, and she lives in Mansfield, Texas.  So I'm kind of the middle person of, of the family, as such.
Story_ID: 69855
Speaker 1: Now how did your parents meet?  Did they have a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: I'm not real sure how they have story of how they met.  Mom was the local pianist that, you know, that, that, that played at the Methodist church.  And the grandparents kind of treated him like the, the son when he came a courting, and, and kind of took him in and showed (laughter)--showed him all the ropes and treated him like a son.  And so they, you know, subsequently fell in love and got married.  His dad was killed at an early age.  His dad was an--and, and after--not really being able to, I guess, find the jobs there in the small towns, he came on to, came on to Wichita [Kansas].  But I was just talking to him the other day, and he says, "I want you to remember how you got your name, Floyd" (laugher).  And I, I thought, "Well, wasn't it because you just named me that?"  And he said no.  He said, actually I was named after a, a white man in Crescent [Oklahoma], and his name was Floyd Yeaser.  And Floyd Yeaser was a businessman; he, he was a politician; he owned the local funeral home, hardware store.  And, and dad said, why I want you--call you Floyd because he was a successful, and everybody liked him.  And so, therefore, you should be able to be successful, and I'm gonna name you Floyd (laughter).
Speaker 1: How do you spell Yancey [sic]?
Speaker 2: I believe it's Y-E-A-S-E-R, Yeaser.  It was in a funeral home, and he was the politician for that at (unclear) and just about every--everything.  He, he basically was quite prominent in, in, in, in Crescent [Oklahoma].  And so (laughter) that's how--that's--I thought he had named me after the doctor, because he used to say, well, you're, you're a blue baby--what they call a blue baby--which meant that you had some heart problems.  And he said, so I used to get up in the rain, and I didn't have a car, and I would walk to the edge of town.  And there was a doctor called Dr. Hess.  And he would say, "Dr. Hess, I need you to come down to the house."  And doctors made house calls then (laughter).  And he would sit around and wait, and then they would come down and see what the problem was.  And, and of course, he said well, you eventually will grow out of it.  And so that's (laughter) a little bit about Crescent [Oklahoma] (Laughing).
Story_ID: 69856
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I, I want you to reflect back and think about some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up in--in fact we haven't established where.  Did you grow up in Oklahoma or did you grow up in Wichita [Kansas]?
Speaker 2: Actually, I grew up in Wichita [Kansas] and actually came into Wichita--I remember a little about--a little bit about the small town atmosphere of where we lived at, which was really with my mom's grandparents who raised her, because they became ill and she kind of moved in and took care of 'em and those kind of things.  But, you know, you had a sandy dirt road that wasn't paved in the town there too.  But it was one of the better houses because you had a couple of the teachers and things like that that lived there, and, and the plot of land.  You'd see the red brick schoolhouse, the black school.  And, and we had like a couple of peach trees and things that was connected right onto the school grounds.  And there was a favorite instrument that we liked to go out ride.  It was called a "Johnny Strike".
Speaker 1: What, what is a-
Speaker 2: The "Johnny Strike".
Speaker 1: --Johnny Strike?
Speaker 2: The "Johnny Strike".  And actually what that is was just a pole and it had two chains that came down and had a bar on it.  And basically you would just run and grab a hold of it and swing, kind of like-
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--riding pole?
Speaker 2: --and swing around the pole.  They would spin you around.  And we would get out there and play on the "Johnny Strike" (laughter).  And so that was, that was kind of what we liked.  And then it had that small town atmosphere.  It had a ballpark, and they would have Sunday afternoon games.  And dad was a big baseball player he thought.  And he would get out there and they would have those, those baseball games until he actually was hit by a pitch and injured, and he had to stop playing baseball.  So, we'd have that small town atmosphere.  But we then subsequently went on and moved into, to Wichita [Kansas].  And-
Speaker 1: When, when did you all move--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: About, about '52' [1952], about 1952.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and, and what age were you then?
Speaker 2: Oh, first grade, some--which would be five, six years old, a bit of that one--and actually went to, to Wichita School [Black Traditional Magnet Elementary School].  And I, I can't remember what the name of (laughter) it is right off the top of my head, but it was--dad was able to get some, some housing.  And, like I said, I was built like base housing.  And, and dad had been trying to get us to move up her, and he, he couldn't get any housing.  And so he said one day he was asking a woman-"Well, I've been on the list for a long time, and I need to get my family up here?  And how come I can't get my family up here?"  And he'd gone over there with a white guy.  The white guy demanded to know what was wrong, and how come he couldn't get on the list, and how come he couldn't get his family in there.  And then of course subsequently after that intervention, he, he got on the list, and we got a home, and we moved into what was called Plainview [Wichita, Kansas].  And, and then from--and then we went to the little elementary there in, in Plainview.  And there were a lot of, lot of blacks through that particular area of, of Plainview, which was like little apartment, for lack of a better term.  And, and then from, from there, we really moved up what's called Northeast.  And Northeast was basically where most of the blacks started to conjugate, and then that's when you started to have the "white flight" from those areas as soon as blacks moved in.  And then that's when you had the blockbusting, and the redlining and all of those things that went on as blacks started to get a little financial and started moving into the particular areas of Wichita [Kansas].
Story_ID: 69857
Speaker 1: Now what, what kind of a little boy were you, and what were you interested in, and what kind of things did you see going on around you?
Speaker 2: Actually, I was quiet (laughter), that's what they tell me--actually, not necessarily a loner, but, but basically quiet; didn't have a lot of friends; didn't, didn't go out a lot; like to play different games in the house and do those kinds things, so really not a lot of things other than ride your bike and do the kind of things that normal, I suppose, kids do--but never probably have thought about what you wanted to be and things like that-- used to see the, the ambulances and stuff go up and down the streets, used to scare me a little bit when I was small.  Because see, at that time, you didn't have municipal ambulances and things that--and, and you would see those kind of things happen like in Plainview [Wichita, Kansas] or anywhere else because you had the mortuary.  Well, if you needed an ambulance, you had to call the black ambulance.  So the black ambulance came from the mortuary if you needed something (laughter).  And so you'd-
Speaker 1: That sounds a little ominous--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yeah, so you would see those kind of things, and then things go on, and go, gee, it's scary out there.  But that was in my younger days.  And then we moved up, what we call Northeast, Wichita [Kansas], and went kind of to an integrated school, which was called W. H. Isley [now Isley Traditional Magnet Elementary School] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they had a--had some black teachers there, and I really started to think about education, even at that age for those grades and stuff.  But, well, you knew you really needed to think about making good grades and maybe start studying a little bit, but basically run-of-the-mill kind things, didn't, didn't really do a whole lot, wasn't--I can put it this way, wasn't a bad kid, didn't get a lot of spankings or whippings or whatever else.  My brother always got blamed for that.
Speaker 1: Did, did you like sports, or music, or books, or anything?
Speaker 2: Not particularly (laughter), not particularly.  I, you know, I guess really--I, I, I decided that when from, from elementary and you got into the first year, which was junior high, like the seventh grade, and I got some bad grades, and I got to looking around and I'm going, all these kids got these good grades, and I wanna be able to flash my grades around too--(unclear)--else.  And I said I'd better figure out what I can do to start studying because you could see the benefits of getting a better grade.  And so I'm going, well, you know, it's time for me to start thinking about this a little bit and start applying myself because I, I, I, I just didn't like that.  But I didn't see that as much prior to that, and I guess I saw it more because I elected to go to an integrated school as opposed to the all-black intermediate school.  And I-
Speaker 1: How did you elect to, to, to do that?
Speaker 2: I had my choice.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And I'm going, well, you know, I'm not the greatest guy in sports.  I might be a little bit of good at whatever else, but if I go to the other school, you--maybe I'll have a better chance.  Because I knew there were a lot of black folks who were playing sports and their grades was terrible, but they was getting the--and they was--and you--they was fairly rowdy and you'd (laughter)--(unclear)--and whatever else.  Well, they were getting all the chances, and I'm going, you know, I don't got any chances to, to make the team.  And, and, and I'm going, well, maybe I'll have a better chance, and maybe the education might be slightly different.  So I was on the border, so I said no, I'm gonna go to Roosevelt [Junior High School, Wichita, Kansas].  And so moving into Roosevelt, I guess I kind of start looking at the grades and started looking at what was going around.
Speaker 1: Now, before we get that far-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --wait (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Let's go back to grade school for a minute.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Did you have any particular teachers or mentors in grade school that stand out?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess there might have been one, and he's, he's still here, Billy [Q.] McCray.  And they were ma--McCray brothers; it was two of 'em, and they, they taught. And, and he would try to show you, you know, some things and talk to you about education, tell you what you needed to go do.  Well, Billy [Q.] McCray and his brother and them got in--subsequently got into politics and things later on, and he became one of our state senators and things like that.  So that was a person, the, the McCrays, that I remember as one of the, the folks that I guess they had a, had a bearing on, on education and some of the thoughts, listening to them.
Story_ID: 69858
Speaker 1: Yeah, in, in high school, what kind of activities were you involved in as you--as I said, you, you weren't in sports; you didn't play an instrument or anything, but (unclear) involved--what, what, what was your social life like in high school?  Did you have (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Well, I had a better one in junior high.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because see, they, they--now the ninth graders now are associated with high school, where it used to be sixth, seventh, and eighth.  And then, and then you'd, you'd go onto--it, it made a difference--I'm sorry--it would be seventh, eight, and ninth.  In sixth grade, it was still in elementary, so they've kind of changed it.  But at Roosevelt [Junior High School, Wichita, Kansas], you know, I thought I could sing (laughter), but they didn't let me sing any solos so I figured my voice wasn't that good.  And then we used to play flag football.  And I'm going, I'm pretty good at this.  And the coach said, "You're pretty good.  You ought--when you get to high school you ought to go out for football."  And, and I'm going, hmm, that's not too bad, but I sure don't like to get hit (laughter).  And actually I found my calling; it turned out to be track and a little bit of basketball.  I did get to play basketball, wasn't prolific scorer or anything, but it was--what they were looking for was a ball handler, a team person to let somebody else take the shots.  And so, so there always was a good rivalry because we'd go over and play Mathewson [Junior High School, Wichita, Kansas].  Well, I was playing first string.  And, and, and even thought they beat us and they laughed at us and whatever else, but I certainly enjoyed it, and it was different.  But--and I'm going, you know, the academics here has got to be different than the academics I'm in.  And I said I'm looking for academics because I just knew that some of those folks were not getting (laughter) their academics.  And they were just--I guess they--I just looked at it as though they were just, just playing anybody, didn't make any difference.  As long as they had the skills they could just get up there and play, and they didn't really have to worry about a lot of academics.  Now, I could have been wrong.  That was just my perception.  But, but basically my calling happened to be track and so for junior high, every year I lettered in track.  Track and field was my forte.  I ran the 100-yard dash, the 220, and the 440 relays.  And we always had to compete against Mathewson [Junior High School, Wichita, Kansas] (laugher), but we could beat 'em every now and then and I could--on an individual sport.  So, I really loved that, had a good coach, taught me a few things, and really enjoyed it; so, it, it, it turned out to be track.  And then we moved on into the East High School from the junior high.  That's basically what we did at junior high.  We didn't, didn't do a lot, didn't have a car, walked, walked unless you could get a ride with your brother--used to have a bus you could get on to ride down to--you know, could get down to ride to the school--went on to junior high and was a four-year letterman at East High School [Wichita, Kansas], all in track and field; ran against--what's our state senator [sic, Kansas State Representative] now?--Jim Ryun--we were on the same team, ran some of the same races.  And you know, that was a time that we had Bob Timmons, who subsequently went on to KU [Kansas University] and had big track and Jim Ryun breaking the, the "Miracle Mile" and all of those things.  Well, Jim [Ryun] and I were track buddies.  We were track friends and we ran-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: --those things.
Speaker 1: --famous Jim Ryun that ran in the [1968] Olympics.
Speaker 2: That's the famous--that's correct.  That's the Jim Ryun at East High School [Wichita, Kansas].  Matter of fact, on a given day I could beat him on a quarter mile before he caught to you.  So I watched all of those things as they progressed before he actually had a shot at going to that and, and the things he used to do in some of the relays.  But stand out--I thought that was my ticket rather than basketball to getting a scholarship if I wanted to get a scholarship in sports.  And, and, and I thought that was my ticket, and it turned out to be my ticket.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I didn't put my faith in the footballs and whatever.  I put it in my individual endurance, and what I thought I could do, and what I was willing to work for, and how much I was willing to give on that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now we have to change tape right here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 70190
Speaker 1: All right, now-
Speaker 2: Talking about high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and who--you had a mentor or, or-
Speaker 2: Wasn't a mentor-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: --but someone that sticks out in my mind and that had an impression upon me.  Actually it was the English teacher.  Her name was Jeanne Ponds.  And she taught at East High School [Wichita, Kansas] for many of years, and I took an English course under her and you know, learned the things about English.  And, and she's the one that sticks out in my mind the most of--I enjoyed that and, and what she had to say, and it kind of stuck with me in, in terms of, of, of English course, and that was her.
Speaker 1: Can you remember anything specific that she, that, that she did with you?
Speaker 2: No, it was just how you use sentences, and how you speak, and pronunciations, and things like that.  And so you find later on what is the correct English.  'Cause you know, you used to, or you hear it, back in the past years when we got Ebonics and things like that.  Well, oh, not with her; you spoke to her right English--and this is how you pronounce it, and this is how you write these sentences.  And so I remember those kind of things (laughter).
Story_ID: 70191
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when, when you were on the verge of graduating from high school, what did you envision yourself doing as an adult?
Speaker 2: I didn't (laughter), just a young kid that started working when I was sixteen--(unclear)--so I worked.  Every summer I worked at the (unclear) Crest Company downtown, Douglas and Broadway [Wichita, Kansas], to earn money and have money in my pockets.  And so, you know, I learned to work early, been working since I was sixteen--didn't really envision what I really wanted to do, but because of track, I received a scholarship from Wichita State University [Kansas] for track and field.  And so that's why I ended up at Wichita State University in track and field--wasn't the greatest, but got a scholarship there, did some from them, for Wichita State [University, Kansas], and subsequently, you know, took the classes, decided that I, I wanted to be a party animal I guess (laughter), so joined the Kappa [Alpha Psi] Fraternity.  And of course you know they could, they could ruin you sometimes too, so it became I became one of them party animals too (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so was there a significant group of black students on campus?  I, I, I guess it had to be to have the Kappa [Alpha Psi]'s there.
Speaker 2: There was a small segment of, of blacks there of course.  You know, like all campuses, the--we try to make sure you went to class.  But you could go to the recreation center, and the blacks would be in one corner, and they'd be over there playing bid whist and (laughter) "tonk" when you need to go to class.  So, that's how actually--I, I actually disassociated the lot of myself from the community to go on for further education.  Really that's what it really amounted to.  And you know, some folks went off to school; some folks didn't, so I just chose something local.  It was a good university.
Speaker 1: Did you stay at home when you went to Wichita State [University, Kansas]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I stayed at home at Wichita State [University, Kansas] and kind of stuck around here.  And mom and dad divorced, and--young--kind of went on my own until I subsequently fell in love, got married young, all those kind of things.
Speaker 1: And did you meet your wife at--in school?
Speaker 2: That's a funny story.  Should I tell you a story how I met my wife?  I actually had a good friend, name was Leo Hawkins, and Leo was from Crescent [Oklahoma] too (laughter).  His family was a big family.  When we were in junior high school, Roosevelt [Junior High School, Wichita, Kansas], played on the same team.  Larry and Leo Hawkins, well, they had a paper route.  And so I used to like to tag along--paper route--'cause paperboys would come--go to your door and collect the money, you know.  And so actually I actually started meeting my wife, who's slightly--three years younger than I am, not a whole lot, three years.  She would come to the door when we came to collect.  And so, so I said, I remember her (laughter).  Subsequently, I married her, but I was--I said, well, I was your paperboy.  I really wasn't.  I was just tagging along.  And later on we started dating eventually, and we used to know each other.  And her older sister--I knew her older sister and everything.  But subsequently I was her paperboy (laughter).  So I like to tell that story.  I was your paperboy; we fell in love; and we've been married for over thirty years (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Story_ID: 70192
Speaker 1: So, now, you joined the police department in 1968.  Now had, had you finished school at this point or?
Speaker 2: No, I had not, no, had not finished school--had been going to school, like sort of taking my time.  I, I decided that I wanted to go to Friends University [Wichita, Kansas] and pla--and run some track and football for them.  So I transferred over to Friends University [Kansas] and was gonna be a teacher.  And then-
Speaker 1: That's--(unclear) education department
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was gonna--yeah, I was gonna be a teacher.  I'm taking all those courses, enjoying it, and gon' be a teacher.  Well, decided that was gonna get on the, the police department.  Well, there were, there were a couple of reasons why I decided to get on the [Wichita, Kansas] Police Department.  And one was that in '66' [1966], I was working for the Boeing Company, and Boeing Company was the military company here.  And they were starting to lay off.  And there were three friends--that we were all friends, and we partied together.  And one was my wife's sister's husband, and he's no longer--and he went on to be a, an attorney up in Minneapolis [Minnesota].  But there were the two Mitchell boys, and they were going--they had just joined the police department-"Well, why don't you come join the police department?  They're recruiting and it's--and you know, it's four of us, and we can all be together, and we can make a difference, and it's, it's, it's a good thing, and so why don't you come and join?"  So between that, Boeing [Company] deciding to lay off, and I'm going, "Well, maybe that's not too bad.  If you guys are there, maybe it's worth going on the police department."  I'm not sure, but got talked into it.  And so I had to move back from Friends University [Kansas] to Wichita State [University, Kansas] because they didn't have what was called police science.  And then it was along toward the war era, Vietnam era, and everybody was getting shipped to Vietnam on top of that.  Well, I'm going, but if you're a policeman, or a you're fa--fireman, or agricultural, you get a deferment.  So if your number comes up, you get to stay at home.  (Unclear)--well, that's something to think about.  But the other thing that also led to this was--is that if you became a police officer during the course of that, and you graduated, and you stayed on the police department, you got a free education.  The government paid for it.  And so my education subsequently was paid by the government because I stayed on, and they paid all the bills.  And so you're seeing that again in today's life, is that they're trying to recruit folks to come on these police departments and those kind of incentives, and for me it as a very good incentive, because it paid for my education.  But I, I got on there because we were friends.  There were very few friends, and we happened to be friends, and we'd happened to have some of the parties.  My house was prolific for having parties (laughter).  Mom let us have parties, but you'd have to have an invitation to get in.  Everybody knew us (laughter).  But you couldn't get in our house unless you had an invitation, and we turned lots of folks away.  And, and so we were, we were fairly known (laughter) throughout the community, but they knew buddy was strict and you would--and everybody was res--respectful, things like that so.  But that's how I came to be on the police department: they talked me into it; Boeing was laying off; I thought it was something that I could make a career out of; and then subsequently it paid for my education.
Story_ID: 70193
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did you--what was the, the reputation of the Wichita Police Department [Kansas] when you joined, and what were your expectations, and--well, in, in, in, in, in, in a larger sense, how did you view the relationship between the police department and the black community?
Speaker 2: Oh, it wasn't good.  They were, they were recruiting.  They really wanted to have some blacks.  And then they used to have to do it like a one-on-one situation.  And, and one of the Mitchell boys was there, and they were--(unclear)--not the value of it.  And I had never thought that I would stay that long.  I wanted to be an attorney, but the situation was, was such I felt like with friends there it, would, would be okay.  Mom didn't want me to go-"What do you want a son on the police department for?  What do you want--it's dangerous and all those kind of things.  Why do you really wanna go do that?"  But I needed a job on top of that, and I wasn't very good working with my hands.  (Laughter) So I decided okay, I'll give it a try.  And--but early on, I, you know, (unclear)--I--but I learned how to just watch and keep my mouth shut until--and I'm going, you watch, listen, learn, keep your mouth shut when--if you move up through the ranks or things, then you can extol some of your virtues and values within that into the officers as you move through that.  So, you always knew you had to, you know--you'd, you, you could probably see some things you didn't approve of, but sometimes you could intervene, to an extent, and you could make a difference.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you could make a difference.
Speaker 1: Studies have shown that--I guess they--there, there's a 90--what do they call it?--the 95--5-95 [five ninety-five five] Theory.  You ever heard, heard of that, where they-
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: They say it's, it's a police management--some study that the Justice Department did.  They said it's five percent of cops that never do wrong and ninety percent will do what, when there--what their partner's doing (laughter).  The other five percent will never do right, that they always do something or they're always involved with some, some nefarious activity, you know.  But the, the ninety percent in the middle is kind of, you know, just kind of shift back and forth, you know.  But what, what were your experiences in the department I guess in terms of that kind of thing?  Did you see a lot of things that are wrong that you--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: I, I, I saw some--I, I saw some abuse.  You know, early on, starting, you know, I'd--it was kind of hard to take, but you know, you, you saw those kind of things, and you go, I, I don't know why they would hire somebody like that 'cause they're gonna get their just due.  Or they would push somebody with a shotgun, 'cause you used to be able to, you know, grab a shotgun out real quick and you could go there.  But then you could see that if you were there, especially if they were messing with a minority 'cause that's the only areas you rode, is that maybe they wasn't as hard on 'em.  But they expected you to be not laid back; they expected you to join in and be aggressive and, and those kind of things.  And I, I worked a lot of third shift and I learned how to--learned how to drink coffee, black, didn't eat the donuts (laughter), but learned how to, to drink the coffee, learned how to listen to country music, learned how to do all those kind of things and be appreciative of them, learned how to--you know, we were checking buildings, learned how to drive fast (laughter), learned how to take naps and stay up and do all those kind of things that went on, but yet to--I knew my place at that point in time, whether I was with somebody black or white, that I knew what was expected of me and what not to breach and not to--or, or where to go to in terms of certain things.
Story_ID: 70194
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you were rookie, how, how was the tra--training?  How were you treated in training?
Speaker 2: I was treated fair--was, was treated well because you could--because you still had to be able to write the reports and do the things.  And, and there was only like six people in my class, and all those people are gone.  And so when you look at my class, I'm the only one left.  In my class there was only like six of us.  But we had very good instructors, taught me well in terms of those things, so.  They always did, and they still do--had always done backgrounds on you, so they knew from whence you came and what your family did.  And you know, they'd done a real good background you, so they knew what to expect from, from us and--or from me.  They, they knew what kind of level of family I was from and what dad did, and all those kind of things and what to kind of expect.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did, did anything happen that you remember really, any, any incident, or any challenge, or, or any, any victory that you can talk about when you were a, a rookie cop?
Speaker 2: Oh, a rookie cop.  Oh, well, you know, I just--I saw Wichita [Kansas] do a lot of changes, and I just watched it change from, from just overnight century kind of stuff to where the black neighborhoods were that, that don't exist anymore.  But we had--but I ended up working for a couple of good police chiefs, in that they were trying to do some things in the city.  And so it really led to some opportunities to try to do some things and pretty much gave me a free hand at doing a lot of different kind of things.  But I didn't do anything that was demeaning.  I didn't--did not do undercover work, was from Wichita [Kansas] and one of the things that blacks used to say, "You're not gonna recruit me from the city of Wichita [Kansas] and make me a narcotics," because we just refuse to do those kind of things.  And so-
Speaker 1: Dangerous--(unclear)-
Speaker 2: They were dangerous, you know, when you knew everybody.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And why would you go and get us to put us into those kind of roles and what--nope, absolutely not gonna do that.  So that was one of the first things.  We would always say, "Nope, not gonna go do those kind of things."  But they had--you know, they were all the little--everybody learned how to play jokes and do the, do the things, but we all came together and did what was necessary until I decided that I wasn't gonna stay on the street very long.  I then started to has--aspirations that, hey, I don't wanna be a street cop all the time.  I wanna go do what other folks are doing.  I wanna be able to, to make an imprint upon the police department to do those kind of things, and so, most blacks were not doing that.
Speaker 1: Well--
Story_ID: 70195
Speaker 1: --Were there very many college educated police officers then?
Speaker 2: No, there weren't.  They were starting to go--we would get off from third shift, and we'd go up to the university during those, those times.  And you'd--there'd be several of us in different kind of classes, taking those classes because the government was paying for it to say that we got the educations.  And so were really starting to get those kind of degrees and stuff.  We were working toward 'em, taking those kind of classes and things and really trying to--trying, trying to do those things.  But I noticed--and then the, the, the people that I came on with and my friends, they all left.  So there really wasn't anyone there--a couple, a couple of older folks that really had gone to the top of where they could based on the constraints and stuff that was put on, based upon their education, based upon how people had saw them come to the police department, of where they thought their level was.  And I said I don't want to be stigmatized or labeled in a certain kind of way because I could be better.  I'm gonna get an education.  And the second thing I'm gonna do is I'm gonna sit for these [promotional] tests.  And I noticed the--there was nobody that would sit for the tests.  And I'm going, "Why don't you guys sit for the tests?"  And they wouldn't sit for the--well, you know, "Tests, I'm not gonna do that," or "I don't have enough education yet to go sit for the promotional exams," and things like that.  And so that used to be really troubling.  That used to be one of the big things that I, that I used to say is that, that the, the minorities would not go sit for the tests.  And they had every excuse in the world not to go sit for the tests or they wanted to be handed something that was maybe softer, cushier without going through all the (laughter), the heartburn to go do it.  And so that's, that's something I guess you could sit and debate with some of 'em, but I noticed that they didn't really do that.  Subsequently, they, some of 'em eventually did, but early on, you couldn't get people to sit for tests and, and so there was never anybody to be promoted because nobody ever sat for the tests.  And it was really troubling to me about that.
Speaker 1: Were they discouraged in any way you think?
Speaker 2: I think maybe they were discouraged-
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: I just--I, I, I just didn't understand why they wouldn't go sit for the tests or they wouldn't go ahead and pursue the education.  And a lot of 'em pursued it, but they never got their degrees in police science basically, most of 'em.  But they just, they just stopped from going, you know--why?  I don't, I don't know why.  But it was, it was an interesting time.
Story_ID: 70196
Speaker 1: And so then I became a recruiter, and I used to do taxicabs.  And, and I said, "But I'm going to be a person that treat you fair, part of the group, and you're gonna give me some respect," and, and they did.  And while there were some officers they laugh at--they were minorities--and I said you're not gonna put me in those kind of categories, because there were officers, right, wrong, or indifferent--black officers--that were not really given the respect or due that really should been have given, or they said, well, you know, they're gruff or rough and that's as far as they need to go.  Then so, so as we progressed through that, then I'm going okay, now I can speak a little bit more.  'Cause I've got this rank, now I can speak a little bit more.  I've got this rank card.  You're willing to listen to what I've gotta say.  So as we move to some of those ranks, and so I thought that-
Speaker 2: Can-
Speaker 1: --was pretty good.
Speaker 2: Can you kind of move as chronologically through the, the, I guess your ascendency I guess?
Speaker 1: Oh, sure.  Well, I mean you, you gotta start as a rookie patrolman.  So we started as a patrolman, and then from that--we didn't have corporals and things, so I actually went to sergeant.  And from sergeant, they-
Speaker 2: What (unclear) is that?  I mean let's try to get some dates here.
Speaker 1: Oh, geez, I was just (laughter)--I, I, you know, I really hadn't put it in chronologic--it's been so many different things.  But we--you know, we started in '68' [1968].  I was probably on the streets for three and a half years.  In three and a half years I, I was off the streets.  I've gone to training section to do some recruiting, so you're figuring that was three years and stayed at sergeant.  And then, then they had detectives, and I said, "Well, I'm gonna be a detective," 'cause--so from sergeant thru a couple years there and went into--and I don't have 'em chronologically; I guess I really hadn't put 'em out.  But from sergeant we went to detective.  And in the detective section they had everything from--they had it in bureau, so you had like the larceny bureau, the auto theft bureau, the fraud bureau, the checks bureau, the pawn shop, and all those kind of things.  And, and--
Speaker 2: And what bureau did you end up in?
Speaker 1: I did larcenies, and I ended up doing robberies, and---But see, they didn't--
Story_ID: 70197
Speaker 1: --But, but blacks weren't assigned to it--didn't go to detective section; they weren't in the detective section.
Speaker 2: So you were the only one and-
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I wanted (laughter) detection section.  And you know, we had a captain, but (unclear)--but you know, they--he, he'd done patrol.  But subsequently before he retired, they had him out doing recovering property and impounds in the trailer house (laughter).  So, you know, so I'm going where's--there was nobody else in the command structure to really, really pull you up, to really pull you up.  So we did the detective sections and went to the various detective sections, because I figured if you were ever going to be able to move within the police department, you needed to be well rounded other than patrol.  And I think--and, and I'm just reflecting from one of my counterparts--several years I used say to him, "You know, you need to become well rounded if you ever wanna be the chief of police or something."  And there's a reason behind all of that: so that you can be well rounded; people can't say, "Well, you just, you just did patrol, but you don't know anything about being a detective, or you don't know anything about the management of operations or the budget."
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: And I said, you know--and a lot of blacks are scared of, of budgets and things like that, so I'm going, "But you got to have all of these things, scared or not."  You gotta be able to do all of these things, so.  So we did a patrol from the detectives, went back to patrol and did patrol, which was basically out on the street.  Lieutenant, it would be your next promotion; went to lieutenant and was a lieutenant--detective/lieutenant on the street, and you had command of the officers, and you did their, their evaluations and things.  So it was--you know, it was, it was really (laughter)--it was an interesting--it was interesting stuff, especially the detective section.  So I used to have a commander that didn't like my writing (laughter), and I'm going, okay, well--didn't like the way I wrote and things like that.  And, and usually you find those things when you're trying to be in those other sections.  They really find fault with grammar or writing and things like that.  So I'm going, "Well, you know, what's, what's the problem here?"  So I adopted a style that I would just go and get a, a, a dictionary, and I would come up with all these big, bad words, and I'd write all these (laughter) different words in there.  And he'd go, "What does that mean?"  I'm going, "Well, you know, that means exactly what that means," and the things, this, and that, and whatever else.  So and then I'd get a thesaurus and I go, okay, I'mma--every two or three sentences I'll throw in all these big words, and get off my case too (laughter).
Story_ID: 70198
Speaker 1: But, but in 1977, we felt like things weren't going, and, and a lot of us looked to the Justice Department to come in and take a look at the police department, because we felt really we were not really getting the promotions and things that needed to be there, felt like we were really being discriminated against.  And-
Speaker 2: But was there, there, there any one big incident that really insulted you all and kicked you over the edge--(unclear)?
Speaker 1: The testing list, because people could get promoted up and down the list, and they could choose who they wanted to be the next one, whether you were at the top, or middle, or whatever else.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So how high you scored didn't really make any difference--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: That's to--that's correct.  So anyway, you could stay on the list for two years, but we could pick anybody up and down the list we want to.  But when you start gettin' passed over, things like that, it finally--you know that you've done your time, and you know you're not that bad, and you should be looked at for promotions and you're not getting them, then something's got to be wrong.  And then, of course, some of the folks said there were some, some derogatory comments and things been going on and passed about the and--things like the associate conglomerate of different kind of things.  Then it was obviously that time for us to do that.  And, and then the--even though they didn't find a lot, it did shake the police department up a little bit in terms of we need to really rethink about how we do these things.  And-
Speaker 2: So, so you really didn't win this, you know--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: We didn't really-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: --win, but we did win in, in our own way because we, we did start to get some promotions and things.  And so the [Wichita, Kansas Police] Department went through a lot of, lot of different things, but stayed in there, and we didn't, you know, didn't get discouraged.  We stayed in there and, and things just started opening up.  In about '79' [1979], then I made it to captain.  And so from--went from that, lieutenant to captain and took over a bureau, which was a section of town, so, okay, so.  And, and a lot of people that you'll go around in Wichita [Kansas]--(unclear)-"Hi," and they'll still remember you--(unclear)-"Captain Powell, how you doing, captain?  (Laughter) How--Captain Powell, how you doing?"  And so I said, well, it's time to change things so, and, and how we, and how we do the districts and stuff.  And so that's when I really came into prominence.
Speaker 2: Okay, it's time to change-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 69566
Speaker 1: Okay. So you were talking about changes and-
Speaker 2: Yeah, so '79' [1979], made Captain, Baker One; city was divided up into Baker One, Two, Three, and Four.  Northeast Wichita [Kansas] was predominantly black, but there were a lot of wealthy whites that also lived throughout the area too on the fringes of it, so you got both of 'em.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--now what does Baker-
Speaker 2: That was just a bureau they gave it a name.  It was, it was just called Baker.  There was no significance to it other than an accounting of Baker One, Two, and Three, and that's what they called them.
Speaker 1: It sounds very police like.  That's why I asked you-
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's very, very police like, you know-
Speaker 1: Baker One, Two, Three.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Baker One, Two, Three, and Four--had Baker One.  Everyone wanted to work in Baker One for area.  A lot of the officers wanted to be there because that's where the action was.  So I guess subsequently that's when you got through all of this racial profiling and stuff.  So it's kind of led to some of all of that kind of stuff because you (unclear)--yeah, because you basically were in an area that's where all the happenings were, and everybody wanted to be there.  But you--then you had the--you really had the opportunity to look at folks who were coming into the area, because then as a commander, when they came out or wanted to transfer in there, you had to write your report.  And you remembered-"No, I don't want you in my district," 'cause you could then weed 'em out.  And then the police department had, had gone to psychological profiling of, of people coming in to try to weed out some of the folks that didn't really need to be on there.  But you knew you--and I used to sit on the--which was, was good, and one of my Captains we went to school with that's passed on, Bill Booth.  We used to do--I used to, I used to have the hiring boards.  And so I used to chair those, so when you wanted to get on the police department, you used to have to come into my board, and I could make the selection of the officer's command staff who sat on the board that I knew would be friendly enough to bring minorities into it.  So, so people didn't, didn't really know about that.  So, so I was on the board.  And so there was a hiring board, and if I needed to say something or add something to the board even, I could add those kind of things to the board and it may be enough to get you hired.  Sure, they had to vote for you.  They surely got to express their concerns, but yes, I could tip the scale.  So when it come to--when it came to hiring, and so yeah, was one of the things I ended up getting the chair was one of those boards, but--
Story_ID: 69567
Speaker 1: The districts--Baker One was a district that was--had a lot of problems, lots of problems.  And we got to do and I got to do a lot of things in Baker One.  And I said we started our, our field office, which is like community policing today.  We started our first one.  We went and got some realtor signs and painted them and stuff (laughter) and put Baker One out there, and put a badge on it, and went and got one of our other guys, Charlie Franklin, who used to be downtown.  And he was kind of like the community officer for downtown business district, and brought him out there.  And, and people would come through, and can you sign this tag light off, or I wanna know about this--and wasn't the best setup because it was in a, it was in a, a junior high school that, that was basically closed except for some minor things.  Mathewson [Junior High School, Wichita, Kansas] at that point was the same old Mathewson, but they closed it, then we just had some community things in it.  So they gave us the space, and we did those kind of things.  But we brought, we brought those concepts to the Baker One, neighborhood watch kind of things.  We started those things back when, and I'm--I laugh today when I see those things coming back.  And I'm going--but we did it a little bit differently.  In community policing today, you just have a community policing officer who's really never been a policeman or a police officer.  And-
Speaker 2: So (unclear) not functioning at the, at the--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: That's right.  He's never been through all of those things, or she's never been through all those things.  So they're out doing their thing trying to get money and stuff, but we were a combination of your beat officer and, and, and the supervisor, and whatever it takes for that area.  And I didn't care whether or not you wanted to get out or not, if it was your district and you were having burglaries and whatever else.  And we would make up fliers and things, and we would go knock on people's doors.  And they used to do stories about us in the news media and stuff about us out trying to, trying to protect and serve and do those things.  And we would do those, and we would organize cleanups.
Story_ID: 69568
Speaker 1: Now did, did you have community partners working at the community level with the police to do these things?  Like a cleanup, for instance, was there a neighborhood organization say they would work with you all, or would, would--and would that neighborhood organization be independent of, of, of the police department and working with you, or would it be something that the police department gathered together?
Speaker 2: It was--there was actually not a neighborhood association.  It was concerned businesses and people that are, are ministers who you got to know based upon you become a command staff and how they saw you as such.  If they didn't see you as such, obviously they weren't gonna work with you.  So trying to build those rapport, there was a Reverend Miller who was here during the course of that, and we got to be friends as such.  And so it was those kind of things or it was a neighborhood guy who thought the neighborhood needed to be cleaned up, or it could be a citizen who saw stuff, or, or from your connection from the recreation center, or it could be any of those things.  But that's how we really built our, built our strategy, or I built my strategy on, on the neighborhood and the people and what we think that, that would be very good for the neighborhood because we all had the vision of improving the neighborhood and being treated like the doors were open to city hall.  And so I tried to make sure that if we did something or I was doing something or we were--that my neighborhood got it first.  And so really Northeast Wichita has got a lot of firsts (laughter).  And we did, we did a multitude of things, from cleaning up the streets just on a Saturday with hotdogs by the businessmen or the Burger King guy or whomever it was, or participating in what's now still called the Black Arts Festivals coming up this weekend (laughter).  Well, when the original founder was there or the police department, we hooked up together.  And from our niche of Baker One we'd go out and get candy and sacks for Christmas and help make the--it, it, it come together and just really tried to make--I wanted the officers to feel like they were at home when they were in the neighborhood whether they lived there or not.
Story_ID: 69569
Speaker 1: Now, did you all have regular meetings with the community, where the community is invited to, to talk to the officers that, that serve their particular beat or, or, or neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Only if we had a meeting did they actually come, but we had our substation, for lack of a better term, or Baker One officer.  We could meet or they would invite us out to a, a program or something, because the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was, "Well, we're having a meeting tonight.  Can you guys come out there, or can you come out there and tell us what you think, or what can you--or, or I wanna complain about an officer or something like this, or"--so it was really the lines of communication there, or we'd--or, or we'd try to make sure that you didn't stack charges on people or, or those, those kind of, of things that went on with our, our, our group of, of officers.  And most of the officers, I can say, that I either had under command or served under my command went on to become various ranking officers more so percentage wise than any other police department, those officers from that area.  Because, you know, I think that they learned, overall, how to, how to police--and I don't know if I had a little bit of that influence or, or not.  But even, even, even our current chief I have to laugh a little about him--to keep him out of hot water a whole lot of times or he probably wouldn't have been where he was at this point (laughter).  But everybody, if you're a minority, you gotta remember to try to pull somebody up and try to help 'em a little bit because, yeah, there is some racism out there, and I'm not saying that, that it doesn't it exist.  It does exist, and you still have to work at it.  It exists today.  And my son's on the fire department, and you know, every now and then he had that little problem.  But you need somebody to, to, to be there as a mentor, to watch what's going on, to see the things on the lines of communication opened, and to treat people with respect and how you talk to 'em, and this is how you ought to handle this situation, or is there a better way to go do it.  And it runs from the cop down, because what I found was that when I left a certain area, and another commander came in, then whatever else, some of the rules changed a little bit and (unclear) communication wasn't as good or people didn't watch their mouths as much-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: --those kind of things.  So it goes from the top, where you've got to lead by example.  If you don't lead by example, I'mma tell you what, sometimes the folks don't follow.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--the police are parent/military--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: The commander sets the stage.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 2: If the commander let you run over, then by God, there are gonna be wild out there.  But you gotta lead by that example, so.
Story_ID: 69570
Speaker 1: But anyway, we, we kind of got sidetracked.  So, that was something--a lot of different kind of things happened in, in Baker One.  But I met a lot of people from the old what they called the MEFSEC, which was a community recreation and park area, but it wasn't run by the city.  Eventually the city came over and take it over.  So for all of those years I worked there part time in the evening time.  And I would see kids come up there, or we would prevent 'em from fighting, was kind of a nice, safe place for the kids to go, and I learned--I see their kids now, and I--you know, used to be some bad kids up there, and that was the place to go.  But we did things with those folks.  We--now you see police officers and, and it's like a ooh, a big thing that they used to--you see the police officers go to camp and (unclear) their children don't know who they are, and all of a sudden the next day they're policemen.  We did that.  Years back we did those things in the community and made sure our kids got those opportunities.  We did those kind of things.  And (laugher) so I--I'm, I'm, I'm just pleased we got--we, we did a lot of those things first and it came right out of the Northeast community and for--in which Wichita [Kansas], that's where they started; that's where all those programs started from.  They didn't start from, from some other group.  They started right there, and, and black folks was really a part of all that, even though they were somewhat quiet.  And I, I--growing up I noticed that while they were supportive of you and in uniform, they didn't necessarily come out and (laugher) speak on your behalf all the time, that yeah, this is what--they may tell you that when they see--well, keep up the good work, but (laughter) they, you know-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: You still--yeah, they, they still kind of held back, but you still had to say well, I know they appreciate it.  It's the right thing to go do, even though they weren't as vocal as I thought that they could have been and supportive as they could have been vocally they didn't and so to do that.  But I--I'm going, "Well, I'm a hometown boy.  I still grew up in this community, planned on staying here, so I mean I'm gonna support 'em right, wrong, or indifferent, so."  That's kind of what we did in, in, in the Baker bureau. And--
Story_ID: 69571
Speaker 1: --Then I got a chance to go back down to the main station and worked back in the detective section and commanding the detectives.  Then I got a chance to move to Major (laughter), and that's when we split, 'cause it had never been a black Major.  So I loved that, became a Major.  I learned how to do the budget, the books, and how to order (laughter).
Speaker 2: How can you--how far can you go?  I mean what's the highest rank in--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Well, we're moving on up the ladder.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We--(unclear)--say we to Captain, went to Major.
Speaker 2: Major, okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Major is the next one.  So major, major is no longer a rank on the Wichita Police Department anymore.  As I understand they did away with it.  But-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 1: --but Major.
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 1: It--yeah-
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 1: --it kept--kept narrowing the perimeter.  So, got to be a Major and loved that, got to say what I wanted to say (laughter).  I got to instill my thoughts on things of, of how the police department for work.  And it actually put you in the inner circle.  And when you became major, you then realize--and I didn't realize--what were the politics of the City [Wichita, Kansas], and how it operated, and what really went on within the command structure.  And then you became the inner circle, and that's when you learn every idiosyncrasy of the police department, when you became the Major.  And you knew how it worked; you knew what groups was out there; you knew if you ever wanted to go up, the kind of support that you needed from the rest of the community; and you knew how they felt about ever office (laughter).  So, you knew how to play the game if you had to play it.  So you knew all those things.  You learned all the inner secrets at major (laughter).  And then-
Speaker 2: The last hidden hand, huh?
Speaker 1: And then--yes.  And then I went to deputy chief--never been a black deputy chief--so went to deputy chief.  And I'm going, I'm loving this; it is great (laughter) to be deputy chief because then you knew that there was an opportunity to become the chief of police.  And I'm going, a hundred and something years and there's never been a black chief of police since the inception around 1871, '75' [1975] era of city marshals for the town of Wichita [Kansas]--some of the famed people, as you mentioned earlier we were talking about, the "Wyatt Earps", and the "O. W. Wilsons", and people like that, and so I'm going, deputy chief.  So--but you know, each promotion that I received and far as support, whether there be from a media or from the community, it came from all over Wichita [Kansas].  So I could judge how people felt about me, not on from just a segment, or whether or not people truly believe that I was doing the right kind of things when it came to trying to be a police officer and policing the city.  So I, I really got a good feel for the whole community and what kind of support and things that was going on, on there.  And that was from all these years, from all the different kind of riots, and from climbing ladders, to, to waiting till you got in the right opportunities to figure out what needed to be done from your perspective, or how you wanted to be treated and those kind of things.  But there was a lot of different kind of things--and, and whether or not you would have an influence on people in the future, whether or not they were gonna join the police department.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I believe that I had an impact on a, a lot of different folks--will they join the police department or not--had an impact on their lives between the police department and being there every night seeing these kids at the recreation center, and visited with them, and just talking to 'em so they got the--I mean so it wasn't--(unclear) you got to talk to a police officer all the time, and you, you got to hear my perspective on things, and what was happening and all of that.  So I'll bet you there's not a kid in Wichita [Kansas] that I don't know, and there's probably--which they're adults (laughter)--that doesn't not remember me in some phase of when I bumped into 'em or ran across their lives.  And so that's just--it was just kind of was rewarding, but--real rewarding in terms of that. But...
Story_ID: 69572
Speaker 1: And, and then, soon as you came to--thought you were gonna become the police--chief of police--they de--the City [Wichita, Kansas] decided that our chief, who was [Richard] LaMunyon at the point of time, and he probably had not been paying attention to the police department as he needed to.  And things were kind of going on a downhill slide and whatever, but we as commanders were still holding it up.  And the, the city officials decided that they needed someone from outside of the police department.  And so when our chief left, which was [Richard] LaMunyon, they basically said if-"You got two choices.  We're gonna have this national search.  We'll spend all this money.  We're gonna hire somebody, and we're not gonna hire anybody even--whether we believe you're competent or not, any of you deputy chiefs, we're gonna hire somebody," because they did a big study that says, "Oh, we need somebody to learn 'em--lead 'em--to the new millennium and it ought to be somebody great and whatever else."  Well, quite frankly, it didn't work out that way, so.  But when my chance came to become the interim Chief of Police for the first black Chief of Police, they had gone and said, "If you become the interim chief of police and you wanna do that, then you can't be chief of police.  You can--if you take it as an interim, or else you can sit and try to, try to run for chief of police, but we already have it, but it's too late because we already got a study going on, and, and we're trying to find all these great people with all of these great resumes"--which turned out to be quite bad-"and we're--but we're, you know, but we're not really wanna reconsider anybody from inside.  But if you do take this job, you certain are not gonna be the Chief of Police."  So I had to make up a decision as to whether or not I wanted be Chief of Police or did I just wanna sit around and wait and see if the climate changed.  Then I decided that after a hundred and somethin' years I wanted to be chief of police.  And so after Carey Chris left to go to the Boeing Company, who--he, he was an interim chief also--then that's when I became the Chief of Police.  And-
Speaker 2: You were interim chief then?
Speaker 1: I was actually the interim Chief.  But the politicians did not want us to be chief of police.  At a later date, down through that, there was perhaps an opportunity to maybe come back and do that after they've solved the eras of their ways, for lack of a better term.  But at that point in time, no.  So after some flaws in how they went and got the chief of police, which happened to be Chief [Richard] Stone, who was coming in while I was during this time, that's when the Boeing Company said, "We appreciate you and all of your efforts that you've done and what you've stood for, and we have a job for you to come work us, the Boeing Company."  And at that time I was forty-two and I had to make some career changes myself.  Did I wanna stay on and see what the climate was years to come, or was the market out there as such that I needed to have a career change?  And I thought I needed to have a career change.  There was a company that said, "We like everything that you have and that you've done for the city.  You're a viable person.  You're the kind of person that we want to have.  Can you come to the Boeing Company?"  And I retired--(unclear) and if you can read the history books a little bit, it says well, you just left.  No, I retired after twenty-two years of service for the city of Wichita [Kansas].  But it was a very good service, but I learned a lot in terms of the hierarchy, and what controls the city, and the associations associated with it.  Whether it was a business association or what, I learned a lot of about politics, and how things are controlled, and how votes go, and, and the inner workings of organizations.
Story_ID: 69573
Speaker 1: Now, basically, how did the community feel about you not being able to continue as Chief of Police--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Oh--[heavy sigh]-
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--outcry or, or-
Speaker 2: There was outcry, not only--there was an outcry, no demonstrations or anything.  There was an outcry of why, you know, you--you know, why--why not (laughter).  But it was just, "Well, we've done this, we've done this big survey and had this group come in that says that we need somebody from outside to come in and lead this police department on."  And it was like nobody was good enough on the police department to do it, or they didn't have the skills.  Now subsequently after all of this, and the next Chief [Richard Stone] came in and he failed in what his job was, the climate changed four or five years later.  And they said, "Well, we've got great people within the police department.  Maybe we ought to look within now" (laughter).  But it's a--it's like being at the right place at the right time.  I always tell folks, some of that besides all of your education and everything that goes on is being in the right place at the right time, and things click.  I wasn't at the right place at the right time as far as some folks were concerned being hired.  I was for the Boeing Company, which turned out to be a very good move, but a lot of times in the career it was the right place, right time; things were clicking right, but it was not to be.  And in each fleeting time that they came back, politician wise, it wasn't the right kind of offer.  It was like, can you come back and help us (laughter) kind of thing.  We don't necessarily want you to be chief.  We're gonna go find somebody, but in the interim again, can you come back and help us?  When the last chief left, the guy who became the chief behind me--can you come back and help us?  Well, if--how can I help you if I wasn't that good?  Well, you, you, you could be chief of police now (laughter).  So I thought it was kind of ironic, but in the same breath, it was only to help them get through their troubled time again, because you are a candidate that can be acceptable to the police department and the community.  But can you help us get through?  My answer is no, I can't help you get through.  I have my commitments here, and I don't think that that would be a good workable partnership.
Story_ID: 69574
Speaker 1: Now tell me, aside from the politics of all this and, and, and the barriers you face in trying to matriculate up in this to become Chief [of Police], what was the biggest I guess challenges of, of, of commanding the Wichita [Kansas] Police Department?  I mean what, what, what, what were the biggest crime issues in the community, and, and can you think of some specific stories you can tell us?
Speaker 2: You know, burglary, assaults were some of the big crime issues that were in Northeast.  We mentioned a little bit about the, the kind of riots and things, but actually Northeast [Wichita, Kansas] was not really a bad place.  We had a lot of folks who would drive outside (laughter) the community and commit some crimes, tried to get back to the (laugher)--(unclear)--as such.  But the community decided to put some money into the city, decided to put some money in some of the major streets and did some renovations and saw--so you started seeing some kind of changes, but, but, but crime, auto thefts, you know just a general run of--and then I guess one of the things--and I did a speech at one of the local churches, and it was, it was one of the majors.  And I said to the community it was time drugs were starting, and heroin, and gangs and things like that was all through there and us.  And you were starting-
Speaker 1: About what time was that in terms of years?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, I wanna say--I wanna say, you know, '85' [1985], somewhere through there.
Speaker 1: When did crack cocaine get, get here?
Speaker 2: Well-
Speaker 1: Or did it ever get here?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, it got here.  Matter of fact, the news stories started doing it like crack--they used to call it--there was Channel 3 here did a story on "Little House on the Prairie" about crack cocaine and stuff like that and with the gangs, really the advent of the gangs.  And the gangs were really startin' to be violent and things like that.  And they would mark their territory by scrawling on the walls and stuff.  And Wichita [Kansas] was really changing and, and.  And then I was going--and I did a speech at the church, and I said you know, you mothers and fathers, I mean this, this is what's coming.  And if you as a community don't get out there and become an advocate to stop the gangs, and the violence, and the drugs, it's gonna over--it's just gonna overtake you.  You're gonna weep and you're gonna cry.  There was an old--there was an abandoned little burger stand across the street from the church and they'd written on it.  And I said to the brethren, you need to get up and I don't care how many times you have to go over it, you need to paint over that graffiti, and you need to start trying to take back the communities and, and doing those kind of things and stuff.
Story_ID: 70199
Speaker 1: Okay, oh, I was asking you about some of the gangs.  What, what, what were some of the gangs--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Well, like the most of them was the Junior Boys, and it was a black gang basically (laughter).  And the Junior Boys were pretty violent.  And they didn't like the drug traffic coming from outside of Wichita [Kansas] trying to monopolize the markets and stuff.  And so there were some, there were some killings and some issues with, with, with those, those, those interaction of those groups and stuff.  And so but basically, you know, a lot of that still goes on, not as much, but yeah, we do have gangs.  And we had to take a different approach to gangs.  And just before I left the police department down at the--made the deputy chief.  I wasn't going into the chief, which when we started our group called SCAT [Special Community Action Team], which was basically community action officers that, that, that worked that trying to stop the gangs and started photographing them, and running their names, and basically looking at what they were doing and following them around to try to, you know, get the goods on 'em to get 'em off the street because you knew what they were doing and some of the crimes they were involved in and those kind of that were, were really going on.  But we all--but, but I used to make the officers--I didn't make 'em.  The wanted to for many a years when they were--like Black Arts Festival and thing like that, we would work that those events.  For years we worked those events.  We worked them free, and there'd be, you know--you could, you could expect to see a, a city police officer--blacks, then we started get more whites involved in traffic control when they're back down in McAdams Park area now.  But we worked those things when people used to have fights and you used to have concerts, and, and we worked all of those kind of things for the community.  We gave back to the community.  We marched in the parades.  We did those kind of things to always make ourselves part of the community, because we lived in the community, we, you know, we shopped in the community, well, what was there we did those kind of things.  So, so we always, always tried to be part of the community and, and be right there with 'em.  I tried to go do those things.  And they built a baseball stadium over in McAdams [Park] over at 13 Ohio down here.  And we were--I used to work there too and met a lot of kids there too (laughter), 'cause you'd have white teams come in there, and they'd always have the police officer and whatever else.  And (laughter) there was a case went to trial around here.  It was a big one.  It was a theft of the baseball (laughter).
Speaker 1: The baseball?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, the park department, well, I worked there for years, and kids would come and they'd get pay check balls.  And the rule was if you hit the ball out a foul, then the little shagger would go it, and you had to give the ball back.  You didn't get a chance to keep it, didn't make any difference if it was a homerun or not.  So for years we worked down there.  So one day there was a homerun hit.  (Laughter) And this guy named Fred Spilleck (ph.)--(unclear) this ball and he refused to give it back, wouldn't give it to the shagger.  And so we went and got the ball.  I went down.  He said, "I'm not giving it back, nope.  It's a homerun."  The rule says if there's a homerun from a stadium in any baseball diamond, you get to keep it.  I said, "Not in this rule.  Here's what the rules are."  So I arrested him.  (Laughter) And I remember this to this day.  It was a big court case in Wichita [Kansas].  We went to trial on whether or not--and they had different sports figures come in and say can you keep this ball or not?  Well, we won the case based upon the neighborhood.  And he (laughter) had, he had to give the ball back, and he got fined.  But they had various celebrities that came in and, and did that.  So, that was a case that always stuck in my mind, the case about the baseball.  So based upon the neighborhood and what the precedent was set in the neighborhood as to how the ball was supposed to be handled, and because there wasn't any money to get more baseballs and things like that, the judge ruled that the guy should have gave the ball back, and he was guilty (laughter).  So, that one was it.
Story_ID: 70200
Speaker 1: And I have to mention this one too, because there was another thing that we did in Baker One, and then go back into the '79' [1979] and '80' [1980], and, and a lot of the big cities had it, was the after night--after party houses.
Speaker 2: I haven't really heard of that before-
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, we-
Speaker 2: --after party houses.
Speaker 1: Yeah, after your party houses.  And they called them social clubs.  And they would be in neighborhoods.  And people would be in the community just struggling to maintain their yards.  The kids couldn't go out and play, and this is really a big issue that had with a lot of neighborhoods and folks.  And they would have a house, and they would start up on any given day, and they'd be in there gambling.  You could go in there and get dope; you could get whiskey; you could gamble all night, and be assaults and whatever else, and cars would be up and down the street.  And people couldn't come out and were deathly afraid of the neighborhoods.  And you'd have 'em all over Wichita [Kansas].  And so I said, "One of the things that we're gonna do is we're going to take back the neighborhoods, and we're gonna stop what's called party houses."  "And we were just a social club," as one of the clippings said.  "Well, party houses is an institution.  It's been around in the black community for years.  And it's just like the Boy Scouts."  And for this town I'm going, oh no, we're not going to.  I don't--this is not the Boy Scouts when I've got people that cannot ride their bicycles, and their children up, they devalue their properties and things.  And all these things go open, especially on Saturday and Sundays all night, and beer cans, and wine bottles, and everything else, said we're--and people were deathly afraid, 'cause they'd shoot in your house and do anything else if you--that was money they was making.  So we would raid party houses, I mean just like (laughter)--(unclear)--we would pull up and raid 'em and take their whiskey and take 'em to court.  And I said we are not gonna have party houses.  So that was a really big issue through all these times.  Party houses were like the Boy Scouts.
Speaker 2: Now, a party house, suppose a person just wanted to have a party?  Now could, could there possibly be a mistake and somebody raid my house 'cause I'm having a birthday party and--now did, did you have a case like that come up where someone was just having a party, and they, they--or, or did people claim that that's all they were doing?
Speaker 1: Sure, that was claimed, but a party house--when you went into a party house, there was usually a bouncer at the door or--(unclear)--in.  You'd walk in and there would be signs that says, "This is what the beer will cost you."  'Cause the liquor store would be closed at 11:00 [eleven o'clock], so you'd get a shot of beer and whiskey, and they'd pull it back in.  There was usually no furniture, card playing tables, and those kind of things, and a lot of whiskey bottles outside, and a lot of cars up and down the street, and most of the people would be intoxicated.  So--and, and-
Speaker 2: So there's a difference, and you could tell-
Speaker 1: And we would know, and of course people would tell us--party house.  And of course the owners would tell me, "Well, I'm not doing anything wrong.  I'm just, it's just like the Boy Scouts.  We should be able to do this."  So we cleaned up the party houses, and they were all over, and we would, would actually raid 'em.  And, and we would raid the party houses, and the people would applaud and said we can now come out and ride our bicycles.  My kids feel safe.  There's not any gunplay going on and those things.  And they were all throughout the different neighborhoods up here, and said not, that we're just not gonna go do that.  We just--so it was a lot of the kind of the issues that we took on, and, and we were able to win and, and take back the community.
Story_ID: 70201
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do, do you, do you see--did, did your ideas--or did you personally participate in the development of any community policing ideas.  'Cause I know that--I know community policy was big as an idea in the early '90's [1990s], and it's still in existence in a lot of places in different forms.  But, you know, it seems to be a decline in talk about doing community policing now the rise of guys like [William] Bratton, the, the one who chief in New York City under [Mayor Rudy] Giuliani that did all the crackdown and that sort of thing.  So it seemed to be two emerging philosophies, you know, I mean two philosophies that are, you know, are batted around now about police departments whether it's better to--and, and be crackdowns on, you know, all the time or to have our community police in situations where the community interacts with the police department.  How do you feel about that, that-
Speaker 2: There needs to be a community policing, but here's some of the problems.  The way a lot of people wanna do community policing is that it takes a lot of money because you take away from the street, and if you can't muster the people to answer the regular calls and stuff, you start to have a problem.  And it, and it costs a lot of budget.  A lot of the community policing and stuff's done on grants and things like that.  And the grants soon wear out, and you--then you either gotta bring 'em on full time or you gotta lay 'em off.  Most community policing that you see now is that, as I was mentioning, they don't know how to be a policeman and how the whole thing comes together.  They only see themselves as more of a social worker of let's go organize a car wash, and let's go pick up the trash.  And they don't answer calls when it comes to the citizen needing a call.  And sure, they make some inroads.  I would rather see a combination of the beat officer in combination working better with the community policing officer together so that you have respect for one another, which they don't have, because you got this elite group that doesn't do anything, and then you got the poor-offs out here trying to work, and chase the criminals, and do things.  And they don't communicate as well, and they don't work together, and they--it's just two different worlds.  And I know that that clashes, and it has clashed here.  So I would like to see kind of a combination of those kind of things working within, in sync to what some of the problems are.  And, and I don't think it works just alone from, okay we got community policing officers.  Let's just go out and do all the great things, and let's--and, and not make mix 'em together.  That, that--you gotta mix 'em together, and they gotta be both; you gotta really have a feel for police work; you gotta be able to respond to the calls; you gotta know what's really going on; and it's gotta be more than just a social club of just going out, and let's just do social things.
Story_ID: 70202
Speaker 1: Do you think a typical beat officer can interact with the community and--on a level where there's a real bond developing between the community and the beat officer--I mean the, the officer decide--actually patrolling a neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I know that's what we advocated in Chicago [Illinois] years, years ago, that the beat officer, the guy that actually, you know, patrolling the neighborhood be the one to meet with the community and talk about the crime problems, cause that's the person that's actually gonna be out there trying to do something about it, you know, is that, that what you mean?
Speaker 2: And, and that's, that's what we did.  That's what we did originally.  Now they don't do that.  Now you gotta specialize officer that's gonna come in and wanna do those kind of things.  Get the beat officer involved.  Let him be part of that.  Make--you know, so people know who he is.  He knows what the problems are.  Give him the time if he needs the time or she needs the time to work on those issues.  They can have the time, so therefore you'll get, you'll get both worlds.  And if they need to answer the calls, they can answer the calls or you can, you know, be the backup.  But don't split 'em up, 'cause when one hand doesn't know what the other hand does, and, and it makes for bad blood between the two.  And I--you hear about that all the time.  It just doesn't, doesn't work the way they, they try to do it now.  I, I think yes, it needs to be the beat officer being the--that, that community's policing officer, and he needs to have the time.  And you need to maybe put your forces in there to, to go do that.
Story_ID: 70203
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Now, so when you retired, it was because of this catch 22 political scene (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.
Speaker 1: --you really didn't have a real good choice.  But, so, so you went on to work for Boeing-
Speaker 2: Worked for the Boeing Company.
Speaker 1: Boeing Aircraft.
Speaker 2: Boeing Aircraft [Company], which was Boeing--it's, it's actually started with Boeing Military.  And here in Wichita [Kansas] they have what's called the Boeing Site.  And they're actually four different companies of Boeing that make up this site.  And for what I do is I service all of the companies, so which what's--which becomes Boeing Wichita.  So you have like, military; you have commercial; you have employee services; and you have computers.  So you have a lot of different mixes, but they all come to one site.  And, and so I went to Boeing [Company] because of the advent of the drug free workplace.  And that's when you start seeing the workplace and say, "Hey, we need to screen our employees for drug or alcohol."  And, and, and the Boeing Company was a customer to the airline, and so the regulations then forced the Boeing Company to say, "We gotta step up to the DOD [U.S. Department of Defense] and the FAA [Federal Aviation Adminitsration]."  And so Boeing [Company] said, "But we need someone to at our site and help develop this corporate program, someone that we feel like would be of good character and that would fit with what we think the mold of the Boeing Company."  And-
Speaker 1: So he doesn't have a good reputation--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Good, good reputation, integrity, what they stand for.  I mean I've probably gotten on TV a few times and said, "Well, you know, we're not gonna let these hoodlums take over (laughter) this, this neighborhood or do something bad.  We're gonna get to the end of it, and we're gonna make sure that thing are safe and things like that."  But overall, your whole reputation of how you carried yourself, and what you did, and your successes and failures and all of those things had a play in that, and your education had a play in that.  You gotta have the education if you expect to move up the ladder anywhere.  If you expect to get a job anyplace, you gotta have a degree.  Don't care or say what the degree is in, but you gotta have that degree.  The degree is the key that is gonna open up to these jobs and success.  I mean it just--you just gotta have that degree.  So I went to work for the Boeing Company, started with the Drug Free Workplace Program in, in '89' [1989], retired one day and went to Boeing [Company] the next--had really good success, had the opportunity at Boeing, not only to manage the--from that I went from drug free workplace, still commanding that, and then I got into more of the health services.  And then I started managing what's called the Employee Assistance Program, which obviously goes hand in hand with Drug Free [Workplace] in which we look at the mental aspects and, and issues of employees, not only from the drugs, but do they have mental issues, how can we help them to keep their jobs and, and give them a second chance, not only from, from, from their last chance letters and things like that that they have to be on, to people who aren't covered by say maybe the DOL [U.S. Department of Labor], but the regular Boeing [Company] employees and how should they go--had a real opportunity; I got a chance to get into manage not only that, but then I managed the safety department for the Boeing Company.  And I guess I've done so well on that--was only there for a time and got a chance to go back to my--went to the medical clinic.  So I became the medical director of the Boeing Medical Clinic, and we had a full clinic there from a emergency room, to a pharmacy, to x-rays, and so we had doctors and nurses.  So that was quite a challenge for me--so managed the clinic, had an opportunity to manage the clinic, manage there for a few years and then it really became too much.  And then what I'm doing now for the past, since '99' [1999], we spent off into what's called the other side of the clinic, Health Services.  And so we do, we do return to work and alternative work for our employees who are injured, trying to get them into placement, keep them--get them back into the jobs because of their injuries, see if we need ergonomic support from them or do they need alternative work, whether they have an occupational or a non-occupational injury; still do the employee assistance program, manage the leave of absence office.  We started the, the Boeing Service Center there, where we brought everything so we can put it in compliance into one center for the whole site, and the records management of that; so I do that.  Besides return to work, I also do--we have some corporate initiatives now, so I do all the wellness kind of things, because we have an aging population.  And so I deal with everything from stop smoking to--we did--we do arthritis; we have a calendar of events; we do flu shot screenings; we do everything to support our employees, and I've--that comes under the umbrella of Health Services.  And so it's kind of different.  Although it's still helping--some of it still touches upon (laughter) some of the (unclear)--it is more toward the health field.  And I love every minute of it; I enjoy it.
Speaker 1: But do you still wanna be a cop?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: That what I thought.  This-
Speaker 2: I'm looking for the--I'm, I'm not looking, but I think that I would like to be a cop again of a small police department.  I've, you know, I've got fifteen years with the Boeing Company, and I'm thinking that I still have some good worth.  And yeah, I'd like to try it again.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--(laughter).
Speaker 2: I think it'd be exciting we did some--it, it just--you know, being police work is being your own boss, and it's a lot of adventure out there.  And even from a command staff of it, I think that there are some things that could be done from some departments to enhance it or make it better or where a community or something.  So, yeah, I'd like to--I'd like to give it another shot perhaps, yes.
Story_ID: 70204
Speaker 1: What did your parents think about your success in the police department?  Did they--how did they--your father's still living, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And your, your, your mother died a while ago.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what, what did she think about your, your rise in the police department?
Speaker 2: Other than being scared when I originally started, I, I, I think they loved it.  And, and quite frankly, I told my mother I actually did it for her so she could be proud.  And so yeah, I think she enjoyed that.  She enjoyed that.  I think all the family did.  I mean it was a different kind of career, and probably never thought I would be doing such a thing, as quiet a person as I was (laughter).  But I've grown to love it, loved it.  I think, you know, my children, I don't ask for them to follow in my footsteps.  You know, one is customer service that likes to get dirty and things (laughter) and does customer service repping and stuff for one of our electrical companies and loves that kind of work.  The other one started out when he was twenty-one.  He's a fireman and is moving up through the ranks.  And so, we're from Wichita [Kansas]; we're pretty much known, hopefully we're respected; and it was a very good community for us to grow up in.
Story_ID: 70205
Speaker 1: Well, what would you consider I guess your--but first I like what, what, what are your hopes and concerns for the black community here in Wichita [Kansas]?
Speaker 2: The hopes and concerns I guess is that I, I think that they have become a little bit devoid of, of leadership.  The leadership is grown old, don't see as much involvement from the church as, as they need to.  The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] has dwindled again, when it was at some of its heights and being involved in things.  I think they need to be a lot more supportive for the right reasons and causes.  There needs to be continued economic development done within the black community.  Some of that is--some of the people who used to work at--there's a group that's trying to building housing.  Some of the communities--I was reading in the paper the other day is that, you know, the community, the Northeast community is one of the poorest, as people keep migrating and whites keep moving farther and farther out, and the land changing and stuff.  I'm not real sure that the community policing that they have is really touching the lives the way they ought to be as a community police to how we saw it.  I'm not real sure if their doing the kind of recruiting that needs to be going on because the blacks and some of the minorities that are getting on there are aren't staying.  So I think there's some issues that need to be addressed.  Wichita [Kansas] has been an all-American city, and yeah the mayor has tried to do those kind of things. But--
Story_ID: 70206
Speaker 1: It's come a long way, but I still see some deterioration that needs to be worked in a different way leadership wise, not only from the community, but from the police department, the fire department, and (unclear)--I think it's time for some new leadership, but I'm not real sure that some of the leadership really remembers where other--maybe they haven't really been touched by all the different kind of things that we've seen from, from the riots and the, the cuttins' and the shootin', and how things have really changed and come over and how things ought to be.  They don't really see it in that light anymore.  They haven't been exposed to it, so they don't really know the history of things-(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) You came (unclear) into the department in 1968, and that was the year that Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed-
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and [Senator] Robert Kennedy was killed, and there was a lot of political--a lot of intense political battle all over the United States, and black people were going through changes.  They were going from--you know, some people would doing less and not--you know, they were turning away from nonviolence to, you know, black power.  And there was a lot of people--and you, you said, you said earlier that you had like a--you thought that somebody in the position to make a difference by hiring more black pe--people and, and trying to help other people come, come along, you know, could--should do that.  Is it--is that what you're talking about, some of the leadership?
Speaker 1: The, the, the leadership within the police department--if they're gonna do community policing, let's do it right.  Let's try to keep moving folks up, keep mentoring them.  Let's try to get more folks on.  Let's try to, you know, get the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]'s and the other organizations back, whether they are neighborhood associations, let's keep them involved.  You know, let's, let's keep involved with what goes on for the social actions in the community, whether it's a festival or whatever else.  Let's do all those things and still be part of the, the, the whole community.  But, but I guess you really don't--people don't really remember the history.  It's kind of like--(unclear)--if you don't know the history, then it--there could be a problem.
Speaker 2: Is there a way to repair that problem?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  You know, I thought that.  I, I don't know.  You know, some of the communities have tried to instill folks that have wisdom and leaders and stuff, but I'm not really seeing that working that much.  I really don't know, but I kind of worry about if you don't tell 'em, or they don't get a chance to go out and like ride along with the police department and things like that that you used to go do, or--and you start seeing some of the cadet programs.  But I think there are ways to start getting--it's, it's, it's kind of like getting a free education.  And that's what the, that's what the companies are doing now, is that they're trying to go into the schools and things and go, hey, are you interesting in being--maybe it's a college--being a policeman?  And this is what you'll get--or being a police officer.  You can get these kind of educations.  And these are the opportunities that we offer you.  And, and to let 'em learn that, and then just coming in--well, I know about computers and--or things like that.  And there's nothing wrong with that because you need that kind of high tech and stuff.  But they just don't know the history.  Once you know the history of what's happened with an organization or a community, I think you're better off.  And we gotta be able to tell 'em that in some fashion, whether it's through these kind of stories or the history books, or, or something.  But it does make a difference, and it will make a difference.
Story_ID: 70207
Speaker 1: Okay, what do you see as your I guess legacy of community service, I guess in, in both the police department and, and at Boeing?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I mean-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I know you have a lot of--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (Unclear) says that, you know, was a fair person.  Everybody knows that, that as a community, whether you got a black chief or whatever else, everybody said but you were the first.  But I wasn't the first just because I was black.  I was the first because I had all the credentials, and I did all the things that needed to be done to associate yourself with that--local boy, local person, did good, broke those kind of ranks, broke those kind of barriers, still breaking those kind of barriers, but I--but they respect me, and I respect them, and teach 'em how to carry themselves, and act as a role model.  And I, I--you just can't go out and find something, something that goes, well, you know, he was a bad person or whatever else.  You carried yourself--and that the kind of person I wanna be, or I, I think that at some point some of the younger kids said, "Well, hey, being a policeman is not too bad because look at so and so, how he carried himself, or look at how Mr. Powell carried himself."  I still get that kind of respect in things that go on with folks, rather I arrested you or not, or whether we did something you or not.  So it was--will I live on the history books of Wichita [Kansas]?  Probably so--called all different kind ranks, from Chief to interim Chief, to--some people remember me at a stage, Major--Major, how you doing?  I mean, I can sit at your table whether you was poor, or white, black, or whatever else.  We could have a dialogue, discussion, or I could listen to your problems, or do whatever the case might be and so could the officers.  And it started at the top, and it went right down.
Speaker 1: We gotta change tapes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 72419
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just wanna ask you like how, how would you like to be remembered?  That's a little bit, slightly, different from the legacy, but.
Speaker 1: I'd like to be remembered fair person, broke some of the different kind of barriers, a role model, treated you fairly, somebody that you would like to be considered like as a role model--I could follow in his footsteps.  I'd like to be thought of, the least, did I open some of the barriers?  Did I pull you along?  Did I help you in some kind of fashion, whether it was from the police department or at Boeing?  I mean did I, did I touch you in some way, and, and was it in a good way?  I, I guess I just like to be remembered like that.
Speaker 2: Would you do anything different?
Speaker 1: I don't know that I'd do anything different.  If the climate probably had of been right and politically right, the only thing different that I probably would have, run for the Chief of Police.  But there was some insurmountable things at that point, and I think that I made the best decision that I could for myself and my family and what was being offered, and took it and retired.  But I was so happy that I'd had a good career, led a good ride, did the right things, that there was a company to step in and said, but we appreciate you and we have something for you here, and that was from the Boeing Company.
Story_ID: 72420
Speaker 1: What, what are you, what are you the most grateful for?
Speaker 2: I guess I'm the most grateful, besides having a family and support from that and the children, I guess I'm most grateful that I wasn't really maimed or injured during the course of my police career.  And there used to be when I was on the police department, every year I would say to myself, depending on the incident, I would know when the incident came along where I could have been injured, maimed, or killed, and I would go, "Okay, I've had it for this year."  And I would know that, and I, and I--you could--I could just tell.  Although I was never shot, I was almost blown up in front of the--a grocery was bombed, and I--what used to call Resuck's (ph.)--it was up on 21st Street [Wichita, Kansas], and they had put a bomb in there.  And they had sent me to, to take a look at it, and there as a guy in the store.  It was a night manager, and called him over to the window and talked to him about it.  And I was calling it in, and I had just stepped back in the car when the building blew up in front of me.  That one, and, and then-
Speaker 1: Was the manager killed?
Speaker 2: No, he was knocked to the floor, but he had gone off to the side of the entrance to the door.  And it blew up the whole building.  So that was one, and then there was--I just, I remember the incident where I was at a filing station, and there was an older guy--was agitated.  And we were working a case, and I was the lieutenant in the--it was a black guy, and he pulled a gun on me--and I was able to talk my way out of it--and was gonna shoot me.   And I didn't have on a vest, and held me hostage there and, and was able to, to, to that one.  But I always knew when I was on the street, if there was an incident, I would go, I think I've had my time for this year of being killed or injured.  And I would know it each and every year when I was on the street. So that was just, just intuition.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: Thank you so much.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: I, I do appreciate it.  I don't know if I'm HistoryMaker or not, but I do think that I at least had a, a role here in Wichita [Kansas] and the Wichita Police Department in Sedgwick County and what happened, and touched some folks lives.  And maybe we've left a little bit of a legacy that you can hear, see, and talk to that's still around.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 72421
Speaker 1: Okay. That was the detective section.  It was one of a happy birthdays when I was working in the detective section.  And like I said, there were very few blacks (laughter) that worked in the detective section at the time, so it was well treated, enjoyed it.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay next.
Speaker 1: Okay, that was my--actually, that was my retirement party.  And that was the next chief of police that, that was being hired by the City of Wichita [Kansas] as I was retiring.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: And that's a group picture including our minister of my immediate family and my grandkids.  And my wife and I were re--renewing our wedding vows here at the home and after thirty-one years of marriage.
VIDEOGRAPHER: (unclear)-camera.
Speaker 1: And this is my graduation in 1972 from Wichita State University [Kansas], and I took that picture alone.  And watching was my, my wife and my mother.  And I said to mom, first you graduate from a university.  And that was what that picture was all about.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  All right, next.
Speaker 1: And that's my wife and I've since--(unclear)--outings at one of their different balls, Kappa [Alpha Psi Fraternity] balls and things that we were having.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Next (unclear)
Speaker 1: And this was just a shot of the family after a wedding that we had attended.  And it includes: my son--starting on the left--my, my mother, who's now deceased; myself, and I have to look twice because my son looks so much like me I'm not sure which one I'm talking about, myself or him; and my sisters; and then my nephew; and then my dad.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, good for camera.
Speaker 1: And in our early (laughter) life when I had the mustache and the afro, that's my dad with his afro.  We were celebrating an anniversary.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, good here.
Speaker 1: And then again, that's my son, and my mom, and myself.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, thank you.
Speaker 1: And that's my wife and my mother-in-law in one of my, my first grandchildren.  And my mom has lived with me since her husband passed, and she's been with me for, oh, fifteen years, twenty years.  And my wife's dad passed away when he was forty-nine.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Next please.
Speaker 1: And that's just a picture of me--unclear--interim Chief of Police, the first black interim police chief for the City of Wichita [Kansas].
Speaker 2: This is in 19--this is when--okay.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Sorry, you have to repeat that.
Speaker 2: That was in 1989.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next please.
Speaker 2: And that's when I was in the fifth grade.  That's when I was in [Isley] Elementary [School] and had just come to Wichita [Kansas].  That's my boyhood picture.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Next.
Speaker 2: Is this Jim Ryun?
Speaker 1: No, that's actually not Jim Ryun, but that's three letter--that was the sport that I said you could do on your own.  You, you could do a lot of things in your sport.  And that's when I was running the, the half-mile relay, and I was running the 220 on that one.  And I was a three-year letterman.  And yes, I did run with Jim Ryun.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: And that is from my junior high school days, if you can recognize me there and my good friend, Leo Hawkins, and Mr. Atkins in front of us.  And that was from our junior high days at Roosevelt Junior High.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Camera's got it.
Speaker 1: I was trying to find Jim Ryun--
Speaker 2: That was being a team player on the basketball team, and I was number four.
Speaker 1: Point guard.
Speaker 2: And that's just my East High [School] identification card I kept for all of these years.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Good for camera.
Speaker 2: And that is the track team, and that is the one that contains Jim Ryun's picture up in the top center.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--right here?
Speaker 2: No, one more over.  There you go, to--that's Jim Ryun.  And we were at East High School, and we were track mates and ran on the same team.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Good for camera.
Speaker 2: And that was in my younger days, as I was going through my college days chasing after my wife (laughter).
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Next please.
Speaker 2: And that is the Boys and Girls Club in which I was a founding member, still am, of the Boys and Girls Club of South Central Kansas, here in Wichita [Kansas], one of original board members.  And that just depicts some, some of the children that we serve.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Next please.
Speaker 2: And that's the way I look in 1968 when I became a police officer.  I was twenty-one years of age.
Speaker 1: That's twenty-one years later as the Chief.
Speaker 2: That's correct, about twenty-one years later and when I became the Chief of Police, and that's the difference.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Next please.
Speaker 2: And that is a picture of my family.  There's only one child missing (laughter) that wasn't here.  But that's my wife, and my son and his wife, and my oldest daughter and her husband, and that's my son, Corey.  And I didn't get a chance to mention his wife, Laura, on the end, and so there's one child missing and wasn't able to be there.  That's kind of a family photo.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  good for camera.
Speaker 2: And that's the patch of the Wichita Police Department, and that's the official patch of, of our department.
Story_ID: 72422
Speaker 1: Oh, okay. The picture we're now looking at is one of the mentors I had during my life.  This is my wife Shirley's dad, Walter Baker.  He was an entrepreneur and did a lot of shoe improvement, so along with the foot area, and especially in the podiatry area.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Great, next.
Speaker 1: And this is a photograph--you're ready?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my two daughters.  The one on the right is, is Ginger L. Powell, and the one on the left, it's my younger daughter that I love--love both of them very much--that's Carmen L. Powell.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  When and where?
Speaker 1: This was just a wed--one of the wedding receptions for my son here about four or five years ago in one of the local hotels.
