Story_ID: 252034
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and, your full name, and spell it for us, please (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Bernard C. Parks,   B-E-R-N-A-R-D, P-A-R-K-S.
Speaker 1: And what does the C stand for?
Speaker 2: Clinton, C-L-I-N-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have any nicknames or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Twelve, seven, forty-three [December 7, 1943], Beaumont, Texas.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Currently I'm a city council member of the City of Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: And you are the former police chief of the city (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Former police chief.  I served thirty-eight years in the police department, retired as the chief of police.
Speaker 1: You were the first African American police chief?
Speaker 2: I'm the first African American that came through the ranks.  There was one prior police chief that was black that came from the outside but I'm the first one that came up through the ranks.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, what, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is November 19th.
Speaker 1: Right, 2000--
Speaker 2: Two thousand four [2004].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In Room 460, [Los Angeles] City Hall, 8th Council District [Council District 8] office.
Story_ID: 252035
Speaker 1: All right.  Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we always ask as a warm up and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But the first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, that's a good question.  I'm a sweet eater and so if I say favorite I'd have to say something like pralines and cream ice cream.  If we talked about real food (laughter) the, I would probably have to say my real favorite is chili beans.  My mother [Gertrude Smith Parks] raised me on chili beans and I still have that affinity for them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color, it's always been yellow and I have no idea why (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you, do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year at all times is Christmastime, all the time.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation is Cabo [San Lucas] in Mexico.  I go every year between Christmas and New Year's and try to go several times during the year but that's my number one place I like to go and vacation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Probably, I have a favorite, I guess I would say favorite subject to talk about.  And I, I, my, one of my favorite is dealing with leadership as it relates to a variety of issues and accountability but I don't necessarily have a, a phrase but those are subjects I talk about a great deal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 252036
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side and your father's [Earl Parks] side.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: We'll start with your mother's side.  Can, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Gertrude Mary Parks, maiden name is Smith.  And that's G-E-R-T-R-U-D-E, M-A-R-Y, Parks, P-A-R-K-S, maiden name Smith, M, S-M-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in October, October the 30th in 1920, 1920.  She was born in Morrows [sic. Morrow], Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how do you spell Morrows?
Speaker 2: I think, I think it's M-O-R-R-O-W-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side of the family?
Speaker 2: My mother's side of the family can be traced, because we have family reunions, all the way back to slavery where the start of the Metoyer family that basically was by a French general and a slave [Marie Therese Coincoin] that created a variety of family names such as Metoyer, Leblanc [ph.], Leblanc, Lefleur [ph.], Lecoeur [ph.], and all of the families that are in the Cane River area of Baton Rouge [Louisiana], Port Arthur [Texas], Beaumont [Texas], variety of locations.  So but they have a very extensive family tree.  I, I can recall my great-grandmother was living when I was a youth.  I think she lived to be in her mid-nineties.  My grandmother is 101 as of today, she turned a 101 in April 2004.  My mom is the oldest of four, four sisters.  And, and they, three of the four are still living.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well it's interesting.  So are there any stories from that side of the family about, about slavery and about--
Speaker 2: You know, I'm sure there are but I'm probably not the greatest historian in a sense.  But going back and looking at the recent reunion where they show actually the name of the French general that is General [Claude Thomas Pierre] Metoyer who caused all of these families to move from that point on and but I'm not as clear as to the slavery angle as knowing that several members of the family in the, on my mother's side were vital parts of civil rights movements in the South.  My uncle, who's married to my, my aunt, my mother's sister, was a, a dentist in Baton Rouge and he was the mainstay in the '60s [1960s] of integrating schools and integrating a variety of businesses and his kids were the first to go to certain schools and so, but Dupree Anderson [ph.] was a vital part of that movement.  But again--
Speaker 1: That's the dentist?  Dupree Anderson?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the, as far as having a, a, analytical knowledge of the slavery connection, I know that where this started but I don't have a great deal of knowledge in that, in between area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How do you spell, now, General Metoyer's last name?
Speaker 2: Metoyer, I thinks it's M, M-E-T-O-Y-E-R, I think it is.  Some people pronounce it Metoyer but it's--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --but they, the family pronounces it Metoyer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He was a, he was a general with--
Speaker 2: French general.
Speaker 1: French general.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So he served back in the, the, the last time the French had some generals over here was when Napoleon [Bonaparte] was in--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the, that's so, that's so in the early 1800s, I guess, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he was, he dates back too--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And then when you look at the, like my grandmother was born in, I believe 1900 or 1901, and her mom was ninety-six years old when her mom, I was, I was a very young person when her mom passed on but that would take her back into the 18s [1800s], 1800s and then on the way back, so they have a pretty good history into the 1800s.
Story_ID: 252037
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Gertrude Smith Parks] grow up in, in Morrow, Louisiana?
Speaker 2: My mom moved when I was about, 1944 came to Los Angeles [California] when I was about three months old and she's been in Los Angeles most of her life.  So all of her life since then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But did she grow up in Morrow?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Morrows [sic.] and then also Texas, Beaumont [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she's been to Prairie, Prairie View A&M [University; Prairie View State Normal & Industrial College, Prairie View, Texas] but she grew up in that area but primarily between Beaumont and Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Now did she tell you any stories about growing up that you remember?
Speaker 2: You know what, there were several stories in the sense of just racism in the South.  How they were very, very poor.  That they certainly in, in being very, very light-complected they still identified themselves as being black which carried all of the negative connotations in that era and in that time.  And, and I believe that one of the driving forces of moving to the West Coast was to get out of that racist South and move somewhere where she and her children could have a, a productive life.
Story_ID: 252038
Speaker 1: --Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is Earl Winfred Parks, E-A-R-L, W-I-N-F-R-E-D, P-A-R-K-S.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Yeah, his date of birth.
Speaker 2: His date of birth would be March 18, 1921.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about his side of the family in terms of (unclear)?
Speaker 2: His side of the family, I have less knowledge in the sense that his, his mom and dad were from Oklahoma and they were black and part Indian [Native American].  But they moved, they were in Los Angeles [California] and basically he grew up primarily in Watts [Los Angeles, California] and then his whole family, I think he was a member, nine members of his family, all of the boys were all [U.S.] military people, my father was a merchant seaman and but served in the war [World War II, WWII].
Story_ID: 252039
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Gertrude Smith Parks and Earl Parks] met?
Speaker 2: You know what, I don't have a story about how they met.  In fact, we've never gone through that but they, I know that he, he served in the war [World War II, WWII] and that, and again primarily merchant seaman.  His brothers were [U.S.] Air Force and different branches but I don't have a story of how they met.
Speaker 1: Now did they meet in Beaumont [Texas]?
Speaker 2: You know, my assumption is, I've never, I, I would have to ask that.  I'm, I'm assuming so and probably while he was in the [U.S.] military.
Story_ID: 252040
Speaker 1: And you said he [Parks' father, Earl Parks] was a merchant seaman--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --all his life?
Speaker 2: Well, he was a merchant seaman through the war [World War II, WWII] then came out of the, the [U.S.] military.  He had a variety of jobs in Los Angeles [California] when he settled here.  Eventually he worked thirty-eight years as a harbor police officer, worked--then left there and worked about five years as a Department of Justice investigator, and then retired after several years of working with the City of L.A. [Los Angeles, California] in our chief legislative analysts' office and our housing authority police.  So he put probably forty-five years in as a city servant and five years in state law enforcement.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so he has a, a rich background--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in law enforcement--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and government.
Speaker 2: He had a rich background plus some unique law enforcement in the fact that being involved with the harbor police as a, an entirely different scenario of policing because you're dealing with maritime issues and military issues and a variety of things that are not common to municipal law enforcement.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he have any stories about growing up or stories about being involved in the police department?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) he had a number of stories of growing up but he grew up in Watts [Los Angeles, California].  At that time Watts was, blacks were just moving in that migration from the South so many of his neighbors were Hispanic and white.  Although Watts at one time was a city onto itself, now it's a, a community in the City of Los Angeles but at one time it was actually a city.  He became thoroughly fluent in Spanish because many of his neighbors were Hispanics.  He went to [David Starr] Jordan [High School, Los Angeles, California] and Jeff High School [Thomas Jefferson High School, Los Angeles, California] and played sports, again went to the military.  But his, he talks about the whole issue that, which gives a different flavor.  Most people believe that racism was only down South and that's where all the civil rights gains were made, from his perception there were equally levels of racism in the City of Los Angeles and during his time, blacks were pretty well relegated to east of Central Avenue and to certain communities.  You did not live on the West Side of the City of L.A. or, or areas beyond certain boundaries, even though there was no colored only line down the middle of the street, blacks didn't, just did not live there.  There were covenants on property titles that didn't allow blacks to buy certain property.  And that was an era where within the police department it was segregated that black and white partners did not work together and actually in the City of L.A. there were a black only firefighting, fire stations, black only police stations.  So it was an era that, he ended up, after the war going to the [Los Angeles] Harbor Department [Port of Los Angeles] as a police officer, a much smaller department but again, those same type of racist attitudes were fundamentally a part of city government.
Story_ID: 252041
Speaker 1: Los Angeles [California], probably to a lot of people's surprise, it really wasn't, really focused on, really has a, the police department here has a, quite a history of racism and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah right.  And you have to realize that I came on the police department in 1965.  Nineteen sixty-one [1961] was the first effort to integrate the police department in the sense of black and white officers working together.  Black officers had been a part of the LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department] for decades but as to actually working as partners it wasn't until '61 [1961].  The, and at that time Newton Station was one of the, the only place that black officers could actually work field assignments.  Black officers could not supervise white officers.  Tom Bradley the, the eventual mayor of the City of L.A. [Los Angeles, California], left the LAPD in 1961 because it was an unwritten rule at that time that blacks could not achieve the rank of captain of police and Tom Bradley was a lieutenant.  And it took 'til 1969 before the black, first black person became a captain and that was Homer F. Broome [Jr.], and he later became the first black commander in 1976 but it, its, and even today in the LAPD, firsts are being made because not all of the barriers have been broken down.
Story_ID: 252042
Speaker 1: So I'd imagine it was tough on your father [Earl Parks] being in the department, the LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department], I guess and (unclear)--
Speaker 2: It was [Los Angeles] Harbor Department [Port of Los Angeles].  But the, the, it was tough because, it was tough on both of them because they realized how fragile it was as it relates to employment.  And on the one hand, they needed to raise money for having four kids and that they insisted that we went to parochial school so they were paying tuition, that they were trying to cause us to have a better life and so there was some, I'm sure situations that they had to gulp real hard and, and, and take as opposed to expressing their outward views because it would jeopardize their employment but these are things that I think they understood.  My mother [Gertrude Smith Parks] for years worked as a waitress and, in, and for a number of years worked for a waitress, a company that did not hire blacks but they did not know she was black and, and so she worked for years for Pig 'N Whistle [Los Angeles, California] restaurants.  And the, we could never visit her on the job, the closest we can, could do was to, to go up, go up by the window of the restaurant and see her in there working but she diligently worked that evening shift and paid our tuition in the tips that she made.  And but I'm sure that throughout their career understanding the necessity of employment, that there were times in which they realized you could not express your views as openly as you'd like.
Story_ID: 252043
Speaker 1: Well tell me about growing up.  What's your first childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My first childhood memory was living at 1147 East 33rd Street which is just east of Central Avenue [Los Angeles, California].  We lived in a big house in the courts that there were approximately 11 or 12 people that lived in that house, 7 of them were kids.  I grew up with my three cousins, my two sisters, my brother and my mom [Gertrude Smith Parks] and dad [Earl Parks] and my two aunts and my grandmother and grandfather.  And so we lived there until I was in roughly the fourth or fifth grade and but that's my first childhood memory going to St. Patrick's [Catholic School, Los Angeles, California] but pretty much life was around the, the courts where we lived in.  We had certain, we generally, the seven of us generally went everywhere together whether it was to the movies or whether it was just playing in the park or going to [Thomas] Jefferson High School [Los Angeles, California] to climb the fence to play football or going to Wrigley Field [Los Angeles, California].  But we had boundaries that we pretty well knew how far we can go as far as where the family felt comfortable.  It certainly wasn't as dangerous as it is today but you always traveled together and you always knew your limitations.  And, and our big, Sunday was always movies at the Bill Robinson Theatre [Los Angeles, California] or the Florence Mills [Theatre, Los Angeles, California].  And at that time they would have not only movies but they'd have keno and they'd have the 'Motown Revue' and you could go and have a whole afternoon with that kind of entertainment at the movie theater.  And I remember nine cent to go into the [Fox] Figueroa Theatre [Los Angeles, California].  And most of my earliest memories all dealt around 1147 East 33rd Street, all of the surrounding area, that we played in dirt alleys, that we had what we called the wood factory was around the corner, the trains would come behind the house, the City Dye Works [Los Angeles, California] was right around our corner.  The Garden Bakery [ph.] was in walking distance from our house.  Central Avenue when it was thriving--cookie [ph.], the florist, all of these businesses that you hear about when people talk about Central Avenue being the heart and soul of the black community, we lived a half a block from Central Avenue.
Story_ID: 252044
Speaker 1: Can you name your brothers and sisters and tell us where you fall in the order of the four?
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm youngest of four.  My brother--my sister, Agnes [ph.], is the oldest, born in '39 [1939], my brothers, next Arthur [ph.] born in '41 [1941], my sister, Cleo [ph.], is the next and she was born in '42 [1942] and I was born in '43 [1943].  My brother, sister, and myself were all just about a year apart.  My, in fact, my sister and my brother are the same age for about four days 'cause she was born on the, on the 15th and he was born on the 18th of November.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we're all within stair steps then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You had your cousins with you, were they about the same age too?
Speaker 2: Same age.  My cousin, Jules [ph.], was the oldest so he was born just a few months older than my sister, Agnes.  And then my cousin, Lee [ph.], was just older, was between my sister, Agnes, and my brother, Art [ph.].  And then my cousin, Pat [ph.], was just a few months older than I was, she was born in April '43 [1943] and I was born in December of '43 [1943].  So all seven of us were in that, in fact, all seven of us were going to the same grade school at the same time.  So and that school went from K [kindergarten] through eighth.
Speaker 1: And what was, was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: St. Patrick's Grade School [sic. St. Patrick's Catholic School, Los Angeles, California] on 34th [Street] and Central Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, it's right across the street from the original home of the Angelus Funeral Home [Los Angeles, California] which was right at Jefferson [Boulevard] and Central.
Story_ID: 252045
Speaker 1: What was your neighborhood like?  What, what were, what were your surroundings like and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, the, the neighborhood on 33rd [Street] and Central [Avenue, Los Angeles, California] was generally single family homes with courts they periodically placed.  A quiet residential area.  The, as you, you went east, pretty much residential where you abutted a, a industrial area that had factories just to the north of us.  The, the [Thomas] Jefferson High School [Los Angeles, California] was one of our major landmarks just east of us.  And Wrigley Field [Los Angeles, California] at about 34th [sic. 41st Place] and Avalon [Boulevard] was one of the major attractions in the city.  And then--
Speaker 1: Was that like a, a--
Speaker 2: Baseball diamond, baseball stadium.  In fact, it was the location where a world champion prize fight with Sugar Ray Robinson and Bobo Olson.  But the Los Angeles Angels at that time were a farm team for the Chicago Cubs and they played in Los Angeles [California] at Wrigley Field.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it was a connection between the Wrigley Field in Chicago [Illinois] and the one--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Same owner but it was a, a, a farm team.  But the Central Avenue was abuzz, you had the, all the things you needed from a barbershop to a hamburger stand to different businesses.  The community I lived in was almost, as I remember it, almost entirely black.  They, you did rarely saw nonblack people in, in that community.  We had a, a handful of Hispanics that went to St. Patrick's [Catholic School, Los Angeles, California] but most of the school was black.  The area was busy it, you never had a sense of not being safe.  You, I think the worst thing I can recall during the time we were growing up is a young man on our street was stabbed and that was like national news as far as people who lived there like, you know, how could that happen and, and people were really concerned.  And but the general sense is that you were safe all the time, you were always with someone.  You always, and as I tell people all the time, you know, growing up in that house, you didn't distinguish between what your mom told you or yor grandmother or your aunt, they were just older and adults and you just complied, it wasn't a matter of debating as to whether your aunt or grandmother or grandfather can direct you to do something.
Story_ID: 252046
Speaker 1: As a group, those seven kids [Parks, his siblings, and cousins] were almost inseparable, I mean because if you walked down the street you were with two or three of them, if you were playing games, so it was almost as though you didn't need a lot of outside activity because you had enough kids in the family that you played with or socialized with, you'd walk to school together, you'd come home together, you'd see each other in school, so we did not have a lot of outside friends per se at least growing up through the fourth grade [at Holy Spirit Elementary School, Los Angeles, California] 'cause the whole thing was centered around the family.  On the weekend, my grandfather would take us all for the big issue was going for a ride while you went grocery shopping.  And you would go there and my grandfather would travel all over the city to save three cent on a can of corn and two cent on this and we used to always ride with him.  The, the bad part of that ride was often we would have to sit in the car while waiting for him to shop and so you would go to a Sears store on Slauson [Avenue] and Vermont [Avenue], it's no longer there, but you'd sit in, you'd sit in the car 'cause they didn't want all of the kids to go in the store, so you'd sit there and wait for them.  But, but it was very positive, very little conflict or strife.  They did not tolerate kids not getting along, I mean, so you did not have long, long activities as it relates to arguments, you didn't have these (unclear) feelings--
Speaker 2: There were no struggles about, the, the, the, were there struggles about who was gonna sit where in the car (laughter)?
Speaker 1: No, you always had that but the adults straightened it out real quick.  And my grandmother was one of those people that if she had a tiny sliver of cake, she would cut it in seven pieces and everybody would get a sliver.  So everybody, you know, and the, we laugh about it now but all the kids wore, the youngest kids all wore hand-me-downs like when all of the males in that group of seven made their first communion in the same suit.  And so until I outgrew my brother, I, my clothes were pretty much hand-me-downs.  In that sense that, I remember, you know, the shoes that I wore they were shoes that he had and that they (unclear), so you wore everybody else's clothes until you were too large to wear other people's clothes.  And so, but that's, that was basically expected that you, it was not a family that had a lot of money but like I tell people, we didn't know that we were poor.  And but certainly the family were pinching pennies and you knew that on Fridays is the, we're Catholic and because we went to Catholic school, you would, you were gonna eat tuna.  I mean you had tuna sandwiches, you had tuna casserole for dinner, you had fish or something all on Friday.  You could pretty well predictable as it relates to your menu and you knew that on Mondays it was gonna be chili beans and rice.  You knew on Sundays it was gonna be grits and liver and onions and you knew, so they had these menus that just revolved.  You knew every day you woke up it was gonna be Post Oats Seasoned Corn Flakes [sic. Post Toasties Corn Flakes], periodically you'd have Raisin Bran.  But it was these kinds of things that were pretty state, stable in your menu and you knew that you didn't take more food than you could eat and you.  And we had a unique situation, my grandfather worked nights and we would get home from school and often eat dinner with him before he went to work but that was very early and so we would all have supper late in the evening.  So we had one bathtub and seven kids would be take, take a bath at night and so you were on the rotations.  It was one house with one, it was weird that that bathtub in the house was in one location and the, and the commode was in another location.  So you would line up and seven kids would take a, be able to take a bath, our aunts and my mom [Gertrude Smith Parks] would wash all the kids up before they went to bed.  My grandmother almost routinely, you had peanut butter and jelly sandwiches before you went to bed.  And every day at seven o'clock on the dot, everybody kneeled down and said the rosary because she list, she turned it on the radio.  And so that, those were the kind of regiments that we went through.
Story_ID: 252459
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you describe yourself as a youngster?
Speaker 2: You know, I was, as a youngster I was the youngest of seven.  I, I remember most of my childhood as, I laughed all the time.  We, we, we spun jokes on each other.  I always was able to tag along with my older brother and my sisters and my cousins so, I was never treated as a, the baby, I, but I (unclear), you know, I went with them everywhere I went.  But I had a good sense of humor.  The things I learned from them but I, I did not have a, a harsh childhood, I had a very good childhood.  Again I didn't know we were poor until you had associations with other people and you begin to relate back.  But again, it was a matter of, you know, I was not the best student until I got older.  I used to believe if you slept with your books you, it was sufficient, you'd get it overnight.  So I was not one that studied hard but I generally would get my passing grades because I was attentive in class.  But we had a lot of things, it was always looking for ways to do pranks on each other.  And the, in Catholic school it was a, one of those things you dealt with a lot of folklore about issues and, you know, you had this premonition that nuns, you know, they were not human, they were somewhat sacred.  In fact, I can recall coming home one day to tell my mother [Gertrude Smith Parks] that a nun ate a piece of candy in front of me and it was, and I was shocked that, I never thought that they ate.  My mother just looked at me like are you okay?  But, you know, I, I recall that I've always having supervision.  I stayed in trouble because I often would blur the lines, if I was told to stay in the yard I would find a way to be next door and only when my father [Earl Parks] came home and he would see you and nobody else would leave the yard and I would be the one that would get caught.  I experimented like pouring my mother's cologne out of her bottle and filling it with water and seeing if she could figure out.  She reminds me constantly that I sold one of her pieces of jewelry for fifteen cent to buy three candy bars.  So I had those kind of things that I got involved with but nothing that was on the edge of being criminal but we just we had a ball, rode our bikes.  We used to take our bikes apart just to take 'em apart and fix 'em up again.  Paint the frame every other week or something but we, we did those kind of things as far as staying busy.  Again we could, had a certain boundaries, we knew that when we got a little older and moved to the area of [Martin Luther] King Boulevard [Los Angeles, California], at that time Santa Barbara [Avenue] and San Pedro [Street], that we could go probably as far south as Vernon [Avenue], and we can go towards where my grandmother lived, and you could go to Figueroa [Street] but you didn't get to much out of that area.  I remember when they were building the, the Harbor Freeway [Interstate 110].  We used to ride our bikes on the Harbor Freeway when it was dirt, when they first grated it to create the Harbor Freeway and you could drive right down Santa Barbara to the on-ramp, right over the dirt humps over to Vernon and go to a store that's still there on the corner of Vernon and Figueroa.
Story_ID: 252460
Speaker 1: --We used to walk to the [Los Angeles Memorial] Coliseum [Los Angeles, California] to see the [Los Angeles] Rams play.  I jokingly tell people that I was an adult before I realized you had to have tickets to get in the Coliseum because we used to just climb the fence.  We used to go to the [Fox] Figueroa Theatre [Los Angeles, California], that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You could get in the Coliseum?
Speaker 1: Coli--yeah, you used to go in the Coliseum and we used to just walk around, climb the fence and go in and watch the game.  And at that time it was very loose, that you could stand in the end-zone seats and at the end of the game you could actually run on the field, the police would not bother you, the ball players would give you a chin strap.  I recall that when Elroy Hirsch played his last game in the Coliseum, that, that every piece of equipment he had on except his T-shirt and his, and his athletic supporter, people took off of him before he got off the field.  And I, somewhere in my memorabilia I have a piece of the jersey that he wore.  But the, that was the kind of thing, it's just exploring and find out what was going on in the city, and, you know, we used to just like a lot of kids trying to figure out what life's all about.  I mean, I remember how we snuck into the Angelus Funeral Home [Los Angeles, California], first time I ever saw a dead body.  And, I mean, but it was a, a situation in which they were right across the street and people would dare each other, you know, you're too afraid to go in the funeral home and you walk in and you see somebody and you go, whoa, they're dead (laughter) and you'd get out of there.  But, you know, but a lot of things, Dolphins of Holly, [Dolphins of] Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] would broadcast from Vernon [Avenue] and Central [Avenue] and that was a big thing as, you know, you're growing up that people would go there and you see the DJ right in the window, spinning the 45s and, you know, it's the, but those were the things I remember in the grade school era in that area--
Story_ID: 252461
Speaker 1: Then about my seventh grade, as I completed seventh grade we moved quote to the West Side [Los Angeles, California] and that was a totally different experience, in a community that was basically no blacks that lived there on Hauser [Boulevard] and Washington [Boulevard], very few.  Went to a good high school [St. John Vianney High School, Los Angeles, California], grade school, Holy Spirit [Elementary School, Los Angeles, California] that had maybe eight to ten blacks in the whole school.  Went to a high school that had that, four hundred kids and I think eight or ten blacks in the whole school.  So a complete culture shock, change from living in a community that was all black, a school that were, was all black and then moving to a part of the city that was practically all white and very few other races.  You saw some Asians, Japanese primarily in or around some of the communities but you saw primarily whites, a handful of blacks, a handful of Japanese but not many other races, very few Hispanics but that was probably in that '57 [1957], '58 [1958] era and until I graduated from high school.
Story_ID: 252462
Speaker 1: When I think about the, all the way through high school [St. John Vianney High School, Los Angeles, California], I, what I think about is we laughed all the time.  I mean, we basically knew what the parameters were, we knew what we were asked to do, through high school played football, had a great time.  My brother and I, our first vehicle, 'cause we worked during the summer with my uncle was a contractor and we worked at Lathers and Plasters [ph.] where we basically went out and carried plank to put up scaffolding and we made money to where we rebuilt an old pickup truck that my father [Earl Parks] had and that was our first vehicle and put an engine in it, painted it, put upholstery in it, and that's what we drove to school is a pickup truck and drove that for years.  That was our first vehicle that we shared until we blew the engine up going up to Victorville [California].  And my father was a person that could build almost anything.  He could look at something and go in the garage with a saw and cut the wood and build it, he built a house, he drilled wells, we used to go up to Victorville, he had about a hundred acres of property.  Every Saturday morning we'd be in Victorville building a house or he built stuff at the, in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and then we'd take it up by truck up to the house, up to Victorville and put it, install it in the house, fix fence posts, learned how to roof, roofing, nailing, studs in the wall, I mean, so, he did everything and we were part of that particularly through high school.
Story_ID: 252463
Speaker 1: Were there any particular mentors or coaches or community people that you'd consider as a mentor as you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I had several.  Probably my dad [Earl Parks] is number one.  He was the one that was always omnipresent.  He would, he and my mom [Gertrude Smith Parks] would never miss one event you were involved with.  One or the other or both would be there, whether you were playing football, whether you were at school, whether you were graduating, they would never miss your event.  But when I got in high school [St. John Vianney High School, Los Angeles, California] the people I remember coaches like Bob Boyd used to play for the [Los Angeles] Rams, was one of the coaches for one year.  My, Benny Lefebvre was a football coach and many of the, many of the coaches.  Father [Vincent] Cavalli the principal of the school, Father [Vincent] Lopez my religion teacher.  In, in grade school [Holy Spirit Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], Sister Mary Andre [ph.] not only taught me in the fourth grade but taught my kids in the fourth grade.  And Sister Charlene [ph.] was our principal, Sister Rosa Lewis [ph.] was our fifth grade teacher but those are people, those are people who still talk to me today.  Sister Mary Andre, my fourth grade teacher, did my invocation at my badge ceremony as the chief of police and my installation as a councilman.  So these are people that you have lifetime relationships.  Just went to a reunion with Father Cavalli, our principal was there and was honored.  So, but there were not a lot of mentors when I was on the police department [Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)].  Several people, many of the black officers that were trailblazers were part of the mentors, Homer [F.] Broome [Jr.] the first black captain, first black commander.  Joe Rouzan [Joseph T. Rouzan, Jr.] was second, probably third or fourth black captain in the police department.  George Lewis [ph.], Jesse [A.] Brewer the first black deputy chief.  Stu Nelson [ph.] a white deputy chief was the first person that gave me a, a job outside of the field, that gave me an opportunity to do some administrative work.  Ed Joker [ph.] was the first captain, gave me an opportunity to get out of patrol and go into detective assignment.  But those are people that made lifetime impacts.  Ed Davis sent me to the FBI Academy [Quantico, Virginia], allowed me to come back.  And, and Bob Rock [Robert F. Rock] selected me as on adjutant, which I think I was only the fourth person in the history of the department that was black that had the chance to be an adjutant.  And then was able to then promote, you know, made sergeant in LAPD in probably five and a half years.  Was the first black and, and certainly--
Speaker 1: Um--
Speaker 2: Hmm?
Speaker 1: I, I don't wanna, I, we, we--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you're, you're racing through so (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: But we need to go back--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to high school.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I was asking about mentors--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in, in grade school (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but those were the--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) take note a in you, including people, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: But the, the, the mentors that I had, I mentioned in high school and grade school were the, the teachers, the nuns, Sister Mary Andre, Sister Rosa Lewis, Sister Charlene.  High school were coaches and--
Speaker 1: Did you play sports in high school?
Speaker 2: Played sports, played football, ran track, stayed in shape by running track so for football.  But the two major coaches we had or three really was Coach Lefebvre, Coach Bob Boyd and then another coach by the name of Familton [ph.] who coached us in, also we had one year as a boxing team but we, that's all of the sports, we had a very small campus and small number of facilities.
Story_ID: 252464
Speaker 1: You started off at grade school in St. Patrick's [Catholic School, Los Angeles, California] and then when you moved you went to--
Speaker 2: Holy Spirit [Elementary School, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Holy Spirit.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then what high school did you go?
Speaker 2: St. John--it was St. John Vianney [High School, Los Angeles, California], it's now Daniel Murphy [Catholic High School, Los Angeles, California], so I went four years there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  St. John what?
Speaker 2: Vianney, V-I-A-N-E-Y [sic.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Okay.  But it's now Daniel Murphy?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you, what did you play in football?
Speaker 2: I played, I played offensive and defensive end, at that time we played on both sides of the ball.  As a freshman I played a running back and a defensive back but my tenth grade year I played in, for 10th, 11th and 12th grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your team was pretty good?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have real good teams.  We had a very small school.  And at the time we were in a league that most schools were two to three times bigger than we were and so we, we were beaten often.  I remember we used to go out and we played Mater Dei [High School, Los Angeles, California] and I think, swear Mater Dei had more people on their football team than we had in our school.  I mean, but we played some fairly big schools at the time.  But we had a lot of fun and I can't recall any given time where we had more than forty people on our football team.  And so we were very small but we had a great time, there were some great relationships, some good, good athletes and so we just, you played then.  But you really found out in high school what the difference was about working with those bigger schools and those superior athletes when we went up against them or you played against a team that had more superior athletes than you did but we hold our, held our own but you just could not compete in many instances.  So we did not have a tremendously successful football, yeah we did much better in basketball, we won some league championships in basketball.  I didn't play basketball but those were the things.  We had individual accomplishments in track.  But football is a team sport.  We, we wouldn't, did not do exceptionally well.
Story_ID: 252465
Speaker 1: How did you do socially in high school [St. John Vianney High School, Los Angeles, California]?  This is like, still a mostly white high school, this school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A white high school but most of my social activity was not associated with the high school in the sense as students we, my brother and I, my brother was the student body president, I was senior class president, I was a year behind him, I was a freshman class treasurer.  But most of the social activities we had were in our community with our close friends and family members that we knew, did not socialize a great deal with students that were in school other than when you were in the classroom atmosphere at the class.  Some of the black students that we lived close to, the Bufford family [ph.], we socialized with them because we played ball together, and we played ball in Deiker Playground [ph.], we used to, went to each other's houses.  Many, for years we even called, you know, each other cousins and things like that but most of our social activities were community related versus school related.  We attended all of the sports activities, the awards banquets, all those kinds of things but really the hub of all of our social activities was family and community.
Story_ID: 252466
Speaker 1: When you were a senior in high school [St. John Vianney High School, Los Angeles, California] did you have a, what was your aspiration career wise?  Did you have one then, did you--
Speaker 2: In high school--
Speaker 1: --think about what you wanted (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I was having so much fun I did not even think about getting out of high school.  I mean, periodically somebody would shake you and say, you know, you probably should study and graduate but, I mean, it was just a fun time.  I played ball.  I enjoyed myself.  I, I didn't really take school that serious.  You look for ways to have fun.  I mean we used to, and that was another thing, it was an all-boys school but we used to sit around and just think of stuff to do.  I mean, we were in an all-boys school atmosphere and we used to play pranks on the whole school.  I mean, in the sense of, in fact, we, I told Father [Vincent Cavalli] at a reunion recently, they could never figure out that the senior class was also giving events and they would sell tickets to the, to raise money for their senior prom and things like that, and the priests, the priests and the student body could never figure out why when these events were given very few people would buy tickets but they were always a full house and what they didn't realize is that they, every event used the same bulk of pink tickets and so several of us that were playing football, we knew that the coaches in their garage down the street would have tickets so we would go and pull rolls of tickets off and give 'em to our friends and we'd all go to the event.  And they would always, they could not figure out how you ended up with a pink ticket and never paid for it but those were the kind of things that we did that, we thought were enjoyable that you beat the system.  And, but I didn't get really serious in really academics until I went to college.  But, but in high school I was a, a C, B student mainly because I applied myself always in a, a cramming mood, I mean, if it was an exam you rushed in and studied enough to get by but it was just a fun time.  You know, we, we had a ball.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in high school?
Speaker 2: In high school my favorite subjects was athletics.  I mean, we played ball, we ran, we stayed in shape.  During summer break, school, my brother and I would play ball for six or seven hours a day throwing the ball and catching the ball, going in and soaking wet in sweat and go and take a shower and come out and play some more, I mean, 'cause that's what our interest was.  But as far as academics, probably math was the, you know, in, in math we, we had a curriculum that took us all the way to, in our senior year second semester we even had a little touch of calculus and that got beyond me but trigonometry and geometry and algebra and those things and we used to have a, a good interest in them.  And foreign languages was never an interest.  We had Latin for four years and I probably remember one or two words that came out of that 'cause I could never figure out when I would ever use it 'cause it was not a, a language that you figured you'd be walking around--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --using it.
Story_ID: 252467
Speaker 1: When you graduated from high school [St. John Vianney High School, Los Angeles, California] did you have an idea that you were going to college?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was gonna go to college but because I didn't pay a lot of attention to grades I knew I was going to community college plus the family was not in a position to send you to a four year college because all four of us were like stair steps coming out of school, and so I was destined I was gonna go to LAC College [Los Angeles City College, Los Angeles, California] and I went there for two years.  I played football there, had a great time and then--
Speaker 1: Now this is 1961 (Simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-one [1961], '62 [1962].  And played football there for two years.  Then I, I left school and went to General Motors and worked on the assembly for about a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, what plant was it?
Speaker 2: That was the Van Nuys Plant, 8000 Van Nuys Boulevard [Los Angeles, California].  And worked on the '60 [1960]--I guess, '63 [1963], '64 [1964] Chevrolets that were on the, on the assembly line.
Story_ID: 252468
Speaker 1: Your father [Earl Parks] at this time is involved in law enforcement as a career (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's in law enforcement as a police officer.  He had a unique job for a long period that he actually, as a harbor police officer he actually was the security for the mayor of the City of Los Angeles [California], with Mayor [Norris] Poulson and later Mayor [Samuel] Yorty, and but that was somewhat unique that he would drive them around and he was their security.  But when they left office he then proceeded, he stayed with the [Los Angeles] Harbor Department [Port of Los Angeles] but then he went into more of an investigative field than a uniform field.
Story_ID: 252469
Speaker 1: Now, you joined the force [Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)] in '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you, did you go right from General Motors to the police department (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that's right I was in General Motors.  I, I was, when I took the examination, in fact, I can remember it like it was yesterday, driving the 5 Freeway [Interstate 5] going to Van Nuys [Boulevard, Los Angeles, California] to go to, go to work, an ad came over the radio that said you can join the police department and make $608 a month and you just take the exam at the age of nineteen, you didn't have to wait, but then you couldn't be appointed until you were twenty-one.  And I had never thought about being a police officer and I had never thought about taking the exam but it just cued me and I listened.  That weekend I called and I took an, a appointment, went and take, took the exam, didn't tell anybody in the family.  The only time I told somebody in the family is when I got passed the written and they sent me a notice about the physical abilities and the physical, what they called it then the physical agility, and I told my mom [Gertrude Smith Parks] and dad [Earl Parks] on my way out the door I was going to the police academy and take this physical agility and they almost fell over.  And I proceeded to go through all of the exams, through my twentieth year.  When I turned twenty-one in December of '64 [1964], I came immediately in the academy in February of '65 [1965].  So all my processing was done when I was too young to be eligible and then I was eligible immediately the first class that was available I went into it in February of '65 [1965].  And the academy was three months at that time so only twelve weeks.  And so, I would say I was successful in the academy and think out of eighty-five graduates I came out like, no I think it was like number thirteen academically.
Speaker 1: Awesome.  Okay.  So, so what did your parents think about that?
Speaker 2: You know, initially they didn't know what to say.  They, after I came back and told them I passed the physical abilities exam, they sat down and said do you really, you know, they, it was like the furthest thing they thought would be from my mind, do you really wanna do this, is this something that you've thought out, is it something you, you think you're prepared to do?  Because up until then they only viewed me as a person that was having a great time, they couldn't quite ever zero in to get me serious about anything.  I mean everything I looked at is from the humorous side and that they would say, you know, why don't you do this, and you, and you'd have a joke about it and they just figured that over time you were gonna grow up but by the, on the other hand, when I told them that I was going to take the exam, I mean, they didn't, they had no clue and they had little understanding and they just kind of looked at me like I was off on a, on a tangent but then as I started going through the academy and passing tests doing all of those things and then getting an appointment date, they saw how serious I was about it.  And then in that same entrance time I got married and had a, a child and moved out and was on my own while I was going through the academy.  And at that time at 18 to 20 years old, it was pretty much expected you were gonna be on your own.  You, when I was growing up, they was no expectation you were gonna live at home beyond your 18th or 20th birthday and it wasn't like they put you out but they did kind of think you, you were gonna be moving on and that you were going to be making decisions about your, your, lifetime.
Story_ID: 252470
Speaker 1: Now was the [Los Angeles] Police Department [LAPD] what you expected it to be?
Speaker 2: You know what, I didn't know quite what to expect because the only police officers I saw were people that were on the street.  My father [Earl Parks] and I had never had a conversation about what to expect but I went into it, it was a, a good experience.  The fact that I had played football allowed me to have more discipline then many people that were in the class and since the regiment, understanding, you know, how the, you, you really were put to task at every day academically, physically, and, and how you reacted to different field situation.  You were tested every day on all those issues and you couldn't have a bad day.  You couldn't be good in academics and didn't do this physical training.  You couldn't be good at shooting but couldn't do the academics.  So it was a twelve-week period where you must peak at the right time, you must do all the things that they expected you to do well.  And at that time, there wasn't a great hurdle of them just telling you to leave without a great deal of explanation.  So you could be dismissed from the academy and it was not the way it is now where all the rules and regulations and justification, you could just be dismissed on some, on a person's whim.  And with, out of the eighty-five people that graduated from my academy I think we had five, five black officers that came, that graduated.  And that, that was one of the first times that I realized the significant dividers related to races when I joined the police department.  That we had, I met officers in my class that were white who had never been downtown L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  They grew up, they were born, raised, and grew up in the [San Fernando] Valley [California] and the first time they ever came to downtown Los Angeles [California] is to apply for the police department.  And the Valley was like a foreign country to where I grew up.  You, you, you knew no one practically in the Valley and you had absolutely no real reason to go to the Valley, and so it was like a foreign country that you heard about, people would talk about the Valley and you'd say yeah that's somewhere out there.  But, you know, my father had a friend that lived in Pacoima [Los Angeles, California] and that was like a journey when we were going out to visit to Mr. Cusman [ph.] and we're gonna get in the car and we'd drive out there and you'd drive and you'd drive and we get there and you'd see people that had horses and cows and lived on mini-farms or big farms and it was, it was a totally different environment that you grew up in.
Story_ID: 252471
Speaker 1: Well you, you think that attrib--you know, contributed to some of the tension in the L.A. [Los Angeles] Police Department [LAPD] with the people that live in the inner city?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I think that there was a lot of tension in the police department primarily because there was not a lot of black officers.  There certainly weren't a lot of supervisors.  And what I found early on was that the police department often misinterpreted minority communities' complaints.  They often viewed if you're complaining, that you were anti-police and they, and it took a long time for the police department to understand, and this is my judgment, that when people complain it wasn't that they were anti or pro-police, they had a, they had a complaint.  And, and the, the, but the police department would often view things through a very narrow spectrum where you either supported us or you didn't support us.  Minority community, particularly black community, was unwilling to say I'm gonna give you my whole hearted support because they were also from a variety of backgrounds, from down south and saw how the police department was an extension of the larger government, the police department often carried out the mission of the larger society, and so they were unwilling to say we're gonna take you at face value, but that was a tension.  And that many times if the black community or an individual in the black community would speak up about something they immediately were labeled, they were, they were a rabble-rouser or they were subversive or they were something other than being a good citizen.
Story_ID: 252472
Speaker 1: --Yeah, I know there was a great deal of tension in the early '60s [1960s] around the shooting of a, a black man in Los Angeles [California]?  It was a famous picture--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of Malcolm X in the movie holding up the poster showing his wounds and stuff at the rally (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was the [Leonard] Deadwyler incident.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the one that caused Johnnie Cochran to become famous.  Probably 1965, '66 [1966] somewhere up in there, where a young man was, failed to follow the street laws and he was trying to get his wife, the story was he was trying to get his wife to the hospital and he put a white rag of some type on his area which in his mind sent a signal that there was an emergency which no one on the police department's [Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)] side had ever experienced that that was a, some kind of a symbol to identify that and so they pulled the person over and between conflict, between he and the officer, the person was going to drive off and the officer in his effort to stop that person reached inside the vehicle to turn the key off and the car lurched, they used the word lurched or it moved forward and while he was trying to disengage himself from the car, he ended up shooting and killing Mr. Deadwyler.  And so that was a case that went on for weeks and weeks and, and the clarifying moment was when the hearing with the, coroners hearing came back and said that the incident was a homicide which meant the person was killed by the hands of another person versus that it, and they didn't declare it as accidental, so that was a, a major defining mark in which many people in the black community viewed it as a victory for the first time that this was, had occurred.
Story_ID: 252061
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is Edwardo [ph.]--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Hewett [ph.].
Speaker 1: Hewett.  Sir could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Bernard Parks, B-E-R-N-A-R-D, P-A-R-K-S.
Speaker 1: And we are continuing an interview today that we started back in November of 2004.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Correct?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And, what, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is, what is it March 30th?  March 30, 2005.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, 31st.
Speaker 2: Thirty-first [31st]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Thirty-first [31st], okay.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in room 460 [Los Angeles] City Hall at 8th Council District [Council District 8] office.
Speaker 1: And you're currently the councilor for the 8th District (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Councilor, council member for the 8th District, yes.
Speaker 1: Here in Los Angeles [California]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 252062
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, from what I, we had you, one of the last things you were on the verge of joining the Los Angeles Police Department [LAPD].  Can you tell us what you were doing prior to joining the police department and what, what prompted you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to join the department?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  At the time, just before becoming an L.A. [Los Angeles, California] police officer I was working at the General Motors Plant, 8000 Van Nuys Boulevard.  I worked in what we called subassembly.  And at the time, on the way to work one day at the age of twenty years old, I heard on the ad that you could take the examination for police officer before your twenty-first birthday.  And so I applied, went through all of the processes at the age of twenty, was able to complete it and at the, my twenty-first birthday was December of 1964, so I was able to go in the first class in 1965 which was February.  And the thing that was most attractive, at the time at the General Motors Plant we were making about $3.06 an hour and we had a annual layoff because of the, the change in the model of the car, and so certainly looking for a more secure job.  And at that time the police department was paying an all-time high of $608 a month, so it was not a, a real difficult choice when you think about the security and also the additional pay involved.
Story_ID: 252063
Speaker 1: Was the exam difficult, or any of that (unclear) (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The exam was very difficult.  One thing that was important to me is that in the exam process if you had gone through either the [U.S.] military or sports you had a little bit more of a discipline, plus having gone through at least two years of college and also a high school education, you had a, a pretty good grasp on the academic part but if you were not able to have that discipline and understand the process you would have some difficulty.  Plus during that time there was not a outreach to minorities.  It was only eight out of eighty-five people in my graduating class [at the police academy], there were only five of them were black, no women, five blacks and I forget how many Hispanics.  But it was a difficult exam that you had to go through an oral interview, a psychological, a background, a medical, and then a, also a physical abilities.  And at the time in '60 [1960], the early '60s [1960s], there were certain stereotypes about black candidates with curvatures of the spine in which many of them were disqualified.  There were certainly issues as it relates to a lack of minorities on all boards so minority candidates did not normally get a above average interview.  So it was a very difficult process to get through.  Not so much on the substance of the exam but just how the evaluation and the rating accrued.  And the background process, it was extensive and they evaluated everything from your high school days all the way through your life, looking at your employment, whether you had been arrested, whether you had bad debts, a variety of things that had both objective and subjective, subjective criteria.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Curvature of your spine, I never heard that one.  (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was, I forget what the term was but it was a, a common disqualifier particularly amongst black candidates and later after some transition of doctors at Central Receiving Hospital [Los Angeles, California], which was the primary location for physical exams, that was evaluated in a different light as time went on but it was a common disqualifier, particularly amongst black candidates.
Story_ID: 252064
Speaker 1: Now what was your perception of the LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department] as you entered it?  Did you have, I mean, what was the street perception and how did you perceive the LAPD?
Speaker 2: Well the LAPD was not viewed, particularly in communities I grew up in, with open arms.  It was a necessary, generally viewed as a necessary evil.  You need the police but there was not a, a, a warm feeling, although what transcend the overall relationship with LAPD was the fact that there were some very visible black officers in the community that people related to.  There was the Tom Bradleys that walked foot beats on Central Avenue.  There was the Officer Kelly [ph.] who rode a three-wheeler around St. Patrick's [Catholic School, Los Angeles, California] grade school.  There were people that were, you know, somewhat legendary in the black community, Kenny Ship [Kenneth Shipp] and the Good Nos [ph.] and Joe Rouzan [Joseph T. Rouzan, Jr.] and Homer [F.] Broome [Jr.], those people were viewed in high standing in the black community, although the police department in general was not viewed in high standing.  And so these are the kind of conflicts that existed at least in the black community.  The police department was viewed as a necessity, it was not viewed as a caring department or one that was sensitive to the community issues.  And the general perception was is that if you could spend your life in Los Angeles [California] and not have contact with the police that was a good thing.  And so it was not a place that you felt that you should go visit.  You only went to the police department when there was trouble.  It was not an issue which, well contrary to today where they have open houses and all that.  Those were not the kinds of things that were consistently explored during that time in, in our history.
Speaker 1: I know the country's perception of LAPD was based on 'Dragnet' basically, yeah--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --and other shows like that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Dragnet.'  And, and I know one of the things is that 'Dragnet' and later 'Adam-12' were the visual image of the police department.  Where, in fact, in years later, some small departments actually used 'Adam-12' as training films because they were technically very accurate in how police work was done.  But one of the things I think without understanding the history of the City of L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and LAPD, there, there is not a clear awareness of why there was somewhat this distance, somewhat of a mandated distance from the community and the police department.  But if you go back in the history and realize that in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], LAPD was one of the most corrupt agencies in America.  In fact, the city government was one of the most corrupt governments in America.  And it wasn't until the, basically resignation or recall of Mayor [Frank L.] Shaw, that the city decided to reorganize its government to where many of the features that are here today was because of that level of corruption, the commission system where you have a citizen sitting on commissions creating policy which basically diffused the power of the mayor, where you had the police department and its discipline system protected by the charter, where up until the last several years, actually the chief of police was protected by civil servants.  These were all fundamental changes that occurred because of the overt corruption by the political process of the police department.  And at one time the police department was viewed as just an extension of the mayor's office in actually doing the mayor's bidding.  And there's documented evidence that the police department was involved in numerous crimes in behalf of the mayor.  And so that's, when you look at the Bill Parker [William H. Parker] era of sixteen years coming in and recreating the department, also having a big role in changing the charter of the City of Los Angeles and then creating a department that was number one mission was to be corruption free, it generally sent out a message that a familiarity within the community drove the corruption issue.  And that's how this, just the facts, ma'am, arms distance mechanized police department image was created.
Story_ID: 252065
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's an important point, that's, that's true of the whole country, I think, in Chicago [Illinois], other cities, started adopting a more detached mechanized, radio dispatched, you know, just the facts type police department to avoid the corruption--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of the familiar.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department] is probably the most replicated police department throughout the world.  They were the first department to have radios, first department to have a scientific investigation, first department to create an internal affairs, these were all features that created, the first department to do analysis in how to deploy its resources using formulas versus other methods of deploying people.  These are the kind of activities that were created in Los Angeles [California].  First department to have a SWAT unit dealing with tactical responses and then it kind of moved throughout the nation and adopted not only in the, throughout the nation, but also worldwide in a variety of features of what LAPD invented here locally.
Speaker 1: L.A. [Los Angeles, California], O.W. Wilson from out here then came to Chicago to reform the--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --the Chicago Police Department.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) O.W. Wilson made a major impact on, on not only Chicago, I think also in New York [New York].  The, but a lot of those issues stem from the Los Angeles Police Department and its efforts to change the dynamics of its history because at one time within the LAPD the, promotional process was just a matter of what you wanted to pay for your next promotional step.  And so their common theme was stated was that LAPD was the best department money could buy.  So if you wanted to be a sergeant it may cost you $500.  If you wanted a lieutenant's position, but it also in dealing with all that corruption and changing that image, and not saying that they didn't have its time and moments where people were fired for doing corrupt acts, the real issue was the, the systemic corruption is what was driven out of the department.  But at the same time the department was not only insensitive to its communities but insensitive to its employees particularly looking at ethnic diversity as being a priority or gender diversity.  In fact, women could not go above the rank of sergeant until the 1980s.  The, Tom Bradley left LAPD in 1961 because he could not, it was clearly stated he could not be a captain, no black would make the rank of captain in the LAPD, in the [William H.] Parker era.  During that period of time when Parker Center [Los Angeles, California] was built in the '50s [1950s], no black worked above the second floor because that's where record identification, but these were all the kinds of not so subtle messages about race relationships within the department and outside the department.
Story_ID: 252066
Speaker 1: In that atmosphere, now what, what, what was your experience as a recruit being trained, I mean, how, how were you received and how did you, what did you have to go through to (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So when I came on, you had a number of officers, and it was a not a lot of them, black officers, I think it was probably about four or five hundred black officers in the police department [Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)], but many of them understood, I mean, and what we used to always say in those times, is that the, there's no longer signs on the water fountain that said black and white, there were no longer a, a issue of saying blacks need not apply but the, it was unwritten rules to know that there were certain jobs that were unavailable.  It was that benign neglect.  It was the view that if the black officers in the department had made the rank of sergeant, that may generally be viewed as your, your, the summit, you're not gonna go beyond that.  Where, and particularly younger black officers it was viewed that you had no opportunity unless you had tenure and then it was only as a sergeant of police and very few blacks would ever make lieutenant and none considered the fact that captain was even in their reach.  And so, you know, you knew that there were certain positions, third floor detectives, specialized assignments, were not available to minorities.  Internal affairs only in the '60s [1960s] began to have black officers but there was only four positions and when blacks applied they only applied for the four positions that were available, never beyond that.  It wasn't until 1971 or so that Joe Rouzan [Joseph T. Rouzan, Jr.] became the first black to be an adjutant to a deputy chief.  You know, these are things that were just unwritten, they just were not, they were not posted saying need not come, you just knew you had no opportunity.
Story_ID: 252067
Speaker 1: I just realized in '65 [1965] you had the riots here in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Did you come in before the riots or after the riots?
Speaker 2: Before the riot, I came in in February, the riots were in August.  And what we have to realize is that the riots in August occurred just about four years after LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department] actually integrated its police, its police cars.  Up until 1961, black and white officers never worked in the same police car.  And, in fact, in the '50s [1950s] up until '61 [1961], if you were a black officer with your black partner and your partner didn't come to work, you were often sent home because they had no assignment for you, or you often worked alone.  And in the '50s [1950s] there were only a couple of places black officers could work, Newton Division.  And this is the same thing in the fire department.  In the fire department the only fire station that blacks were assigned, were 34th [Street] and Central [Avenue].  And so, these were the common threads in the department that blacks weren't sent throughout the city and it wasn't until '61 [1961] that you had a black and white police officer in the same police vehicle.  And then what occurred, kind of a dramatic shift was that when the riot occurred, one of the edicts of the department was that they mandated that black officers could not work together, 'cause they were trying to spread them as far as they could so people could see that there were more black officers than people may have perceived.  So after the '65 [1965] riot was the effort to show the city that there was, you know, as much visibility of black officers as possible.  But it was clearly not a part of the fabric of the department to even consider blacks in any meaningful manner, it was almost an afterthought, whatever job assignments, you have to realize that in the, until the '60s [1960s], blacks couldn't supervise white officers.  If you were, that's why most blacks that were sergeants were detective sergeants where they had no supervisor responsibility.  When they made black lieutenants over at Newton they only supervised black officers who worked Newton.  In fact, there's a story about the city messed up in a department and promoted four black lieutenants and only had three spots and ended up having to terminate one of the black lieutenants on probation because there wasn't a fourth job for that lieutenant.  That lieutenant later became an attorney, a judge in a variety of other things but these were the kinds of things that are, are marked in the history of black progress in the department.
Story_ID: 252068
Speaker 1: Now what was, well what were your experiences as a trainee, how did you, how were you treated and what was the, you know, what were the biggest challenges that you faced?
Speaker 2: The, the biggest challenges were that you were not generally even considered.  If there was a special detail such as in a patrol unit where you're gonna have a special, what they used to call a special operation, blacks weren't even thought of to be put in those positions.  Blacks didn't get a chance to work in vice unless it was a specific black vice problem, where your ethnicity played a role.  But the key was, is that most of the decisions were not, were being made by white supervisors who tended to pick people in their own image and likeness.  So you may have gotten on the department, you may have gotten in patrol, but there was no real channel to get you out of that into specialized assignments or other assignments that would equip you to become a sergeant because no one was willing to, to select you for those.  And so it was generally almost viewed as if you got through the selection process on to the department, it was viewed as you were fortunate but there was no real value in being on the department unless it was an ethnic issue of community relations or something in which, at that time, the view was a black officer working with, working to solve a black problem but not necessarily that black officer could solve universal problems, and so you were just viewed as being on the department.  Many times also realize in the '60s [1960s], when the Black Panther Movement and the riots occurred, concerned, black officers were being suspected of being subversives inside the organization.  Black officers were surveilled just like black residents.  Black officers were dealing, they--black officers started a black police association, it was viewed as a subversive unit within the police department 'cause why would blacks all want to come together.  And you heard people say well, we're all one LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department] and, and why would blacks need an association and the white officers don't have an association, I say, you do, you have LAPD and so, you know.  But these were the, and this was not just in Los Angeles [California], I joined at a very young age an organization called International Association of Chiefs of Police.  And I used to go to the conventions and there were few, if any, black officers in those associations, few, if any, received any committee assignments.  And in fact, even in the police department deputy chiefs used to call me in and wonder why I went to these association meetings, did I go on my own time, how did I get there, what was the reason for my participation, because they couldn't understand why a black sergeant and lieutenant would have an interest in going and finding out what was going on in law enforcement on a larger scale.  And so those were the kind of biases, I mean, that many of the, the issues of the department was far beyond where people were using racial slurs but it was clear that there was no open armed approach of acceptance nor was there willingness to help facilitate and there was a constant questioning of, or of being suspect.  We used to laugh about it as black officers, if you wore a natural and a leather jacket you were just viewed as a Black Panther whether you did anything or not, it was just viewed as you took on a image of a negative in which the police department was associated with.
Story_ID: 252069
Speaker 1: The other side of that with the [black] community during those days, there was a lot of talk about the community distrusting black officers and being informants and trying to tell--
Speaker 2: Well, I think, we got a bit of that, the people distrusted but I think the, what I found, the more that you were in the community, the more that you were visible in the community, the more that the community appreciated that you had a willingness to try to work and address issue from the inside.  I'm not saying that it was easy because if you came on the side of not agreeing with a community position, then you were viewed as just a black that was useless or a Uncle Tom or you had been basically taken in the department [Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)] and brainwashed.  I mean, so it was one of those issues that as always if you stood up and took a position that was contrary or you were not on the forefront or out walking in the march, there were people who suspected your loyalty to the community.  And so, but it took a while for people to understand that if you're gonna change things from the inside that there were different ways people had to play.  You could not, there are many people that were viewed as radicals that were blacks and radicals and today the positions they took would not be viewed as that radical but at the time, they basically lost or destroyed their career because they spoke up but they, they basically broke down barriers for those who came behind them.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  (Unclear) I was just, I guess, well it must have been, it must have been tough to be a black police, police officer in them days then (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: It was tough because you have pressure from both sides.  The communities sometimes were suspect, certainly you were suspect in the police department because you were, what was it, you were scrutinized in every way.  And what I used to always think was humorous was that you'd have a young white officer come in the department that showed just a, a tad of maybe skills and people would be predicting that they could be a chief of police in the future but yet they'd by working side by side with a minority or black officer whose skill level was significantly higher and people wouldn't even consider them for a position in a division, and so it was strictly, I mean, it was just that those skills were ignored.  It wasn't until black officers became supervisors, sergeants, lieutenants, that then their ability to sit on interviews, sit on panels, being able to make selections, began to open the doors to get black and female officers an opportunity to be in different assignments.
Story_ID: 252070
Speaker 1: When you were a rookie cop, did you have a mentor or were, were there a number of people that helped you along that you could--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well, well I was fortunate enough when I came on, the first break I got was that I went to Wilshire Detectives [Los Angeles Police Department Wilshire Detective Division] very early, it was almost unheard of, when I became a detective with two and a half, less than three years people just couldn't understand how that happened.  Just happened to run into a captain, Joe Cushore [ph.] at Wilshire that gave me an opportunity to be a detective.  From that I had an opportunity to meet Joe Rouzan [Joseph T. Rouzan, Jr.] and Homer [F.] Broome [Jr.] and I began to in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] began to coach Pop Warner football.  And from there, here are two people that began to talk about studying and promoting.  And then met Jesse [A.] Brewer and Ed Henry and those who were in that level ahead of me, Billy Wedgeworth, that were all in the mindset of studying and promoting.  And all of 'em moved forward, Billy Wedgeworth left as a commander, Joe Rouzan left as a captain, Ed Henry retired as a captain, Homer Broome was the first black captain, first black commander, Jesse Brewer retired as an assistant chief being the first deputy chief.  I got a chance to meet them as I was preparing to begin to study in the late '60s [1960s] to begin to get ready and prepare for sergeant.  So I had an opportunity to go sit down with them and find out what they did to become sergeants or lieutenants and began to incorporate what they advised me to get into my study program.  Then I had folks that were not black like Pete Nelson who was a deputy chief, because of his relationship with Joe Rouzan gave me an opportunity to work in a, the first time a black working in what we call the administrative position in our detective bureau.  Those were the kind of things that occurred because folks were willing to take a, a chance.  And then, you know, making sergeant and getting a chance to go to Internal Affairs [Internal Affairs Group] and those kinds of positions, gave me an opportunity to promote to the next level.  I was always fortunate that to realize early on that these exams that were given, that 50 percent of it was in your hands, if you studied hard and wrote a decent written you would be very competitive because you had no expectation of getting above average at all, and so from sergeant to lieutenant to captain, I was fortunate enough to write and compete in the exams on the examination part of the written and do quite well and always ended up with the average oral of which meant you would always get promoted.
Story_ID: 252071
Speaker 1: --You started going to school too around the time that you--
Speaker 2: You know, I, I came on the job with, it's kind of interesting, with forty-five units of junior college [Los Angeles City College, Los Angeles, California] and what was interesting at that time in the '60s [1960s] because realizing most of the LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department] officers came from the [U.S.] military, had a high percentage of military people, not people who came from the college ranks, so with forty-five units in 1965 I had some of the high, I had some of the highest education of, of my graduating class, contrary to today where most everybody that comes to the department has very close to a bachelor's degree.  At that point a few college credits was significant in comparison where most people came with a, a high school diploma.  What for my, I always tell people, my progress in the department in 1970 I was a police officer with a A.A. degree and in 1980 I was a commander with a master's degree.  So all of my education and most of my promotions occurred between the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s].
Story_ID: 252473
Speaker 1: So we, we have you around 1970.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, can you tell us about your, your promotion to sergeant, I mean, that must have been a big deal, that's the first of your promotions.
Speaker 2: That's right.  When, when I made sergeant in 1970, at that time again, it was the, the first general wave of black sergeants actually going out in the field and supervising, not first but close to the first wave, very few sergeants, so I made sergeant out of Wilshire Detectives [Los Angeles Police Department Wilshire Detective Division] and I went out to [Los Angeles] Harbor Division [Port of Los Angeles] and, and basically supervised the many officers in that division who were nonblack and that was not in, in that era, that was not something that was viewed as routine because there was not a lot of black officers or black sergeants and certainly Harbor Division wasn't viewed as an enclave of places where there was a significant black community.  But again, making sergeant, and also making sergeant at barely 25 or 26 years of age, both of them were unique because, number one, it was a very small number of sergeants that were black and rarely had any of them made it in their twenties.  It was something in which was somewhat unique.  And generally they would, promote more tenured people.  And again realizing at that time, we still had detective sergeants and that's where most of our black sergeants worked, from the historical perspective if they made sergeant and they were not put in supervisory positions.
Story_ID: 252474
Speaker 1: Were there any specific community issues in 1970 when you were the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were community issues in the '70s [1970s] because we were still only five years after the Watts riot, we were still in the late '60s [1960s] the antiwar demonstrations, you also had the assassinations of MLK [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and [Senator] Robert [F.] Kennedy and [President] John [Fitzgerald] Kennedy.  All these things were crushed into the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], so it was a very volatile time as to street activity dealing with demonstrations, the [Vietnam] War, all these things were percolating on the city streets.  And one of the things, even at that time, whatever was happening throughout the world, found its way to play out in the streets of the City of L.A [Los Angeles, California].
Story_ID: 252475
Speaker 1: Now, in 1968 when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and I heard all kinds of stories especially with black police officers in--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Chicago [Illinois] about were, were there and what happened--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in the police department during that time even though it happened in Memphis [Tennessee], not in the city--
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: --where they were.  But do you have any recollection of what you were doing when Dr. King was assassinated in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in '68 [1968] I was a, a police officer working in Wilshire Detectives [Los Angeles Police Department Wilshire Detective Division] and the, and again, realizing that up, well before Dr. King was assassinated, general perception was Dr. King was a communist and a subversive and he was a rebel (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the police department [Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)]?
Speaker 2: Within the police department.  He was a rabble-rouser because he came out and created civil unrest and those were the perceptions of Dr. King from the general population.  It was not--
Speaker 1: Now, at that time did that seem, and now you, you just came out of (unclear).
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) except that Dr. King he was a hero, a peacemaker.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but not with--
Speaker 1: Nobel Prize winner.
Speaker 2: No, not, not as a police officer.  The police department viewed, when you visualize that, when Dr. King showed up and there was civil unrest, the police department was thrown into action to quell that civil unrest.  So he was viewed totally different than in the general public.  He was not viewed as a peacemaker, he was not viewed as a Nobel Peace Prize winner, he was viewed as a, a rebel rouser and a person that created community unrest because the police department's general perception was they had to respond to that unrest.  Just as the response to the Vietnam War, it wasn't that the police were supporting or not supporting the war, it was that generally in this city at Century Plaza [Hotel, Los Angeles, California] was the location that the president would stay at whenever he came to Los Angeles [California], that became the symbol of a demonstration for the city, in the City of L.A. [Los Angeles, California] for those who were against the war.  So it became viewed as the police were against the war demonstrators versus that the war demonstrators were creating civil unrest and the police were interjected into saving property and saving lives.  I think the same attitude just prior to that with Dr. King was, if you look at the videos and the, and the media projections in the South where Dr. King was leading civil disturbances down in the South, the police were interjected in those in stopping that civil discourse and then immediately were labeled as being anti-civil rights.  In many instance were working at the direction of the political powers and in those communities that was basically thwarting this change.  And so these are the kinds of issues and things that were thrust upon the police department and, and certainly I know black officers did not view that Dr. King was a subversive, did not view him as being someone that was anti-United States, but clearly as a police response to his presence, generally his presence was viewed as being, creating a disruption in the city because of the issues, whether he was leading a march against the war or leading a march against the anti-civil rights or the issues that he chose to come out on, would not be quietly assembled inside of a building and give a speech, he would create that tension and turmoil in the street which thrust the police department in the middle of it.
Story_ID: 252476
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was wondering if there was a story from that day--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --because that's the type of day that calls all these contradictions to a, a head and I know I've heard many a story from that very day when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] died from--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --departments so.  Did, yeah how did you have, do you have any stories from that day?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think that was unfortunate that there was conflict with the department [Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)] where some people thought it was great, that he was no longer there.
Speaker 1: Did, did you hear that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: No, we heard that, I mean those were the kinds of tensions that were in roll call rooms and hallways of police stations where there were white officers who thought it was wonderful that, in that he was assassinated.  There were--
Speaker 1: And they weren't a little subtle about expressing that?
Speaker 2: Oh no, and this, and black officers thought that was offensive and these were the tensions that were ongoing in which, in a department where, number one, you're supposed to have a united front in how you go out and enforce the law, these were the kinds of tensions that were inside the department and created additional tensions in people's interaction with each other.  But they were not unlike, excuse me, other tensions in the sense of civil rights, affirmative action, these debates have been held in the hallways and byways of police stations for years where people have a completely different view of whether women should be police officers, whether affirmative action means that all minorities got a break as opposed to were promoted with their qualifications, these were the kinds of things that may not crop out into the public domain but they are the challenges that were discussed and, and debated and, and vigorously created tension inside of station houses.  And so it's not unlike whatever happens in the community doesn't exist inside the police department.  Same issue with Malcolm X's death.  There were people who thought that was a good idea.  There were those that were black that said that wasn't a good idea and that tension played out within the police department also.
Speaker 1: But how did it affect you, your disposition as an officer, I mean this, this kind of (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the way it effected my disposition is to realize how far we had, we had to go.  That we were, as a agency not only, not sensitive to our community issues, that we had folks in the department that were well behind the curb as it related to what these symbols in the black community really meant.  Now only what they meant, they didn't even care what they meant.  And so that was a clear indication of, of showing, the department was in the dark ages as it related to many of these issues.  No matter what the happy face was put on, to say well the police department was driving to do this or that.  And, and what you found, what you found in many instances, these very issues that played out in the street created the very changes within the police department because as you saw the Watts riot and people identified the absence of black officers or the absence of promotions the, in dealing with a variety of civil issues, that those were kind of the issues that drove more of the sensitivity, not that it was overnight, not that, you know, it was something that said the door was wide open, it still caused a great number of years for certain changes to be made.  And those changes are constantly under scrutiny and can revert at any time depending on the sensitivity of those that are in charge of the department.
Story_ID: 252477
Speaker 1: As a young officer, did you, did, can you remember when you first encountered corruption in the, in the police department [Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)]?  I mean, I'm sure everybody knows it must be there at some point, at some place.
Speaker 2: Well I think you--
Speaker 1: So did you have a initial experience where you witnessed, you know--
Speaker 2: Well what I, well I think when, and again for corruption and it just depends on, you know, there was, there was a very broad definition of corruption and, and I think some time people, a very narrow definition where people think corruption is just a matter of taking money or, or such as that.  I think what you found in the police department, if, and again whether there was corruption in the sense of how people thought and dealt with people, that you would see that there was a insensitivity of a whole community.  Whether there was a caring or whether you would add a blemish on somebody's record and be concerned about it or how you would impact people's lives, if you were not as sensitive as it related to whether you charged them with something or whether there was a lack of concern at all in the sense of charge them and let 'em work it out themselves.
Speaker 1: The conventional wisdom is very tough to, to report something that's corrupt and people will agonize over whether they ought to or not because of--
Speaker 2: But it's always that, you know, things of agonizing.  I, I, I've never been in a situation as a police officer where the conventional corruption is for someone say taking money.  I've not been confronted where that has been thrust upon me or where people that were around me had difficulty understanding that issue that you couldn't, although we had times in which officers basically got arrested for fixing tickets or for bailing people out of jail for a fee and things like that, these were not systemic things to where they were ingrained in the department to where it was the way business was done.  But what I viewed and over time, is that if there was corruption, it was more of in the thought processes of how you dealt with people, whether you dealt with them with dignity, whether you dealt with them equally, whether you reflected any real sensitivity of the impact that you made on their lives or was there just a general perception that some people were throwaways and others were worth saving.
Story_ID: 252478
Speaker 1: And I think that's where it's a harder issue to address that level of corruption because so much of it could be done on a subjective level as opposed to an objective, as, as opposed to an objective, and you know the whole issue of what probable cause is, it's all in the eyes of the beholder but whether you've done something that gives me the right to maybe take one of the two most precious things you have which is your liberty or your life, whether that level of insensitivity rides through on those kinds of decisions and whether yes, legally you could have done that but did you have to do that.  'Cause what I found early on, is the general public often did not complain about what you did but they consistently complained about how it was done.  Unfortunately, by minority communities, particularly black communities, continually complaining about how they were treated did not drive a change in the treatment, what it drove was a perception of antipolice, which was again the level of insensitivity as though we're here to provide you this service and you're not accepting of it so it must be an antipolice versus the fact that we may not be doing a good job.  And the police department has always had a very difficult time in understanding service from two angles.  They clearly understand service from the giver of the service.  They've never quite understood the receiver of the service because they don't often receive their own service.  So they're offended when you're not satisfied as opposed to saying well maybe there's a reason that you're not satisfied.  And a lot of that plays from the fact that historically police officers have not lived in the very city that they're providing this service.  So they only have one view of their service as the giver of the service and, and they get offended by the fact that you don't find that service acceptable and rarely if ever have the benefit of receiving their department's service and seeing whether it's the quality they think it is.
Speaker 2: You know, yeah, this is really a source of tension in the community (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's, it is a tension and what you find just like anything else, the more that you are associated with issues, the broader your point of view is.  It's easy in life in the supervision if you can make decisions in a closed door and not being worried about the human aspect.  The human aspect is what broadens your view and creates conflict because it then clearly reflects, it's not as simple as you thought it was.  When you see the faces of the people you impact by your decisions, whether they're residents or officers, it creates a different sensitivity on how that decision should be made.  If you can make those decisions void of that human contact, the decision is fairly easy 'cause you don't have any repercussions of knowing how they impacted the people.  So, part of that whole leadership equation is having compassion to understand how you impact people.
Story_ID: 252479
Speaker 1: You steadily moved up the ladder in the department [Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)] over the years and did you, you earned a B.S. from Pepperdine [University, Malibu, California].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]--
Speaker 2: USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) USC.
Speaker 2: Don't, don't don't make me UCLA, now.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, okay, all right, I, I forget, you know.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I'm from Chicago [Illinois].  I better watch it, watch where I step with this.  But, yeah, so, did you, what did you learn in school that that really helped, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --contemplate and get a degree.  And what, what (unclear).
Speaker 2: What was fortunate, I thought, is that and I, and everybody I think it's different for them but I really didn't come to appreciate my education until I was able to work and gain my education at the same time because I began to see how what I was going to school for actually impacted my day to day life which would, I think would have been different had I gone to school and gotten all my degrees and then went into the workforce.  Because like I said, I came on as a twenty-one year old police officer with forty-five units of community college [Los Angeles City College, Los Angeles, California] and then progressed through and got my community college degree by studying.  I always kid people and tell them that it took me eight years or nine years to get out of community college, it took me that long to figure out it was a two year college but I stayed there and got my education but then immediately from 1970 to '76 [1976], I got both my bachelor's and my master's degree.  What was the beneficial, both the bachelor's and master's degree program was that I was working in an environment that the very things I was studying was helping me do my job.  The other issue that was important, I was going to school with people who actually were in a work environment, they were not just students living at home with their parents, they actually were working in a variety of governmental employment and they brought real live circumstances to the educational process.  So those were the benefits of going to school at the time I went to school, to see that it wasn't just memorizing the material for the test, that there was actual application and real live application in, in your job.  And also you had the ability to learn from your fellow students who were all working for a living.  And particularly at USC we had students that were from foreign countries in a variety of interests where you often found that their issues were very similar to what was going on in your organization as it would be in a foreign government in their organization.
Story_ID: 252480
Speaker 1: Well tell us about some of these other promotions--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and how they took place and, just, and by 1980 you were a commander--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --which was a, that means that you commanded a district or (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, basically the way it went in the City of L.A. [Los Angeles, California] is that it had to, also at the time you were a police officer you go to sergeant, you're supervising a group of eight to ten officers, generally in a uniform assignment or you could be a detective sergeant and basically work as a senior officer on a investigative table or you were in some administrative job.  As a lieutenant, you were a watch commander, you ran a watch of one-third of the, of a patrol assignment or you could be in specialized assignments like community relations or you could be a detective lieutenant.  So a variety of assignments that you could go through.  But I was fortunate, and again meeting people early on in my career that gave me some real insight on how and what I should be doing to prepare myself.  And then I had the dedication and the, and the discipline to study generally somewhere, some time with up to a year in advance of an exam, preparing myself for that written exam because I knew that would be the one facet that I had control over because they had to grade the exam in the blind, they didn't know who the candidate was, and depending how well I could prepare myself for the exam was indicative of how well I would do on, on the process because in studying prior exams and promotional lists I found that those who wrote the best, irrespective of their orals, did the best.  And so you found as though if you could get an average oral and study hard and get a good written you would be successful.  And so with the sergeant's exam on a list of, I think there may have been four hundred sergeants on that list, I made sergeant I think in the first six months the list came out.  As a lieutenant, I had I think in the top ten writtens and I was number, I think thirteen in the list that got promoted [in the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)] very shortly.  And captain I was number two on the list.  Commander I think I was number four or five.  And so, I was able to promote because I scored higher on the exam.  And I was able to promote very rapidly in the decade of the '70s [1970s] because I hit all of those exams within a two year cycle of, of studying, promoting, getting ready for the next exam.  The longest, and I was always so very fortunate to make promotion the first time I took the exam so I didn't have to go back and take it over and over again.  And then the first exam that I actually stood, stayed longer in rank than any other was at commander because the city went through some transition and actually cut the number of deputy chief positions so for about four years there were no promotions to deputy chief.  And so I stayed in the commander rank for like eight years before I made deputy chief but again it was because of circumstances of not having open lists, not having promotions because there was a major cut in the number of deputy chiefs and it took that long to attract them out.  But I was very fortunate in going through the ranks and, and promoting.  With the deputy chief exam, the only one I had to take twice, and then the chief of police exam I was fortunate enough to take twice and be successful on both of them.
Story_ID: 252481
Speaker 1: What do you think the--were the major strengths that you brought to the positions you held as you, you know, as you rose up the ranks [of the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)]?
Speaker 2: I think the number thing was that I brought integrity and consistency and I, and I brought the issue of an understanding of what the department required but I had a unique I think also additional background.  Early in my career I had an opportunity to be part of a NOBLE, the National Association of Black Law Enforcement Executives [sic. National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives], where I got an a significant understanding about issues that dealt with race relationships in other cities, and particularly issues that dealt with use of deadly force, things that were very critical issues throughout the nation.  And with that exposure and with that, having a broader view of law enforcement other than in Los Angeles [California], I was able to incorporate that in how I addressed issues that confronted me.  And so I've always been very, very explicit on what my views were about using deadly force and using force of any of type.  I was one of the first captains that actually kept my own files in place to track what officers did with use of force because I didn't think it was by coincidence that there were people that got in use of force more often than others.  I was one of the first captains that would reassign or put people on the desk because they reflected a, a level of use of force that was inconsistent with the norm.  Though, I was one of the first people that would find in, in the sense of disciplining people, that would look at not always discounting the complainant from the community but looking at the person bad, back history and saying how is it that you as an officer would have three or four improper remark complaints using the same vernacular with three different people yet within, we're gonna find we can't prove these three separate incidents but I viewed it as if you can report them together and show that there's a history of that kind of use of similar terms, similar circumstances that you would be able to sustain it.  Now I was overruled by my supervisors but it made an impact on the people that worked with me, worked for me to know that I wasn't gonna tolerate that behavior.  And so also one of the first captains that would send people to psychological evaluation when it appeared as though they were out of sync as it related to their behavior and what was expected.  So those are the kinds of things that I brought to the table.  And plus I think many black officers have a tendency to carry the community concerns because they can't avoid the community, they grew up in the community, they're aware of what these issues as it related to police work was all about.  And so you had a community sensitivity.  And in many instances you carried those community concerns in your day to day work environment.  And so you had a broader view of what police meant to the community other than arresting people like they say hook 'em and book 'em and that was the end of it.  You understood a much, had a much broader understanding.  I think that's what I brought during my career.
Story_ID: 252482
Speaker 1: Did the election of Tom Bradley like help things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think Tom Bradley--
Speaker 1: --him having been an ex-police officer and a black officer?
Speaker 2: You know what, I don't perceive that he was narrowly defined as it relates just for the police record.  I think what Tom Bradley did for the city, is he opened up the view that many minorities and females woke up every morning saying I have an opportunity.  It wasn't just in the police department [Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)], it was all over the city.  That I have an opportunity to fulfill my dream in the City of L.A. [Los Angeles, California], whether you were a, a custodian and wanted to be the chief custodian or whether you were administrative assistant and wanted to promote to something else, he brought that in a general context to a city that was exploding with diversity.  And it wasn't just in the police department it was all over the City of L.A.  But I think that was what his, one of his major legacies was as it related to just the waking up knowing for twenty years that here is the most visible symbol of achievement that everyone can say these opportunities are available.
Story_ID: 252082
Speaker 1: Now, can you tell us when did you first hear about the concept of community policing?
Speaker 2: First concept was it, during the Ed Davis [Edward M. Davis] administration in the '70s [1970s].  He created two or three major directions in the department [Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)].  One was the basic car where in his view that what was wrong with policing is the police officers never had a relationship with the community they served.  So he broke the city up into several dozen what he called basic cars.  And the concept was that basically nine officers would be assigned to each basic car which meant these nine officers would work the same unique area and they would pass the baton after an eight hour shift and they would consistently work that car.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now you're saying car, what are you--
Speaker 2: Police car.
Speaker 1: How do you oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And that car--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) would be assigned, instead of in the past people just had cars out patrolling and they would be dispatched--
Speaker 1: A random patrol.
Speaker 2: --random patrol.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And dispatched randomly, he reconfigured and said let's coordinate and break the city up into coordinates that identified with a police car being assigned routinely.  So the same nine officers, every day would be assigned there and they, and with nine officers when one officer was off, the other two would be working constantly, and they would be the same officers that when night watch was off, they would give it to morning watch and say this is what occurred.  And the more that they worked that area, the more they became familiar with it, the more they would be sensitive to the community's needs.  So he created that concept called the basic car which was the first step in community policing.  He then invented something else called team policing where he experimented with a larger concept and say well if that worked well with these individual basic cars, why don't we pull several basic cars together, put 'em under the direction of the lieutenant and say you're now responsible for an area of the city over a twenty-four hour basis.  The experiment with the team policing it didn't work as well as the basic car but yet what it set in place was the understanding of several principles, one that the police department had to rely on voluntary compliance of the law.  So the more people that you got to voluntarily comply with the law, the less that the police department had to do in arresting law violators.  The way you developed that voluntary compliance is having officers familiar with the problem and do as much prevention and intervention as they did with arresting people.  So if you can convince a liquor store owner of as to what the law is and how to comply with it, you wouldn't have to sit in front of their place and arrest law violators for drinking in public view.  That was the concept.  And the other issue was based on that, there was a direct correlation on the cooperation that you received from the public as to how much force you would have to use to impose the law.  And the more that you had a familiarization with the public, the view was the less force you'd have to use and more cooperation would be gained.  That's the crux of community based policing.  Unfortunately, those who don't understand it well, and it's currently, as it exists in the City of L.A. [Los Angeles, California] today, believe it's more about community relations but you're just out making people feel good.  In reality, what Ed Davis did, which was contrary to his persona, people viewed him to be the tough abrupt police guy that said arrest them at any cost, hang 'em at the airport, but he put into place a concept that had more community orientation that actually impacted crime positively than any police chief in the history of American policing because he put police officers in people's front rooms of their houses, and their churches and their stores, talking to them about how they can be a partner in cutting crime, reducing crime, and when that fails catching the criminal.  But what has occurred over time, is people have gotten away from that true conception and believe that the community relations aspect can be done by one group of officers but the real police work can be done by these other officers.  And so they've kind of destroyed the concept because the community never complains about the community relations officer because the community relations officer never does anything to be complained about.  But they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He shakes hand and greets 'em and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  What he, what they complain about is the guy that shows up at two in the morning and is discourteous and mistreats them and believes that he has no relationship with the public.  That's the concept that is currently being employed in L.A. City [Los Angeles, California] today, where senior leads are put out as the face of the police department but do not in effect respond to your call when you need them and is not the disrespectful officer that drives the community discontent.
Story_ID: 252083
Speaker 1: The disrespectful officer is the one that's sitting in his car somewhere or her car, and gets a call and doesn't provide the service and when someone asks them about the community relations aspect of the job, they say categorically, call the senior lead we're really, we're the real police, we just arrest people.  That's how we have gotten away from what is viewed by almost every expert as true community based policing.  You cannot have community based policing without every officer understanding their role and responsibility to the community.  And you get those who don't understand it and will say well, if everybody's responsible then no one's responsible.  You say no, no, everyone is responsible because the moment you tell a police officer that you have no responsibility for treating the public properly, for serving them, they will take that to heart and, and in return, their insensitivities will become a part of how they operate.  And you can't solve those insensitivity issues by sending a group of smiling senior leads out and say don't you think we're wonderful?  Because yeah, they are wonderful except they have no ability with the small number of them to impact the four million people that are in the city [Los Angeles, California].  And so that's the split force operation that has basically destroyed what was viewed as a ideal concept.  And what's unfortunate about community based policing is everybody nods in agreement that it's good but no one takes the time to identify what they really think it is because there are some people who would say community based policing is, is, as insignificant as an officer smiling and waving, where some people will say no it's more of a special unit, here's community policing, I got a bike unit.  None of those are community based policing.  Smiling and waving is just courtesy.  A bike unit is a unit that could be a unique way to enforce the law.  And what's a misperception about community based policing is that it's not soft on crime, it's not saying don't arrest people, which many people believe that if you just go out and shake hands and smile.  Police, community based policing covers the entire spectrum of a complex issue called crime and it understands that you can prevent crime by educating the public when you go to a burglary and explain to people how not to be burglarized in the future.  You can prevent crime by analyzing where crime keeps occurring and going to that local community and giving them the information in hopes that they not be victimized initially or a second or third time.  And you can intervene in certain things such as youth not going to school and getting them to the truant officer so that they can go to school which then cuts down your crime because you can do a variety of things on, on the prevention, intervention, and education aspect that actually prevents crime, so you're never losing sight that you're there as a crime fighter.  Then when that fails, you arrest people.  And when that fails you prosecute them and you still have a responsibility when they come out of jail to hope that you rehabilitate them and get them back into the mainstream.  But without that complex response to a complex problem, you find people come up with a very simplistic view of just arresting people, count your stats, say if crime's up or down, and move on.  And that's the unfortunate aspect, and they'll label that as community based policing (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 252084
Speaker 1: Another aspect of all this in, in most police departments, success is measured by a number of arrests rather than prevention.  Is it harder to measure a crime that didn't happen?
Speaker 2: It is harder but the issue is it's, but you've set yourself up for failure because if you don't participate in, in the issue of prevention, intervention, education, then what you develop is, you're going down a road of saying the answer to our problem is keep building prisons.  And the answer to our issues are build more courthouses because we, we only have one solution and the age old statement that if the only tool you have is a hammer then everything looks like a nail.  So the issue is that in order to look at this complex issue, you must have complex responses.  It's, you, if you choose to, you can make every police department an arrest machine, you could put 'em in a mode that's all they do but if you're smart about it, you begin to realize that there are about 20 percent of the criminal population that commits about 80 percent of the crime.  So if you start concentrating on the 20 percent you'll make more of an impact than going out every night with a big net saying let me arrest everyone.  You will also find that if you analyze what you've done in the past, that you could impact what you do in the future, so if you realize that you have made a thousand arrests for drinking in public view and you take on an educational program of how to educate bar owners and liquor store owners on how to prevent that, you can actually change the dynamic of that crime but yet people will criticize you that you're a thousand arrests short of last year but what you actually have done is changed the dynamics and solved the problem.  So we have just as much responsibility to solve problems as we do to make arrests, and that's where there's a lack of understanding.  It's just like the issue of, of responding to false alarms on burglaries.  If you find that you have a significant increase and it's all in one building, you have as much responsibility to go there and educate the business owners of how to keep their alarm systems from causing you to come unnecessarily as you do to fine them for having a false alarm.  And so the more that you look at your job in a narrow fashion, it always reverts back to arrests and what they call objective figures but if you truly are doing your job as it relates to solving problems, you'll find that there are both objective and subjective measures to impact the problem and does not get to arrests all the time but causes other things to occur.  So it's a very complex problem and I always am very leery of anyone that is able to capsulize what they do in police work with a sound bite because there's nothing in police work that is so mundane that you can capsulize it in a sound bite.
Story_ID: 252085
Speaker 1: Tell me this, now you, you became police chief of the city [Los Angeles, California] in '97 [1997]?
Speaker 2: Ninety-seven [1997].
Speaker 1: And during this rise what were the, what were the highlights and the obstacles and what are some of the stories going on?
Speaker 2: Well I think first of all, the, you know, the obstacles in general were certainly in the competitive process of exam taking.  That you had to just understand not only how to take an exam but you had to understand the political process in the department [Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)] that would allow you to be promoted.  And so you, it was not always the smartest person who got promoted but it was people that understood both processes and if you separated them, you could be good at one part and after taking exam, you never get promoted.  The other issue was understanding clearly at all times that you had, whether you wanted to accept it or not, you had a additional responsibility of the community's concerns about policing as well as promoting.  So you could not abandon that responsibility because the community was looking for your ability when you got in those positions to make an impact on the things that they viewed as being important.  And also officers that followed you were looking for you to make an impact on what was obviously a system that did not promote minorities and females.  And so if you got in those positions and did not make those changes, then you not only did a disservice to those that were in support of you, both the community and those who came behind you, but you did a disservice to yourself because the whole purpose of getting in these positions was to make an impact in my judgment.
Story_ID: 252086
Speaker 1: Did you change some things when you--
Speaker 2: Oh, you had to.
Speaker 1: --as, as you moved up the ranks [in the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)]?
Speaker 2: That's right.  You had to make the changes in order to change the dynamics of the organization.  That you looked at issues, whether it was diversity, whether it was dealing with use of force, whether it was dealing with rules and regulations that inhibited people's ability to progress or whether it dealt with a lack of sensitivity where the community perceived the department, all of those were vital issues to make an impact to bring a more inclusive nature in the department.  And what I found is that whether I was a lieutenant in Venice Division and I was going out to meetings and letting people see the visibility of what I was doing and bringing forth solutions to their problems, or as a captain in 77th [Street Community Police Station] where you were addressing issues to where the community felt they were being unfairly treated and you had to either discipline officers, retrain them, reassign them, because the clear message to me has always been the community's morale and the community's input by far was the most important input as it related as a police administrator.  And so those were the kinds of things that I felt that you had, you could not ignore, you could not, not pay attention to, and that's what drove my perception of what policing was about is how did we solve community issues, how did we eliminate community tension, how did we cause the community to believe that the police department was one in the same as the community.
Story_ID: 252087
Speaker 1: Now, the Los Angeles Police Department [LAPD] really was in, was in national news from beginning of the '90s [1990s] and all the through--
Speaker 2: Um-hm
Speaker 1: --for, not for the best things.  It was always in the midst of some struggle.  The first incident was Rodney King's beating and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --arrest in 1991 [sic. 1992] I believe it was, right?
Speaker 2: Ninety [1990], '91 [1991], '92 [1992], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You were like deputy, deputy chief (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Chief, that's right.
Speaker 1: --at that time.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now how did you perceive that, I mean, with all the, media focus on--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: --the city [Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: Well the first time I saw it on television, you looked at it and said that's not, that was a bad deal.  I mean you could see obviously a couple of things, having sat on a bunch of use of force boards, you saw immediately that there was, whatever happened, and people were saying well what you didn't see is what happened before the tape started rolling.  It made little difference what happened before the tape was rolling because there was what you saw in the tape didn't warrant what the response was.  And generally what was most obvious to me is that when you hear officers say how violent the circumstances were but yet you see the officers that were surrounding the incident not appearing to be frightened, animated, or involved, gave a clear indication that this fear factor wasn't as, wasn't evident to all of them.  When you saw the sergeant spending more time trying to get the taser wire untangled versus supervising the officers involved, it was a clear indication that you have a situation you know how to control.  And I was the first administrator on the police department that personally and publicly said that this was not a policy incident and had to go to my roll calls as a deputy chief and tell them that, you know, they needed to look at that from the eye of a community perspective and not buy into all the rhetoric as it related to how they thought police officers should feel about this incident, and it was not well-received but clearly it had to be said.  And when you went through the Rodney King incident and then later all of the revelations over the computer and the cars where people were using derogatory and ethnically-stated complaints, I remember being in a meeting with deputy chiefs and Chief [Daryl] Gates when he was made aware of these racially insensitive remarks and where people, he was asking for insight about how the department should address it and I couldn't wait to raise my hand and I said the way you address is you stand up and you acknowledge it occurred, you basically tell people you're going to take serious action against those that were involved, you apologize to the community, and you make sure that people know that that's not indicative of the workings of the police department.  And there were others who said no, you never acknowledge that you, you basically say that it's a, you know, this dark police humor and you use it on the basis of saying it's a aberration and he did that, and basically escalated this event far beyond what it should have been.
Speaker 1: To a full scale riot of (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the, in the sense of--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: You know, so it went way beyond--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) city, right?
Speaker 2: And so the issue is there are times in which these kinds of situations should be dealt with just as we dealt with Rampart [scandal], you acknowledge it, you make it public, you bring the world in, and you show 'em what you found and you say, hey this is what we found, this is what we did with the officers, this is what we've located, here's the extent of it, and it becomes a public issue in which the department is driving this versus the fact that you have all of this discontent because it appears as though you're covering something up that is obviously can't be covered up.
Story_ID: 252088
Speaker 1: Briefly explain Rampart [scandal], for those who didn't (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Rampart is a circumstance that I, I, in fact today it's kind of interesting, they're gonna have a news conference talking about they're settling the last of the Rampart cases.  Rampart costs the City of L.A. [Los Angeles, California] just in settlements about $70 million.  But what Rampart started off as an, it came to my attention about five or six months upon becoming chief of police that we had about three pounds of cocaine missing out of one of our lockers.  I directed a very extensive review to make it wasn't just misplaced.  But once we found out that it was truly missing, started investigation and we began to focus in on an officer by the name of Rafael Perez through a variety of sources and such.  It took us almost a year and Rafael Perez was arrested for stealing this cocaine.  And in that theft of the cocaine we then, even while he was going to trial, continued to investigate his actions.  He went before court and was, it was a, a hung jury.  We began to deliberate on what are we gonna do with Rafael Perez?  And in that discussion we said we're gonna retry him but we're gonna continue investigating his actions.  During that continued investigation we found out he had stolen not only that three pounds of cocaine but he was responsible for another couple of pounds and then the more chilling effect is that we found that he had identified a glitch in the system.  He found out that if narcotics have been booked and the case has been disposed of, that that narcotics would stay in our system and no one would pay attention that if you took it out of the system and returned it.  So he would go to the locker and ask for narcotics that had already been disposed in a case and take it out as though he was going to court because at that time you must bring the evidence to court, and then he would replace the cocaine with powdered sugar and a variety of other things and then return it to the locker.  When we showed him that we had evidence and revealed it that was the first time that he then said I give, I will cop out, I wanna work with you.  But then we had a debate with the district attorney, district attorney said, let's just take his plea on this case and let it go by the wayside.  We said no, we wanna interview him to find out what is his extent in a, in this whole issue of stealing narcotics and anything else he may wanna tell us that would be important to us to know as to the system of L.A. Police [Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)] dealing with the public.  And initially, when we started this off, we thought he would give us about a week or two of testimony and we would be able to sort through it.  It, we turned out he gave us about four months of testimony.  About three thousand pages of transcripts where he told us about a myriad of things.  On the face of those issues you could tell that many of them, almost all of them, you couldn't prove them just by him, you had to actually go out and investigate these leads that he gave us.
Story_ID: 252089
Speaker 1: Almost immediately we [Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)] found that about a 120 people were in jail that whether we believed it or not, you could no longer allow them to stay in jail.  So we took that information to the district attorney and said these people need to be removed from jail because he has given us enough doubt; they may be in jail illegally.  We then moved from there to start putting cases together on a wide array of evidence on officers and their perjury, their planting of evidence, a variety of things that had came to our attention, many of these cases never were completed because it was only Rafael Perez's statement and we knew that you could not prosecute a police officer merely on his statement with no other evidence but yet we went forward on it.  And when it all boiled down, our first inclination was that there was a small handful of officers in Rampart [Division], it was not systemic in the sense of what people visualize it was department wide and that there were some people that speculated that this would impact twenty thousand cases.  Turned out today we found it impacted two hundred.  Within the first year or two of investigation we identified the first 126 and it has not been this greatest corruption scandal in the history of the City of L.A. [Los Angeles, California] but it did indicate that there were some issues of supervision, issues of not paying attention, issues of a unit gone off the map as it relates to their responsibility, and it became also obvious that many people knew about what they were doing and did nothing about it.  But it also clearly indicated that everything Rafael Perez said, may not have been accurate because we determined that many things he said were not, were not accurate.  But he also said a lot of things that we couldn't prove and he also said a lot of things we proved that he was absolutely accurate about the corruption within the department.  We found that that had an impact a variety of ways.  We had officers that resigned because they didn't wanna go through the investigation.  We terminated some officers.  We had some that we have great deal of concern about but could not terminate, they're still in the department, and they're, in some instances, not working in the capacities of being able to do police work, some are still doing police work but you still have concerns about 'em.  And so, when it all boils down, we completed, as a department, a three hundred page document called a Board of Inquiry [Into the Rampart Corruption Incident] that laid out every aspect of what we knew about this case.  Well it was interesting we put that report on a, on a website, and in the first month it was on the website eighty thousand people made copies of it to evaluate what those 80 or 90 recommendations were.  And before I left the department we had completed, I believe about 90 percent of the recommendations to change dramatically rules and regulations on how officers were conducting themselves as gang units, how they were booking people, systems that had fallen apart where you didn't get the adequate review.  And upon putting that report together, which I thought at the time more than satisfied a internal review of what occurred, we then got the political process involved in which there was a demand to bring the federal government in which then created a consent decree.  What's interesting about the consent decree is we're paying a organization $10 million over five years to direct us to do what the Board of Inquiry said we should do.  And about 90, 80 or 90 percent of the, of the consent decree basically says LAPD should do what it's already doing.  And so these are the kind of dynamics to where it became overblown as a political issue as opposed to staying with the facts of the matter and looking at exactly what occurred.  It was a unique circumstances amongst a small group of officers, localized in one division, that went completely off course in what they considered doing God's work as opposed to doing police work.
Story_ID: 252090
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: It's Bernard C. Parks, B-E-R-N-A-R-D P-A-R-K-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is 12-07-43 [December 7, 1943], place of birth is Beaumont, Texas.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Currently I'm a city council member of the Los Angeles City Council, [Council] District 8.
Speaker 1: And you were the, the police chief of the Los Angeles Police Department [LAPD], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I spent thirty-eight years in the police department, the last five as the chief of police.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is July 31, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at my field office on Crenshaw Boulevard in the Crenshaw area of Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: And we are completing an interview that we started November 19, 2004, correct?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Ten years ago.
Speaker 2: Ten years ago, okay.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 252091
Speaker 1: --We're gonna start with 1997 with your selection as police chief of the City of Los Angeles [California].  Now who preceded you?
Speaker 2: The former chief was Chief Willie [L.] Williams and before him it was [Chief] Daryl Gates.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the, the administration of Chief Gates was really problematic.
Speaker 2: Well, I think the issue is that it depends on how you balance it.  I think there was probably some of the greatest innovations as it relates to following through on some of [Chief Edward M.] Davis' programs on community based policing, certainly looking at the tactical issues of the department.  During Gates' tenure towards the end, we also suffered probably the largest and highest violent rate in the city and the highest crime rate.  We, in the latter part of the '80s [1980s], we were averaging over a thousand murders per year and over 300,000 Part 1 crimes per year.  And so we had some tumultuous times.  In his tenure we had the riot that occurred after the Rodney King incident.  There was the Rodney King incident.  There was a number of issues during his tenure.  They talked about comments that were made of people's perception of his insensitivity and so there were, there was a, a balance there that clearly many times when there were negatives they were viewed that the black community were, were the subject of those issues.  But one of the things you find in police work is that generally even in bad times, the chief of police overall rating often is in the high 70, 80 percent positives.  And so I think citywide he was viewed differently than in specific communities.
Speaker 1: Well, in terms of the black community--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --he was very unpopular and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was a, so several (unclear) but yet he had his supporters in the black community but he had, there were incidents, Rodney King being the, the, the most obvious but there were a number of things, the comment about the chokehold, whether black people were normal.  Those are the kind of things that created some real dynamics.  Also there was such an upheaval after the Rodney King incident and then later the riot that actually the city went through a process that removed the chief of police from civil service and put them in a different category of selection with a five year review after appointment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Which, which made it easier to remove a--
Speaker 2: Made it easier, well, you know, one thing, and this is probably a bias of mine, there are many people that talk about you can't fire people in civil service.  The, the key on civil service, you can fire people, you just have to do your homework and make sure what you charge 'em with is something that you can validate.  From my perspective as a chief of police, firing a chief for cause does not mean you have to find them guilty of some crime.  A chief's cause could be something such as his ineffectiveness of, of communicating with his commission, his--concern about his comments, how he addressed the public.  There are some things there that you find that it was difficult to fire Daryl Gates because the commission continually rated him as outstanding as a chief of police, so it was very difficult to then backtrack on written words and then say I wanna fire you.
Story_ID: 252092
Speaker 1: So what did you think, I, I probably asked you--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in 2004, but what did you think personally about the Rodney King incident and its aftermath and did you know any of those officers?
Speaker 2: No, I did not know any of the officers.  I, the, when I first saw the Rodney King incident on TV, the first reaction was it was disbelief that you would sit there and you kept waiting to find out what was prompting the actions of the officers.  What drew my attention early on in watching it, and it was played over and over again, is how relaxed and how nonchalant the officers were, that particularly on the peripheral, were dealing with the circumstances particularly when they were alleging that it was this serious and almost a death type situation that they had to defend themselves but yet you see officers almost with their hands on their hips watching what was going on.  The sergeant that was there was more intent in keeping the taser wires from getting untanked, getting tangled, and you just kept looking to see what was the issue that prompted this.  And I was a deputy chief and I was in Central Bureau [Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)] and so my job was to go around to the roll calls and talk to our officers to find out what the temperature was as it related to their understanding.  And the thing that came out clearly was officers almost universally were stating, well the tape was unfair because it didn't show what happened before the tape came on.  And you, my reaction was it made no difference what occurred before because if he had been Public Enemy No. 1, once he was on his hands and knees on the ground, you put handcuffs on him and the situation is over.  So it made very little difference if he had punched somebody or kicked them or whatever, which no one could determine what he did, but it clearly was an indication of significant overreaction and abuse of an individual and I thought from the first time I saw it and particularly as it went on, that it was clearly inappropriate.  And I was one of the first chief officers in the department that expressed that which created some turmoil in the department where officers believed they weren't being supported and the chief in Central Bureau thought Rodney King was an okay guy.  He said it had nothing to do with his character the issue is what we saw on the tape, you could not validate it.  And then there was discussions as the case was being investigated, I was called in by the, the district attorney to talk about the incident 'cause I had taught use of force in the department for years, and they wanted to know in identifying, you know, which stroke was out of policy, you say, well it was a cumulativeness of the incident that you had to look at.  I couldn't look at it and say strike six was worse than strike seven or strike four was the real indication of where it went sideways, and looking at the whole set of circumstances you have the belief that there was a need or they thought there was a need to take the person into custody.  So you, the first contact in trying to get the person settled you can somewhat evaluate and say they, that it's necessary if the person is not being cooperative but quickly after that once the baton began to get used over and over you couldn't see a purpose for it, and so it clearly was out of policy.  And unfortunately in dealing with use of force circumstances, often they don't look very good because you're out in a dynamic situation and there's a, it's a fistfight or you're trying to get somebody into custody, but also often you could use force that's out of policy but may, may not be sufficient to be criminal.  And that's where I think often the community views things and say well if it's not a policy then it should be a case to show that a person has violated the law.  The law is a completely different animal in the fact that you have to show specific intent, you have to show that the person chose this action to intentionally harm or injure, and that's a very difficult process on a criminal case where you can clearly show it's beyond the bounds of in policy but it's a major step between out of policy and criminal.
Story_ID: 252093
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And in terms of some of the police officers saying that you, and I know this was used in the defense of Stacey Koon and the other officers, in terms of them saying that that you didn't see what happened before--
Speaker 2: That's exactly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) they were doing this, is, is there any instance where a police officer can, is supposed to administer punishment, you know, to an individual in the street?
Speaker 2: No, when you look at the criminal justice system the only part of the criminal justice system that initiates punishment is the court.  They're the ones who decide whether you get guilty and what you're gonna serve as time.  The police job often is overlooked in the sense of one of their major, their major roles is to collect evidence.  Their role isn't necessarily to find only the evidence that would show the person is guilty, their job is to find the evidence and document it.  It's the prosecutor's job to decide whether what you've collected is sufficient to then send it to a court.  It's the court's job to decide guilt or innocence and punishment and so these are the steps that you go through.  So no police officer has the right to administer punishment, no police officer has a right to be judge and jury, you are there to control the situation, make an arrest, collect the evidence, and present it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  There is a comic book called 'Judge Dredd,' I don't know, and they made a movie starring Sylvester Stallone where these certain police officers in a far distant future were judge and jury and (laughter) executioners.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, so but, but because, that's science fiction because that's not supposed to be happening.
Speaker 2: Well, it's science fiction--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) because you don't have, you often do not have all of the circumstances to be in that situation so early in the process.  You, you, we're often amazed to find out the basic number of times you may have a police contact which may go in the millions.  Then how many of those millions turn into arrests?  Maybe a couple of hundred thousand in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  How many of those arrests eventually end up from, moving from felony to misdemeanor?  How many of the felony or misdemeanor arrests end up in actual filings?  How many of the filings actually go to court?  You could cut that down to where it's a very small number of people that you go from police contact to going to court and testifying.  And so you clearly are not in a position to have all those judgments made on the initial step.  So there is a need for other set of eyes to review it and to make sure that you're taking the entire picture into review as opposed to your instincts.
Story_ID: 252094
Speaker 1: At the time of the Rodney King beating, your position was?
Speaker 2: I was a deputy chief in our Central Bureau [Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did, did you have feelings about or ideas about what should be done to prevent that kind of action in the future?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, you know, in my judgment and I've had this all this time, and one of the fortunate things for my career, early, early on in my career I had the good fortune of meeting a number of black police officials in the organization call NOBLE [National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives].  And one of the things with NOBLE and, and they also, in their infancy, were also members of what they call the International Association of Chiefs of Police [IACP].  And the International Association of Chiefs of Police at that time actually condoned the use of deadly force on property crimes.  Through NOBLE's efforts as members of IACP, that understanding was changed dramatically.  And NOBLE was the first group of officers I dealt with that talked about this whole issue of use of force, use of deadly force, evaluating whether officers had a right to use force, and I carried that over, having met with them and looked at the material that was created and began to look at that and how I administered with, from the rank of lieutenant to captain and how I looked at use of force in, in my command.  And I'll never forget I had a call from an assistant chief because he was made aware that every use of force that happened in my command I would keep it and, and log it, and he called me to ask me was that true and I said yes it is.  And he says, well we in the department don't want anyone to be capturing use of force and logging them because our general answer to the criminal justice system, to attorneys, is when they ask us how many pieces, how many uses of force an officer may have, our common answer is we don't know because we don't count them, we basically keep them dispersed individually.  And I said well it's almost impossible for me as a command officer to have use of force going on and not be able to go back and assess whether this is the person's first use of force, their second use of force, whether this use of force occurred with the same partner, I said so every use of force I get after I review it, I put it in my bottom drawer and I put it alphabetically so when there's another one I go back and I begin to look at people who are beginning to have uses of force more regularly than other, than others.  He did not like that and said, you know, I really shouldn't keep that file.  I said well, for me to run my command, I'm gonna keep that file because I wanna know who's using force and for what reason and how many times these same officers or a same officer is using force and for what purpose and is it a trend and do you now analyze it.  And if you start seeing trends, you can call the officer in and sit down and say this is your fourth use of force in a month, why are these things going on.  And what you found when you began to track use of force, that anything from albeit force beyond just handcuffing people, all the way up to a shooting, what you found is that there was a small percentage of officers who were constantly involved in use of force.  It was not something that ran amuck or the gamut of every police officer.  So you could pretty well look at a stack of use of forces and you begin to see the same names crop up.  If you look thoroughly at the way they perform their task, you often could see some of the same tactics that caused them to use force and then you could make decisions to not let these two officers work together any longer, to move these officers to another shift.  You can start making decisions that are administrative that you don't have to wait for the next use of force because use of force much like domestic violence escalates and if officers feel comfortable pushing people around with their hands, the next thing you know it's a baton, the next thing you know, it's a chokehold at the time, these are things that escalate.  And the other thing I found is that in monitoring use of force, generally officers that felt comfortable with their own physical fitness use less force.  The officers that used force more routinely, there were those that did not have a comfort level that they could physically engage and be in control of a circumstance.  And so you begin to see that those were trends that would also pop, pop up.  And you also saw where there's combinations of the same partners that they would basically get in these circumstances, when other partner combinations didn't, and when you separated 'em you found often those use of force would go away.
Story_ID: 252095
Speaker 1: Now, now you were a candidate for chief of police, right, in 19, I guess what in '94 [1994]?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it was '90 [1990], '92 [1992] or somewhere in that area.
Speaker 1: Ninety-two [1992], okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the, the department decided to hire from the outside of the department?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I came out as the top candidate inside by one point and [Chief] Willie [L.] Williams came in one point better as the outside candidate and Mayor [Tom] Bradley made a decision with all of the things going on in LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department] as it relates to the Rodney King, the riot, and a variety of other things, he thought it would be important to go outside for the first time in the history of the department, other than decades ago there was an outside general brought in when the City of L.A. [Los Angeles, California] was going through the significant corruption, somewhere in the '30s [1930s] or so.  So that was the first time that they had chosen a chief from the out, through the examination process from the outside.
Speaker 1: Right.  That's, that that usually happens when there's a drastic shift in a department, you bring somebody it's like--
Speaker 2: Well, generally you find if you, if you monitor departments throughout the nation, generally the formula of when there is either major systemic corruption or some issue that you would find there is a willingness to go outside.  What you found in the City of L.A. is a somewhat limited access to outside candidates, by charter the rules said that for an outside candidate to compete and to even be considered, they had to have the overall highest score.  So if you were going through a, a examination process, if you competed and did well but you came out overall number two or number three, you couldn't be considered because you had to have the overall highest score which made it more difficult for outsiders to be competitive and basically allowed the internal people to be given more consideration.
Story_ID: 252096
Speaker 1: Plus when you consider since say the '40s [1940s], between [Chief] Bill Parker [William H. Parker], [Chief] Ed Davis [Edward M. Davis], and [Chief] Daryl Gates, they covered almost fifty years of police service at the chief's rank, so when you were averaging within the nation, maximum three years for chief of police, when you had the political process that chiefs would turn out every time there was a new mayor, it was very unique that in the City of L.A. [Los Angeles, California] you had three individuals that covered a fifty year span.
Speaker 2: Right, now that's, that speaks to the, to a pretty unique political situation for police chief.  I mean it, it would, did those three chiefs have like a, like one up on the process or something?
Speaker 1: Well I think what you found is that they basically competed for the position, they took the exams and then their competition, they came, even though they may have had outside candidates, they came out number one or number two and then it was a matter of the commission, which has been in place for decades, made the final decision, they'd recommend a person to the council, to the mayor, then it was up to them to make a decision as to who they thought would be the chief.  They've had instances where, when Chief Gates was selected he did not come out overall.  He did not come out number one on the list, he was basically, a [deputy] chief by the name of [James G.] Fisk came out number one but the board picked Gates as the, was the second person on the list and he, and he got appointed over Fisk.  Fisk was a unique guy that he was viewed as the most community-oriented deputy chief on the department, in fact, he came out number one twice, when [Chief Thomas] Reddin was selected and also when Gates was selected.  So a very unique situation to where an internal person could compete and come out number one and not be given the job.  And, and, and the other issue, even though we've had a number of people on LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department] that went to other departments to become chief, it was pretty clear that because of the longevity of at least three of those chiefs that a lot of very well-qualified people were on the department they just never got the opportunity because there was never an opening.
Story_ID: 252097
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, well in, so this is like '92 [1992], this--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --high profile position, Willie [L.] Williams comes in from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and is appointed police chief and you're the assistant chief.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I, he appointed me assistant.  I was deputy chief and then he appointed me assistant chief, yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  But I've read that your philosophies didn't mesh for some reason or there was some tension.
Speaker 2: Well, I think what you found is that certainly there was tension after he made the decision to demote me without ever having a conversation with me but I think what happened is that there was a political pressure on Chief Williams when he was here in that there were folks that were wondering or because we had a change in mayors, Mayor [Tom] Bradley left after twenty years as mayor, Mayor [Richard] Riordan came in and they had a completely different perspective and I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Think they were different parties to, right?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah different parties.  But I think from the Riordan era, I don't think he and his administration came in with a great deal of respect for Willie Williams, they didn't view him as being as they viewed up to par in running LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department].  And I think what added to that is Willie Williams got into some controversy about some of his personal integrity such as whether he was taking comp tickets to go to [Las] Vegas [Nevada] and things.  Once those things became public, the whole issue of his credibility kind of waned and I think that was just a matter of when it got time for his five year review and were they gonna reappoint him, the new, the new mayor and his administration and his commission could not overcome their angst about what they viewed was his personal issues dealing with Las Vegas and things of that nature.
Story_ID: 252098
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So in, in 1997 you were appointed [chief of police].
Speaker 2: That's right.  We went through a process chief, Mayor [Richard] Riordan was still in office and so I was appointed in, I believe, August of 1997.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well what were you priorities in the LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department] then?  Now this is, this is once again high profile--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --situation, 'Nightline' covers this every night--
Speaker 2: Um-hm
Speaker 1: --they're talking about this almost, there's, there's discussion, you know, on 'Meet the Press,' everybody's talking about the LAPD in these days.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well my priorities were very simple.  I thought that over time in this city [Los Angeles, California] that particularly the news coverage, had a tendency to concentrate on about everything within LAPD other than how it addressed crime which I thought was their primary job.  And in fact, we had one of major papers came to me and said they're gonna put a new reporter on the LAPD beat, and I said what are they gonna do?  And he says they've been assigned to cover crime.  And I said well, what were they, what was the paper's priorities before?  And he said well, our priorities before were, we often looked at the personal relationships between the chief and the commission or the commission and the council or the mayor and the chief.  And I said you're telling me that as the major newspaper in the city you never thought it was important to cover the efforts in reducing crime and the actual crime reduction?  So I made crime reduction and our efforts regarding crime as being our number one priority.  I also added in there that we had seen a large number of issues over the previous years of where officers' integrity were being questioned, whether they were in court and they testified in improperly or they told a lie in court.  We also saw the issue of integrity being bashed around during the [Chief Willie L.] Williams era.  And so that was another issue that we talked about with our staff is integrity.
Story_ID: 252099
Speaker 1: And one of the things I wanted to correct early on in my tenure [as chief of police in Los Angeles, California], is we'd heard for decades that the police did not hold officers accountable.  You can go all the way back to the Christopher [Commission] Report way back when, and it talked about not holding people accountable and also rewarding officers who may have been involved with misconduct, rewarding them by promoting them very quickly after their misconduct.  So I revamped the entire discipline system almost in the first six months.  And what I hoped to achieve was that we had heard for years that people could go to a station or they can contact a supervisor and they couldn't get a complaint made.  What I found in my tenure is that often people may not have been satisfied with the outcome of the investigation and they may have been dissatisfied but where their greatest concern always was if you took the complaint and investigated it, often they could live with you, I disagreed with your out, your outcome, well we changed the entire system that basically said no longer, this was in place since [Chief William H.] Parker, basically the criteria was if a supervisor is made aware of a circumstance and the circumstance appears that's it's misconduct, the supervisor is obligated to make a complaint investigation.  Well if you figure there's eight hundred to a thousand supervisors that are listening to what people are saying in the community, they can have totally different interpretations of what they think misconduct is.  And what you found is that supervisors begin to play fast and loose with the rules.  They would listen to what the person said, they'd say do you wanna make a complaint or would you be happy if I just went and talked to the officer?  Well a lot of people would say, well, just talk to the officer.  Well that's complaints about an officer's behavior that goes by the wayside.  So what I changed it to is that you had no discretion.  If you heard a complaint, no matter how frivolous you may think it is, how outlandish you may think it is, you write it down and put it on a complaint form and let the investigation dictate whether it's frivolous, outlandish, or it can be proven.  All of a sudden our complaints doubled because we found that officers were suppressing a large number of complaints or their supervisors and that's something that created a real dilemma for the union because they don't want officers to be disciplined at all.  And so you find out that you now are looking at more people about complaints, the system took a little longer to get to the, to the conclusions.  What we also found is that you had the ability that often on the reverse side, that you also had ability to begin to identify people who made a significant number of frivolous complaints because you had 'em in file, you could say here Mrs. Smith made twelve complaints of which all of 'em were, were by circumstance of investigation were erroneous.  So you could begin to look at whether the person's credibility warranted an investigation.  So, these are the kind of things that we put in place.  The second thing as part of the discipline system, begin to evaluate on every promotion that what was the person's historical record as opposed to just how they came out on the list.  And what we found out is that when that, we put that in place and we called it a board of inquiry, we go and do a board of inquiry on officers who had prior discipline to determine what was it, how serious was it, did it impact the community, what were the things that we were looking for, because the city's rules did not allow an officers package to be a part of the review for, for their promotional exam.  So they could go in a promotional exam and write well, go to an oral interview with community people and tell 'em how wonderful they are and the community people will have no idea that in his package or her package they were a significant number of complaints.  So what I instituted was you had to go, when a officer had a history of complaints, we had to do a reevaluation prior to promoting them.  And we basically denied promotion to a large number of people because they had had these historical misconduct.  So those were two things that were done almost immediately, were not well-received by officers but clearly a benefit to the public.
Story_ID: 252100
Speaker 1: Joining us as an observer is Kim Briggs [ph.] of [HistoryMaker] Councilman [Bernard] Parks' staff.  Sir, tell me about the establishment of the Cold Case Unit [sic. LAPD Cold Case Homicide Unit], this is the first one in the country, right?
Speaker 2: Well from my understanding it was the first one.  Basically the way that came about is that we had in the late '80s [1980s] I mentioned about a thousand murders a year.  And in fact when I was a deputy chief in Central Bureau we had an area called Rampart [Division, Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)] that was averaging a 150 to [1]70 murders a year.  And it was so overwhelming for that local division that we actually, during a period of time, closed down the homicide unit so that they could catch-up on their workload and we dispersed homicides in their division to the surrounding divisions so they could help them.  Well overall over that four or five year period, there were so many unsolved homicides that just did not have the time to work on them.  Plus there were older homicides that just fell to the back of the shelf.  The other thing we found out is that there were two or three advances in technology.  One dealt with DNA which before on blood spatter and such you could, best you could hope for is a analysis do determine the blood type and that didn't really narrow it down to a suspect.  We also knew for decades we used fingerprints and fingerprints were only good if you knew who the suspect was and could compare them.  Then there was, then, then you ended up with the AFIS [Automated Fingerprint Identification System] System that electronically put fingerprints to where you could run them against millions of prints electronically.  The third technology was that we had a electronic system that could match ballistics.  Before you could check ballistics, it was done by hand and you could only assess a gun against a cartridge if you had them in your possession.  And so with that technology the belief was that we could make a lot of headway if we started concentrating on unsolved cases that had been in file, and hopefully those cases that were in file had a decent preliminary investigation that captured all of the available information.  And so the investigation started the cold case unit, well the detective or our deputy chief in our headquarters bureau was given the assignment to put that together.  They brought more people into robbery homicide and they began to deal with the cold cases and began to look at cases that you might use some of the new technology.  And over time we had progressed to where it was the primary link in the city that solved one of our major cases that dealt with a serial murder.  And also with the very unique circumstances of the first time in the state's history they were able to use DNA from a familial relationship where they had the DNA of a relative that had gone to prison and they were able to identify the serial murder as his father, and so those were the kinds of things that came out.  But the, the cold case unit really relied on an ability to assess the new technology, plus the hope that the preliminary investigation was so well done and the preservation of evidence was still available that you could actually go back and re-interview and find evidence that you can either look at blood, ballistics, or prints and begin to figure out who might have done that crime.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the, the crime you're talking about that they were able to solve was the Grim Sleeper?
Speaker 2: The Grim Sleeper, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Fellow named Lonnie Franklin (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lonnie Franklin, that's a, the name was basically coined by a reporter that put some time in and began to piece together the volume of homicides that appeared that were connected.  And one of the things I think that during the, the last 15 or 20 years, Figueroa [Street], which has been a historical, Figueroa and Western [Avenue] has been historical locations for prostitution and street violence, has been subject to about four or five serial murders that basically took advantage of people that, generally women, that were on the street and basically in some instance these serial murderers were working simultaneous, they may not have been working together but they certainly were going on around the same time and he was one of them.  And I think the last we checked, it was probably ten L.A. City [Los Angeles, California] homicides and one I believe in Inglewood [California] and I believe out of all of them, they had one victim that basically survived.
Story_ID: 252101
Speaker 1: Well tell us about the Rampart scandal.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now this is, this is a police district that you at one time were a superintendent of, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I was the deputy chief in one the five divisions that worked for me was Rampart [Division].  But basically what occurred in Rampart was that after being in less than six months in the, in the job as chief, one of my deputy chiefs came in and said we have a problem in our lab.  And I said, what's the problem?  He says they can't locate a, a couple of pound package of, of cocaine.  And I said well, let's quickly do an audit to see if it's been checked out for court because that (unclear) the narcotics at the time was taken to court as evidence.  Now it's different, you take a photo of it.  They view narcotics as a carcinogenic, you don't take it out but at the time you physically took that package of narcotics to the, to the court.  And what happened was they did a thorough and exhaustive evaluation and found that there was drugs missing.  At the same time, we had a process in our department that to cut down the amount of travel for officers going to court, they could call the property room and say I'm going to court tomorrow and I need evidence connected to case such and such.  Well during the night a courier hired by the City [of Los Angeles, California] would take that evidence to their lockup in their station and they could then go directly to their station on their way to court to pick up the evidence.  Well at the same time we were monitoring whether this evidence is missing out of the locker downtown, we found that some additional narcotics was stolen out of the locker in Rampart.  So we began to assess whether these cases were, were one in the same.  And some of the highlights that kind of directed us even closer to Rampart is that we found that whoever checked the narcotics out on the first theft used someone else, some other officer's name and serial number.  Yet, the city employee that was working in the property room heard them speak Spanish, observed them, gave a description and she had a kind of unique hearing in the sense that she determined that this person was Hispanic but they were specifically Puerto Rican.  And we wanted to know how did she know that, and she said she grew up around Puerto Ricans and they had a different somewhat dialect in dealing with the Latino language.  So she gave us those so we began to then concentrate on Rampart because that's where the second package was stolen, we didn't think that was by coincidence.  We then began to zero in on a group of officers that worked in the gang unit and we began to see a number of things that were not at department standards.
Story_ID: 252102
Speaker 1: One of the things that was most obvious, our people that were investigating went into Rampart [Division, Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)] station and they found that their locker room in very graphic terms and paintings, was actually named "The Yard" which is a term used in prisons.  And we thought that was a little strange that we'd have a division that was run by a cap- two or three captains, where a deputy chief would be in that division routinely and no one thought it was unusual that you named your locker room "The Yard."  So we began to assess that.  We found that there was many things because of the volume of work, that there's a lot of corners being cut, that people thought they were different, they didn't have to comply with the rules, they thought they were special, these are the things that began to identify that there were a group of officers that were working outside of the bounds of what our manual said.  As we went forward we began to concentrate on Rafael Perez who came to our attention through a variety of ways.  And what we found in surveilling him that he conducted himself much as a drug dealer.  He would cu--basically take himself off the freeway, make U-turns, find a- he kept having these surveillance tactics that he thought he was being followed.  And so we pretty well zeroed in that Rafael Perez was the guy, we began to concentrate on it.  At the same time we, we had another incident that was corollary but not directly related.  We had a young officer by the name of David Mack that actually robbed a bank and he was best friends with Rafael Perez.  And so putting all these things together in the prosecution, we identified that Rafael Perez was the guy that actually had stolen the narcotics and we prosecuted him.  There was a hung jury.  And so they released him but we continued the investigation.  Well we found out that Rafael Perez, who had worked narcotics and gangs, found there was a hole in the system.  And what he found out was that as long as a case was active, there was a great deal of systems in place that monitored where the narcotics was, who had it, was it checked back in, did it go to court, did it get left in court, but what he found out that if a case was dissolved, was disposed, that they had no further court hearings on it, there was very lax kinds of controls.  So he'd go out into a property room and check out drugs on cases that had already been resolved.  And he'd take 'em, and he would slit 'em open and he would replace the cocaine with sugar or other kinds of powder.  He would return them and he always would use someone else's serial number to do that.  He also knew that when we disposed of drugs, what, what our normal practice was, we would take it out to some place that they were gonna burn the drugs or we'd do a random check of the drugs to determine what was in the package with the quality and the quantity, and so he had a great chance of his packages not ever being randomly checked, so this stuff would go through.  So when we found he was doing that and, and basically confronted him, he basically said I give, no one knew I was doing that and for you to figure that out, I give.  And he began to tell us a variety of things that he said was going on in Rampart.  And he talked about officers stealing drugs from suspects, he talked about officers abusing suspects.  We also found that, although it wasn't him, another officer actually shot a suspect, a young man by the name of, of [Javier] Ovando, and basically planted a gun on Ovando, later went to court and testified and watched them send Ovando to prison for sixteen years.  And so all these things began to come to our attention.  We identified about a 130 cases that were probably tainted because we had no other evidence except this group of officers' testimony.  And so we went to the DA [district attorney] and said these cases needed to be disposed of because you can't justify the prosecution because you can't believe the officers.
Story_ID: 252103
Speaker 1: And so at the time the media just took off on this [Rampart scandal] and they were, and they had claimed that there may be thousands of cases that would unravel, there were literally hundreds of people that, officers were involved.  And we kept saying no, our investigation found less than a dozen and maybe about a 130 cases.  And the media just went wild.  Well, we successfully prosecuted the, the officers involved, about eight to ten of them, we also had some others that dealt with criminal abuse in, in dealing with suspects and we went forward.  And after we had reached a level of prosecution, I decided we needed to do a very thorough evaluation to determine all of the systems that had failed, so that we could go back and begin to correct things citywide and begin to look at how we were gonna do business in the future.  We completed a four hundred page report that we called the Board of Inquiry [Into the Rampart Corruption Incident].  We published it to the world.  In the first month that it was on our website, eighty thousand people downloaded it to see what we were talking about, what we were doing.  Unfortunately, we were being monitored by the federal government since the Rodney King incident and unfortunately, they viewed LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department] to be put under a consent decree with like a feather in their cap.  So they rushed out to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], they took our report, they slapped some legal papers on it, and said it's now called the consent decree, and they then proceeded to invoke a consent decree with about 90 percent of their recommendations were the recommendations that came out of our report.  And then they demanded we hire a monitor and the monitor was gonna make a couple of million dollars a year, so it took seven years to implement a report that prior to my leaving office, we'd implemented over 80 percent of it.  But they brought in all these auditors and assessments and so we ended up with a consent decree, cost us somewhere in the neighborhood of over 14, $15 million to implement.  What's also interesting is that they made, they mandated a much more robust auditing unit.  Well if you go back in our history, you find out much of the audit in the City of L.A. in the department, was cut out during the '80s [1980s] due to budgetary concerns.  So these are units that were already in place, auditing what was going on, yet we had the council believing we couldn't afford those reduced, review of, it used to be three captains in a station, they cut 'em back to two.  There used to be two commanders in every bureau, they cut 'em down to one.  They eliminated what they considered administrative functions that they didn't view or didn't understand the necessity of 'em.  The consent decree brought back a large portion of some of those administrative and audit functions.  And that's probably the, the primary benefit of the consent decree is to reestablish what was there prior which was the administrative and audit function.  And so it was, it was one of those things that we thought we were doing the best we could in bringing this to a conclusion, identifying it, closing it down, prosecuting the people, identifying the ills that were going on, publishing them so the public knew that it was transparency, and to our shock, the federal government viewed that with all that material, that they wanted to then impose a consent decree.  They did not do any of that investigation nor did they during the Rodney King incident and that circumstance, did they come out and find any of these ills within the department.
Story_ID: 252104
Speaker 1: Basically you get punished for trying to monitor what your own department is doing?
Speaker 2: Well we got punished, plus the other thing that was bizarre to me is that we had media people that actually took a shorthand approach that said well it's your fault [HistoryMaker] Chief [Bernard] Parks because it happened on your watch.  And I said well, what was my alternative, I could have basically ignored it and you'd have never known anything about it, so the fact that I found it and put an end to it and then established guidelines to correct it in the future, you're saying it's my fault?  I mean that was how bizarre the circumstances.  Then we had political people that thought it was their way to jump in front of this and become the visible protector of, of the community and they were actually looking and enjoying the fact that LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department] was finally under some federal control.  Even though they ignored all the things that were done by the department in identifying it, bringing a conclusion, and when it was all said and done, when it finished, there were still no more than a dozen officers that were involved and there still was about a 130 cases that got dissolved.  And so our, our initial assessment was very accurate.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in, so this is a kind of a strange mix on one hand, you're seen as a hero by a lot of people not just locally but nationally.  And on another hand, you're being blamed for things that you discovered that were wrong with the department, because you were in charge of it.
Speaker 2: Well, the thing is, I think you have people that don't understand the dynamics and anything they, you know, very shorthand and very limited understanding, they believe that any time something happens that the person in charge is responsible.  And you say, well that's true to a degree but on the other hand, if something occurred and you found out and you had the ability to say nothing, no one would have ever missed the three pounds of cocaine that was missing, nobody would have known about Rafael Perez had we not investigated [during the Rampart scandal].  You know, these are things that were brought to the public's understanding by the Los Angeles Police Department, not by any other outside agency.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yet there are people that clearly wanted to establish fault and they didn't know where to place it and so they came up with well you found it, you said yeah but we discovered it, we stopped it, and we gave a track record of how to not allow it to occur again.  Yet, there are those who appreciated, outside of the City of L.A. [Los Angeles, California], police chiefs across the nation basically marveled at the fact that LAPD was so upfront in identifying and then sharing the information with law enforcement and across the nation.  The closer you got to L.A. City [Los Angeles, California], was a lack of understanding to the point that they were less willing to give that credit and more willing to say we need federal intervention which most people across the nation looked at and said why would you need federal intervention when you have a chief of police that actually is doing their job.  So that was somewhat of the dichotomy.
Story_ID: 252105
Speaker 1: So in 2001, when James K. Hahn is elected mayor of Los Angeles [California], he went another, in another direction for police chief.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yes, he did.  The thing is what we found, and this is something that I was surprised in the fact of how the community reacted, he campaigned and, and one of the things if you understand the political issues, his father [Kenneth Hahn] was a forty year elected official in the, in the County of Los Angeles [California], and which was interesting, his father always represented a large segment of the minority community.  So he was well known and respected and particularly was basically viewed in the African American community, the black community, as a person that was very supportive.  His son and later his daughter, got a great benefit from their father's legacy.  Jim Hahn ran for controller, he ran for city attorney, and when he ran for mayor, he ran on the platform, particularly in the black community, that he was going to retain [HistoryMaker] Bernard Parks as the chief of police, he was a good chief of police, whatever.  When he became chief, as, as he became mayor, as he's moving through the, the process, he was confronted by a dilemma, and that was the LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department] union was willing to endorse another candidate and he basically was offered a situation where they would endorse him, if they get, if he gave them two things, one a new chief of police, and number two a three day work week.  He agreed to both of those and almost immediately upon being elected, he implemented, which was very strange in the city that the mayor is implementing a deployment plan for the police.  So that was the first indication.  Second one, he then made a decision that he was not gonna reappoint me.  Well I don't, I think he misread, misread the tea leaves because overwhelmingly, four years later, the very community that had been his core of his success, completely voted against him and so he was one of the few one term mayors in the city's history.
Speaker 1: Right.  He was defeated by Antonio Villaraigosa.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And the thing is Villaraigosa ran against him the first time.  Villaraigosa was actually going to get the endorsement of the union and basically had told them he was not gonna cut a deal with them about the chief's job nor was he gonna cut a deal with them about deployment.  He wanted to assess both of those.  When Hahn, when they went to Hahn and basically said, hey, look we're gonna go in another direction but we're gonna give you one more chance to agree to our two demands.  He jumped on it and got the endorsement in the, in the very twilight of that evaluation.
Story_ID: 252106
Speaker 1: --How did you feel about, you know, your efforts at police reform, I mean police reform is tough.  I know it's a tough thing.  They, they described it as trying to turn around a aircraft carrier (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, it is tough but again, you know, one of the things that I think LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department] trained you very well, is you work an assignment, you don't own the assignment.  You'd work at it as hard you can for that period of time.  Yet at some point in time somebody's gonna tap you on the shoulder and say you're assigned, you're gonna be doing something different.  So what I found throughout my career in LAPD, every place I worked, I was using the same principles of people's behavior, taking people, holding people accountable, so going to the chief's office wasn't like it was a brand new deal, all it was is the things that I thought were important I could impose throughout the city [Los Angeles, California] as opposed to just within the area that I particularly worked in.  So reform was important but it's, reform is only good if you are institutionalizing it to where it becomes a part of the day to day workday.  It's not good, reform is not basically in the best interest of the community if it's only a program.  You got a program called something that could dissipate the minute that you have a change in command.  The whole issue is institutionalizing accountability, institutionalizing people are going to be disciplined.  You know, it's unfortunate but in four years, four and half, five years of being chief, we had to fire a 140 to [1]50 police officers.  And these were not cases where you hear the police leak say you were firing people 'cause they had, their shoes weren't shined, these are people that had violated the community or used force excessively or lied about something or were criminals in the sense.  So, these are people that in many instances may not have been, may not, or should not have been police officers in the first place.  So it was a, you know, one of those issues to where in holding people accountable at every rank you had that ability to impose that citywide as opposed to just your recommendations at a deputy chief level or at a captain's level.  I think if you look at my history that's been a, a, a strong point.  When I, as a captain you held people accountable, you adjudicated complaints fairly, and you sat on boards of rights and when people were wrong you terminated them, you sat on use of force boards, you identified where force was used appropriately or you declared it wasn't, or you made a, what we call a minority opinion, told the chief although the majority of the board thinks it's is okay, I don't think it's okay.  But you looked at things across the board and being a very, and very fair.
Story_ID: 252107
Speaker 1: Now, now you went on to, almost immediately to run for [Los Angeles] City Council?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I left [the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)] in May of 2002, I was really just gonna retire after thirty-eight years and figure out what I was gonna do, and then a number of people called and said are you aware that there's an open seat in the 8th District [Council District 8] and will you consider it?  And I said, you know, for decades people have asked me, 'cause I was also so visible in the community, I took that part of my job very seriously of being out, going to people's events, you know, being a part of what the community was doing.  And I said, you know, I've told people for decades I would never run for office.  And then when this came up, I said okay, we'll give this a try.  And, and the first thing we had to make a decision is that I didn't, I lived about a block out of the city [Los Angeles, California].  So I had to actually move in the city to establish residency and so I ran.  What was unique on my first election is that the previous elections, I think, in that district had, I think, a maximum of about fifteen thousand people voted and that was the largest turnout.  In my first election we had over I think 23 or [2]4,000 people voted and I got like 78 percent of it.  And so one of the first calls I got, it was kind of strange when I got in office, Jim Hahn [James K. Hahn] called me and he said, "I wanna congratulate you at being elected councilman," and I said, "thank you."  And he says that, you know, "Well everybody's assessing this is, is really amazed at your percentage that you won."  And I said, "Well why would they be amazed?"  And he said, "Well nobody ever generally on a first election gets 70 to 80 percent."  And I said, you know, I've, "Not like I'm unknown and it's not like I just showed up recently."  And I think people appreciated the fact of what I did as a police chief and a police officer, I think that was a carryover and I was fortunate enough to get elected three times.
Story_ID: 252108
Speaker 1: The 8th District [Council District 8] includes the well-to-do black community of Baldwin Hills [Los Angeles, California]--
Speaker 2: Baldwin Hills.
Speaker 1: --Leimert Park [Los Angeles, California], another legendary community--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and some other, Chesterfield Square [Los Angeles, California], Crenshaw [Los Angeles, California], Jefferson Park [Los Angeles, California], West Adams [Los Angeles, California], yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, that that's generally the, our boundaries, when we took office twelve years ago, currently, recently in redistricting we lost some of our areas such as, we had the Baldwin Vista [Los Angeles, California], we lost a portion of Jefferson Park, we lost a great deal of Leimert Park.  And in fact, the way the boundaries were redrawn, unfortunately, most of the wealth in our district was taken away.  We lost like forty thousand jobs and the district now is probably one of the poorest, if not the poorest in the city.  And so, and the community is so outraged by it they're now going through a, at least two communities are suing the city about the redistricting.  But, but the one of the things that we have tried to do in, in the sense of being in office is listen to the public.  The things we were told when we first got in office is that there is a significant lack of service to public's concerns.  We always were told that unlike other communities, there was, they, there were no events that were put on to where the community come out and enjoy their community.  We were told that there was a, a lack of public in the sense of visibility at community events and things.  So we tried to structure the deployment of our office to combat that.  We created that every neighborhood council, which is a new form of government that was put in the city, every one of them had their individual field deputy to where their field deputy was their point of contact with our office.  We set up meetings to deal with the leadership of the community.  We also began to look at what are the kind of programs that people would like.  And so we concentrated to make sure our parks and our libraries were all upgraded and we ended up building a couple of parks and upgrading all of our libraries and building a new library.  So all of those free type of activities were a priority.  Also we began to look at what are the things that would interest people.  So we created with a community group a book fair to where we bring out artists and, and also authors.  We also realized that MLK was a big day in the community and we happened to have one of the largest MLK parades that went through our district but at the end of the parade there was no activities, and people just kind of went to the parade and went home.  So we created a MLK Festival to where people could enjoy their day off and, and basically socialize in their community and basically have something to do.  We also found that there was little around holidays that was being done.  So we created a Christmas, a Christmas tree lighting program and also we probably in twelve years, given away almost fifty thousand toys to kids.  So we are generally, in the first week of December we have a toy give away.  We concentrate on Thanksgiving, working with community groups in our own, giving away turkeys and turkey and on Thanksgiving activities.  And then we attempted to look at ways that, you know, on holidays, July 4th we created venues for the fireworks and also jazz festivals in our parks.  So that's the kind of thing that we created by listening to the public.  In our field people have been very, very instrumental in creating a public service attitude where they are going above and beyond in notifying the community, dealing with them, solving, solving their problems, even when it's beyond our control, bringing the city family in.
Story_ID: 252109
Speaker 1: And then we [Council District 8 representatives] also looked at ways in which, how can we educate the public about what we're doing?  So we created a massive e-news, every Thursday we publish basically a newspaper and we tell them everything we know, what we're working on, what we know other people are working on, what are the things going on in the city [Los Angeles, California].  So we try to continually look at ways to educate the public, make them aware of what's going on, what's effecting them, showing up at their meetings, things of that nature, giving them activities to go to, and that's kind of what we've done for the last twelve years.  And in addition to that, we've had some success in development.  We had a eleven-acre plot of land that was burned down in the '92 [1992] riots where we'll bring a, a new million dollar building there for government, for county government services.  We are in the process of, of getting a commercial development there.  Now with the, the remaining six acres in Marlton Square [Los Angeles, California] that is deteriorated over 20, 25 years, we just, before redistricting, we were able to get a, an agreement with Kaiser [Permanente] to bring in a 200,000 square foot clinic.  So we've been successful in bringing in the needs, bringing in housing, not only for affordable but also market rate housing because we needed, we believe we needed a balance in there.  So, that, we've spent a lot of time looking at repair and services of trees, sidewalks, streets, because that's what people call us most about, what's, why are our streets deteriorating?  Why can't we can't get our sidewalks fixed?  And we've kind of come up with programs on each one of those to enhance the community beyond what the city budget can do.
Story_ID: 252110
Speaker 1: What's the percentage of homeowners to renters in the, 8th, 8th District [Council District 8]?
Speaker 2: We have a, the highest percentage of, of renters.  Even people that live in single family homes, a large percentage of them are renters.  And so we have, and that's one of the things we also worked hard with the balance, the city [Los Angeles, California] when I came in office were overwhelmingly positive to renters and hostile to landlords.  And we tried to balance that believing that if you own property and you take the, you know, the, the view of you want to provide housing, you're doing a tremendous service to the community and you shouldn't be punished for it.  And so we're trying to, we ended up trying to balance the advocates on both sides so that you could get the true sense of what's going on in our housing market because without landlords we'd have a, a much more, a larger group of homeless people, and without tenants we'd have a ghost town, so we gotta balance those, those needs.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know, people have said that it's, one of the things you have to do to stabilize a community is to organize those who don't have a financial stake in the community, who don't own, especially in a poor community a lot of people don't own but if you can, have, do something to generate a stake.
Speaker 2: Well they have to have a stake; either their kids are going to school, they see that they are, there's a role for them.  And again, I don't think there's a disparity in the fact that somebody rents a house that they have less regard for their neighborhood.  What we do see in many instances is that multifamily housing has unique and different issues than single family housing.  And so again, you need to be as sensitive as to their needs in making sure they're getting the same services, their trash is being picked up, their alleys are being cleaned.  A lot of the multifamily areas in our district, the 8th District, were built when there was only a requirement of one parking place per, per unit.  Now with multigenerational housing arrangements and larger families, you find that there are, are three or four times the number of people living in a unit than what it was built for so what you, the first complaints you get from the public is there's a lack of parking.  So what we've tried to do is go through the community of where we could, we could create dynamics of diagonal parking because we've got some communities where people are walking two or three blocks from their parking place to their home.  So you try to find ways in which you can serve them.  And the way some of these houses or multifamily units were built, they have to the rear parking in the garage.  Well most single women and maybe single men are not gonna park in a dark alley in a garage and walk around the corner to the front of their house, so they're gonna use the street parking.  So we've tried to find ways to expand the diagonal parking.  And also what we found, and this comes out of the last couple of riots, the tendency for the media was to identify communities as vast communities with no identities, so South Central, L.A. [Los Angeles, California] was the calling card for almost all of the city area south of the, the Santa Monica Freeway [Interstate 10].  And, but yet in other parts of the city you'd hear terms like Venice [Los Angeles, California] or Northridge [Los Angeles, California] or a variety of communities that's, Silver Lake [Los Angeles, California], but there was a uniqueness of those communities that were identified.  But in primarily the poor South Los Angeles they would, it was just South Central.  And then they changed South Central to South L.A.  We put a great deal of effort to identify the unique communities of Vermont Knolls [Los Angeles, California], Chesterfield Square [Los Angeles, California], a variety of communities that you actually put the identification of those communities by signage or by gateway signs to let people know, you know, on this side of Van Ness [Boulevard] you're in Chesterfield Square, on that side of Van Nuys [Boulevard] you may be in another community or where Vermont Knolls is going down Vermont [Avenue].  So, naming of communities have brought a positive identity for people that live there so that they just aren't viewed as being a part of some vast wasteland.
Story_ID: 252111
Speaker 1: Now, you've, you've run for Congress?
Speaker 2: No, not Congress I ran for--
Speaker 1: Oh (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the mayor and I also ran for a Board of Supervisors.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause we had a note that you ran--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --for the seat vacated by [HistoryMaker] Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.
Speaker 2: Well that was the Board of Supervisors.
Speaker 1: Oh, the Board of Supervisors.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  I'm, in my mind I thought it was the U.S. Congress.  I'm sorry.  So what are, do, do you have any plans for running for some other positions?
Speaker 2: No, I'm, I have plans to retire June 30, 2015, which is roughly a little over ten and a half months from now and so that's what I'm gonna do.  And after fifty years of city service, I think it's time to relax a little bit and do something else.
Story_ID: 252112
Speaker 1: Okay.  After serving in the spotlight in, in kind of a hot seat as a police chief of, of the City of Los Angeles [California], you decided to run for city council and have had a, you know, a successful term basically.  What, what's your philosophy of public service?
Speaker 2: You know, I think, what I've tried to, and, and this comes a great deal from the police department [Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)] and growing up in this whole issue of community and relations, community policing things of that nature, what I use as a guideline is that you never substitute community service for your own public or, or personal interest.  So you're constantly insuring that whatever you do is in behalf of the community and not for self-interest.  And I think that's been the balance to where you are constantly looking at how you can enhance a community.  And also part of that is not, like a lot of people believe you are doing a lot of things if you put your name on so many things, you can go through the community.  I think the key is, is that you're doing things in behalf of the community, it makes no difference who did it, it's a matter of whether it got done, does the community see it, do they enjoy the program, do they see things done differently.  And they appreciate what's done and that is you're always putting that, it, as your primary goal, is dealing with public service and never addressing self-interest or letting self-interest supersede public service--
Story_ID: 252113
Speaker 1: And, and as you end, as you wind down a life of public service what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My hopes are that we find a way to regenerate activism.  I think that the, what's unfortunate, I've seen over time, in decades in the past, you could generate interests in the black community on the basis of them seeing the, the need and the benefit of looking at issues and how they impact a larger group of people.  Today my sense is that if it doesn't, if it doesn't impact people individually, they have little interests, unless something's a catastrophe, and if it's a catastrophe you can get them out for four or five hours on a given day but it's not sustained.  And I think it comes out clearly in our voting numbers, it comes out clearly in our lack of participation in activities.  You know, to see the lack of the black community expressing themselves at budget hearings where the city's divvying up $8 billion of their tax money, to not see people taking an active role in the, what they believe is wrong with their community, those are things that I'd hope that the activism that our communities have thrived on in the past, find its way back to where people have taken an active interest in their community and leading in behalf of their families and their, and their children and not keep waiting for that mythical leader that they keep saying, there's gonna be a leader that comes pretty soon and, and basically get us out of this morass.  Well, often they have to realize they are the leader and everyone can lead in their own part of their community.  But I would hope that our activism is rekindled, not by the next shooting or the next disaster but people have a ongoing appreciation of building on what happened in the past.
Story_ID: 252114
Speaker 1: How did you feel about the election of [HistoryMaker] Barack Obama as president in 2008?
Speaker 2: You know what I think as many people have said, that, two things, one, it may have been one of the proudest times in, in this country.  And secondly, second feeling was it was something that you never thought would occur.  And I think that, that was the two things that I sensed.  But I think the fact that, to see and, and it's unfortunate, I don't think people appreciate his sheer brilliance and the things that he's done and that he has basically galvanized an entire [U.S.] Congress to prevent him from being successful, so you'd have to believe that he has certainly a lot of capabilities that people are frightened of.  I think the unfortunate thing about his election is everyone, not everyone, many people viewed that we're post racial, that everything's okay now.  You've had a black president, you don't need affirmative action, you don't need to be concerned about minorities and females getting some consideration of equal opportunity or human rights because he's now the centerpiece that if you can be president, no one else should have a problem.  I think that's a total misnomer.  There are just as many issues that we're confronting today as we did in the '65 [1965] riot, the '92 [1992] riot, the issues of the, fifty years ago we had the issues dealing with human rights that the human rights act.  All those things, they may be more subtle today, they may be something that is no, you don't have a sign on the wall that said colored can't drink here but there are so many barriers to where people get trained not to participate because they know the outcome is not necessarily positive.  So I think that's been the one negative that maybe general society has chose to use that as a symbol of everything's okay when it's not.  At the same time, we have people that are fighting twenty-four hours a day to make sure he's as ineffective as possible and I think those are two very negatives--
Story_ID: 252115
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point is there anything major that you would go back and do over again (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know what?  My career has been that you don't get do overs, there's no mulligans.  And so you do it as best you can, you improve every day, you try to make sure that you are providing the service you were paid to do and you learn from it and you try to teach others that come behind you to keep that process moving.  But I've grown up in ability to go and say, you don't get to go back and bemoan something.  You know, just as in the police department when they say you're no longer working patrol you're going to detectives, you pick up your stuff and you go to detectives and you work as hard as you can in detectives, one day you may through an assignment or a promotion come back to that area and you can pick up what you thought was needed but you don't get to go back in my judgment and, and look at things and reminisce a lot about what could have happened because you do as best you can, or what should be happening at the time, and that's where I put all my energies.
Story_ID: 252116
Speaker 1: What do you consider to be your contributions now, what, what do you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: You know what, and this seems strange, my number one personal legacy is I'm on the wall at Cedar Hospital [Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California] on the 6 Gallon Club of giving blood.  That's the number one.  How many lives have you saved and helped by doing something as informal as saying let me give you a pint of blood every three months or whatever.  I really think those are the kinds of things you can help people without having to go to each room and knock and say I saved your life, they don't know where that blood came from.  So that's a big thing where you can volunteer and do things to help people when they don't even know you're helping them.  But I think for my professional legacy, what I think will probably be remembered most is that I view things very practically.  I took the time to understand what I thought the public need was, and I made decisions that I thought were in the best interests of the larger population.  Now people may not have agreed on all those decisions but I also can say that in fifty years, I've not had a circumstance where my integrity or my principles have been violated to where people thought I was ever dishonest.  Those are things that are very important to me that you live by your principles and that you, what I found in this life is that you can make mistakes and people will tell you when they think you made a mistake whether you agree or not, what they do not forgive you for is for, if you have a integrity issue or you have a violation of what people consider you or your values are poor.  Those are things that you must hold on to whether you are at the lowest level or the highest level that you came into office principled and with high values and integrity and you left the same way.
Story_ID: 252117
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family.  Do you have children?
Speaker 2: I have a number of children.  I have, currently I have two daughters and a son [Bernard Parks, Jr.].  I lost two daughters to cancer.  And so one daughter lives in Houston, Texas, the other lives in Louisiana.  My son is in Los Angeles [California] and he works for me.  I have seven grandkids and generally they, my son has two and the other grandkids are living outside of the state.  So you, you have a, a family then, my mom [Gertrude Smith Parks] is ninety-three, is still alive.  My father [Earl Parks] passed away in 2008.  But I have a brother and two sisters, so most all of my immediate family is right here in Los Angeles.  Still have a large segment of cousins and other folks live in Beaumont, Texas and Baton Rouge, Louisiana and a variety of places where they grew up but the, my immediate family is here in Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to cover before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, I think you've exhausted me.
Speaker 1: All right; yes, sir.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 252118
Speaker 1: Well the last question is similar to legacy but a little different--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --phrased a little different a, a little bit more personal.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: You know, I would like to be remembered as a person that came from just somewhat meager background, that developed themselves to where they provided a service, and that service generally was viewed as positive in the community.  But I'm not one of those fanfare people, you know, I, I tell people I, I like to view that you came in without great notoriety and you are gonna leave without great notoriety and in between there you hope you helped a lot of people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you, sir.
Speaker 1: All right.
