Story_ID: 22511
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Darryll John Pines, and my last name is spelled P-I-N-E-S.  First name is D-A-R-R-Y-L-L, and middle name is just John, J-O-H-N.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is August 28th, 1964 in Oakland, California.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: My occupation and title is Professor and Dean of the A. James Clark School of Engineering at the University of Maryland, College Park.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July 13th, 2012.  It's actually Friday the 13th.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're currently in the dean's conference room called the Havener Conference Room in 3203, Jeong Kim Engineering Building at the University of Maryland, College Park campus.
Story_ID: 22512
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions that we are asked to ask, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Typically, blue.
Speaker 1: Alright.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: The fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Typically, any location that has historical sites that are of interest historically.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I do, but I can't remember them-I mean, people (unclear)--but I can't remember it off the top of my head, but I say all kinds of things.
Story_ID: 22513
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family separately from your father's side so we can keep 'em straight, and then we'll bring them together and talk about how they met and that sort of thing.  So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 1: My mother's full name is Maureen Foster, and her last name became Maureen Foster Pines, as she married my father.
Speaker 2: And, how do you spell that?
Speaker 1: Uh, Maureen is spelled M-A-U-R-E-E-N, Foster, F-O-S-T-E-R, and then Pines, P-I-N-E-S.
Speaker 2: Alright.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: Her date of birth is July 19, 1940 in Liverpool, England.
Speaker 2: Okay. Okay, Liverpool, England, well, okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's ancestors, and, and including how they got to Liverpool, and do you know, and what they were doing in history?
Speaker 1: My mother's father, my grandfather, named John Foster, also called Jack Foster, emigrated from Nigeria to Liverpool to work in the shipyards of Liverpool.  He later upon arriving in Liverpool met a lady from Ireland who became his wife.  Her name is Mary Foster, and the two of them had fourteen children, of which my mother was the youngest.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, this is your grandfather?
Speaker 1: Uh huh.
Speaker 2: And what is his date of birth?
Speaker 1: I do not know his date of birth.  I've never known his date of birth.  Neither have I known my grandmother's date of birth on my mother's side.  And neither do I know on my father's side, either one.  And I can explain that when we get into my father's side of the story.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Do you suppose it was around the turn of the century?
Speaker 1: I suppose it-he was--since she was the last born, I suspect that his birthday was just before the turn of the century, like in the 1880s, 1890s.   And his wife was a bit younger than he, so she was probably in the early 1900s.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Alright.  Now, okay, so there's a, now are there any stories on your father or mother's side about life in Nigeria or in Ireland?
Speaker 1: In Nigeria, we don't know much.  We also know little about their time spent together in Liverpool.  And one, one of the stories that my mother always related to me is the time that she grew up, you know, literally, being a very small kid, only three of four years old, two or three years old, during the war, World War II.  And she often relays stories about the bombs being dropped on England, and more specifically Liverpool, and how all the children survived, that, you know, that endeavor and, and, and that the family was able to recover and then rebuild after the war was concluded, and then people back, going back to get their jobs, back to where they were.  So, she remember-, she always relates to me the sirens that she heard as a small kid going off in the city of Liverpool and running to hide into the basement, into the shelters that they had for, for, for bombs.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was very interesting to me. Plus, she, and she said, you know she told us the history of our grandfather, that he came from a certain, you know, from southern Nigeria in a particular tribe, which is the Obo tribe of Nigeria, and, and-- The Ibo?
Speaker 2: Ibo tribe, excuse me, of, of Nigeria.  And to--so we don't know any more beyond that, his siblings that remained in Nigeria.  So that's where there's a loss of the family tree.
Speaker 1: Now does he, did he have another name other than Foster?
Speaker 2: I'm sure he had a Nigerian name, but he changed it, I think, once upon arrival into Liverpool.  I don't think that name, I think his, he obviously had a Nigerian name before that.  And again, we don't know that name, and my mother, you know, we looked at passports and we couldn't find it.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your grandmother's maiden name?
Speaker 2: You know I don't know that.  I honestly don't know that.  I've only known her by her, you know, sort of name that her, her spouse gave her, so I don't know that either.  I think one of my aunts would know, so I could find out that information, but I don't know it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm wondering if they were Catholic, there were so many children.
Speaker 2: Yes, they were.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Clearly, coming from Ireland, my mother was raised Catholic, which then she trans-, transferred that to us.  So my brother, my sister, we were both, all raised Catholic because my mother was raised Catholic.  Not that my father wasn't raised in, in a certain way, but he didn't take ownership of a religion (laughter) and my mother did take ownership and made sure that we, we were raised Catholic.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, are there any stories that, that are passed down from your father's side about life in Nigeria--?
Speaker 2: You mean my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Oh, your mother's side, your, your, your mother's father's side.
Speaker 2: Well, not to us, because we never--before--let's see, my grandfather died when maybe we were two years old, back in England.  We, what had happened was, my, my, my father met my mother, because my father was an American serviceman stationed outside of Liverpool, in the [United States] Air Force.  And they met in the early 1960s in Liverpool.  Unfortunately--right after they met, they were married in Liverpool.  They had one child, which is my sister who is one year older than us.  And then in the interim, between that one year they moved to California.  And unfortunately, we never met our grandfather, because within a couple of years he passed away back in England, and similarly with my grandmother.  Another year later, she had passed away.  So, we never met physically, the kids.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 22514
Speaker 1: Liverpool [England], okay.  So did--any stories from--well, you never--okay, what did your mother say about growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Maureen Foster]--about her life growing up in Liverpool?  My mother grew up, you know, in a working class neighborhood in Liverpool, because you can imagine, you know, an immigrated Nigerian with an Irish wife with fourteen children.  They grew up pretty much blue collar, working class, and they, you know, with fourteen kids, of which I believe only nine survived birth, nine or ten.  Two were twins who passed away at birth and another couple passed away through, through miscarriages.  And so actually there were only nine to ten kids that actually survived.  And all those kids got, you know, educated in Liverpool in the public school system.  My mother never got more than a tenth grade education in Liverpool.  And she ended up working in the local factories and stores of Liverpool.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And met my father at, I believe, at an event at some club, you know, during that time period.   As you remember, it was sorta the Beatles era, and, you know, the American servicemen would go to various clubs in Liverpool.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was going to ask you if your mother, you know, knew any of the Beatles--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she spoke about them.  She didn't know them personally.  She was just like another fan.  And she was talking about how great the time period was when she was a kid, you know, being in her, at that time, you know, sorta early 20s, enjoying that great scene that was emanating out of her hometown, which was kind of fantastic for her, so she enjoyed it.  So she did relay that story, and she has all these artifacts from Liverpool and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did she have a reverence for the blues?  Like a lot of those artists, they, they, they collected the blues records and knew all the--
Speaker 2: She knew all that stuff, yeah, absolutely.  She knew all that stuff, she knew the music very well.  She had, you know, at that time the LPs, you know, 45s and things like that.  And, and she had that, and so did my father, because he was also there.  And they had an appreciation for the music out of Liverpool, and in, in, in general just jazz and other music types, musical types as well.
Story_ID: 22515
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Alright, now, let me go to your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 1: My father's full name is Claude Russell Pines, although he usually never goes by the middle name.  He just goes by Claude Pines, C-L-A-U-D-E, and then Russell, R-U-S-S-E-L-L and then Pines.
Speaker 2: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: His date of birth is June 4th, 1939, in Louisiana.  I actually don't know the city.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Do you know if it's in the Gulf down there by New Orleans?
Speaker 1: Oh, it's by New Orleans.  It's, it's, it's Hammond, Louisiana.
Speaker 2: Hammond?
Speaker 1: He grew up, he grew up in Hammond, Louisiana, so I'll have to assume that his birth place is Hammond, Louisiana.  If I remember his birth certificate it says Hammond, Louisiana.
Speaker 2: Is that H-A-M-M--
Speaker 1: H-A-M-M-O-N-D.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Hammond, Louisiana.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 1: Very little.  If you think I know little about my mother's side, I know very little about my father's side, partly because when my father was ten years old his mother died.  She was hit by a car, which is a story he relates to us.  His father, he never--his father, who married his mother, left the family before he was ten years old.  So, he never grew up with a father in his home.  And then when his mother was hit by a car, he was sort of adopted by a group of foster parents, which we actually don't know their names very well and their backgrounds.  But they raised my father and his two sisters to obviously adult age.  And then all three of them, my father and his two sisters, left Louisiana and came to California for jobs in the great sort of migration from the South, as most folks either went to Chicago [Illinois], black families, or they went to the West for jobs in Los Angeles [California].  And in our case, my father came to the Bay area where he found a job in the naval shipyard of Oakland [California].
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Now--it's interesting though, he's a foster child and marries a Foster [Darryll Pines' mother, Maureen Foster] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Basically, you know, but you know, I'm using the term foster, but he literally was adopted by another lady who was very familiar with his mother, and decided to take him and his sisters on to parent them, essentially to adulthood.  And, and so, when we were little kids, my brother and my sister and I, we only knew of that, of them as almost our grandparents.  And we would just call them--we never actually knew their names.  Until this day we never knew their actual names.  We just called them 'Mama', you know, 'Mama' and 'Papa', and that's how we referred to them.  But they were really my father's, in some sense, foster parents, or adopted parents, you know, who adopted him in some sense and took them underneath their wing.  And he grew up that way, and he treated them as if they were his parents.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 22516
Speaker 1: So did, what did he [Pines' father] say about growing up--?
Speaker 2: He, you know, I think my father [Claude Pines] had in some sense a tough life growing up in the South, in the Jim Crow Louisiana.  And with the loss of [his mother in a car accident]--he didn't have a good relationship with his father [who had left the family], even though he found his father later in his life.  But since his father had left his mother to raise, you know, two, three kids and then unfortunately get hit by a car and die, and his, his father didn't really come back into his life, you know, he had a tough time, I think, just making it.  And that's why he went into the service [U.S. Air Force].   He found a more stable existence in the service and felt that that would be an avenue for him to be successful, and it turned out to be a pretty good avenue for him to be successful.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how old was he when he joined the service?
Speaker 2: Seventeen, eighteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, had he, had he finished high school?
Speaker 2: He finished high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In Louisiana?
Speaker 2: In Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what branch did he join?
Speaker 2: The Air Force.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, so this would have been, what, roughly what year, let's see?
Speaker 2: This was probably somewhere around 1958, '57 [1957].  He would have been seventeen, eighteen in '57 [1957].  And so he got stationed over in, you know, after going through training, stationed over in Liverpool. Probably met my mother [Maureen Foster] around 1962, '63 [1963], '62, [1962], '63 [1963] because my sister was born in 1963.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: I don't know the details.  I've never asked either, either parent before.  My mother is passed away, but I never asked my father.  My father is still alive.  I just understand that they went to a nightclub and they happened to see, you know, some British women, which my mother was one of them, and he happened to ask her out with his friend to another friend.  So, they went out on a double date and then they got to know each other much better.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 22517
Speaker 1: Did, did you get the sense that there was a, I guess, a black British community that your (unclear) was involved--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  You know what's interesting, what I've discovered is really interesting, actually.  American servicemen married a bunch of British women and came back to the [United] States.  And there was this club, believe or not, of former American Air Force servicemen who were African-American who married either African-American British women or Caucasian British women who came back to California.  And they're all over the States, but there's a large population of them in California, and also Caucasian servicemen did the same thing.  So there's a group of these folks, and they actually have events.  So, what was funny for me is that a friend of mine, parents came together the same way.  And there--this friend of mine, her parents knew my mother and we became really close friends because of this little unusual link where her father was an American serviceman, married her mother, a British woman in Liverpool, and lived around the block from my mother.  And to this day we're the best of friends.  And we met, you know, probably I met them when I was in my mid-twenties and didn't know them at all, and we were talking about England and we both said "Liverpool" and, you know, "My mother's from Liverpool," and "My mother's from Liverpool."  And, you know, really, and then we started doing the homework.  And there's so many people we found like that.  So, it turned out to be a pretty interesting thing.  And they were in California as well, where I grew up so it's interesting, it's an interesting link.
Story_ID: 22518
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, when you consider your parents' personalities and talents, their habits, their looks, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think a combination of both.  I think, me personally, I say my father's [Claude Pines] a very smart man.  For a man who didn't have the privilege that I've had to get a formal education in college--he went two years in college, but he has a certain amount of really, you know, incredible knowledge and deep understanding of history.  He writes very well, again, for a person who had a high school and then a two-year education sort of experience in a community college in Oakland [California].  But I've been amazed by that.  And I think he has his own innate knowledge.  My mother [Maureen Foster], on the other hand, is a more compassionate person.  She did not have more than a tenth grade education, but she had an understanding of people, which is partly what I have, a pretty good understanding of people.  And I interact with people extremely well, and so did my mother.   And so, I've kind of inherited both sides.  I've inherited in my opinion, the sort of, a sense of commitment to education and learning, and I still have that love and desire to always want to read and learn things, which I think I get from my father, and the compassionate side and people skills that I get from my mother.  And I believe that's what makes me who I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you look more like your father or your mother?
Speaker 2: I think a combination.  I think, now days I think I look more like my father.  When I look at myself--and by the way, I have a twin brother, identical twin brother.  And so we both I think look like our father at this point as we've aged.
Speaker 1: Now, is your twin brother an engineer as well?
Speaker 2: He's an engineer as well.  He's an electrical engineer.  I'm a mechanical engineer, he's an electrical engineer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22519
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Lots of early childhood memories.  It depends on, you know, where would you want to go with that question.  I mean, in terms of how it relates to my interest in engineering, there's several that I think were contributing factors more so later in teenage life and less in--
Speaker 1: I'm talking about earliest childhood memories, the first thing that you, the kind that you remember.
Speaker 2: The first thing that I remember is, you know, honestly, there's two major events that happened to me personally as a kid.  One, I remember a trip that my father [Claude Pines], our whole family, took from California to Louisiana.  We had never been to Louisiana.  We were probably, me and my [identical twin] brother were probably four or five.  And he was taking us back to see where he grew up, to see his adopted parents, which were really kind of somewhat our adopted grandparents on his side.  And this was the first trip that we made to, for us as kids, to the deep South, during the mid-60s [1960s].  So it was probably 1968.  And, of course, as a kid you don't know what's going on, you're just a kid.  But what I remember is being in the little backyard in Hammond, Louisiana where my brother and I were playing with this wooden car.  For some reason it stayed in my memory, playing with this wooden car that was made by my adopted grandfather.  And my father, it was given to my father, and then my father was giving it to us.   And I just remember that.  And it was something that he really, really appreciated, and I appreciated, because it was made by my adopted grandfather and given to my father and my father was giving it to us as a toy to play with, and we really enjoyed that.
Story_ID: 22520
Speaker 1: Now, is it just you and your [identical twin] brother?  Do you have a--
Speaker 2: I have a sister.  My sister is one year older, and she's, you know, got an education in business and she works, she works for Tavis Smiley [American talk show host and author].  She was the original person--when Tavis started, only two people were there, Tavis Smiley and my sister Denise Pines.  And she's still there now, twenty plus years later.  And the two of them started the Tavis Smiley, you know, sort of productions. And my sister had, on the side at the time--before she worked with Tavis--a publishing company, which is still alive today, called Pines One Publishing, and that's how they got together.  She published his first two books when he was looking for a publishing company.  She actually--the very first book that he published was published by my sister's corporation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah
Story_ID: 22521
Speaker 1: Now, I read that your mother [Maureen Foster] was a book binder.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So my mother is--
Speaker 1: Is that how she [Pines' sister, Denise Pines] got in the publishing business?
Speaker 2: I don't think it's how my sister got in the publishing business, because you know, book binding is really a blue collar job where you're working in the factory taking papers, you know, and binding them together and just doing that process.  But that's the job that my mother did for her entire life at various different firms, both in San Francisco and Oakland and Berkeley [California].  And her last job was being a book binder for U.C. Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, California] at the U.C. [University of California] system, you know, before she ended up passing away with cancer.  But she, yeah, that's what she did.  So, she worked in a very, you know, hard blue collar kind of job and did that for a long period of time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did your father [Claude Pines] do for a living? 1. He worked as a shipping and receiving clerk and manager for the naval shipyards in Oakland.  And then after that job, which he worked at the Oakland--we call it the Oakland Naval Supply Center.   He then took a job at Pfizer Corporation in shipping and receiving, and then he ended up working for the, again, the Naval Supply Center. He again went back and then they commissioned through a BRAC (Base Realignment and Closure Commission) re-alignment back in the mid-19--, early 1990s, to close that base there at Oakland, the Oakland Naval Supply Center, and so he had to make a decision to go to one of the three spots in the country.  One of them was Los Angeles [California], was San Diego [California], where there was a shipyard-Norfolk, in Virginia, and then Bremerton, Washington.  He chose Bremerton, Washington, and that's where he resides today, in a city called Silverdale where he used to work at the Bremerton shipyards up in Washington state.
Story_ID: 22522
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now, when you were growing up then--and your household consisted of your mother [Maureen Foster], your father [Claude Pines], your sister [Denise Pines], and you and your [identical twin] brother?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Now, anybody else in the household?
Speaker 2: No, just us five.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Well, can you describe, you know, not only, you may have moved around a lot, but can you describe where you lived within the context of giving me the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The sights and sounds and smells of growing up.  So, we pretty much lived in almost just two places.  We grew, you know, we initially, when we first moved to Oakland [California], I remember that we lived in an apartment complex.  And then my family was fortunate enough to buy a house which I believe at that time in 1969, cost about $26,000 in Oakland, in East Oakland, and on a street called Holiday Avenue, 7507 Holiday Avenue.  And it was in the middle of East Oakland, and he was just happy, you know, to have a single-family home that had two bedrooms.  So, my brother, my sister and I grew up in the same bedroom, the size of probably ten by twelve square feet, right.  So, we had bunk beds, like twins would normally have, (laughter) fighting about who would be sleeping on the lower level and the upper level.  And, you know, as a kid when you grow up, you don't know any better.  As far as you're concerned, this is heaven, you know, you're happy.  My parents had a, made sure the environment was, we always had food.  We always had things that we needed, clothes.  But the most important thing that I think my parents always emphasized was education.  And so we, from day one we knew that education was important because they were not afforded an education that they knew that we would be afforded as being the next generation after the Civil Rights era, coming up.  So, they thought that it was extremely important that we got a good education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22523
Speaker 1: So, I'll tell you the sights and sounds of that era.  So, this was, you know, the early, late 60s [1960s] or early 70s [1970s].   This is Oakland right after the Black Panther Party [African-American revolutionary socialist organization, active from 1966 to 1982 in the Unites States].  I can remember quite honestly when we were living in an apartment in 1968, '69 [1969], standing on the street corner and seeing a bunch of Black Panther folks--which my parents really didn't get involved, they may have went to one event--but it was really striking for me now, when you look back that that actually emanated out of Oakland, California.  Based on the environment of Oakland which was a blue collar, it's still a blue collar town, but it came from obviously the black population that evolved from the migration from the South.  So, everybody came from either Louisiana, Texas, Alabama, Mississippi, and immigrated to Los Angeles [California] or Oakland to work in blue collar jobs.  And then as the Civil Rights [Movement] evolved, what happened in Oakland was, and it's still systemic today, is the systemic behavior of the Oakland police against the citizens, which is what evolved with respect to the creation of the Black Panther Party.  And it emanated from Oakland and migrated to Chicago [Illinois] and so forth, around the country.  But I remember though the vivid scenes of these Black Panthers standing on the street corner with their leather jackets and their hats, protecting or watching out for any trouble.  And I find, you know, I just find that amazing that it stays in my memory.  And then where I grew up, you know, there was, it was just before--unfortunately, it was just before the factories in the United States, blue collar jobs, were starting to leave and head to Mexico, alright.  So everybody, every African-American who was blue collar typically had jobs in those factories in the 1970s, similar in Chicago.  And so what happened is, as people had jobs, the community was fine, there was very little crime.  And then as those jobs went away, of course, the crime went up.  And then at the same time, in the late 70s, early 80s, that's when the real hard-core drugs started coming into the environment, like crack.  And so you watched this neighborhood in which my parents bought, which was a very nice neighborhood, multi-cultural yet predominantly African-American--it had a few Caucasians and a few Hispanics--it started to evolve and it started to deteriorate because people were losing their jobs and people were really fighting just to survive.  And that's where we grew up.  And, you know, so there would be times where it was, you know, lots of bad things going on, but you know, you basically stayed focused on what you were trying to get accomplished.  But you could see the whole thing just deteriorating over time, you know.   And that's what happened in those communities, and it's still somewhat of a microcosm of what happens today.  So, that's where we grew up, you know, in the middle of what somebody called the hood, but it was a great community as far as I'm concerned, and still is.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, did the Panthers that you saw have guns?
Speaker 1: Yeah, absolutely, and they were carrying them, because you could carry them as long as you didn't threaten the police.   At that time, California law allowed people to carry weapons, uh, until they carried those weapons to the Sacramento State House.   And then they said, "What's going on, we can't have these people coming into the State House with these shotguns and stuff." (laughter).  And that's when everything changed.  But before that, what would happen, what was allowable was the Black Panthers would--when there was a police incident in the neighborhood, they would stand a certain distance away, just to make sure that the person wasn't abused, and that's what would happen.  And of course everything escalated after that.
Story_ID: 22524
Speaker 1: Alright.  Yeah, let's talk about some of the black community of Oakland [California], who comes out of there and what's done there and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so you know, Oakland, I think in the entertainment and athletic community, there have been a number of great entertainers that have come out of Oakland and great athletes, people like Paul Silas, Bill Russell--San Francisco and Oakland [California].  On the entertainment side, M.C. Hammer, the rap artist; Toni, Toni, Toni, the other sort of R&B [Rhythm and Blues genre of music] group; and the Pointer Sisters.  You know, people like that, these groups that have spanned multiple decades in the music and R&B industry as well as hip-hop, have come out of Oakland because of the climate.  I mean, even to some extent Tupac Shakur came out of Oakland, because he was in a[n] art school in Berkeley [California] and ended up writing poetry that led to rap, and he ended up intermingling with the rap community of Oakland.  And so he had strong ties to that area even though he moved to Los Angeles [California] and then moved on to New York, but that's where he really got his start.  And so, there's this history of great folks that have come out of Oakland.  And of course, you know, (unclear) into the politics that come out of Oakland.  And so, you know, I understand that culture because I come out of Oakland and I have studied it, you know, pretty prolifically.  And I have a, just an appreciation for--you know, I love my home town and I don't mind that people talk badly about the crime, but I love the contributions that those people have made.
Story_ID: 22525
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, when you were growing up, now Willie [Lewis] Brown [Jr.] was elected in the late '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: In the late '80s [1980s] and early '90s [1990s], that's right.  So, Willie Brown was the mayor of San Francisco [California], but on the Oakland [California] side--
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: African--yeah, that's why--it's always this difference between Oakland and San Francisco.  It's like D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia] and Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 1: Alright (laughter).
Speaker 2: It's like D.C. and Baltimore.  So, what happened was on the Oakland side the first African-American mayor was Ellie Hugh Harris.  After that, Ron Dellums, who was the congressman for many, many years for Oakland/Berkeley [California] became the mayor as well, recently, like about just six or seven years ago before the current mayor who's there now.  And so, it's had a history of activists who have led the city.  Not all necessarily to positive things but, you know, they tried to, you know, set the city on the right and proper course, but it has a lot of attributes that are really positive.
Speaker 1: Willie Brown was mayor of San Francisco?
Speaker 2: Yes, Willie Brown was the mayor of San Francisco, yes.
Speaker 1: I need to be driven from the room.
Speaker 2: That's alright (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, so when you were growing up, was there, a lot of, I don't--some of the musicians that grew up in the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California], I'm getting the two sides mixed up maybe, but they talked about all the musicians that--
Speaker 2: The Spinners came from Oakland [California], yeah, so--
Speaker 1: I don't know if Mango Santa Maria was from San Francisco [California] or Oakland, now.
Speaker 2: I think San Francisco.
Speaker 1: San Francisco?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But the Bay area had a thriving music community and a thriving political climate as you know--activists in Berkeley [California], activists in Oakland, activists in San Francisco for different things.  In San Francisco, mostly for the gay community, a very strong--Harvey Milk--do you remember that guy who got killed, unfortunately?  Willie Mosconi also got killed.  And so, the bottom line is that the nature of the northern California experience which is pretty much strong left-wing you know--hard core political activists is that community--so very far to the left in almost all its thinking.  That's the nature of the Bay Area, and Oakland is just a part of that culture, right.
Story_ID: 22526
Speaker 1: And similarly, which was also very inspiring to me, was the fact that that same area that I grew up with the larger [San Francisco] Bay Area [California], was the head, or you know the central area for advancement in technology in Silicon Valley.  And that did not go unnoticed by me, right, even though I grew up in the hard-core Oakland, I was very much aware of reading about what was happening in Silicon Valley at the time because I happened to grow up right in the middle of, fortunately for me, the hottest era in the world, as it related to chip development, computer development, the early computers, personal computers came from you know, Apple [Incorporated] at that time.  When I graduated from college in 1986 with a B.S. degree in mechanical engineering, believe it or not, at the same time I got my degree, Steve Wozniak, the co-founder of Apple, got his B.S. degree in electrical engineering.  And at that time he was the co-founder of Apple, and he was our commencement speaker.  When I got my degree in 1986, I attended an Honor's Society banquet, and believe it or not, my lab mate was a young lady whose father was the CEO [Chief Executive Officer] of Intel [Incorporation].  And for four years I worked with this young lady, Karen Grove, and she was just my friend, as a student at [University of California] Berkeley [California], you know, a white young girl who was one of my really good friends who for four years hid the fact that her father was Andy Grove, the founder and CEO of Intel Corporation.  And so, we got to our banquet, our Pi Sigma Banquet, which is the honor society for mechanical engineering.   And we get to the banquet and I say, "Oh, who's going to be the guest speaker?  And Karen says, "Oh, I think my father's going to give a talk", like her father's like some arbitrary father, you know, and he happens to be an engineer.  So I get to see the program and I say, "Andrew Grove is your father, the founder of Intel Corporation?"  She said, "Well, I couldn't tell you."  I said, "Why couldn't you tell me, I've known you for four years, and you haven't told me this stuff.  I would have never put two and two together, because you just never acted that way, right."  And she said, "Well, if I had told you, you would have treated me differently."  I said, "You're right, I would have treated you differently.  I would have treated you like royalty."  (laughter).  And so as it turned out, what a cool thing for me personally, to have one of my friends be the daughter of this pioneer, you know, in literally silicon chips, and all the Intel chips.  And so I got a chance to get to know her father.  What a coincidence for me.  So that's what happened.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's how I got interested in technology big time.
Story_ID: 22527
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, your neighborhood [in East Oakland, California], give us a sense of what your neighborhood was like.  I guess this is California, so everybody's got a yard, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a little yard (laughter).  You know, one of these little one-story homes, with a little front yard and a larger backyard, nice blue collar community.  People, everybody knew everybody on the block.  You know, you had the standard grandmother who if you got into trouble she would tell your parents, "What you doing outside the house at this time?" kind of thing.  So, it was a very nice community.  You knew everybody.  Everybody went to the local elementary, middle, and eventually they went to the local high school.  But as I said, as that time period progressed, things deteriorated.  And the school system started to get worse because of the crime and because of the problems with, you know, financial support for the system.  And at that time growing up, you know, it's funny.  When you grow up in the middle of the hood you know everybody.  So, you know where the bad people are, you know where the good people are, you know where everybody--you just know that.  So you know where to avoid.  And to you, it's not complicated.  To some people on the outside, they're nervous about being there, and to you it's like I know exactly who these people are.  They're not going to touch me, because I don't mess with them, it's very simple.  And also my brother, my sister [Denise Pines] and I were, we were also athletes a little bit.  So we played sports.  So there was another thing where athletes were typically not messed with as well.  People treat you with a little bit more respect because you're playing for some team and you can play well.  So what happened, you know, we grew up, to me in a very nice community, with all the attributes that you want to have.
Story_ID: 22528
Speaker 1: The only thing that was hurting us in that [East Oakland, California] community was that the education system for where we were heading was not at the level that my parents wanted it to be at.   So what they did is they made a petition, my mother [Maureen Foster] did.  She wrote a petition to the Oakland school system and said in our high school there were some missing classes.  For example, and this was a high school called Castlemont High School--it didn't have advanced language classes, it didn't have calculus, math class.  So, my mother was actually able to--now here's a person with a tenth grade education--my mother was able to negotiate a petition to get us to go to Berkeley High School, my brother and I, because she made the case that the high school in our neighborhood did not have the advanced classes that would allow us to go to college.  And this is now, you know, 1978 timeframe, '77 [1977], and she got that done. We ended up taking a bus for fifty minutes to get to Berkeley High School everyday, my brother and I.  And because she didn't like the high school for my brother and I and my sister, she put my sister in a private high school.  Again, two parents with blue collar jobs essentially were able to pay for my sister to go to private school and forced us to go to a great public school.  By that time Berkeley High School was an excellent high school academically in the state of California.  It turned out to be that at that time, surprisingly, the number one high school academically in the state of California at that time for a public high school.  So we were blessed and lucky, my brother and I, to go to Berkeley and take the advanced classes that my mother thought that we could handle.
Story_ID: 22529
Speaker 1: Let me go back to grade school.  We have to do this--but--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: So, where did you start school?
Speaker 2: We both started school in an elementary School called Markham Elementary School [in Oakland, California], for the first four years, from kindergarten through fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you did have kindergarten.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We did have kindergarten.
Speaker 1: Now, was this an integrated school, or--
Speaker 2: This was, yeah, because it turned out to be--this particular school, you know, it was integrated, but it was mostly blue collar people who were white, black and Hispanic, right.  And that's the school we went to, and then again, my mother [Maureen Foster] felt that that school wasn't doing a good job, so she wanted to put us in a more strict school.  So, she ended up paying for all three of us to go to a parochial school called, a Catholic school of course, called St. Benedict's, also in Oakland, but about ten blocks away.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is, you went from--
Speaker 2: From fourth grade to eighth grade, to St. Benedict's and then from kindergarten to fourth grade, excuse me, kindergarten to fourth grade we went to this school called Markham, M-A-R-K-H-A-M, Elementary School.  And then from fifth grade to eighth grade we went to a school called St. Benedict's, which was a Catholic school and it was private.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Again, all about improving our ability to get educated.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Math, easily math.  You know, still today, math.  And of course, you know, engineering now, but math for sure.  I loved math, I could work problems for days.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's still that way.
Speaker 1: What was it about math that attracted you?
Speaker 2: I love structure.  Math is like a language to me.  There are fundamental building blocks to math, and it's structured.  If you follow the structure--you follow the theorems, the definitions and the axioms, and you just follow that, it's a language.  And you've got to have the foundations of the language to do the art form of math, or to really do the creative stuff, to really do the new math.  And if you don't have that foundation, you will never be great.  So I like the structure of math.  I like the methodology.  And it's the first thing you learn as a, I think, as a kid, that there's that much structure associated with something that's also abstract, that has creativity to it.  But has structure and that was important to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now were there any special teachers on the grade school level?
Speaker 2: On the grade school level I would say there were several teachers that were really, really special that made me get interested more than, you know, than another.  I would say maybe there were a few, but I'd say one eighth grade teacher really woke me up, I think.  And his name was Mr. Morris Sublay [ph.].  He had a French surname, but he taught social studies and history, and my brother and I both were not doing very well in his class.  And this is eighth grade now.  You'd think that by that time we should be doing well, because we should have been, because we all enjoyed school, but we were actually not doing that well.  And Mr. Sublay pulled us aside and he said, "You guys are smart enough to do well, what is your problem?"  And he was a very serious teacher.  And he was right.  We were not getting our homework done, and so we got it done.  So he really made a difference to us because he said, "Now is the time to wake up, because you're about to go into high school."  And he woke us both up and it made the difference for us, obviously, in getting to the next level.   But we were good students but we were just not applying ourselves sufficiently enough, and then finally we did it.  So, we owe a lot to him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he taught history and social studies?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22530
Speaker 1: Now world events are going on when you were coming along.  Do you remember, now you were really young when Dr. King was assassinated?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yeah, I was four.
Speaker 1: Four.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now--
Speaker 2: Yeah, one of the big milestones that I remember vividly was obviously Dr. King being assassinated.  But probably more impactful to me, and that was impactful, don't get me wrong, but what was also very impactful to me was 1969, was the landing on the moon.  And I remember that vividly because we were watching a black and white television with some, you know, wire mesh antennas to make it work, going into the screen, going in and out.  And here we are watching this incredible moment in humanity, the first human being to walk on the moon, Neil Armstrong.  And what really is really special for me, honestly, that was part of my first interest in having some interest in space. And having done research now in space and aerospace about four years ago--three years ago, in 2009--to watch Neil Armstrong walk across the moon, walk on the moon...  And in 2009 I got a chance to meet him and shake his hand, forty years later from that.  For me that was extremely special, personally, because Neil Armstrong never comes out and talks to people.  He has become sort of a person who sort of, you know, keeps to himself.  But he came to this event because it was the fortieth anniversary of, the fiftieth anniversary, of landing on the moon--fortieth anniversary of landing on the moon.  And he came to an event at the National Air and Space Museum at the Udvar-Hazy Museum over at Dulles [in Chantilly, Virginia], and I went.  I had the chance to be, you know, invited and I had a chance to take a picture with him and shake his hand and talk to him.  It was unbelievable for me personally, you know.  It was like the epitome of my entire life, like this is what I wanted to do, and I met the guy who kind of somewhat inspired me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, when you were a little kid watching this, you were what, five, watching this?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, you know, people do form good memories at five.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you have a sense that this was historic, I mean, or did you take it for granted?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I've often wondered when little kids see something like that if they just take it for granted, "Yeah, we're walking on the moon."
Speaker 2: No, I knew it was historic.  Partly because my father [Claude Pines] was feeding it to me, that this was a big deal.  We got to watch this.  You know, he made a big deal about the timing of it all.  We got to come home, we got to watch this thing.  And it was a big deal.  So, he made it a big deal, so it became a big deal to me.  And then when I saw it I realized it was a big thing for humanity, not necessarily, I would say at that time.  I knew it was big because my father was telling me it was big, but I think it did excite me about doing something new and great that hadn't been done by society, right.  And so, now when I look back on that event, I'm like, wow, that was really magical.  I didn't take it as magical at the time significantly, but over accumulation of time, yes, it was significant, right.  So, that set a big milestone as something that left an indelible memory for me.
Story_ID: 22531
Speaker 1: Another event that left an indelible memory, believe it or not, was the 1974 resignation of [President] Richard Nixon.  I remember that vividly.  I remember the day.  I think it was August 2nd.  I don't know why I remember it, but it was August 2nd, you know, 1974 that Nixon resigned, and I remember the Oakland Tribune on the front page.  And it left a memory, like the first president to ever resign the presidency.  How did that happen?  What did he do?  You know, so I was--and of course, I was ten.  So I was much smarter, much wiser, and so these things had vivid memories for me, just as much as for most people--You know, you grow up in California and there are certain things that leave really strong memories in your mind, and most of them are associated with bad things, like an earthquake.  We all remember earthquakes as Californians.  We remember earthquakes, we remember exactly the date, we remember exactly where we were.  So, Loma Prieta [earthquake in 1989 in the San Francisco Bay Area], the Northridge quake [in 1994 in Los Angeles, California]--all these things we remember very vividly because it you know has a big impression shock-wise on you.  And so, the other thing I remember in my life, you know, in 1986 the [Space Shuttle] Challenger accident--again, because I'm a space nut who loves aerospace.  That was also a major memory for me growing, you know, coming up as a college kid.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you were like twenty-two?
Speaker 1: Twenty-two, exactly.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Challenger.
Story_ID: 22532
Speaker 1: So, so your mother [Maureen Foster] got you in Berkeley High School?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: This is important.  So, now, was your brother [Derek Pines] your best friend, growing up?
Speaker 2: I think my brother indeed was one of my best friends, there's no doubt.  But also sort of, it was like a sanity check.  I mean, I think we were both our best friends, that we competed against everything, we competed in every sport.  We competed in every class.  You had someone to check your homework with.   You had someone to do projects with.  He ended up choosing engineering as a profession, like I did.  But you have, because he's your twin brother, your identical twin brother, you have a second sense about your brother and your brother has a second sense about you.  And there's a certain special, just feeling, between the two brothers.  And so that we were not going to let either one of us fail in whatever we were doing.  So that was unique, and I'm fortunate I've had my brother for all those years through high school to be there to play with, to do all the things that we did together.  So, yes indeed he was my best friend, but in every way, in just multiple ways.  So, I think we helped each other be successful.
Story_ID: 22533
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you said you were involved in sports.  What did you play?
Speaker 2: I played basketball, you know, like the standard kid growing up, all the way from elementary school [Markham Elementary School and St. Benedict's Catholic School in in Oakland, California] through high school [Castlemont High School in Oakland, and Berkeley High School in Berkeley, California], you know, competed to stay on the team and do my studies at the same time. Played baseball, played football, but really played basketball the most, and started, you know, started in high school and went out for the U.C. Berkeley basketball team [University of California, Berkeley].  But then I realized, what am I doing, you know, because I remember vividly that I would go to these practices at U.C. Berkeley, 1982, and the person who was there before me, believe or not, was Kevin Johnson [current mayor of Sacramento, California], another point guard.  I'm like, this guy is killing me every day.  What am I doing?  So, after like I think trying out for like three or four weeks and realizing that I'm probably the fourth string point guard of this--I'm on the non-travel team--I think I'm just going to focus on my education, which is what I ended up doing.  I was basically saying I had fun.  Sports, you know, the basketball thing, is over.  I can play it in inter-murals, and I'm just going to focus on my education.
Speaker 1: Now, did your brother play?
Speaker 2: He played too, absolutely.  He played in high school with me, on the J.B. [junior basketball league] team.  He didn't make the varsity team unfortunately, but played on the J.B. team.  We played together at one time and then, you know, he went, he ended up graduating and going to a different school.  That's when we kind of split our paths and he went one way and I went a different way.
Speaker 1: Now this is after high school?
Speaker 2: After high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, you went to different colleges.
Speaker 2: Different colleges, exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he went to Cal State [California State University], Long Beach [California] and I went to U.C. Berkeley.
Story_ID: 22534
Speaker 1: Now, in high school were you involved in clubs and activities and--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, one of the key things that made us both go into engineering, when it's really all said and done, was a program called MESA, called Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement, which was started in California and now it's probably in twelve states of the United States.  But it was started in California.  And U.C. Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley] had a chapter that was connected to Berkeley High School [Berkeley, California].  So, one really I think, important teacher in high school for us was Mr. Lee.  He was the math teacher in tenth grade.  And he saw both my brother and I doing well in math, and he said "You know, you guys should enter this Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement [MESA] program where you can stay after hours and work on extra math problems, but you get paid to work on these math problems."  You know, it was a small amount of money but it was an incentive to the best kids who were interested in math and science to stay interested.  And what they did was after hours or even during certain times during the day, they would bring in mathematicians, they would bring in people from the different professions like engineering, and there you would see what you could do.  And I think for both my brother and I, it solidified that we were going to be engineers.  That was it.  I mean, because I remember going on a tour to San Francisco [California] to see a building being constructed and I said "This is it for me.  I'm going to be, I'm definitely going to be an engineer."  And that really pushed me over the top, and I think similarly for my brother, he probably saw some of the same things.
Story_ID: 22535
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, when you graduated [from Berkeley High School, Berkeley, California] were you near the top of your class, or were you, where did you stand?
Speaker 2: You know, I think I was in the top thirty of my high school class.  I don't know exactly, I can't remember exactly the number.  I definitely was in the top thirty of my class, so I don't know where my brother was.  I don't think I've ever asked him that.  But I was in the top thirty of my class, you know, and applied to only two schools, believe it or not.  I only applied to U.C. Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley] and I applied to the same school my brother applied to, which was Cal State [California State University], Long Beach [California].  And one other school was Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  We both applied--I don't know, we got all this literature from Boston University and so we applied to Boston University.  So we got into Cal State, Long Beach and we got into--and I got into U.C. Berkeley.  And I just decided that I was going to go to U.C. Berkeley.  I was going to stay local.  I wasn't going to go to Los Angeles [California].  My brother decided he was going to go to Los Angeles, Long Beach, and start up down there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Alright, so wasn't hard to choose where you were going to school since you were already connected to--
Speaker 2: It was easy.  It was like, you know, Berkeley was just like my local school, like if I grew up in College Park and went to [University of] Maryland, yeah.
Speaker 1: U.C. Berkeley has a great reputation--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: You know, in the sciences, so.
Story_ID: 22536
Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers and mentors there [at University of California, Berkeley]?
Speaker 2: Well, believe it or not, the former president of this university, the University of Maryland, College Park-- Dan Mote [C. Daniel Mote, Jr.], who just stepped down two years ago was my academic advisor as a freshman in 1986.  So, the first person that I meet is Dan Mote, who is a mechanical engineer.  He's the one who signed my course registration so I could get my courses as a freshman.  And that person left a lasting impact on me as an engineer, because what I could do was really watch him as a faculty member and watch him as a researcher work on all kinds of very interesting research topics related to skiing.  He was an avid skier and he was interested in these failure mechanisms that he would see in skis and in ski boots, and also in the gondolas that would take you up on the ski lifts onto the slopes.  So, as a student, I was a freshman, and I can remember him talking to me about these various problems that he was working on, which really made me quite interested in the subject of engineering again as a freshman.  And little I would know that from 1986, that twelve years later this guy who was just my academic advisor as far as I knew him, would become the president of this institution that I end up working at some twelve years later, right.  So, and so, this person has had an incredible effect for me and he's still here.  He's literally still--he works in the college still.  He's stepped down as president two years ago and he is now literally professor in chemical engineering and still provides me, and serves as a mentor and advisor to me, and always has served as a mentor and advisor to me.
Speaker 1: That's something.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 22537
Speaker 1: I didn't ask you this, but it came across my mind, so I'd better ask it.  Did you have a, when you were in high school did you have a science fair?  I mean, how did you do in the science fair?
Speaker 2: You know I didn't, you know it's interesting.  I didn't do any science fairs, right.  I didn't participate in any.  Neither my brother nor I participated in any science fairs at all in high school [Berkeley High School, Berkeley, California], surprisingly.  So, our interest in engineering came from that MESA [Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement] program only, and fortunately we were exposed to little projects, but not really, really big projects.  You know, the robotics projects that--and I don't remember a single one.   And unfortunately, we didn't participate in any California science projects or fairs, unfortunately.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, were you, you know, the time you're growing up, there's a huge emphasis on science fiction in the movies and stars--
Speaker 2: Star Wars, yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: Another couple generations of Star Trek [television series] on TV.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: You know, high tech stuff going on in the movies.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Did you go to see those movies?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  So I mean, the 'Empire Strikes Back' [Star Wars], do you remember that?  The sort of George Lucas series of films, and then there was 'Star Trek', various generations of Star Trek.  I mean, obviously, for a techie person, somebody who likes science, math and engineering, I mean, and as a nerd, really love that stuff.  You know, I remember, you know, religiously watching every version of Star Trek, every version, knowing everything about it.  Because one thing about Star Trek is that it's authentic, that the discussions are scientific.  They actually had a group of scientists that advised the show to make it accurate.  So, when you think about something like a communicator, before a communicator even existed, like our cell phones now--I mean that was visionary, but that vision did get realized, which is amazing.  So, that's why most scientists and engineers kind of loved Star Trek because it was really accurate.  The discussions were accurate.  They were scientifically accurate about the science, about the astronomy that they were--in whatever portion of space they were in.  It was real, it wasn't artificial, it wasn't something made up, it wasn't just science fiction.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a schematic of the 'Enterprise' [Star Trek reference]?
Speaker 2: I did not, but I did have my own Enterprise (laughter), I did have a model of the Enterprise (laughter).  I definitely have models of various vehicles, 'The Empire Strikes Back' vehicles.  I had models of actors, I had models of the vehicles.  I had Legos [by the Lego Company].  I had all kinds of things that I would make and buy for--and books--I mean I had all kinds of science fiction books, I still have those books.  I was an avid reader of science fiction, and just reading in general.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite author, science fiction author?
Speaker 2: Well, you know it's interesting.  I was asked that question the other day by a student here [University of Maryland, College Park].  And I said, you know, not really, but if I look back at the stuff that I have, clearly Isaac Asimov is one author that I clearly have the most stuff of.  But as I said, there was lots of folks that I read from, so I can't really say that to be true, but definitely I had a lot of Isaac Asimov work, and you know, I still have it and I still look at it every now and then.
Story_ID: 22538
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So alright, so U.C. Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley], this is 1986?
Speaker 2: '86 [1986], '82 [1982] to '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: '82 [1982] to '86 [1986], okay.  Well, what was going on?  There's always some kind of social upheaval going on, on campus?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.  So, you know it's interesting.  In '82 [1982] to '86 [1986], this was the era in which, if you remember, the divestiture of South Africa.  Nelson Mandela was still in prison.  As you know, U.C. Berkeley was a highly activist campus from the '60s [1960s], from Vietnam [War] days.  We had, you know, when I went to school, believe it or not, in 1982 when I went to school there you still had people from the 1968 Vietnam era who were still living in People's Park [near U.C. Berkeley, site of political activism in the late 1960s].  Now, these guys were probably now in their early--in those days back then they were probably in their early, late thirties or early forties, some of them in their early fifties.  And they were still living in People's Park in Berkeley, California and still coming to campus putting a box in the middle of Sproul Plaza [a center of student activity at U.C. Berkeley], standing up on the box talking about we got to get out of Vietnam.  Uh, we're out of Vietnam.  So then right after that the next series of people were the people talking about we need to divest everything, Coke [Coca-Cola Company], Pepsi [Pepsi Co Incorporated], Chevron [Corporation], everything out of South Africa until the people of South Africa are free and Nelson Mandela is free.  So, this is the era I grew up in as a college kid.  And so I would go from--I mean, engineering was on the other side of campus.  I would live on the other side of campus and then I would come for lunch and I would listen to the wonderful speeches.  I mean, totally enjoy it, and became obviously an advocate of divestiture.  We got the University of California system to divest, firms that did businesses in South Africa until the political climate was going to be better.  And then what was really fantastic for me personally was I left U.C. Berkeley, went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and ended up there in 1988, '89 [1989] when Nelson Mandela was free.  And he came to Boston [Massachusetts] and we were able to see him, so--.
Story_ID: 22539
Speaker 1: So, alright.  So, now, when you were a freshman had you decided what branch of engineering you were going to go into?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had decided it was going to be mechanical engineering.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you know what was interesting was I had, I didn't know anything else.  I knew it was going to be mechanical engineering because it turned out at the time, [University of California,] Berkeley did not have aerospace engineering.  But that turned out to be what I really wanted to do.  But I didn't know any better at the time, so I chose mechanical engineering because I felt that I could get a job in mechanical engineering, and it worked out for me.  But I ended up doing all my work in aerospace engineering when it was all said and done, which I still do today.
Story_ID: 22540
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, are there any other highlights at U.C. Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley] before we move you on to graduate school?
Speaker 2: Well, I think for me there was this network of African American students that came in with me who have all gone off and done great things as well.  And, you know, that first group of folks you come in with as a college kid, they become your friends for life.  It's amazing how it works out that way.  So, I maintained these relationships with at least fifteen or twenty of them who came in at the same time I came in, roughly one year apart and two years apart, but we all came through Berkeley at the same time.  And so, we all, you know, have a special appreciation for that place.  And just the other day, one of our compatriots, almost lost his life, and it rallied all of us around the situation to resolve it, and we're talking about now maybe a hundred people involved in this one person's life.  And it was really kind of neat because it brought us all back together after now, 1982--so what is it, thirty years?  Yeah, thirty years, is that right?   Yeah-- thirty years when we first met each other.  And it was great, because it was like a reunion.  But it was towards this, and we were all on virtual, on-line, communicating to each other about one of our colleague's health because he had fell off a bicycle and got hurt and was in intensive care for several, for more than a week, and finally survived.  But it was, but that was the other, I think, important experience, because all of these people were in engineering, and that's what I wanted to mention.  All of these African Americans were in engineering.  And some of them went off to do great things:  medical doctors, they were CEOs [Chief Executive Officers] of Fortune 500 corporations.  Uh, and so that class of Berkeley--and the way I look at this is that we were the first generation within, of course, of a three or four year period that were allowed to get an education, just that simple, because of the Civil Rights era, thanks to our parents and their parents before us.  And it made that big of a difference, made that big of a difference for even me to sit here as a dean of this wonderful college [of engineering, University of Maryland, College Park], because of the opportunity to get an education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was there, were you a member of a, did you all have a black student--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  We had black student organizations.  We had a black engineering organization.  It was called BESA, the Black Engineering Student Association, BESA.  Actually, it was BESSA because it was called the Black Engineering Science Student Association, so it was called BESSA, in the College of Engineering at U.C. Berkeley.  And there was also a national organization called the National Society of Black Engineers, which I was a member of, and all my friends were.  And it's still a very strong organization today.
Story_ID: 22541
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Alright, now, okay, so MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] now, how did you choose MIT?  Was it easy--well, if you can get in, you should choose it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, okay, you know, four years later after coming out of high school, I was a much smarter person, much wiser about the world.  And I realized that, and I'm a very competitive person, so once I realized--I went to U. C. Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley] and I was able to do well.  I realized that I wanted the biggest challenge.  I wanted to take on the toughest challenge and I wanted to be at the best school this nation had to offer, and I felt that was MIT.  And I wanted to also experience the East Coast, and so I applied to MIT, Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California], U.C. Berkeley, University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] and Cal Tech [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California].  The only school I didn't get into, and I won't hold it against them, was Cal Tech, and it really made me mad at the time, I mean, to be honest with you.  And I still hold that letter today, right.  And it's used, I've used that letter as ammunition for my entire life, to be honest with you.  Even though this is on this tape, I'm just telling it like it is (laughter).  You know, because I said I got into every school and I didn't get into Cal Tech, you gotta be kidding me, at that time, you know, twenty, twenty-one, twenty-one years old.  So, I went to MIT, and being the competitive person that I am, I wanted to go to the best college, and I felt MIT was that school.  And it actually turned out to be one of the best decisions I ever made in my life.  And because I went to MIT, got admitted, obviously started my graduate program, met some fantastic people--I mean people who just are my colleagues and best friends today--I met a fantastic advisor who took me underneath his wing.  His name was Andy von Flotow.  He was--
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Andy, A-N-D-Y, von Flotow, V-O-W [space] F-L-O-T-O-W.  And he was, Andy was a person who grew up in Canada and got his Ph.D. from Stanford [University] and ended up on the faculty at MIT in the aeronautics and astronomics department.  Even though I was a student in mechanical engineering, Dr. von Flotow was willing to take me as a student, a graduate student, and do some research on space structures control.   And at that time, in space research there was this interest in building these very large telescopes.  I mean, telescopes, if you can imagine, ten kilometers in length, I mean ten kilometers in length in space, to look deep into the vacuum and see if there are other solar systems, civilizations, so forth.  And one of the problems that these large structures had is that they were so long that they would vibrate, and therefore when they vibrated they would affect the focus of the instrument.  So, the problem I worked on was could I develop a method that can control these structures to, you know, fractions of an arc, what we call the arc second of angle, very small fraction of an angle, to get the resolution that these instruments needed?  And I ended up developing the sensor that could be used to control these vehicles of large spatial extent, and that's what I worked on for my Ph.D.  But I worked on it for Andy von Flotow.  And in so doing I met so many fantastic people at MIT, and really understood why I was in MIT, just like I had thought.  I didn't know what it would be, what the experience would be, but the experience was even better than I could imagine.  So, I truly enjoyed it, and to this day I feel like it was one of the best decisions of my entire life, was to go there and be educated at MIT, so--.
Story_ID: 22542
Speaker 1: Do you have a story about something that happened at [MIT]--or something you learned?
Speaker 2: So, many stories, there's so many stories, so many stories.  I tell you, something that I learned at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] which I use pretty much in everything I do here.  It's that I believe that with the right people, with the right inspiration, the right leadership, the right vision, that any technical problem can potentially be solved, which is what I trained at MIT to believe.  Probably, because I ran into so many fantastic, smart people who worked on so many complex problems that they believed that, that literally, you would look at these problems, and you'd say there's no solution to this problem.  But they would never look at it that way.  They would always have an optimistic view of the problem.  Now, the only thing that would stop the problem from being solved was whether it was against the laws of physics.  So as long as it wasn't against the laws of physics, it could be solved.  There was just that mentality.  That's what was our belief at MIT, it was solvable, it's always solvable, and that's what I believe what I have brought here to Maryland, that I have an optimistic view on all complicated situations, and they're solvable.  So, I'll give you one example.  In 1988 there was a group of aerospace engineers at MIT, students, mostly students, and a couple of, a couple of faculty, but mostly students who were working on a project to build the first human powered aircraft.  So, you say, okay, why do I care about that?  And essentially you don't really necessarily care about it other than it's just a challenge.
Speaker 1: Now, you mean human powered, do you mean human, with physical--
Speaker 2: With your physical body.  You're riding the bike, like riding a bike and flying at the same time.
Speaker 1: Like in the movies, in the old movies where we see the guy like flapping and then fall over the cliff?
Speaker 2: That's exactly right, that's exactly right, exactly right.
Speaker 1: But they were trying to make sure it--
Speaker 2: Make it really happen.
Speaker 1: Really happen.
Speaker 2: So it turns out if you would do the analysis, right, if you did the analysis in say, the 1400s, it's not doable.  If you do the analysis in the 1900s, it's barely doable.  But if you did the analysis now, in 1950, 1960, 1970s and the 1980s, it's doable.  And now that it's doable, you can fly for a pretty long period of time.  I mean hours, okay.  So now, they took upon this challenge and said we're going to go to human powered aircraft and we're going to fly, we're going to build it, we're going to engineer it, and we're going to fly a human in it, and we're going to break the world record.  Well, it turned out I decided it was like a dumb decision on me, not to participate as a student.  I could have participated, right.  But I said I'm too busy working on my own research, I don't have time for this project.  It turned out my office mate, who sat right next to me, decided to work on it.  I regret my decision to this day, right.  And it turns out that those guys built a human powered aircraft, several versions of a human powered aircraft.  One of them was called Daedalus, D-A-E-D-A-L-U-S, and it broke the world record of flight for human, for a human being flying a human powered aircraft.  And it flew for three hours, okay, just to give you a benchmark.  The longest one before that hadn't even flown for an hour, okay.  So, what a great thing, a great thing in human achievement, a great thing in our field of aerospace engineering, and again, it was that MIT mentality. It can be done if it doesn't violate the laws of physics.
Speaker 1: We have to stop here, and I have to ask you, how do they do it?  I mean, what technique do they use?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, what they did is, they did all these studies on new aerodynamic air foils that they designed, and then they, and then the other thing they did is they made structures really like that you couldn't have made in the 1400s, like where they couldn't be made out of, they were made out of composites which didn't exist in the 1900s but exist today.  So, one of the challenges was could you design and develop and aircraft with the appropriate endurance qualities and lift it, what we call lift the drag properties as well as lightweight structures such that my energy can actually generate a push-up prop to move this vehicle and cause it to lift off the ground.  Not only lift off the ground, but fly for a long period of time based on my own personal energy.  Well, they've worked out those numbers based on improvements in aerodynamics and improvements in flight controls and improvements in lightweight stiff structures.  And those were the advances that they made that allowed it to happen.  Amazing, you know, at the time it was an amazing thing, but it doesn't seem that much now, but at the time it was.
Speaker 1: How did they launch it?  Did they jump off something, or they did they--
Speaker 2: No, no, they had wheels on the ground and then they wheeled it down along the ground or on a rail and then it lifted off and then they were flying.  And once you're flying, essentially you just power a little bit more to get an ascent trajectory and then you maintain a steady state, a steady state level flight.  So, it was amazing at that time.  It was a great project, a great historic accomplishment in our field, but it actually brought a lot of attention also to MIT.  And so I said that if I ever got in another situation in which I could inspire a group of students to do something like that, I would do it.  So, I'm doing it right now.  You happen to be here while I'm doing it, right at the same time.  We built, in the last three or four years, we built this human powered helicopter and it just a month ago broke the world record, right.  And now it's [University of] Maryland [in College Park] students and not MIT students.  So I'm very excited about that because it says that you can do the same thing.  And again, it all requires engineering but it requires the talent, it requires aerodynamics that were more efficient, and it requires like restructures and control systems.  And so we were able to do that here, but not for a fixed wing vehicle, but for a helicopter, a hovering system.  And we were able to fly only--and it's much different times.  You were only able to fly for about a minute of flight time, but no one else had ever done it in the world.  So, we did.  So, those are the kind of things that, you know, you challenge the kids to think that they can make anything happen, make it possible.  And I believe, you know, that's what I really care about, is that feeling that, you know, we advance society when we're able to make and inspire people to do things that they didn't think they could do, and take the risk when no one else is willing to take the risk.  You've got to be able to do that, and I believe in that.
Speaker 1: Now, this helicopter.  I'm going to have to ask you about the helicopter.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's cool.
Speaker 1: Is it, I mean, do you see this as--what happened? Did the person give out, in terms of energy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you can't do any more--
Speaker 1: Just didn't have the endurance?
Speaker 2: --and then you're out of, you're just exhausted.  So, this will give you a benchmark.  When you get on the treadmill, or you get on an elliptical bike, if you ever do this when you both are working out, turn it to the power switch and you'll find out that at your highest peak power you're probably putting out, maybe if you're lucky, 200 watts of power, okay.  Now you turn that to Lance Armstrong, he's putting out a 1000 watts compared to your 200 watts, right.  It turns out that a horsepower is about 746 watts, okay, of power if you convert it to units.  So, a human being is roughly capable of, an average human being, you and I, an average human being in a fit condition, is able to probably produce 350 watts in a fit condition, just an average human being who's fit.  So, now you see how hard the problem is.  Well, can something at a fraction of a horsepower, a fraction of a horsepower, lift an airplane off the ground?  So, just to give you another benchmark, the Wright brothers, it took them a twelve horsepower engine to get the Wright flyer off the ground in 1903, a twelve horsepower engine.  The human being only has a fraction of a horsepower.  So, now you can understand how hard the problem is. It's an order of magnitude difference in power to achieve flight.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, alright.  So, this is, MIT is a rich environment you're saying.
Speaker 2: Oh, to me it was a rich environment, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were working on the, what was it again?
Speaker 2: Oh, space structure control for my research.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then I learned about these human powered flight vehicles from just being, you know, just being a student there and then taking that idea and bringing it back to College Park some twenty years later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 22543
Speaker 1: Now, what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: Well, my dissertation was development of, development of some piezoelectic sensors that would be used to control the vibrations of a structure.  So, what does that in esoteric terms, what does that really mean?  Essentially, structures vibrate, and what we want to do is make them quiet, so we want to cancel the vibration.  So what I was able to do is to develop something what's called a wave sensor.  It senses waves on the structures.  The waves move back and forth, and you can sense those waves and then create an anti-wave, and you can cancel that vibration.  So, I created a sensor that sensed the wave and created an anti-wave that cancelled the vibration of a structure.  So, why do you care about that?  Well, when you hit a structure, it can immediately be silenced by my control system.  Even if I hit this panel right now, it would be silenced by a control system.  So that means when it's looking at a, through optics, if it's looking at some kind of deep space object, the image would not be blurry.  That's why you would care about what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, is this device actually employed now?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Many versions of control systems are employed now for these kinds of structures.  But, you know, it's not really enormously commercial because it's one Z, two Zs up in space, because space is not a huge market in general, for society.  So, yeah, they're being used by the government.  It's being used by researchers, it's being used by people who put telescopes up in order to do it now.  They didn't know how to do it back then, now they know how to do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what's the largest, did they ever put up a ten kilometer?
Speaker 2: No, they never put up a ten kilometer.  They were really, it was hocus pocus.  I mean, they were dreaming of these large, what they call large baseline infra barometry systems.  They still have not put those up.  But they have put up you know, large telescope systems.  I mean, but they're not, they're a fraction of the distance.  They're more like a half a kilometer than ten kilometers.  They're more like, I would even say just mostly just like maybe at best, 100 meters, which is huge, and you can think about how long that is.  But, you know, just a 100 meter race-- but which is like 300 yards.  That's a pretty big structure in its right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, this would be an object, I mean--
Speaker 2: You could see it.
Speaker 1: In space?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: 100 meters across?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yeah.
Speaker 1: With no atmosphere to obscure them?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Vision of--you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean it's like you can see the space station if you look up at the right time, 5:00 or 6:00 p.m. at night, and if you know the orbit that you're looking for, you can see the space station.  It's that big of a structure that you can see with the naked eye from the ground without any optical aide.  You can look through a telescope, but you can actually see a reflection of light in it, and you can see it from here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a big structure.
Story_ID: 22544
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, so, now are there any other teachers at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that we need to mention or--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean there's several.  I mean, I think, you know, my advisor is a key one to me, who just had a lasting impact on my life, which is Andy von Flotow.  But many of my committee members were valuable to me.  And all of my student colleagues were valuable, I think, to me, and great colleagues.  I can't think of somebody I can say that you know really had a bigger impact than my advisor.  I mean, it's always good for a graduate student when their advisor is a key person and becomes a person that you remember forever.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, alright.  So, you earned your Ph.D. in 1992?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Story_ID: 22545
Speaker 1: So, you went on, you went from there [graduate school at Massachusetts Institute of Technology] to, you worked at Space Tethers, Incorporated?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that was just a summer job, so that was like three months.  And then I went to go really work at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory [in Livermore, California].  I came back to California, essentially, back to the [San Francisco] Bay Area, and you know, got married in 1993 in Pennsylvania to my wife Sylvia, and then we moved to--prior to that I had already moved to California, so in 1992 I moved to California, to Livermore, to work at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us how you met your wife.
Speaker 2: I met my wife through friends of our family.  When I went to Boston [Massachusetts] my mother knew another lady in Boston through friends of our family.  And so, when I arrived in Boston I ended up staying with this family who their daughter was a friend of mine and then her cousin ended up being my wife.  So my mother had a friend from Boston, who when I went to MIT I stayed with.  The daughter of this person was my friend.  Her cousin became my wife.  Her cousin lived in the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area.  And so, what happened, when I was at MIT every now and then the cousin would come up and visit her cousin and I happened to be over to the house at one time and said, "Who's that?"  And that's how we got to know each other, because I didn't know who she was, and--but I immediately liked her personality.  And so we ended up starting to date in 1990 while I was still a student and then became more serious in 1991.  Then I graduated in 1992 and then we at that point had gotten engaged in 1992 and decided to get married in 1993.  Yeah, so that's just how it worked.  It was kind of just a friend of the family.
Story_ID: 22546
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, 1992, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory [in Livermore, California].  So, what was going on there?
Speaker 2: So, I chose Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory because at the time, even though it's a Department of Energy facility and tends to work on big physics projects--because Livermore's lab is dominated, again, by scientists as we had an earlier discussion about (laughter).  So, big physics happens at Lawrence Livermore Lab.  But what they were doing just before I got there is that they had this incredible space project that involved-- you may remember this, as under President [Ronald] Reagan's time, 'Star Wars', do you remember that?  And during this time period he put a lot of money into a space shield for the United States that literally, for any intercontinental ballistic missile [ICBM] coming from Russia or anywhere, that we could put up and deploy a family of spacecraft that would not only look out for the intercontinental ballistic--ICBMs, but it would also shoot them down in their ascent trajectory.  So, I joined that program.  Honestly, I joined that program because it was spacecraft and I was excited about being a part of that, to be honest with you.  And they had a lot of money.  They had a billion dollars of money.  Livermore had several hundreds of millions of dollars for this program, and they were looking at the time for a spacecraft engineer to help solve that problem.  So, I was in heaven.  I was like wow, I get to work on all this stuff, this is great.  So, I went to Livermore and I became part of the main team that was working on this problem.  And while we were working on that problem we got another big project which was called the Clementine Spacecraft, which was a demonstration program to demonstrate advanced technology that would help legitimize the Star Wars problem.  That is, that you could detect ICBMs coming at you and you could shoot them down.  So, Clementine was the demonstration project that demonstrated this could be done.  So, my job was to do the navigation for the spacecraft, but also help design and analyze some of the instruments, the sensors, the optics that were used to track the ICBMs.  So, this turned out to be a great project for me, because what happened was there was a major science part of the project.  So, we were going to deploy the spacecraft.  It was going to do an orbit around the moon and then after it did an orbit around the moon it was going to fly by an asteroid, the spacecraft.  So, I, with a couple of colleagues at National Naval Research Lab was developing the navigation algorithms and the control algorithms for the vehicle.  And it turned out that this particular spacecraft with the sensor sweep was the first spacecraft to discover water at the South Pole of the moon, which allows for life to exist on the moon.  But no one had confirmed whether there was water on the moon and not at the South Pole.  So, this did it at the South Pole.  Using the hyper-spectra imagery system that we had, we were able to ascertain that indeed water was present at the South Pole.  It was a major discovery in science, and it was such a major discovery in science at the time, that to this day a replica of the Clementine Spacecraft sits in the [National] Air and Space Museum [Smithsonian Institute, Washington, District of Columbia].  So, that was a proud moment for me personally to be a part of that program and a part of that accomplishment with my colleagues from Livermore and from Naval Research Lab.  So, I was just lucky, again, in the right place and the right time there to work on that program.  And then I worked on several other programs related to uninhabited air vehicles also, for Livermore up until about 1994.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  That's big stuff.  So '94 [1994], is that your last year with Lawrence Livermore?
Speaker 2: That's right.  So I ended up having a great time.  I worked there from 1992 actually to 1995.
Story_ID: 22547
Speaker 1: January 1995 I left [Lawrence] Livermore [National Lab in Livermore, California] and I interviewed in '94, the fall of '94 [1994], I interviewed for a job here in Maryland, partly, only, and here's the only reason.  Because my wife [Sylvia Pines] was homesick.  She's from Pennsylvania.  She hadn't really adapted very well to California.  I don't know why (laughter).  But she hadn't adapted.  Everybody liked California.  She didn't like California.  And she decided that she wanted to come back home.  I was quite happy at Lawrence Livermore National Lab, and I said to her, I said, "Okay I'll come back to East Coast, but I'm not going to live in certain places."  I said, "I'm not going to live in the South, the deep South.  I'm going to live--I'm not going to go back to Boston [Massachusetts].  I'll live in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, or Virginia.  You pick one."  And that's where I started interviewing.  So, I interviewed, and ended up having a friend here at Maryland in the aerospace and engineering department, and I said, "Hey, you know, do you have any positions?"  And he said, "Well, why don't you send your resume?"  And so I sent my resume.  And he said, "Oh, we're interested in interviewing you, so why don't you come on out."  So, I came on out in 1994 and interviewed and, of course, the rest is history.  I loved the opportunity, I loved the job.  I ended up taking the job starting in March of 1995 and I've been here ever since.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And you said Dan Mote [Pines' freshman advisor at University of California, Berkeley, who served as president of University of Maryland, College Park from 1998-2010] was here, right?
Speaker 1: No, he wasn't here at the time.
Speaker 2: Oh, he wasn't here at the time?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was still back at [University of California] Berkeley.  He came in 1998.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so after I was already here, yeah, so he came.  And, so he didn't, you know, he had nothing to do with me going here.  I just came here on my own.
Story_ID: 22548
Speaker 1: Okay, University of Maryland, 1995.
Speaker 2: Correct, when I started here.
Speaker 1: Yes, so you started here as a, basically as a--
Speaker 2: Assistant professor, right from scratch.  You know, I came here you know, kind of had developed a research program to get my research started and teach courses.  It was a transition.  It was a good transition for me.  I love education, and I love being able to see the next generation learn and grow.  And so I came up the ranks as an assistant professor and then I got promoted to associate professor and then I got promoted to full professor, and then I went into the dark side of administration (laughter).  But, I mean the most important thing I think that, you know, were my contributions and research.  And then I still do research and I still teach, by the way.  But my contributions are my students working on revolutionary ideas, and I will just talk about a few of those ideas.  One of my students--so, you're very familiar with GPS, the global positioning system.  You have GPS in your phone, you have GPS in your cars, you must have--GPS is everywhere.  That's how we navigate today.  One of my students developed an alternative to GPS that might have the same accuracy, but it only works in space, because it works only in a certain part of the spectrum.  It works in the x-ray part of the spectrum, and x-rays don't get through the atmosphere, only electro-magnetic signals get through the atmosphere.  But x-rays get absorbed by the atmosphere.  But it turns out that stars--working in stars--which was essentially just like our own solar system, but stars was like the sun.  But there are suns or stars like the sun that are spinning stars, and when they spin they emit a radiation, and they emit a radiation in an entire broad spectrum of the electro-magnetic spectrum, certainly optical band, the infra-red band and in the x-ray band.  And it turns out that you can receive these signals in any part of the band, but they're pretty strong in the x-ray band.  And if you could receive them in the x-ray detector, you can actually navigate from them.  And it turns out we developed such a system that may work very well for deep space navigation, and it currently has been studied by NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] and the [United States] Department of Defense.  So, we're most proud of that contribution in terms of research.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is something that wouldn't work here on earth but it would work, it only works in deep space?
Speaker 2: Correct.  So, if you have a spacecraft and it's navigating, it could get a signal from the star, essentially, and then you just have to navigate.  And so, so that's going to, that's a pretty big contribution of research.  And then, then what we've been also working on is we've been working on, you know, revolutionary designs of UAV's, uninhabited air vehicle systems, at the large scale and at the small length scale.  So, we made--if you've ever seen a maple seed fall off a tree, nature makes maple seeds and they swirl and fall down, and if you've ever just watched one, it kind of just twirls and falls down and gets blown with the wind.  And you think, well why does that happen, why does nature do that?  Well, nature does that to spread the seed as far and as randomly as possible for it to grow and spread the seed in the tree somewhere.  But it turns out if you would actually look at the aerodynamics of a maple seed, it's one of the most efficient aerodynamics of anything ever made, but made by nature.  And if you could replicate that in a flying system, you could have a pretty efficient flying system.  And so that's kind of what we've done as well.  We've taken a maple seed, we've understood it's aerodynamics, and we've integrated it into what we call an uninhabited air vehicle design.  And we fly these little maple seeds around and they can be used as toys or they can be used as surveillance systems and they can also be used as all kinds of delivery systems of payloads.  And so, one of my other students is about to get his Ph.D. and then graduate, and he's already started a firm and he's trying to sell these things back to the government.  So, a kind of interesting little idea as well.  So, again, what I've tried to do is push my students to develop revolutionary concepts, concepts that will transcend where we are today and push to kind of where we might want to be really ten years from now.  And that's kind of what I do with my students.  I try to give them very challenging ideas to work on so they can have a revolutionary impact on the field.
Story_ID: 22549
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I've read that the University of Maryland [College Park] is ranked number eight now.
Speaker 2: Yes, in aerospace.
Speaker 1: In aerospace.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, engineering.
Speaker 2: Engineering.  And when I came here, just to give you a background, when I came in 1995, we were ranked tenty-second, same department.  So, it was over that time period that the department has gotten better and better and better every year.
Speaker 1: Well, in terms of science and engineering and technology it seems as though--I know we interviewed Freeman Hrabowski [president of the University of Maryland, Baltimore County] a few years ago at--
Speaker 2: I know Freeman.
Speaker 1: --the University of Maryland--
Speaker 2: Baltimore County.
Speaker 1: --County.  He's doing all kind of revolutionary things over there.  Do you correspond, or do you--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Well, it's interesting, you know, I've been in this state for eighteen years, and Freeman has been in this state much longer than me, and Freeman has been in STEM [Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics] doing great things.  And believe it or not, we met for the first time literally in April of this year, which is unbelievable to me.  In this little small Mickey Mouse state of Maryland we didn't cross, our paths didn't cross.  And there was, and he knew about me and, of course, I've known about him.  He's a national and international figure.  And it was so funny because we were walking--we both, well, he didn't know me.  I knew him, and I was walking out of the building and I saw Freeman for the first time physically, you know, in the flesh.  I'd seen him on television (unclear).  And I waited for him.  He was talking to someone and he saw me waiting for him.  And I said "President Hrabowski, how're you, I'm Darryll Pines."  And immediately when he heard my name, he knew who I was, because he had known--because I'm at Maryland, he's at Maryland, and it's a small state and our education is STEM--and it was interesting that we actually decided that we would work together from that April meeting.  In fact, and it's funny that you asked me this question, that we're supposed to get together in another couple of weeks for the first time, uh, it's the second time, to discuss how we can work together on stem education as it affects both student retention and graduation, but also as it affects some of the minority students in the state as well.  So, we're looking forward to it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just thought it was natural that you all should know each other, and that you probably, you know--
Speaker 2: We should have known each other for years.  It's just really odd that we hadn't met.  And he even said the same thing.  It's just crazy how we hadn't met.
Story_ID: 22550
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you've been involved in a lot of programs for, I guess, to develop, you know--well, tell us what the Sloan Scholars Program is.
Speaker 2: Well the Sloan's Scholars Program is a program put out by the Sloan Foundation [New York] that we [University of Maryland, College Park] were one of the first five schools that were selected to participate in increasing the number of minority Ph.D.s in engineering, specifically.  But the Sloan Program is both for science, mathematics and engineering.  And so we submitted a proposal to the Sloan Foundation back in 1995 that we wanted in 1996, and we've been at Sloan University for all of those years in terms of graduating and recruiting more minorities into science and engineering, specifically from my perspective in the College of Engineering, in engineering, and then graduating them and getting them into the workforce and academia and into government and industry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I'm one of the partners.
Speaker 1: Sloan is associated with Charles Kettering, right there in the [San Francisco] Bay Area?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Both, were they both in engineering?  I know Kettering was an engineer, but I'm not sure if Sloan--
Speaker 2: I think they were mostly scientists, actually, and mathematicians. Kettering was an engineer, correct. But the Sloan Foundation is, you know, this private organization in New York that essentially does these sort of projects based on their foundation board in kind of what they think is important for society.  And so they thought that this dearth in the number of Ph.D.s graduating in the United States and the minority population in all of science and all of engineering was too low, and they still think it's too low.  And thanks to them and many others, there's been a growth in the number of Ph.D.s granted to various groups, and I think without this support maybe some folks may not have gone into the science of engineering, so I think it's important.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell us about the GEM [National Consortium for Graduate Degrees for Minorities in Engineering and Science, Inc.] Program.
Speaker 2: The GEM Program is very similar but its job is to recruit students just to go into graduate school.  And that's to get, they initially start off as just strictly a program to get people to get a master's degree.  So, it was founded about forty, yeah, forty-something years ago in the '70s [1970s] and it was started at [University of] Notre Dame [South Bend, Indiana].  It lived at Notre Dame for more than a decade and then it got moved to Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], well, the Washington region, and now its headquarters is here in the Washington region.  But it basically produces graduate fellowships for students to get masters [degrees] and a few students to get Ph.D.s, but the agreement is the money comes from corporations.  So, if you got a GEM Foundation fellowship you would have to work for one of the partner corporations in the summer.  That's their requirement.  So, I was a GEM fellow.  Even though I was a GEM director here at Maryland, I was a GEM fellow as a student, and I got a GEM Foundation fellowship when I was at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge] and I ended up having to work for the Chevron Corporation in El Segundo, California.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's out there by the airport.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Story_ID: 22551
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What's the NASA's [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] CUIP [Constellation University Institutes Project] Program?
Speaker 2: Well, I was the PI [principal investigator] of a big multi, literally nineteen-university endeavor, and I was the principal investigator to bring nineteen universities together to work on some strategic technology areas for NASA, with the program being run out of NASA Glenn in Ohio.  And so, so there was a big proposal effort.  We were trying to develop the next generation of tools and technologies for the next generation of government space launch.  So, the team was spread across many areas of propulsion, structures, systems engineering, you know, all kinds of areas of sensors.  And, and so I happen to be the PI, and actually it turns out that that program is coming to a close later this year, but it's a program that's been running now for, gee, I guess it's now six or seven years, and it's been a pretty good, it's been a great program for the universities in terms of the development in technologies for NASA.  So, a lot of technology has been transitioned to NASA and it will lead to the next generation's space launch vehicle that they're going to build, that NASA's going to build, and you know, that's why they created the program so that we would do the basic science, the basic research in propulsion, technology, and structures technology and health monitoring, and hopefully have that go into the next, get integrated into the next launch vehicle.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, this is up in Cleveland [Ohio], right?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: With Dr. Julian Earls?
Speaker 2: That's with Julian Earls, and it was Julian Earls and other directors.  Julian Earls used to be the director and now, Woodrow Whitlow was the previous director, but now he's at NASA headquarters.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We interviewed Dr. Whitlow last month, I believe.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, he's a good friend.
Story_ID: 22552
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now tell us what, what is the solar anomalous and magnetospheric particle explorer [SAMPEX]?
Speaker 2: So, that was a program at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] Goddard [in Greenbelt, Maryland], right down the street here, about fifteen minutes away.  Fortunately, we're close to Goddard.  And so, they came to the University of Maryland [College park] back in the late 1990s and said we want to get universities involved with some of our science experiments, and what we would like you to do, is that we'd like you to create an operations center in partnership with Bowie State [University, Bowie, Maryland], and literally track these satellites, and give us the data, but we want the students to track the satellites, and we want the students to do the navigation.  So, believe it or not, they gave us the money to create like an operation center here which was being run by three or four students on a daily basis, twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week for about five years, to get the data, send it to NASA, but have students do an actual real operation, a real data gathering of a real satellite.  And that was called the SAMPEX satellite.  I happened to be the director of the program, and it was a wonderful program.  It had Bowie students involved, it had our students involved, they got to really understand how the space systems work, and got them involved with real science.  So, it was wonderful.  It was a wonderful little project.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's called SAMPEX?
Speaker 2: Yeah, SAMPEX, for short.
Speaker 1: For short.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Story_ID: 22553
Speaker 1: You served in 2003 as programming manager for the Tactical Technology Office and Defense Sciences Office of DARPA, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, I don't know how much you know about DARPA, but this was probably the best job I ever had in my life, okay.  Dean's a great job.  That's a better job.  Let me tell you why.  This is like, imagine somebody comes to you, the government--you know, this is probably one of the best jobs in the government.  So, what happened was DARPA is the research and development arm of the [United States] Department of Defense that thinks far out, I mean thinks twenty years out, thirty years out.  And in its mission statement, essentially the mission statement says to prevent technological surprise from adversaries.  That is, work on the next generation things, whatever those things are, so that the United States doesn't get caught off guard.  DARPA originated after Sputnik was launched, and the Russians put the first satellite up and it scared the heck out of the United States.
Speaker 1: This is 1957.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  I would have to say 1957--right in 1958, DARPA was started, okay.  It scared the living daylight out of the United States and the Department of Defense.  So, they've created this agency.  Its budget when I was there was about two to three billion dollars.  And it brings in the best scientists, mathematicians, medical doctors, engineers, and social scientists into the government for a short period of time to work on futuristic programs that can have some relative impact to the Department of Defense, moreover, to prevent this concept of technological surprise, so they'll work on revolutionary ideas.  For me it was perfect.  That's exactly how I think, exactly what I like to do (laughter).  And, if you get your program approved, they give you tens of millions of dollars to run the program, right.  So, I always had these crazy ideas about various things.  So, I'll give you an example of one of them.  I launched a program, because of course, that's another aerospace thing.  I launched a program to essentially mimic insect flight.  I wanted to build a system that could harness the physics of biological creatures at the small scale.  I mean, things that might weigh ten grams, twenty grams, but harnesses the physics of a biological system.  So, it's that it harnesses a flapping mechanism, the aerodynamic features at that scale, the navigation at that scale.  How does an insect navigate?  It doesn't have a GPS [global positioning] system.  How does it do it?  It doesn't have the brain of a human.  It has very few neurons that are firing in that brain.  So, how does it do it?  Could we make a mechanical system that could mimic that?  So, I created this program which is called the Nano Air Vehicle program.  And fortunately, the director of the agency gave me 'x' amount of money to run the program and launch the program.  We put it out there to the community and we got twenty-two proposals, of which we down selected about four, and funded these four projects.  And one of my, I feel it's one of my greatest claim and contribution to the Department of Defense and to advancement of a technology, is that what came out of it, believe it or not, was a team from--one of the corporations created a biologically inspired hummingbird, that you can go on You-Tube and do 'hummingbird' and do 'Nano Air Vehicle' and you'll see the video of it.  And it was funded by my program, and it would have never happened if it wasn't funded by my program, in my opinion, because nobody was doing it at the time.  And so, now you have this biologically inspired thing that was mechanically derived that essentially looks like a hummingbird, flies like a hummingbird--maybe it doesn't completely sound like a hummingbird, but wow, what a thing.  So, now, why would you care about that if you're the Department of Defense?  Well, it allows you to fly this little system into a building, like this building, navigate down the hallway, maybe carry a sensor that has some biological sensor that it could actually sense that an environment's been harmed in any way, with a threat, and then therefore not put the human at harm's risk.  That's what (unclear) wanted to do.  The government was interested in doing that, and the program got that to a certain level of you know, capability.  So that's why it was such a great thing to do, because you could do that, you could inspire people to work on these complex problems, and they could solve them and produce something like that.  So, I was there for three years.  I got a chance to start four programs, and one of them was this x-ray navigation program that I talked to you about earlier that we did research on here.  One of them was a Nano Air Vehicle program, and then there were two other programs that I did that were, you know, kind of really revolutionary, in my opinion, and made a good contribution to the Department of Defense.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The hummingbird model is useful because it can hover and change direction?
Speaker 2: Quickly.
Speaker 1: Quickly?
Speaker 2: That's correct, right.
Speaker 1: Now, these, some of these sounds like, you know, you go to a James Bond movie, and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the guy that outfits James Bond in the beginning of the movie, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: This device lays all these things out.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wish that was me (laughter).
Speaker 1: (laughter).
Speaker 2: 'Cause I would be in heaven, because I would go, you know basically, you know, James Bond would come to you and say, I think I need this.  Okay, and come back in a couple of weeks, I think we'll get it done.  And I would love to hand them, here's your box, inside it is a hummingbird, only use it for this (laughter).  Because I feel that's what that organization does.  You know, obviously it's not like that, but you know, it's kind of like that, honestly.  You know, there are some technologies that are being developed by DARPA that I think would just shock people.  They would never know it's going on, it's unbelievable.  Because this place recruits the best talent this nation has to offer from corporate America, from government and from academia to DARPA to work on these advanced problems for the sole purpose of protecting the nation.  And everybody there is a U.S. citizen and they have the same mindset that I have, that they care about their country.  They love technology and they want to prevent us from being behind, and they want to make a contribution.  So, it's a wonderful place to be.  And then the government gives you money to run your ideas, and so what else could be better?  And so we had a, I had a great time there, it was a fantastic time.  I met some very sharp people and I believe it's in the spirit of innovation as well.  DARPA is a very innovative, one of the most innovation agencies that are in this nation.
Speaker 1: Now, this is something that if this was on, in a movie or television, people would call the person developing these things a scientist.
Speaker 2: True, true.
Speaker 1: And the engineer still wouldn't get any credit.
Speaker 2: That's okay.  They would call him a mad scientist, too, maybe.  You're right, I mean, but that's okay.  You know, I'm not going to, you know, miss over names or worry about whether about it's being mis-labeled.  It doesn't matter.  It's both.  It's science and engineering.  You need a science to understand the physic of flight at that scale and you need the engineer to integrate the system that mimics that flight.  So, in my opinion, it definitely leverages both.  So, I don't care if someone labels it as a scientific experiment.
Story_ID: 22554
Speaker 1: Now, are there, are there any devices that we have today out here in the world that were developed by DARPA?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And has spun out into the--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --into popular culture.
Speaker 2: Well, let's talk.  Let me give you a couple examples.  The M-16 rifle came from DARPA.  The actual internet came from DARPA, but it came from the predecessor of DARPA, which was called ARPA, the Advanced Research Project Agencies.  You may have--it wasn't Al Gore that you might think popularized it, it was ARPA.  And what happened in ARPA, in the 1980s the government worked with the [United States] Navy and they wanted to connect different places within the Navy through a network.  And so, they went to a few people in the university community to see if they could create a protocol, create a signal and send that signal across this protocol and across this network.  That was the first e-mail sent.  I think it was roughly in the late 1980s, I don't exactly know the date.  That was the precursor to the ARPA net, which was the precursor to the internet as we know it today.  And so it was quite fascinating that DARPA really spearheaded really where we are today in terms of something so impactful like the internet.  I mean, everybody takes for granted that it exists today, especially my kids, you know.   My kids take everything for granted.  The internet exists, you can go on the web and find information.  Cell phones exist.  Cell phones did not exist in the late 1980s right.  So, they don't understand that, because they were born in 1996 or something or after some certain time period.  They have no clue about how did this happen?   Well, people were thinking about making technology smaller and sending more bandwith across these devices wirelessly.  And now, here are we and we made it happen, right.  And scientists and engineers made that happen.  It wasn't anyone else.  Scientists and engineers made that happen for society, for consumers to use, right.  So that's why I love the field, because who knows what's going to happen in the next twenty years?
Story_ID: 22555
Speaker 1: Now, you were chair of the [University of Maryland, College Park] school's department of aerospace engineering from 2006 to 2009.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: What's it like to be the chair?  Is it a--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, in the university landscape, you know faculty are tenured.  The Chair has minimal power, because faculty are tenured.  So, your job is to talk to your colleagues, provide them with an ability to be successful.  That's what I feel my job is as a dean as well.  My job is to make all these great people who have great ideas as successful as they can be to move our university to the level that I want it to be.  But similarly in the chair, it's the narrow focused discipline of aerospace engineering.  It's to improve the quality of the student population, it's to improve the quality of facilities.  It's to insure that research thrives.  It's to assure that we can have impact.  And my job is to coerce and move people slightly in a certain direction and get them to believe in what they believe in, which is excellence.  And so, once positive things happen then people will do anything, because they see that it's been positively reinforced.  So, you can only sort of direct, guide, coerce, because it's not like the military and I can tell you what to do completely.  I have to have you believe that this is the right thing to do and that it's the right thing for the department.  And fortunately, most people were like-minded and on the same page.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you've been able to bring like funding from NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] to the school and I guess--and to other schools, from what I understand here through--I guess it's, well, do you want to talk about that on how you were able to do that?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean we're at research I institutions, and so part of what Research One institutions do is that they do deep research.  And to get that--to do the research, you need the funding.  And so, we work with our government partners by either collaborating, submitting proposals--but most importantly, we're trying to respond to their requirements as well.  So we have expertise that we think we can offer, but it's against their requirements and there are problems that they want to get solved.  So, we build a team.  You're building a set of expertise from various schools to address the problem, and then you submit a proposal and you hope that you are the successful proposal bidder and you're the most highly ranked proposer.  But you do all the legwork to build the foundation so that you can be successful.  So that's part of what research institutions do.  So with the faculty--work at a place like this--part of their job from the state perspective is to teach courses, but the other part is to do the high quality research on behalf of the sponsor, whether it's the government, the state or the corporate entity.  And so, so you need the right facilities, the right people, the right students to pull this off.  So that's kind of what we do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This one NASA project, I think was renewed for $22.8 million.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the NASA Pew Project that we talked about before.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we had that project for about five years now, maybe six years.  And it's going to come to a conclusion here this fall.  That's the last quarter of the proposal effort.
Speaker 1: Now, does Mark Lewis work for NASA?
Speaker 2: He works now for, he used to work, he used to be in the department, but now he works for a firm called IDA, downtown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Institute for Defense Analysis [IDA].  And so he's on leave of absence from the aerospace engineering department.
Story_ID: 22556
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, now, 2009 you became the dean and--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Nariman Farvadin, professor--am I pronouncing it right?
Speaker 2: That's pretty good, but it's Farvadin.
Speaker 1: Nariman Farvadin, professor of engineer.  Now, who is Nariman Farvadin?
Speaker 2: He was the previous dean in front of me, so he was here before I was here.  He now is the president of Stevens Institute of Technology [Hoboken, New Jersey], and he was my provost.  So, he was my dean.  I was the department chair.  He made me, selected me as department chair and he became the provost and he selected me as dean of the college.  Then he left the provost and became now president at Stevens Institute of Technology.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Okay, so you were the dean from, well, until now.  You're still dean.  So, okay.  Well what are some of your plans as dean?  I mean, do you have a vision for what you want to--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I have a vision for--
Speaker 1: And you're doing it.
Speaker 2: And I'm doing it.
Speaker 1: You're doing it, but do you--
Speaker 2: Well, I believe that, you know, this generation, if you notice these sets of kids today, this generation, they have a real strong social conscious.  And so either-- you know, you asked me about each era has its moments.  So, in the '80s [1980s], you had apartheid and you had divestiture as a major issue throughout the decade of the '80s [1980s] and it changed the world, it changed South Africa.  You know, in the '90s [1990s] you had the internet, the dot com era.  People made a lot of money.  It was hot, social issues were not as strong during that time period.  People were all about selfish and making money.  In the 2000, you had a collapse in the stock market and we're kinda still--and you had Enron and you had a couple other things, and here we are now in the beginning of the first, the next decade of the twenty-first century.  And what you find out is that this generation which has grown up with all of these nice wonderful electronic devices and the internet, these kids are socially connected by Facebook, by Twitter, and they also have a social conscious, more than maybe the group from the 1990s.  So what they, what I notice that they want to--the kids in engineering and science today, they want to take their skill sets and they want to solve problems that benefit society.
Story_ID: 22557
Speaker 1: Alright.  You were going to give me some examples of [current students in engineering and science]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, you know, the [Unites States] Department of Energy started a competition called the Solar Decathlon Project, which is basically to develop technology to build homes that can be off the grid.  That is that they can only be powered by solar light and battery power and that they can be self-sustaining, minimal impact to the environment.  And our students got really excited about this competition, and they've been participants in it in the last decade.  So, recently in the last year, as of last year 2011, when a group of our kids won the competition, they built this home which they called 'Watershed'.  And it was a home that literally was (unclear) the grid.  It was only about 1200 square feet, and every other team helped build this home as well, but it had very unique features that made it more sustainable, made it less impactful to the environment, and by the judges' determination, was the best home.  And this was a two-year project that involved 300 students, but that's what they cared about.  They cared to have user skill-sets to make something that was artistic, solve the problem, but had minimal impact on the environment.  I don't think that could have happened, that would have happened, maybe thirty years ago, you know, in this place.  And so part of my vision is to leverage our students' interests to solve problems that have a huge impact on society in a positive way, like the development of solar decathlon.  We sent students overseas to countries such as Ethiopia, Burkina Faso in Africa, Peru, Thailand--and they go into developing nations where--let's say you go into a village and there's no clean water in the village, that--basically for ages the women have been walking a mile to a dirty creek, trying to filter the water through some kind of cloth and bring that water back, which is probably infected with--who knows, all kind of bacteria, and then that's the water they've been cleaning and drinking with.  Well, if it just had the equipment and the support, maybe there's a well literally a hundred feet deep in their village, which is what typically is the case, and wouldn't it be nice if the students could drill that well, build that well, put a pump there and let them get the water right there in the middle of the village.  Well, that's the kind of stuff we do.  We send our students overseas to a program called 'Engineers Without Borders' and they go everywhere in the world and they essentially work in these developing impoverished countries.  They actually train the citizens of that village to use it and develop it themselves, because when the students leave and come back to school after a couple of weeks, it's self-sustaining.   So, it's a sustainable program where we go and have that positive impact with our engineering skill sets, and we have the students make a difference with their skills--either clean water, solar power, go to school, clean up a river, and then come back.  And so, we love this program.  And so, these are the kinds of things that we're trying to do with our students to have a positive impact on society.  I think the other thing that we're trying to do which is even more locally now, this concept of social entrepreneurship and social engineering.  How do we use the talents that we're training these kids to have to go into the neighborhoods of the state of Maryland and make a difference?  And I'll give you another example.  We've had our students go into the local cities around Maryland and do energy audits for various different corporations and buildings and then provide a report and recommendations on how that particular business can reduce its energy footprint so it can reduce its power usage, and therefore it would reduce its impact on the environment and also save costs.  So, this is a positive thing, again, that our students feel very good about going out and doing.  So, again, we want our students to be conscious of this: the environment is important, the engineering can help and make it more sustainable.
Story_ID: 22558
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, you're still doing, you're still engaged in research.  What personal research are you, or is that a proper question for me, or are you just doing it by yourself or are you--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I'm doing it with my students.  I still have, I have four Ph.D. students and one master's student.  So, I'm really still working on ideas related to navigation and control and aerospace vehicle design, and also on what I call health monitoring of aerospace systems.  That is, monitoring the health of helicopters and making sure they don't fall out of the sky if there's a mechanical failure.  And so, I still care about all of that.  I still try to do it.  Of course, I'll be doing this mostly on the weekends, but we still get it done, because I never want to be just purely an administrator.  I want to always continue to do research and continue to think outside the box.
Story_ID: 22559
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you're actively involved in creating minority students for the [University of] Maryland School of Engineering?
Speaker 2: Yes, and so, we basically--in fact we're holding a reception in the first week of August with a lot of principals of high schools to basically tell them what we would like them to do with respect to recruitment of their students from Prince George's County, Baltimore City, Washington, the District, and a number of different other private high schools as well, so that we can encourage those students to potentially apply to Maryland and come to Maryland and stay in the fields of science and engineering.
Story_ID: 22560
Speaker 1: Okay.  You explained earlier the difference between an engineer and a scientist--
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: --what they are really about.  What do you see coming down the road for engineers now?  You're at the cutting edge of engineering, and so--
Speaker 2: You know, yeah.  It's a great time period.  Let me just articulate a quote that I always like to use to sort of separate engineers and scientists.  And it's not my quote, it's a quote from Braun Carmen, a famous aerospace engineer who actually solved many fluid mechanics problems.  And he said it as follows, "Scientists study the world as it is, engineers create a world that has never been."  And I love to use that because it doesn't disrespect either discipline, but it states it fairly succinctly, too, and people can understand that.  The average layperson can understand it and the average engineer and scientist can understand, and there's no disrespect intended.  We need both, you know, the United States, the world, needs both.  For example, we're working on nano science and nanotechnology, and there are fundamental discoveries when the length scale goes to ten to the minus nine meters, and ten to minus ten meters.  There are fundamental phenomena at the atom level that happen that hadn't been discovered, right.  Fascinating stuff.  Now, do I personally care about that?  Yes, I care about it because those fundamental physic[al] laws that are discovered at that scale may lead to a new engineering system, that if I didn't understand that, I can't engineer the system, or I got to understand the laws of physics.  The laws of physics still are very important, always important.  But that's the kind of discovery that's happening today, at the nano scale and that's where engineering is headed.  So, there's going to be some nano scale technologies that will come out that will have an impact on society that society won't even know what hit them, because it's happening in government labs andin academic labs today.  The biggest impact that's coming down the pike for society, for the average citizen, will be the improvement in health care due to technology.  It's in labs now.  There are things that have already happened, so I'll give you some really kind of trivial answers related to biomechanics.  So, you're going to see this in the Olympics for the first time.  You're going to have a guy who's a double-amputee, who's going to have an engineered set of calves that is going to be able to run right in the hundred meter, and 200 meter--
Speaker 1: Alan Pretorius [Oscar Pistorius].
Speaker 2: Pretorius [Pistorius], exactly, from South Africa, right.  Now, people have argued he shouldn't be allowed to run, because is it that engineered legs run faster than the legs of a normal, non-engineered human being?  Well, it can be.  That's the funny thing about it.  It turns out that the particular prosthetic legs that he has, they're not as good as what they should be.  And you can design systems that are better than the human calf muscle and the muscle reflex response rate that are embedded in the human body, and when that happens, then that question is going to come up again.  And that's not that far away.  Now, he's not going to win anything.  I think it's more for show than anything, but he's not going to win.  But now, this is the kind of thing that happens.  That you study the problem and now you can have a human being like that have a better life, number one.  And number two, compete in the Olympics, and not only compete, but be competitive, maybe even potentially be in the top five.  Now, that's amazing to me, right.  And that's an engineered prosthetic system.  Those kinds of things have been in the works for the last decade, to get to where they are today.  There's a whole another generation of prosthetics that are in the works now that you haven't seen that's going to make it better for him, way better for him or for people like that.  There's a whole bunch of also embedded biomedical devices that we're going to have implanted in our bodies that are going to be measuring your pulse rate, measuring the moisture content on your skin, measuring lots of other factors that you under-stress.  Then what's going to happen is that your iPhone [Apple device] is going to be downloading that data.  That data's going to be sent to some central depository or repository where your doctor can evaluate your day to day behavior, what's going on with you, and have a whole long history of what's going on with you, if you allow it to happen.  Now, there's some sensitive privacy issues here, right.  Because what's also happening, but quite interestingly enough, is you always think security from a hardware perspective.  So, you close your door, you lock your door, and you're secure inside of your house.  Well, you never really think about it too heavily, most people don't at least, is about your digital security.  And when I mean your digital security, all of your digital security.  If I take a picture of you, where's that picture going?  If I measure the size of your iris, what am I doing with that data?  So, when you go overseas, and I'm sure you guys fly all the time, you go overseas, and some places they take a picture of your iris, they take a picture of you.  You never ask, where did that data go?  That's your digital fingerprint, but you never think about that.  That's just as much as your privacy as anything else.  I can manipulate that and become you.  Are you with me?  So, this is where we're headed.  The next twenty years, security and privacy and digital fingerprinting of you, whatever it is on you, it's your privacy, right.  If I pull out my cell phone, and if I get into your cell phone, and I get all of your phone numbers and all of your information, and maybe your bank accounts, right, have I violated you?  Yes, I have, right?  Now, if I put my cell phone down and I reach in your back pocket and I grab your wallet, you will arrest me.  You will call the police to have me arrested, because I stole your wallet.  But I just stole your wallet electronically.  And the laws are different.  So, when I steal your stuff electronically, I don't get harmed at all.  There's no law for it, I don't go to jail.  I should to go to jail, I just took your wallet, but I took your wallet electronically.  So, this is what we're dealing with now in society, is your digital image and your digital fingerprint and your digital memory of your privacy that we haven't thought about before, but we've been thinking about now for the last decade.  We've got to solve these problems.  These problems are technical, they're legal, they're policy and they're still wide open.  We haven't figured it out yet as a society, but it's a big issue but it's coming down the pike.  So, and it's tied to health care, because it's privacy as well, tied to health care.  So, the biggest, I think, technology and policy thing will be cyber security.  I use it as a buzz word. Really, everybody uses it as a buzz word, but it's really your privacy, your security, and your digital fingerprint.  And, then of course, there's health care and its advantage to enhance your life, to make your quality of life much better.  It's coming down the pike.  It's going to make all of our lives longer, last longer.  We're going to have better prognoses, and many, many things are in the works right now.  They're sitting in people's laboratories, they're spawning off new businesses.  It's happening, it's going to happen, right.  I can tell you that's going to happen.  In the energy area, lots of stuff is going on.  So much stuff is going on, it's impossible to talk about.  Will fuel cells become popularized so that you and I have a fuel cell in our car?  Yes.  Will battery technology improve?  Absolutely.  Who will win the battle?  Over in the marketplace, the best competition will win.  Lots of competitors are out there.  Will oil still be important?  Absolutely.  Oil will be important for the next, who knows, ten, fifteen, twenty years, right.  However, other technologies and other sustainable green energy will evolve, will grab a certain portion of the market space and we'll be more of a sustainable society, we'll be less of a negative footprint on our environment.  All of this is going to happen.  It's happening now.  The momentum has gone that way.  We can't stop it, it's going to happen.  Who will be the winners and losers, we don't know.  It's difficult to predict, you know.  Technology is non-linear and it's sometimes difficult--winners and losers.  I'll give you a major example that you've seen in your lifetime.  So, the cell phones and the cell towers:  So why did the cell phone become so popular and why did we have to put up cell--why was it affordable?  Well, because we put up all these cell tower infrastructures.  Now, you probably don't remember this, but back in late 1989, there was a thought, if you remember, the very first cell phones were satellite cell phones.  I don't know if you remember this.  There was no cell tower infrastructure whatsoever.  It was all, you had these backpacks, you put the cell phone in it.  Do you remember?  And you pulled these big things out and you had a call and it went up to a satellite link and came down somewhere else.  And everybody thought at that time, this was like 1988, 1989, that you needed to put up this network of satellites to have global coverage for cell communication, right.  So there were these firms.  McCaw, I don't know if you remember, McCaw Cellular was one of them.  Something called Teledesic was another one.  And they tried to commandeer the entire launch community to launch all these satellites, to launch like hundreds of satellites up, right.  So, people let them go do their thing.  They started launching a couple, they only launched like a couple of satellites.  But, by the time it takes to launch a satellite, people realized that you could put ground infrastructure up faster around the world and then establish a cellular network.  So, they beat them to the marketplace.  The cell towers beat the satellite guys to the marketplace and could deliver band width.  And it was cost effective.  So, that's why we have cell towers, because it was cost effective, you could generate more band width, you could connect it to the device faster and you could beat the guys who were trying to commandeer the launch market.  It was an amazing thing.  So, all these firms that were satellite firms lost, you know, went bankrupt.  So, all I'm saying to you is that technology is an enabler, but you can't predict the winners and losers.  And, because in that case I think a lot of people would have said that the satellite guys were going to beat everybody when they didn't, and they didn't.  And that's why we have what we have today.  It's fascinating to me.  So, and things like that happen, and I love the term non-linear.  The non-linear, you can't predict that the market is going to change because of some very simple things, if you don't see them.  So, we'll see that with health care.  We'll see it with energy, we'll see it with security.  These are the three areas that you should watch out for.  Security: security forever, energy: the next decade and health care the next decade.  And that's where the jobs will be.  Jobs will be in those areas, there's no question about it in my opinion.
Story_ID: 22561
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today?
Speaker 2: My hopes and concern for the African-American community is that they are integrally part of the next wave of technology.  And it worries me to no end that we're not producing enough minority engineers and scientists for them to participate in that revolution that's coming.  And I see it everyday.  I sit here and see the human capital everyday.  And we have, the volume is out there in the high schools.  It's getting those kids interested in committing to this subject matter and science as well and getting them interested in staying the course for a long period of time to earn their degree so they can make that contribution.  We are clouded by the fact that other, you know, the media, the toys that they play with, clouds their judgment, and therefore they get sidetracked into other potential professions that are not really going to be relevant for them.  That's my opinion.  And, so I think that, you know, we've got to reach deep into the middle schools and elementary schools and build a pipeline.  It's a long process, and just the fact that you're telling these stories of the HistoryMakers is wonderful because I think they need to see role models.  And, you know, for an overused term, I still think it's very important that they see people that they think that they can be.  It definitely worked for me.  I've seen multiple people like me--Ph.D.s before me, that I could believe that I could be one of those persons.  And I have many, many role models that I could really point to.  So, I think that's important, but I think it's a bigger problem, and we've really got to move that tide so that, you know, we change the numbers that are going into these professions significantly, by order of magnitude--order of magnitude, and that's what I see today.  It's just not good, it's just not good.
Story_ID: 22562
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me this.  When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and tweak something?
Speaker 2: You know, when I did those science projects you talked about in high school (laughter), I would have, I think I would have been more of an applied person as an elementary, middle school, high school kid and done more projects.  Because I believe your experiences improve your engineering.  And if you, the more you do things, the more you build stuff, the more you design stuff, the better engineer you are, and it happens faster.  I've had to evolve over time to become, you know, a really good engineer, but I could have been that engineer probably in the mid-twenties instead of maybe my mid, my early thirties.  I would have been smarter about certain things.  So, I don't regret anything, but if I would change anything, it was that I would have been doing many more projects, you know, building many more things, because they're fun, you learn so much from them, they're innovative and exciting.  And you know, I think our most fertile time in our brains are when we're between the age of eighteen to about forty.  I believe that's when we have the most fertile productivity and contribution and innovation, and I think, you know, you can't lose any of that time.  That time is important.  And so, that's just what I personally believe.  Obviously, people can be innovative after that time, but I believe that's your most fertile time, and you have to really, really work hard.
Story_ID: 22563
Speaker 1: Okay.  The follow-up to that question is, when you look back over that same time period to today--and you're still young--what today would you consider to be your legacy, today?
Speaker 2: That's a hard question.  I always feel I haven't done anything (laughter), personally.  Maybe my legacy will be leaving the tools and putting in policies institutionally to make this place successful, but to make people successful.  I always believe things are about people and about the ideas that they have.  And what I would like all engineering colleges to be is to constantly think about developing the next generation of everything, and never be willing to say no, just to go ahead and work hard and do it.  So, if I can instill that philosophy into the people here, all things are possible.  I think in our country, I think we've been very lucky.  If you just look at even the last forty years, twenty years, you constantly see us innovate.  I mean, Google wasn't here, you know, before 1995.  It didn't exist.  It exists today.  Many people are employed by Google.  We all use Google.  You use Google, every human being on the planet might use Google.  That's an amazing thing.  It touched every, almost every human being on the planet.  How many people can say that, that something like can do that?  So, America is about innovation, it's about these great people that we've allowed to immigrate to our country that bring great ideas, that work really hard to produce the next generation of innovation.  So, I think that's the thing we have to cultivate, is that culture, and keep it going, because in this nation and in the world we have competitors, and they're trying to compete just as much as we are.  And so, we've got to cultivate the next generation, let them be free and think freely and come up with great ideas and suck those ideas into great--and translate them into great things and we'll continue to do great for society and great for the country.  So, I really believe that probably will be my legacy, is that we leave that sort of footprint here where the culture has radically changed and people believe that they can do anything.
Story_ID: 22564
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us something about your family.  Now, you got married back in 2000?
Speaker 2: 1993.
Speaker 1: '93 [1993], okay.  And do you have any children?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have a sixteen year old daughter who's actually working here [University of Maryland, College Park] (laughter) and I have a fourteen year old son.  And, you know, obviously, your pride and joy are your offspring and what they do.  So, my daughter is doing, both are doing well in school.  I'm very proud of that.  I have no idea what they will really do.  I don't think, I think neither one will be an engineer, unfortunately.  My son may be a biologist, so, a scientist.  And so that will be great if he goes in that direction, but that's kind of what he likes now.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And is your sister [Denise Pines] still producing Tavis Smiley?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my sister, yeah, she still works for Tavis Smiley.  They still work on many, many big projects.  I don't know if you've heard of the 'America I Am' Project.  That was actually my sister's idea, which went national and went everywhere.  And she was very proud of that program.  And now, as you know they've done, as you know, his organization is in all kinds of things as it relates to sort of various things related to minorities and entertainment, in media, in politics, and stuff like that, and bringing big issues to the black community to essentially address how that community can get better and be more strategic.  So, I think Tavis has done some great things, and I think the organization has done some great things and they will continue to do, you know, some great things for that community.
Speaker 1: And your brother's an electrical engineer, right?  Where is now?
Speaker 2: He works for a firm that does, believe or not, traffic engineering and traffic monitoring in southern California and in Oregon.  And so, you've seen those traffic lighting systems on the highways for getting onto the freeway in Los Angeles [California] right where it stops you.  That whole network, they monitor those systems at some central location.  So, his firm essentially monitors the sensors and then improves them and then sort of works with the city to really diagnose the traffic problems in the region.  So, that's kind of what he does.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And your father's still alive?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's retired but he's hanging out in Bremerton, Washington, and not really doing anything, just involved with his church.  And, you know that's about it.  I mean, he doesn't really do anything technical or does anything related to work.  He's really, really retired, he just hangs out.
Speaker 1: I'm sure he's proud of you all.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he's very proud.  I mean, he's very proud.  And my mother if she was alive today, would be also very proud.  And so, but you know, we're proud of our parents, too, and we believe we're real good products of what they've created, and they created a very nurturing environment for us.  All three of us, to be educated and successful, so we owe a great deal of gratitude towards them, and they're really our heroes, I think in my opinion.  Like I said, my father's very smart.  I'm amazed at how smart he is.  For all the education that I've had, and the lack that he's had, and for him to know some of things as well as I know them (laughter), I'm like how do you know that?  You know, so it's always been impressive to me, and so yeah, I think we're very happy with what our parents have instilled in us.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 22565
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything that I haven't asked about before I ask my last question?  I've got one more question.
Speaker 2: I don't think so (laughter).
Speaker 1: Alright.  Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered maybe as someone who had, who was a big idea thinker about everything: about science, about technology, about engineering, about people, about society, that, you know, we're on this planet for a short period of time.  We're part of the human species.  And I always see it as our purpose is to make the next generation better in whatever way that can be.  And if it can be an engineering system, great.  If it can be for advancing about where our species is headed and our survival of this species and what we can make--our goal is to make a contribution, and to me make the world better for everyone.  And I see that, I really see that as my legacy and I see that as the imprint that I leave to others to continue.  That's really how I see things, honestly, how I see things.  It's that we're here for a short period of time and then when that time period is over, what are you going to leave for the next generation?  So, hopefully we will leave a few things.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Well, thank you.
