Story_ID: 46701
Speaker 1: If you would give me your full name?  The name you were given at birth?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  Henry Presswood (laughter).
Speaker 1: Would you spell that for me?
Speaker 2: H-E-N-R-Y, P-R-E-S-S-W-O-O-D.
Speaker 1: That was the name you were given at birth?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: No other name. Any nicknames?
Speaker 2: Any what?
Speaker 1: Nicknames?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Hank (laughter).
Speaker 1: Hank.  No other little names, as we say.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Ok.  Where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Electric Mills, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Electric Mills.  And when were you born?
Speaker 2: October the 10th, 1921.
Speaker 1: You just had a birthday.
Speaker 2: October 7th.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: October 7.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  1921.
Speaker 1: You just had a birthday?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That makes you how old today?
Speaker 2: I'm '82'.
Speaker 1: Eighty-two.  Congratulations.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: You are presently employed or retired?
Speaker 2: No.  I've been retired ever since '83' [1983].
Speaker 1: Okay, since 1983?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: What today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes
Speaker 2: Today is the 11th and the 6, 19-- I mean 2002.
Speaker 1: 2003?
Speaker 2: 2003 I meant to say.
Speaker 1: You do dates like the military?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, you do.  Where are we right now?
Speaker 2: We're down 1900 S. Michigan Avenue.
Speaker 1: In Chicago?
Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 46702
Speaker 1: I have a couple of little, sort of little fun questions for you.  We call them People Magazine questions. What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food (laughter)?  That's kinda hard to say mam because I likes to eat (laughter).  Yeah, I like, oh, I like a lot of sweets and what I don't need.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  ...a lot of sweets.
Speaker 2: I (unclear)
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  All.  I got one of them there Mississippi cooks and she cooks everything.
Speaker 1: That's good.
Speaker 2: So, but anyway, I like, I like, I like sweet potato pies, I like, I like, we use to call them candied yams.  But, however, I likes that, I likes cake, I like, oh, I can't name it all.  I li....  I love all sweets.  I'll say it like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's a good thing to say.  Do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: (unclear)
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: A favorite time.  You know what, mam, every time the good Master wake me up in the morning.  I feel... favorite.  That's the way I look at it.
Speaker 1: Special color that you like?
Speaker 2: Special clothe?
Speaker 1: Color?
Speaker 2: Color.  I like, I likes, mostly I like gray.  I likes blue.  I likes brown.  I likes the colors period.
Speaker 1: You like colors?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: When you go on vacation, where is your favorite place to take a vacation?
Speaker 2: When I go, when I go on a vacation, I go to Charlotte, North Carolina to see my sisters.  I now--and some time I go over to Detroit and see some of those old friends, just here and there.  I get in my car and I'm gone.
Speaker 1: Which one of those cities or areas do you like best?  Charlotte or (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Charlotte, North Carolina, where my, my peoples there, some of peoples there--my sisters.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase that you like, a favorite saying that you like?
Speaker 2: A favorite saying? Oh, (unclear)  Well, you see, I, I, I--it's kinda hard to answer that, a favorite saying, because I'm a fi... I'm a fella like this, I don't meet no strangers.  And I'm, I'm friendly at all times.  And I, I wouldn't--I can't--I don't think I can give you a specific thing on that.
Speaker 1: That's good, I'm glad that you like all--everyone.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's a good thing.
Speaker 2: I don't hate nobody.
Story_ID: 46703
Speaker 1: You were born in Electric Mills, Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your family and (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: My --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --your mother and your dad?
Speaker 2: --Yeah my dad was named Dee Presswood (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Dee (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: D-e-e, that's all, D-e-e.  My mother's name Josephine Presswood.
Speaker 1: Where were your--where was your father born?
Speaker 2: Oh, my God (laughter).  I done forgot that.
Speaker 1: Was it Mississippi?
Speaker 2: It's somewhere in, somewhere in Mississippi, but I don't know, I don't know.  (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And your mother?
Speaker 2: --I've never--and my mother too.
Speaker 1: They both were born in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember your mother's maiden name?
Speaker 2: Josephine Matthews.
Story_ID: 46704
Speaker 1: Matthews, Matthews family, was it a big family?
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  All, all I, all I can remember is my grandmother and grandfather, you know, her parents.
Speaker 1: You remember her parents?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember their names?
Speaker 2: She was named, she was--my grandmother was named Georgianne.
Speaker 1: Georgianne? And your grandfather?
Speaker 2: And my grandfather named Stuart.
Speaker 1: Were they also born in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: I, I guess so.  I, I really don't know, you know.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --Cause you know, you didn't question the old peoples (laughter).  (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(laughter).  Yes that's true.
Speaker 2: --You did not question them at all (laughter).
Story_ID: 46705
Speaker 1: Are you an only child?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Are you an only child?
Speaker 2: No, well you see my older sister in Charlotte, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember.  Oh, I was so little when all of them, you know--the most of them was gone, you know, when I come along, you know.  That's the way I say, you know.  The Lord had taken them in.
Speaker 1: How many were there?
Speaker 2: I think I had, I think I had two brothers and two sisters.  I think that's the way it was.
Speaker 1: Are you the youngest?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You're the baby, of the family?  You're the youngest?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm the baby boy (laughter).
Story_ID: 46706
Speaker 1: What do you remember about your family and your growing up in Mississippi, the earliest time?
Speaker 2: The earliest time.  The only thing--my grandfather--he had an old...(laughter).  He had, he had an old wagon and an old mule and I use to like, like to ride, ride on the end of the wagon, you know.  Everywhere he went I wanted to ride on the end of the wagon.  And so, that's, that's all I can say bout it, you know.
Speaker 1: What was your grandfather doing?  How did he (unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: All, he was a farmer, you know, he was a farmer, yes.
Speaker 1: --And so did he sell his (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: He, he raised watermelons, all stuff like that, you know.
Speaker 1: And sell them?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So you would go to market with your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, that sounds interesting.
Story_ID: 46707
Speaker 1: Who else do you remember besides your mother's parents, mother's father and mother?
Speaker 2: My other, the other part of my family--parents?  My mother's sister Ida Nelson, she lived in Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: How often did you see Ida?
Speaker 2: Well, after, after I came out of the army, after I was discharged from the army, well, I--the first wife I had, (laughter) she had a different ideas when I came out of the army (laughter).  And so, at that rate--my sister was in--we--I had come to Meridian--my daddy had done moved to Meridian.  He was working at a salt and ice factory there in Meridian, Mississippi.  And, so, I had got out of the army and my sister, she come in to see me from Birmingham, you know.  And so, when she got down there, she wanted me to go back to Birmingham with her, and so, I did.  And, so I went back to Birmingham.  And so, I was working at Carnal (ph.) Steel Company and in Birmingham.  So I played baseball in the city league there.  And so....
Story_ID: 46708
Speaker 1: Can we talk a little bit about what you were like when you were a young boy?  When you, when you were spending a lot of time with your grandfather and your mother and dad?  Do you remember any stories that your grandfather or your parents told you from before, a long time, any old stories that they passed on, that you liked?
Speaker 2: Well, no, I, I, I couldn't, I couldn't say yes, because just like I said before when grand... when they, when the grown... when the grownups was talking kids had to vamoose, mean get out of wa..You couldn't, you didn't hear.  They, they didn't allow us to listen to the grown people--they say grown peoples conversation.  So, I, I couldn't....
Speaker 1: No songs, do you remember any songs or anything from that time?
Speaker 2: Nah (ph.).
Speaker 1: You were little--did you have a favorite one?
Speaker 2: Nah.  I can't remember.
Speaker 1: What age did you go to school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I went, I went to school--I finished the, the, the tenth grade and that's far as I went.  And so, then I had my schoolmate, one of my schoolmates--then I married her.
Speaker 1: You went to school (unclear)
Speaker 2: In Electric Mills, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: --The first school, what was that like, your first school? What was that like for you?(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: That was, that was my first school.  That's that's the only school I went there.  And then, and then (laughter) I, you know, then I worked.  I started working, cause see--and then I, I married my school... one of my classmates, you know.  And so we had kids, so I had to go to work.
Speaker 1: So when you, when you went--that, that school had all the grades? (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --You went into that school(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I went up to the tenth and then that was it.
Speaker 1: What was it like leaving home to go to school?   Leaving your mother and your dad everyday to go to school?
Speaker 2: It was, it was beautiful.  It was beautiful. You liked (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: I liked to go to school.  I wanted to learn as much as I could.  And, you know, and what I did get, you know, it was a blessing, you know.  Because I would ask the teacher questions, you know.  Sometimes I'd stay after school if something I didn't understand, I, you know, cause I wanted to have my grades up.
Speaker 2: What was it, what was it the subject that you liked most?
Speaker 1: I liked history and then I liked math.  So... (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: History and math simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --and so when... you know, and so at that time you know--you see we had those, what, what you would call it, geographers, you know.  And so when that geographer asked that's bout history, he was bout history, and so, you know, I wanted to know a little something, you know.  I didn't get it all (laughter).
Speaker 2: What kind of student were you?
Speaker 1: I, I guess, I, I wish she was, I wish she was alive she'd tell you.  They didn't have no problem with me.  Every time you see me I'm the same, I'm the same today as I was yesterday and I always will be.  That's just the way I am now.
Story_ID: 46709
Speaker 1: You sound like you really liked this teacher.  Do you remember her name?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, M.C. Shepard, L.R. Power....  So when I went to North Carolina to see my sisters here, the other summer, summer before last, then my sister had--my younger sister, she had been to the home for the elder peoples.  And so she told Miss L.R. Power, that was my next teacher, Ms. Shepard was the, she was the, she was the, M.C. Shepard, she was the principal, you know....  However, and so, I said, "You mean to tell me Ms. Power is living."  She said, "yes."  I said, "let's go."  And I got in my car and we went on up to that home.  And so, when we got there, you know, I asked, you know, to the desk, and let people know who I was and who I wanted to speak to and everything. (unclear)  So, my sister and I--Ms. Power remembered my sister--and my younger sister.  But, however, I walked in, so Ms. Power looked, she looked at me.  I said this, this what I say, I said, "You don't know me?" just like that.  She looked at me, she looked at me, she looked at me.  She said, "Tell me what your name."  I said Henry Presswood.  And Ms. Power had--was in a wheelchair.  Ms. Power stood up, just like that, and she hugged me (laughter).  She was glad--because I was, I never, I never gave them, give them any, any--I wasn't no--I, when I went to school, I went to school to study.  See, and I never did give them no problems.  See, and so I thought everybody, I thought the teachers and everything liked me because I was I didn't know no other way.  And I'm the same now.  See, I'll bend over backwards to make you smile, you know, or whatever.  But, you know, and I mean it.  See, I don't try to put on no show, you know.
Speaker 1: Anything else that you remember that really impressed you?  It sounds like your teachers did, especially Ms. Powell, Ms. Power?  And when did you go to see her?  When did you and your sister (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's in Charlotte, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: --And when did you do that?  When was that visit?  What year was that?
Speaker 2: Oh, that, that been bout five years ago, maybe, maybe going on six, you know.  Um-hum.  But I still go and see bout my sisters, and you know--my older sister and the younger sister.
Story_ID: 46710
Speaker 1: So there's a sister older than you and the sister (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah, she's up there--Mary, she's the oldest one.
Speaker 1: What's, what was your relationship like with Mary like when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Beautiful.  Beautiful.  I was the pet (laughter).  I was the pet (laughter).
Speaker 1: And your younger sister?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the only boy.  I was the pet (laughter).
Story_ID: 46711
Speaker 1: And so you, you finished the tenth grade (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --from the same school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure.
Speaker 1: --and then what did you do?  When did, when did you start, you know, you're known for baseball, so when did you start playing baseball?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a man--ok there in Electric Mill, Mississippi, where I was born at--they had a big sawmill there.  And my dad, he worked the sawmill.  And a fella by the name of Mr. Jimmy Faison [ph.], Jimmy Faison, played baseball with the--the baseball team there was named --the sawmill name was Electric Mills.  The baseball team was name Mills City Jitterbugs.  They had Mills City Jitterbugs across here.  And so, Mr. Jimmy Faison, he played first base and that was my first--I wanted to play first base, but see, and then I learned to play shortstop.  You know, that the way it was.  But, however, Mr. Jimmy Faison was one of my mother's boarders.  Well this big sawmill wasn't too far.  And so, they had the--at 12:00 noon the whistle would blow, would blow, and then the workers would go to dinner, or lunch, whatever you might call it.  However (laughter), and Mr. Jimmy Faison was one of the boarders that my mother would cook....  She had, she had bout six or seven, maybe eight or 10, you know, and they would come walking over there at 12:00 noon.  And so, and when I'd be at home, Mr. Jimmy Faison would get a ball had a rubber ball, and he'd toss the ball and learn me how to catch that ball, learn me how to catch the ball.
Speaker 1: How old were you then, when you got interested in baseball, the earliest time?
Speaker 2: Oh, foot, (unclear) when I first started going to school and I use to see the big boys.  I always wanted to play, you know.
Speaker 1: Did they let you play?
Speaker 2: Nah, not until (laughter) you know, they didn't want to fool around with me.  They didn't have time for me at that time.  But, however, I didn't stop.  And when Mr. Jimmy Faison would get off work, he'd come to the house, he'd toss the ball to me.
Speaker 1: How old were you then?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was bout, I'd say bout 12, I think I was bout 12 years old.  I believe it was, something like that, ten or 12 years.  I can't recall exactly.  But, you know, I can remember it good.
Story_ID: 46712
Speaker 1: So what do you remember best?  What are the things that make you feel, or remind you feeling really terrific when you were little?  When you were young, very young?
Speaker 2: Well, I use to love to dance.  I use to love to (unclear) (laughter)....
Speaker 1: You started dancing when?
Speaker 2: Oh, early, when I could get away from around my mother them (laughter), because my mother them, they was, they, they, they, they, they, they was Christian peoples.  And so, you know, they, they--we had to walk--I'll, I'll say it like--let me use this word, please.  I would have to walk--we, Helen and my, and myself--that we was the smallest.  We had to walk a chalk line, you know.  Just like, if, you know, if you get drunk, the police make you walk a line.  We had to walk a straight line, you see.  And when the grown peoples are talking, just like I say, I had (unclear)  My grandmother, if, if she was there, she'd just give us the eye.  I knew the eye to get up and go out of there, you know.
Story_ID: 46713
Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Georgianne Matthews.
Speaker 1: Georgiana Matthews.  All right, so you're, you're around 10 or 12.  You're living in a Christian home.  (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --You--there's Mary, your sister, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and Helen, your sister, your younger sister?
Speaker 2: Oh, Helen?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, Helen, she, she coming on up there too, you know (laughter).  I can't recall exactly how old my sister is.  She, she, she, she in her 60's, I don't, I don't know how... you know, I don't know exactly, I don't....
Speaker 1: When you all were growing up in that house, when you were saying that this is a Christian household, what was that like for you?
Speaker 2: It was beautiful.  It, it was beautiful in a way of speaking because I had to go to Sunday school and everything.  See, we didn't, you know--when I went to school, from school back home, the next thing, get my books and try to, you know, get myself together to go back to school the next day.  And, but, however, we would--had to go, had to go to Sunday school, and the morning worship, and at that time they had a BYPU, they use to call it.  But now they call it BTU, I think it is.  And so, however, they--we'd go there too.  They kept us in church.
Speaker 1: That made for a long day.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: That made for a long day.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 46714
Speaker 1: All right.  You're now out of high school.  You finished tenth grade.
Speaker 2: Yes sir.
Speaker 1: And then what do you do?
Speaker 2: I worked.
Speaker 1: And where did you work?
Speaker 2: Worked at the sawmill.  I picked up broken lumber and put on a buggy.  My daddy got--my dad, my dad was working out there.  My daddy, he's a little straw boss.  And so, he got me little jobs.  I'd pick up broken lumber and put it on a buggy, then the truck would come and get it and take it and then they'd trim it up and run it through the machine and, and, you know, dress it.
Speaker 1: You know, Mr. Presswood, people talk about Mississippi in an unfavorable way, a lot of times when they talk about Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Tell me what it was like for you growing up in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: ... in Mississippi?
Speaker 1: --yes, in Electric Mills, and finishing school and going to work in the mill?
Speaker 2: I didn't have no problem, no problem whatsoever, you know.  White and black--"Hey Hank, come here and do this."  I'd go--I use to work in different places with them, you know, when I had pass time give me a little money and put in my pocket.  I ain't had no trouble.
Speaker 1: What kind of work did you do other than millwork, in that time (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Nothing but do--work on the lawns and different things, you know, like that, and flowers yards--work for those people, you know.
Story_ID: 46715
Speaker 1: And then you did millwork and started to play ball when?
Speaker 2: Oh, I....
Speaker 1: When did the big boys start allowing you to play ball?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --Baseball?
Speaker 2: Well, there in Electric Mills--see Mr. Jimmy Faison started me at that.  He the one taught me how to catch the ball and everything.  And then they, they--when they'd go and workout I'd go out there and I'd go in the outfield and learn how to catch a fly ball and all that stuff, you know.  I was a little guy, you know.  And then they started to putting me in the infield and so I say, "I believe I want to play first base."  So Mr. Jimmy Faison say, "You's  fast."  ... say, "Why don't you try shortstop?"--just like that.  And so, they'd hit the ball and knock me down.  I'd get up and throw them out, you know, throw the ball to first base.
Speaker 1: And you were about how old then?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You were about how old then?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was real young then.  I don't know exactly, exactly how old.  (unclear)  Say I, (unclear)  I don't know.  I don't know exactly how old I was.  You know, to tell you the truth, cause I, I want to tell you the correct thing.  See, I, I can't, I really can't recall.  But, I was a, I was a, I was a--I had done--I was a teen, I was a teenager, all right.  What I mean by that, I was pass 12 years old.  I was bout 14 or 15 years old--something like that.  I guess I was somewhere in there.  I don't know exact.
Story_ID: 46716
Speaker 1: Your father had passed away by that time?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You said your father (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, he passed away.  My dad....
Speaker 1: --When you were how old?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was grown when dad....  I was grown.
Speaker 1: Let's stop here for a moment--to the time that you go into playing ball, professionally.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Can we do that?
Speaker 2: I'll try.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I wanted to talk a little bit more about growing up in Electric Mills, Mississippi.  Some of your, your family members, especially your mother and your grandmother.  What was it like for you being "the boy" between two sisters?
Speaker 2: Seem that, seem to me that, you know, I don't know too much bout it, but seem that the way they treated me, I figured I was the pet cause I was the only boy.  And so, you know, they just, they, they just did everything for me, you know.  (unclear) that's all I can say.
Story_ID: 46717
Speaker 1: What was your mother like?  As a person, what was your mother like?  What do you remember about your mother?
Speaker 2: She was a Christian-hearted woman.  That's all I can say.  And, and she wanted us to come up right, you know.  She did, did her job, you know.  I can say that much.
Speaker 1: What was a (unclear) a typical day in your house with your mom, with your mother and your grandmother?
Speaker 2: When I go to school, come home, then whatever little work I had to do around the house--whatever they wanted me to do....  Then, the next thing I did--you'd find me--I got my head in the book, you know.  You see I was tryin to get me something, you know, to go on, you know, where I could....  And they use to teach me all the time to treat everybody right.  Everybody--I haven't bent over.  I have been mistreated.  I smile and go ahead.  You mistreat me I'll smile and go ahead.  See, I figure you'll get yours later on.  That's just the way I was.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Who inspired you the most when you were growing up, your mother or your father?
Speaker 2: Both of them.  They were always; they were always there for me.
Story_ID: 46718
Speaker 1: What was your father like?
Speaker 2: Huh?  Oh, he, he, he was a deacon of the church.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: What church was that?
Speaker 2: That was Provident Baptist Church, in Electric Mills, Mississippi.  (Laughter).  He was a deacon, (laughter) and I had to walk a chalk line.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: That's why you were in church all the time?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's, that's for sure, on Sunday--Sunday school and church.  Yeah, that was it--church all day.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Any stories that you remember from then?  Any stories--anything that, in particular, that you've learned from your dad, your father, as a, as a deacon of the church?  Anything that in particular, that he said to you that sticks with you even now?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He would, he would always sit down, you know, and explain life to me, you know.  And tell me which is the best way to do, which, you know.  He said sometime you gonna run into, look like a blockage, he say, but don't pay that no mind, you know.  Don't let it get next to you in a way of speaking.  He said, because you--it's somebody will work it out for you.  Well, I wanna know who was that somebody.  He say, "God."  And I couldn't, I couldn't, you know, at that time I couldn't understand that, you know.  How is God gonna do it, and, you know, (laughter).  That's cause he wasn't here.  He say, "He is here."  Well then I, then by me being young, I be looking, you know, to try and see him, you know.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Looking for God.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 46719
Speaker 1: Jackie hit me one 'bout leather-high and just like you shove me down, I played shortstop.  He shove me down, I straightened up. Jackie could run then, you know.  So when, so that, that, that was a time I got a chance to see, to see and meet Jackie Robinson, you know.  And I always said, you know, I look at the real good, the baseball players, I said "I'm gonna play baseball like him one day."  So, I might not have did it, but you know, I enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 46720
Speaker 1: I want to go back just a little bit to understand what--you've told me so much so far.  And so I have so many questions and I'm curious about when you were young and in school.  Tell me a little bit about that school, was it a big school, or...?
Speaker 2: Well it went, it, it, it, it went all way to the tenth, that's as far as it went, see, to the tenth grade, that's as far as it went.
Speaker 1: So you went into the school at what age?  How old were you when you started school?
Speaker 2: Oh, six years old.  They had to go, they had to start the ABCs and all that.  We use to sing the ABCs (laughter).  So....
Speaker 1: Was this a one-room school.
Speaker 2: Yes, it, it, it was a huge size, see.  And Ms. Ella R. Power, she was in one room.  The principal, Ms. M.C. Shepard, the, the, you know, the head--that's the school she spent--she taught the eighth, ninth and the tenth grades.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who were you friends in school?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Who were your friends in school?
Speaker 2: All of them I would say.  I didn't, I didn't--I don't think I had....  If I had any enemies, I don't, I don't know, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite friend? A best friend?(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, I was just; I was just like I told you.  I always been the same, you know.  I had a big smile for everybody and I meant it, you know.  And so, if I had some enemies, I, I didn't, I didn't know nothing bout (ph.) them.  Cause I went there, I got my studies out and whenever they let us outside for play, and, you know, I had, you know, young guys, we'd be together, you know.  And so its things that I saw some of them do I didn't do.  Cause you, you might be hard to believe.  I never smoke, I never drank in my life.  I tried to smoke once, and I was with the Cole brothers then.  We--my daddy worked in the sawmill in Electric Mills, Mississippi.  And daddy was up on--he could look at the big ice plant.  So the Cole boys, "come on Hank, we going up there, and we get us water."  We carried buckets of water from there, you know, to, to home, you know.  And so, I never will forget it.  L.C. and Ernest, the Coles, those were the big boys.  Lewis, Arthur and myself were little guys, you know.  And they gonna teach us how to smoke.  But they were picking up cigarette butts off the ground.  And, so picked up cigarette butts off the ground and they showed me how--had a paper bag (unclear) full.  They rolled the cigarette.  Okay.  Bout time I got my tobacco in there and went to lick, and I looked down--my daddy was a big man--my mother was small.  I saw those "two little ones" standing in front--what I call "two little ones," he wore an "11" shoe.  (Laughter).  Oh, my goodness!  (Laughter).  (unclear)  But, however, he said, "What?"--And he like to have scared me to death when I looked up and seen my dad, cause they didn't play.  And so, anyway--can I continue?  All right, and so, and when daddy say, "What in the world you...?"  He say, "Hank, boy what you call yourself doing?"  And so, he looking at L.C. and Ernest, those, the big boys, you know.  He say, "You guys got them over here."  He say, "If I had me a stick, I'd beat every last one of you."  (Laughter).  But, however, he said, "You all get on away from this ice plant."  He say, "And I bet not never catch you all here no more, trying to teach Lewis and Henry--he called me Henry--Lewis, Henry and Arthur how to smoke."  And he said, "And I'm gonna tell your mother and father bout you guys."  And he said, "Young man, I'll take care of you when I come home."
Story_ID: 46721
Speaker 1: What happened when you got home?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  So, 12:00 noon, the whistle blowed and they let them go to dinner.  He could--walked home--got there.  I was so scared when that whistle blew, cause I was like, "Daddy gonna whip me."  And so he came home.  He said, "I'll take care of you this afternoon."  That was a bad day for me to think bout that whipping.  And so, 3:00 in the afternoon, daddy got off, and I could see him coming, you know.  I stood out--I could see him coming round a great big old "mill-pond", it was called.  You might not know what I'm talking bout.  But, however, they'd walk around that pond bank to the house.  And, I saw daddy coming.  The closer he got to the house, the more I worried.  And so, when he got to the house--time he got to the house, he said, "Hank."  And I said, "yes sir."  He said, "Come in here."  I went in there and he had a strap (laughter).  I said, "daddy"--I started praying.  I said, "Daddy if you don't whip me this time"--I said, "as longest day I live, I will never smoke again."  And so, my dad, he stood there and looked down on me, you know, like.  He said, "You, you, you, you not lying to me, are you?"  I said, "No sir."  I said, "I never lied to you."  And, now, okay, he didn't whip me.  Okay, I got, I got drafted in the army.  I didn't smoke.  And when I come out of the army, I didn't smoke.  I didn't drink.  And so when I got discharged from the service, and dad, he was in Meridian at that time, then, working at the (unclear) ice factory down there.  But, anyway, he was downtown on Fifth Street.  That was the street, you know, that was the main street there.  And so, he was down there talking to one of his buddies.  So I got out the service come--and he say, "Here's my son."  I, I had done been by the house--living in Meridian.  And, so, he had--the first thing he asked me, "Did you learn how to smoke?"  I told him "no."  "Did you learn how to drink?"  I said, "no."  He said, "Well, what did you do in there?"  I said, "I loved to dance."  I said, "I bought a lot of my boys--buddies"....  I'd buy you some....  Yeah, yeah, I'd buy you some now (laughter).  But I just don't drink, you know.  That's just it.  And so, it's not the idea that I think I'm better than anyone else.  But, I--it just wasn't my thing.  Only thing I liked to do--dance.  I use to could dance.  I still can do a little bit now, but not as much (laughter).  But, still in all....  Now that, that, that was my thing dancing.  I use to love to dance, you know.
Story_ID: 46722
Speaker 1: Mr. Presswood, you described your mother as a short person and your father as very tall.  Who do you take after most, do you think?
Speaker 2: Well, I believe, I believe my grandmother and my mother, you know, in a way of speaking.  But daddy wasn't a--I didn't know nothing bout my dad, you know.  Nothing but he was a good dad, that's all I can say bout him, you know.  And my mother was a kind-hearted lady, you know.  And I guess that's where that come in on me, you know.  I'll bend over backwards to, you know, to see you smile and things like that, you know.  But, I don't, I don't try to bother nobody's business, or nothing.  I take care of Hank's, you know, you know.  And now, whatever we do, we do that and that's it, you know.  Going--you know what I mean--go to dance, or whatever we go, whatever.
Story_ID: 46723
Speaker 1: You talk about you and your friends playing near the icehouse and, and your dad coming, your father coming from the mill.  How far was the house?  How far did you have to walk to school, for instance?  And how far did your father have to walk to the mill?  How far was the mill from the house?
Speaker 2: You could see from our house, where we was, where we was living at--you could look at the sawmill.  It was bout, I would say--give me four city blocks, I'd say--just say, that's just an estimation.  And, I, you know, when he's coming home, when he and Mr. Jimmy Faison, the bunch, was coming for dinner, I could see him walk around when I was--when school was out, you know.  I could see him, you know, walk around that--coming around the pond-bank, in order to come where, you know, to the house.
Speaker 1: And the school was how far? How far did you have to walk to school?(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: It was down, it was down, it was the... it was down in, in, in the "Quarters"--use to call, call, call it "the Quarters", see.  We, where we were from the salt mill, it was a place use to call the "Upper-cut."  Now, (laughter) all I ever knowed was the "Upper-cut."  That mean it was north of down, down in, down in where we went to school, down in, you know, downtown there--down the little town.  It wasn't no town--just a big (laughter)--just a big--we use to call the store a big commissary.  We use to call that a commissary, you know, and the school, "down in the Quarters", you know.  See, a lot of peoples lived down in the Quarters, but we lived in the "Upper-cut."  Daddy bought a home there and he had--daddy would plant a lot of different stuff, you know, like that watermelon--whatever, you know.  We had plenty to eat like that, corn....
Speaker 1: So, where there other farms in the Upper-cut?  How big (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Mr. George Cole, he's, he was the "big man", you know.  He was, he was, he was, he was, he was black, but he was, he was the big man.  Now, he had big farm, we just had a little old, you know, something to feed the family, you know.  So, we just had a little spot.  So, last year, I, I went, I, went, I went to Meridian.  I got a, I got a, I got a half, I got a half-brother down there.  And I went to Meridian, and I say, "well"--I asked the man, I say, "come on go with me."  I say, "I want to see if I find where we use to live."  It's impossible, but I tried it.  So, what, where I made my mistake, when I left Meridian, to go, go to Electric Mills and the "Upper-cut", as they call it (laughter).  Instead of me taking Highway 45, I taken the interstate and I, I remember the little old, the little place there, when you leave, leave Meridian, going north, called Succannotci (ph.).  That's an Indian name--Succannotci.  And, so anyway, the Choctaw Indians, all those, (unclear) use to live back in there and all that.  And so, but however, we kept going, kept going and I told him, I say--his name "Jesse."  I say, "Mr. Jesse", he say, "Yeah."  I say, "Man, we ain't got to Electric Mills yet."  I say, "We ain't even got to Succannotci."  And now, where I made my mistake--when I left out of Meridian, instead of turning right on Highway 45, I turned left and hit the interstate.  So we went bout, I, I, we went bout, bout 20 miles, 20 miles from there.  And I saw a sign say "Electric Mills."  You had a railroad track, here.  On that side said Electric Mills, on this side said Electric Mills.  And so, I told, I told, Jesse, I say, "Jesse", I say, "Man let's cross this railroad track."  I know, I knew we use to go up the highway that, that, they--where they use to call it gravel highway, gravel road, you know.  It had rocks.  That was before they put the interstate.  So anyway, I say, I know we cross the tracks--it say Electric Mills--cross the tracks.  And I--you could drive your car so far.
Story_ID: 46724
Speaker 1: Then I say, "Jesse", I say, "we better get out of here now and we'll walk."  I say, "And be careful."  I say, I say, "Now we, we--it's a lot of rattlesnakes in these woods."  I say, "And now you have to be careful where you step at."  I say, "You be careful, hear."  And so, I say, "Now that, that's some portion of mill-pond."  I say, "I can remember my dad, my dad and his bud..., his friend, use to go around and they use to--they had a thing called--they make a thing called a "gig."  And they would gig bullfrogs, you know.  And eat frog legs.  So, however, (laughter)--look how (unclear) (laughter).  So, however, any, any, anyway, I say, "No this is not right."  I say, "This is not right."  So we got in the car and went on back.  And I still say, the next time I go--I just want to go and go around.  They say, they, they, they--the, the old highway is still--I know it was across the track, go around the curve, that's where our home use live, we use to be.  I just want to go, I just want to go and look at that.  And I'm determined, I'm gonna, I'm, I'm gonna try it again, if the Lord bless me.
Speaker 2: And your father and your mother owned their home in Electric Mills?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: How far was that from Meridian?
Speaker 1: Oh, bout 55 miles, something like that, something like that.  I guess it was bout 55 miles--45 or 55 miles.  I just can't....
Speaker 2: And how long did you--did your family keep the house?  The....
Speaker 1: Until death did them part.
Speaker 2: You said that you moved to Meridian?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What age were you?
Speaker 1: Oh, I was, I don't know.  All I can say is--they use to say I was a big boy.  I don't, I don't, I can't recall--I don't know.  That's been a long time, mam (laughter).  (Unclear) a lot of things I done forgot!   (Laughter).
Story_ID: 46725
Speaker 1: Well, you went into the service, after you left high school?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: When was that?
Speaker 2: I--19... (unclear).  I went after World War II, World War II.  I went in, it was 194..., '45' [1945], yeah, 1945.
Speaker 1: What service?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What branch of the service?
Speaker 2: I went to--they, they sent me to Camp Shirley, Mississippi.  That was out from Hattiesburg.  And, so, when I got on, when they, when the shipment come up, it was, it, it was a white corporal named Corporal Clayton (ph.), I never will forget him.  He gave me the, gave me the orders and things.  I was the only one on the train knew where we were going.  I couldn't....  He said, "Do not tell them where we're going."  We left there, left, left, left Camp Shirley, Mississippi, to Fort Benning, Georgia.  And so, that's where, you know, that's where we went.  And so, I was the only one that knew exactly where the shipment was going, see.  A lot of them asked me, "Where, where we going, Hank?"  I said, "We riding."  That's all I'd say.  Say, I was told not to, you know, say.
Speaker 1: So you went from Mississippi to Fort Benning, Georgia?  That meant that you were in the army?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was in the army.
Speaker 1: And did you just serve in peacetime?  Or, were you shipped overseas?
Speaker 2: No, I never did.  Here what happened, here what happened (laughter).  Okay, when I was, when they shipped me from Fort Benning, Georgia, I went to Camp Lee, Virginia.  All right.  And when I got to Camp Lee, Virginia, they put me in special service.  I was in special service.  And, they put baseball players in special service.  They put the basketball players special service.  Football players and also mess workers, all those, all those had--we in the battle--we were different, you know, in a section there.  And so, when I was in Camp Lee, Virginia, I had taken my training there, in Camp Lee, Virginia.  And, so, the corporal there, told me, he say, say, "Well, Hank, say you gonna--the shipment's gonna, going out, and say, "You might be shipping out."  He say, "If you play baseball like they say--claim you can, you won't have--you wouldn't have to go overseas."  I went to work.  I went to work.  I'm not bragging bout, you know.  But, I could play pretty good.  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 46726
Speaker 1: Well, you know that brings up the question for me is sort of--you're being modest.  You started playing ball at home (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --When did you start to play seriously at home?  Where (unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: With, with the, with the, with--they had a team, the team there at, at, at my hometown named the Mill City Jitterbugs.  It's like I say, Mr. Jimmy Faison, taught me and I used to play baseball with them.  And, I was the only boy, you know, played ball with them.
Speaker 1: Well, how old were you when you started playing (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, I was, I was, I was a teenager.  I don't know exactly how, you know, how old I was.
Speaker 1: But you were a teenager?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: How long did you play for them?
Speaker 2: Well, I played until the, the, the mill...--when the mill shut--closed down.  The mill just completely shut down, closed down, you know, and then, that was it.  And I went to Birmingham, where my--to live with my auntee, you know.
Speaker 1: When did you go to Birmingham?
Speaker 2: I went to Birmingham and then I--what year was that.
Speaker 1: About how old were you?
Speaker 2: I still was, I, I, I still was, you know, a teenager when I went to Birmingham.
Speaker 1: And what team did you play with there?
Speaker 2: The, the city league, the city league, the city league.  We use to, we use to, we use to tease, we use to, we use to tease Willie Mays for taking a bucket catch. See, Willie Mays lived, lived up, on the hill from, from, from us.  My auntee lived 6141 Avenue G.  And that was on the Heights (ph.), you know.  And my uncle worked at... at (unclear) steel mill there.
Speaker 1: It sounds like your family had money.  They always lived in a better house, in a better neighborhood.  Who else did you play with in addition to Willie Mays, who was playing on your city league team at that time?
Speaker 2: I played in the city league, you know. And after, just like I say, when Willie Gray come to come there.  When he come to, come there, will he come, you know--when we--when I was working at the sawmill.  See, I can get--I have to go back to that.  When I was working in the sawmill in Canton, Mississippi.  That's when Willie Gray them--when he was playing with the Cleveland Buckeyes, and that's when Willie Gray come down there to, to get me.  And so, he had done told the owners bout me.  So that's when I got in the Negro League, see, see, and I--so that was it--from 1948 to 1950.  In 1950, from 1950, '52' [1952] I was with the Cleveland--with the Claves (ph.) and the Monarchs (ph.).  And so, I (unclear)--they use to call me "Baby."  I got a book out there with the--in my car--some of the history bout myself.  And, cause I wanted, I wanted him to see it.  And so, anyway, and that would, could tell you some more, you know.  It's something that, that than run across, that my mother forgot.  It's right there.  I was interviewed at the White Sox ballpark.  I had done went to the ballgame and this "Liza" from Kentucky, she interviewed me there, and you got pictures of me, and everything there.  And they said on there "the late start."  And that, that could tell you, that could tell you more about me.  Now, if you wish to see that, I'll....
Story_ID: 46727
Speaker 1: I want to talk a little bit about your army career.  Since you went into the army after World War II, but you seemed to have special privileges because you were a baseball player.  You had already established your reputation as an exceptional baseball player.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All on the city league in Birmingham?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: That's where all of that happened?
Speaker 2: That start--that's were I really got going, you know.  I really got going.
Speaker 1: Had you played with Willie Mays at that time?
Speaker 2: No, I did not.  Willie Mays was with another team.
Speaker 1: He was with another team (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: See, I was working there that (unclear) work.  And so, Willie Mays was back somewhere else.  But, in the city league, you would come in contact.  They had "A" and "B", see.  And, so, that's the way, you know, we learned.  Cause we use to tease Willie Mays bout the "bucket catch", you know.
Speaker 1: Anybody else that came to prominence in baseball that you played against or with in the city league when you were in Alabama?
Speaker 2: No, really, it really was, it really, really was not any, anyone else.  Cause when I went to the Buckeyes, you know, no, I don't, I don't recall (unclear).
Speaker 1: Did you play baseball in the army?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  What was that like?
Speaker 1: Oh, beautiful.  I played with--when I was in Fort Benning, Georgia, I played with (unclear) Tigers, that was the name of the team.  So, what, just like I said not too long ago, he told me, he called and told me, say, "If you play baseball, you won't have to go overseas."  I went to work, just like I say, you know.  And they must have, and (unclear) must have--you know he looked out for me.  You know, any, anytime the first sergeant, and all of them, you know.
Speaker 2: What was the record of the team that you played with in the army?  Was you record (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --Oh, beautiful, beautiful record.  We had a good one, we had a good one there (laughter).  We'd go from different camps in order to play different teams, you know.  And so, it was, it was really beautiful.  What I mean by that, you know, it was okay.
Story_ID: 46728
Speaker 1: Not saying anything, you know, okay.  We got us the equipment, went on in there, got dressed out, come on, come on out.  Sitting down in the dugout on the other side, Satchel [Paige] was warming up.  (Unclear) had a new mitt and Earl was letting--Satchel was a little bit distance from where the pitcher mound that catch it.  He was back, standing back a little further.  And, I teased the (unclear) and I said, "Why are you standing so far back (unclear)?"  And he said, that said, say, "Satch arms so strong," say, "I can't get to the regular whatchcallit."  Okay.  I laughed like that.  Anyway, when Satch got through warming up.  He reached down and put his blue jacket on.  He here come, walk--he come on our side and we in the dugout.  He walked to this end, he turned around and he went back to this end.  The second time he went down there, he reached in the back pocket, looking at us, going on down.  He said, "Boys," say, "I got that ball today."  (Laughter)  So, I noticed Jeffrow and Al Smith and all of them wasn't saying nothing.  He said, "Yeah, Hank, yeah you been hitting them line drives, running like a deer, and all like that"--say, "Not today."  He said, "Not today.  You won't touch me today."  I said, "Well, I'll tell you what, Satch," I say, "I gonna go to that bat rack," I said, "I'm gonna get me a 34-inch bat," I say, "I gonna give you a whipping today you never had before."  (Laughter).  I was talking to him--I, I mean he was a top pitcher, no doubt about Satch.  And so, anyway (laughter), he laughed.  Okay, all right, he kept--when they, when they got the side out, well, the next inning, I was gonna get chance to bat, you know.  And I--when--all when they called me on there, I went to the bat rack, and I got that 34-inch bat.  I walked up, and big old Satch looked at me--laughed, you know.  He say, "Not today."  I say, "The only way I don't whip you today, I see you put that ball in your pocket and keep it in your pocket.  But if you throw it to me," I say, "I'm going to whip it"--just like that.  He said, "All right."  Oh, when he got on that mound, he leaned down there and got his signal from the table, the table.  He reared up, (makes sound) he threw one after me.  I hit the dirt and I got right back up--hit them pants.  You didn't dig in on Satch.  It's all in that book, I'll let you all see.  See, you didn't dig in on Satch.  He wound up, next time.  I say, "Now he bout gonna throw me a fast ball."  I say, "I'm gonna be ready for that one."  He leaned over there and he rocked, (makes sound).  And all I could do was just du-, just finch, like that--"Strike one."  And he say, "Yeah."  I say, "I'm gonna whip you."  I say.  Now he reared up again, I say, "Now I don't know what he gonna do this time."  I say, "But I'll get him."  He threw me a curve ball.  I hit a long foul, out of the ballpark.  I was way out of there.  Oh, I was ready now!  I pulled my pants up.   I could see myself now (laughter).  How I did--(laughter) and so, I just wanna tell you what happened.  But anyway, he reared up again--(makes sound).  That's all I did, and I say, "Well."  I say, "Now he, he gonna throw me a curve ball next."  I say, "I gonna be sure enough ready for that one."  He leaned over there and he rocked, and he had a hesitating pitch.  The rule is, is, is a ball when they went to the major leagues.  He reared up, and he stepped and he threw me a knuckle ball, that's what we call it, and that ball just floated.  And I swung, and pulled a muscle in my side.  I missed it.  (Laughter).  I was off three or four days before I could swing a bat anymore.  And so--oh, he laughed, oh, he really laughed at me.  So anyway, (laughter) he pitched three innings.  The third inning he called his outfielders in.  There was big Joe Green, there was big Tom Harris, there was "Chappy" [ph.], Othello Renfroe, but we called him Chappy.  We say, "Satch wind up with a baseball and turned loose aspirin tablets," that's just the way we'd say.  He was just that fast.  He, he, he was, he was a great pitcher.  And so, that was the end of me with Satch Page.  And so (Laughter).  Anyway, so, the time we went--when we went to Kansas City.  I went when we went to play the Monarchs in Kansas City, Satch--
Story_ID: 46729
Speaker 1: You talked about two things: Monarch.  Talk to me a little bit more about playing for the Monarchs.  When did you go to the Monarchs?
Speaker 2: I, I played from 1948 to '50' [1950], from '50' [1950] to '52' [1952] with the Monarchs--that was that.
Speaker 1: That was it?
Speaker 2: That was that.
Speaker 1: And, just tell us a little bit about--a lot about that--about playing with the Monarchs? Was (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: It, it was really, it really, it, it, really an interesting, you know.  I enjoyed that very much, you know.  Cause I, you know, you know, when I went there, you know, John Buck O'Neil, who lived--which was the skipper--I got (unclear) (laughter).  And I--he just taken, he called me "baby."  He just taken me under his wing, I will say like that, you know.  He gave me all the chances that I needed, you know.  Sometime, sometime I, sometime, you know, I had to play the hot corner--that's third base.  It was pretty warm down there, you know.  Guys hit the ball down there, it get to you quick.  And so, but, anyway that, that was, you know.  I just enjoyed playing baseball, period with Kansas City and Satch, you know.  Just to be with Satch, you know.  And he use to tease me about, you know, how he.... (laughter)  I'd say if I just got one hit off you Satch, I'd say, man, that would have been it.  I'd say, that would've been good history for me (laughter).  But, instead I got a pulled muscle in the side from you.  (laughter)  He ....
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about what it was like playing on that team with him--lessons learned for you?
Speaker 2: Well, you see, the, the, the, the under, under the leadership of, of Buck O'Neil, you know, I really got where I could understand somethings that I didn't understand with Alonzo Boone.  But, Boone was a good man, a good skipper, but Buck would take time, just like I was a kid--his kid, you know.  And he, he'd call me baby, you know--"come here baby, let me tell you this and that."  He'd tell me the fundamentals of baseball.  He would tell me different things, you know, bout how to be a good ball player.  The first thing, you got to believe in yourself, you know.  See, you can't go in there with a doubt.  Just figure that you can play as good as the next fella, you know, you know.  And say you do a good job, that's all you had to believe, just do a good job.
Speaker 1: I don't play baseball, and for all of those who don't play baseball and maybe don't understand the game, you're saying that he taught you some fundamentals.  He taught you things that you didn't know.  Give--talk to me about what those kind of things (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well he just, he just, he just, he, he, he, he first wanted to know did I drink.  I said, "no."  I said, "I got a clear head every time I go on the playing field", you know.  It's like that.  And he--and in fact--Buck was sort of like a father, in, in a way of speaking, to me.  You know, you know what I'm saying?  He was, he--that's the way--I'd look up to him.  And, I'm gonna to try to go for the, for the Buck Blues next month.  I'm gonna try my best to get there, see.  Now only thing, only, only thing that would hold me up, my wife is handicapped, see.  And so, you know, that's the only thing that, that, the only thing I'd be worried about leaving her by herself.  Cause if she fall, you know, it might, I don't know, you know.  I hate to even think about that part.  And so, that be the only way, but, if I don't go, I will, I will talk to Buck and you know, (unclear) I call him and talk to him.  So he, he, he--they giving him another birthday, I think Buck be 92.  He'll be 92 years old.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you were playing with the Monarchs?
Speaker 2: Well, I was getting on up there, I guess. (laughter)  I was going up the ladder.  I don't know exactly how old I was.  I can't, I can't give you no specific time.
Speaker 1: And you played for how many years?
Speaker 2: Well, I played, played from (unclear) from 1950, and then 19, 19(unclear), 1952, so, and that was that.
Story_ID: 46730
Speaker 1: The Negro League ended in what year--the Negro League ended in what year--because Jackie and the others went to major leagues?  (unclear)
Speaker 2: I, I, I don't, I, I, I, I don't know what they....  All, all, all I can, the last one I was playing--Cal City, Buck talked to me, you know.  I could have went down in Mexico, and told him no, I'm gonna go in now.  Things were--I don't exactly know--I can't recall.
Story_ID: 46731
Speaker 1: You talk about your first encounter with Satchel Paige and then you moved to the team with Satch and played.  What else do you remember.  What's outstanding for you in that period of time when you were playing on the same team?
Speaker 2: Well, I loved baseball and so, everything was, it was just, it was, it was a pleasure to be on the team with Satch and John Buck O'Neil  Just to be there, just to be there, cause, there's no--they all--in fact the whole ball team--they, they treated me nice, you know.  I was nothing but a kid, you know (laughter).  And they--(laughter)  But they, they, they were number 1.  I had a--that, that Cleveland was the same way, you know.  I didn't have no hard time about my baseball playing, at all.  Nobody gave, gave me a hard time, you know.
Speaker 1: Who recruited you to the Monarchs?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Who recruited you to the Monarchs?  Who recruited you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I--when Cleveland won our league, that's where I wanted to go.  And so, I talked to Buck O'Neil.
Speaker 1: So you just went to Buck O'Neil?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I wanted to talk--let me talked to Buck.
Speaker 1: What was that conversation like?
Speaker 2: I wants to play with the Monarchs.
Speaker 1: And he said?
Speaker 2: Yes.  (laughter)
Speaker 1: Do you really mean that nobody gave you a hard time? (laughter)
Speaker 2: (laughter)  Well, you see, he, he, he, he, he knew my rec.., my little record, you know, I had, you know.  You know, I'm not patting myself on the back.  I, I, I think I did a good job with Cleveland and then whatchacallit.
Story_ID: 46732
Speaker 1: Well tell me about your little record with Cleveland.
Speaker 2: (laughter)
Speaker 1: How little was this record?
Speaker 2: (laughter)
Speaker 1: How big was this record?
Speaker 2: Well, well, well, I don't know, you, know.  Iwe--use to be a hotel we lived at on 55th and Central Avenue, in Cleveland.  And it's not down on Central no more.  But, everybody that was a baseball fan, they knew me--in Cleveland, you know.  In fact, they (unclear)--I could--if I went downtown Cleveland, somebody gonna see me and know me and talk to me, you know, when we was off and that.  I don't know--just everybody treat me nice in Cleveland.  Everybody treat me nice in Kansas City.  So, I, I, I don't have nothing (laughter)  I don't have nothing to add or subtract, multiply, or nothing (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, I'm glad that everyone treated you so very well.  Obviously you deserved it.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 46733
Speaker 1: You talked about that intimidating game against Satch.  Any other games like that?  That you experienced tough?
Speaker 2: No. if we had, it, it, all--now, now, don't don't get me wrong.  They--it was good pitchers on all the teams.  But, Satch was the idol.  He was not only mine, he was a lot of ballplayers idol, you know.  (laughter)  So, and at that rate, he was just, he, he was the one, you know, you know, he was the one.  I looked up (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Who also was as intimidating?
Speaker 2: No, no, I didn't think about nothing--nobody but Satch.  If I could have got a base hit, I'd go right back to it.  If I had got one hit off of Satch, I think I'd, I'd had that recorded, you know--(laughter)--just one hit, cause he was great.  And, and, and, and I know I got some witnesses that--Johnny can tell you that.  (laughter)  I got some witnesses, he was great.
Story_ID: 46734
Speaker 1: You played into--during your career, suddenly the National leagues, the black leagues, where being challenged.  Players were now going to the white majors.  What was that like for you.  What, what, what was happening into the game then, into the leagues then?
Speaker 2: Well, it looked like, you know, when, when your game had stars like Jackie Robinson, things like that.  When, when, when you take, when you take a star leave the league, you know, that, that hurt that, that particular team he was with, you know, and, in fact, the league, because a lot of people would go to see Jackie play, you know.  You know, whenever the Monarchs, wherever they go, you know, wherever he was, you know, they went to see Jackie.  Jackie was fast, you know, and everything.  And they go--he was an exciting ballplayer--in fact, a great ballplayer, I'll say it like that.
Story_ID: 46735
Speaker 1: What was your best year?
Speaker 2: Well, I thought I had some good years, just bout every year.  But, you know, my batting average fell.  Satch put my batting average down.  I wish I could see him today (laughter).
Speaker 1: What was your average before Satch?
Speaker 2: 287 and thing like--287 and one time, one time 287 and--it's in my book.  I can't think of all of that.  It's in my book (laughter).  But anyway, Satch put me down to 194.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  That was when I was with the Buckeyes.  (laughter).  He caused me to drop a whole lot.  I'll tell you, yes, he did.  I got to give him credit because he was the one.  He was the one, yes, yes indeed.
Speaker 1: What was your best game?
Speaker 2: My best game?  Oh, I had some good games.  Well, cause see, I'd come up there and (unclear) and I'd run like a deer, you know.  I'd bunt, we called it, see.  I was fast.  I'd hit them line drives.  I'd wear a pitcher out, but I could hit.  I could hit.  I could really--I thought I was a better hitter until I met Satch.  Then I found out I wasn't as good a hitter as I thought I was (laughter).  He was something, he was something else!  (laughter)
Speaker 1: So, you don't remember the year that he really--your average dropped because of Satch?  You don't remember?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I was with Cleveland, you know, (laughter) that's when it dropped.
Speaker 1: How did you feel about that, and how did you feel about Satch?
Speaker 2: Well, you see, he's a great man.  That was my man.  Satch was my man, that's what I called him, you know.  Yeah, he, he, he, (laughter) he, he, he use to tease me.  He'd say, "You ain't gonna hit me today.  I'm gonna whip you."  (unclear)  It's in the book.  It's in the book out there.  (laughter)  But, anyway.... (laughter)
Speaker 1: Tell me about your book?
Speaker 2: It just--I was interviewed at the White Sox ballpark, and....
Speaker 1: When was that?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I, I can't recall.  It's in my book, but I can't, I can't think about all of that.  I do the best I can, but I can't think of that.  See, a lot of things have slipped my memory, see, see.  A lot of things, you know, they slipped my memory.  Some of them come back, you know, but, no.
Story_ID: 46736
Speaker 1: You mentioned the Cubs when we were off-camera.  And, how do you feel about the way baseball was played then, and the way baseball is played now?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, I think it's been a lot of improvements in baseball.  In fact, it ain't no think, I know it's been a lot of improvements on--in baseball nowadays than it was back then, you know.  You got better ballplayers and everything, see.  You got fellas with confidence in, in, in themself.  And, see that's the main thing.  You've got to have confi....  I don't care what you're doing, if you don't have no confidence, you gonna fail.
Story_ID: 46737
Speaker 1: You--there is a tremendous amount of interest today, in the black leagues, in the Negro leagues.
Speaker 2: Well they don't, its, its, its not, they, they, they--its none.  I don't know any Negro leagues playing at all.  Is that what you meant?
Speaker 1: No, just that people are very interested in the Negro Leagues, and you, and the other players that are still with us.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yes, it's a lot of times people that see me, you know, and they knew who I am and everything--some don't, you know, you know how that go.  Some don't--but the ones that know that I played baseball in the Negro League, you know, they always got a conversation for me, you know.
Story_ID: 46738
Speaker 1: Is there anything at this point within your career or your life that is the most outstanding for you, other than your encounter with Satchel--with Satchel Paige, anything else that's outstanding for you, from the time that you were playing?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, you know, it's a, it's, it's a lot....  What do you mean, what--I want to know what you mean bout the "outstanding"?  Now, what you (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Well, you loved the game so much (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I loved the game.
Speaker 1: --and the story that you tell about your first day against Satchel Paige was certainly outstanding.
Speaker 2: That's exactly (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: You are being very modest about your own averages, you own, your, your own accomplishments (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --during that time.  Anything that just stands out for you.  You, you told me two things, that, that, that intrigued me.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: The other story was the--you stepping into a very large park, the intimidation of the crowd, anything else outstanding like that, that--a particular game, or player?
Speaker 2: No.  Well, yeah, it was a whole, it, it--well, I tell you, it was some of the biggest ballplayers in that Negro League.  If they had got the chance--they should have been in the major leagues a long time ago, you know.  When I was--when I went in the league, you see.  It was a whole lot of ballplayers there.
Speaker 1: Who else?
Speaker 2: Oh, Luke Easter and all those good--Luke Easter and all--cause Big Luke hit me one in Cleveland one year (laughter) when he was with the (unclear).  Anyway there was Big Luke, and all right, Joe Green, there was, oh, I can't name, I can't name, its, its, it's so many of them.  It was some outstanding Negro baseball players.
Speaker 1: You played against Luke Easter?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  He hit me one too, and knocked me down--at shortstop.
Speaker 1: Did you ever come back and beat him?
Speaker 2: Did I come back to meet him?
Speaker 1: ...beat him? Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, yeah, yeah.  The Buckeyes, we beat them.  We beat the (unclear)  That was in Cleveland when I was with the Buckeyes.  That was, (laughter) that was 1948 when we played them--and, yes indeed.
Speaker 1: And what about Big Joe Green?
Speaker 2: Big Joe Green, he, he, he could hit that ball.  He could hit that ball.  It was some outstanding ballplayers, you know.  And I wanted to be, I wanted to--but I wanted to be--you know--I'm gonna tell you who my--really my idol was Jackie Robinson.  I wanted to be, I wanted to be like Jackie Robinson, you know.  I wanted to be fast and could do more, more than one thing--to get up there and swing the bat, and everything.  I wanted to be able to be a good infielder, or whatever, you know.  I just wanted to be a good ball player, you know, you know.  I just wanted a little recognition.  And I worked hard.  I worked hard to be a baseball player.
Story_ID: 46739
Speaker 1: And you were not recruited by the majors--by the white teams?
Speaker 2: No, well, you see, at that time, just like, just like if you see my book, see I was a late starter, see.  And then I tell you what, I tell you what, when I with, when I with, when I with the Monarchs, balls started running 'tween my legs like they use to do Chappy.  And, you know when your time is out, don't nobody have to tell you nothing, see.  When the ball started to running through my legs, I couldn't pick the ball up, you know.  I had slowed down.  It was time to come and go to work in the steel mills for my family.  So that, that just the way I looked at it.
Speaker 1: And you made that decision to give up ball and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And go, go to steel mill and work.
Speaker 1: And when was that?
Speaker 2: That was after I left.
Speaker 1: After you left?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How long did you work for Inland Steel?
Speaker 2: 30 years and 9 months.
Speaker 1: Did you play on the company team?
Speaker 2: Yeah we had, had softball.  I got jackets, I got a rack of trophies.  See, they played--they had this fast pitch--softball.  They couldn't fool me with that, you know.  And so I got trophies and everything to prove I'm not telling you--just to be talking.  I got trophies.  And we--ok, they had two leagues in there.  Our Local 1010 and then the Inland Athletes Association--the AAA--IAA, you see.  We won championships from--a winning championship in the Local 1010--this year I get a 3/4-length jacket.  I got all kind of jackets and things.  And if we won in the IAA, we had 2 leagues a year, we'd get a short jacket.  If I got one, if I got a 3/4-length jacket this time, I got the short jacket for my wife.  If we didn't win the next year, and the next year we won, then I changed jackets around.  And I got trophies, plaques and everything.  That--you know, and....  So, it, it, it was really interesting and that.  I played the softball and stuff--that fast pitch and everything.  And, so, it, it was--I had fun.
Speaker 1: What was your best year when you were playing with your company team?
Speaker 2: I'm not patting myself on the shoulder, (laughter) but it looked like every year, you know, cause, you know, it, it just was, it was just different.  They just--only difference was they just, they kept pitchers pitching to me, and they, they--that wasn't nothing.  Just like a kid would (unclear) the ball to me and hit--I'd hit the ball.  I got my plaques.  I can bring you the plaques and show you.  (laughter) I'm not kidding.  And so, anyway, that was it.  So, I was looking, I was looking in my collection there last night.  And I'm looking at now a picture--I hadn't--I was standing up there, and I was looking, and I had started thinking about what happened back in those years and all.  I was playing for....  And so, yeah, I had a good record, had a good record on my job, good record playing ball and everything, so--I thought I was blessed.  In fact, I knew I was blessed.  I knew I was blessed.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you.  I enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 46740
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: I hope, I hope that the black community would get--in the, in the beginning, would get itself together first.  Then you can move.  But if I'm gonna pull against you--that ain't helping us none.  We got to get together, you know.  We got to get together.  (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So you (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --You ain't got to boast about nothing.  Just be together.  Don't--just because--I'll put it like this.  Just because I would get a good job and you don't have one, I don't look down on you, you see.  See, I got time for you, but we got to get together with ourselves, and then maybe things will turn around, see.
Story_ID: 46741
Speaker 1: Mr. Presswood, what would you say is your legacy?
Speaker 2: My what?
Speaker 1: Your legacy?  What, what do you leave us, or what is most outstanding contribution?  What, what is your legacy to us.
Speaker 2: To, to that?
Speaker 1: To baseball?  To us as a people?
Speaker 2: I love my people.  I have to say it like that.  That's all I know, see.  Yeah, I look upon peoples, I don't care how--what, form or fashion they might be living in, I still don't down them cause I got a dollar or 2 more than the other one.  I don't like that--I don't do it like that, you know, see.  And if I can help a person, I help them, you see.  That's me.  And what little bit I have, I share it, see.  That's just the way I am.  That's the way that the way--I was--come up from the ground--treat everybody right.
Speaker 1: So how would you like to be remember then?
Speaker 2: As a good person.
Speaker 1: As a good person?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Sir, anything that you would do differently than you've done in your 80+ years of life?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I, I don't know.  All I want to do is to live a comfortable life, treat everybody like I always have--I can't change.  I cannot change that, because just like I say, once before, I'm the same today as I was yesterday.  And I always will be, the same, see, see.  I, I don't, I don't want people, that I pass by them--turn his nose--"that's old Hank, he...."  I want to meet people with a smile, you know, you know.  A lot of time I meet people it's not a smile, but I still give them a smile, see.  And you can tell exactly when I go in a grocery store--the kindness--the peoples--I don't care what colors they are, it don't make any difference.  When I walk in there to take my stuff in there, they know that's Hank, cause I go in there with a big smile and I mean every bit of it.
Speaker 1: And that's your legacy.
