Story_ID: 572228
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer, and Matt Hickey [Matthew Hickey] is the videographer.  Would you state your name and spell it for me please, including your middle name?
Speaker 2: Okay.  It's [HistoryMaker] Charley Pride, Charley Frank Pride, and it's C-H-A-R-L-E-Y, F-R-A-N-K, P-R-I-D-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And today's date is?
Speaker 2: Today's date is May the 3rd.
Speaker 1: Two thousand and six [2006] (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two thousand and six [2006].  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell me your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Well, I tell--they--if you look all in my history and everything, it says March 18, 1938.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where were you born?
Speaker 2: Don't necessarily mean that that's it, though.
Speaker 1: Oh, well what date do you celebrate your birthday?
Speaker 2: I celebrate it every March 18.
Speaker 1: Eighteenth?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is the location of where we're having (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Where we are now?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: We're at 3198 Royal Lane in my office building, Royal Lane.  That's at the corner of Royal Lane and Webb Chapel [Road] in Dallas, Texas.
Speaker 1: All right.  And tell me your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation, I guess you'd say I'm an entertainer.
Story_ID: 572229
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you five questions.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Ooh, my favorite food.  I got a quite of bunch of 'em.  Well growing up, my favorite food was mostly, you know, I--what we call--they call it I guess soul food and stuff like that.  Peas and corn and, and cornbread, and milk, buttermilk and I still like that.  I'm just naming what I still like, so if it's going to be my favorite food if I could get it.  I don't get it like it was when mama and them--when my mother [Tessie Stewart Pride] made it but, but now--I mean, as far as going to cafes and things like, I like--it's a certain taste of Mexican food I really love.  I could eat it seven days a week.
Speaker 1: What is it?
Speaker 2: Called El Fenix [El Fenix Mexican Restaurant].
Speaker 1: El Fenix?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's a chain of restaurants.
Speaker 1: Well, what is the food that you like to eat?  What do you have (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh, I--the, the, the, the--I--mostly I eat and I don't even--when I sit down, they don't even ask, they just bring me a single beef enchilada and a beef queso.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: A beef queso and, and a virgin frozen margarita.  No alcohol.
Speaker 1: All right.  What is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Oh, I got a bunch of 'em.  Probably Christmas because I'll get with all of the grandkids and the family and all of that.  It probably would be that.
Speaker 1: So wintertime?
Speaker 2: Probably for that part, yeah.  But summers is best for me because I love to play golf.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I'll go someplace where I can.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And what's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess blue.
Speaker 1: Blue (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It would be blue, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what's your favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: Sometime I, I tell you--I'm probably gonna tell you one, but I've--I got a bunch of 'em.  A lot times I just remember myself saying to people a lot that I'm just a--I'm just a guy.  I'm just a guy.
Story_ID: 572230
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're going to move on and talk about your family life and we'll start with talking about your mother.  Can you tell me her name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother name was Tessie B. Stewart [Tessie Stewart Pride], T-E-S-S-I-E, B, Tessie B, period. Tessie B. Stewart, S-T-E-W-A-R-T, and of course, she married my daddy [Mack Pride, Sr.].
Speaker 1: What year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It would be Tessie B. Stewart Pride then.
Speaker 1: When was she born?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eight, 1908.
Speaker 1: Where was she born?
Speaker 2: Pickens, Mississippi.  My mother was born in Pickens, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Was she raised there also?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Where was she raised?
Speaker 2: I think she was raised around Lula, Mississippi somewhere.  I'm not sure, but it wasn't--she wasn't raised in Pickens.
Speaker 1: Was she raised by her parents?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she share any stories with you about her family life?  How far did she go to school?  Did she work?
Speaker 2: Sixth grade, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Up there, if you'd like to take a shot of it, I have a--she had some beautiful handwriting for being a sixth grader.  I have, kept on my desk over here all the time, but she went to the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she share any stories about her life growing up?
Speaker 2: I, I--it was a--I forget how many was like--I have to think about how many--it was more than five or six of 'em in brothers and sisters and she was a twin.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was--but it was what you called not identical.  It was a boy and a girl.
Speaker 1: Fraternal.
Speaker 2: Fraternal.  That's it.  And I remember that, and I think he lived to be--I think my understanding that he lived to be about eight or nine or ten, something like that.  I think something like diphtheria or fever or something.  I don't know what took his life, but.  They said she was so small when she was born that they would carry her around on a pillow--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --afraid to hold her just--but holding her you know, without the pillow would be a little afraid.  So they would put her on a pillow so to make sure that you wouldn't drop her or something like that.  I remember something like that.  Those are little things that I heard mentioned.
Story_ID: 572231
Speaker 1: But I, I can remember when we had a chance to be one on one.  I can remember--I can give you some things that I remember saying to her and things that she said to me, but--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but as far as about her childhood and things like that, I didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, let's talk about that then.  What, what did you talk about one on one?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, with eight boys and three girls, I mean (laughter), you don't get a chance to be one on one too, too often, so.  This one time I remember, and I tell this a lot of times on stage that--not on stage but to, to a lot of just talking like we're doing now.  My mother [Tessie Stewart Pride] was washing clothes out in the yard on the old tree and it was very hot and she was washing her clothes with lye soap.  I don't know whether you're familiar--how many people familiar with lye soap, but it makes your hands look like prunes, I mean--you know, and my mother was a pretty lady and I'll show you a picture of her when we're done with this interview.  So, she--here's this one time.  So, I walked up to the washtub where she was on the bench standing there.  But I had a--I had an advertisement with a blue coupe Ford.  It was blue, 'cause I said earlier that I like blue.  So, I walked over and I said, "Mom."  I said, "If I had a million dollars, I could buy this car for you."  She said, "Yeah."  This is what I tell a lot of times about planting a lot of seeds and I say this sometimes on stage, too, this partic- particular part of it.  And I say--I said--she stopped.  She says, "Yes, you could buy me that car."  She said--so she took her hands like this (demonstrates).  Washed all of that lye soap off her hands.  She said, "Now let me tell you something."  She said, "Yeah.  You could buy that car, but there's some people that would give a million or a whole bunch of millions for what you got."  My little eyes kind of looked up like that, you know, and I said--she said, "Hold up your right hand.  You got five fingers on that hand, five on the other, both of your legs and feet.  Some people ain't got no feet, no legs and a whole bunch of things like that and they'll give a whole--."  So, I mean, I--small, you know, but, I, I remember hearing it but now as I look back, she was planting seeds.  And so--and, and it's really--'cause my mother passed away early and she was forty-seven years old.  And she used to say things like that, you know.  "Oh, by the way, too, if I'm the shortest living, don't you die because I die."  She says, "There's good people everywhere, so you got a lot to do."  So all of these things that's--as I was listening, you know, just had an effect on me and I, as I say, as I said before, I think it was just--I think she was preparing me for what I'm doing right now really 'cause when she said, "You got a lot to do," I just--I'm really trying, got a lot to do (laughter).  I'm having a lot to do right now--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: --with this career of mine and, and by the mere fact that you hear talking about trendsetters and HistoryMakers and et cetera, so.  I was going to be the greatest baseball player.  That was before I was going to do it, but I had no idea that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I just sang because all of us sang.  A matter of fact, I thought that--we lived out in the country.  I thought singing, I thought everybody else sang, too.  We all sing.  I thought it was just like eating breakfast (laughter), but I found out people--some people can run faster than others.  Some could--some don't (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did your mother sing?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, but not--she sang in church.  I mean, anything like that, you know, in the congregation, but wasn't never a quartet or--I didn't either.  There was in--none of us were never in a quartet and we all just sing.  I mean, we were just blessed with--.  Like my, as I said earlier, I think prior to we going into this interview, my younger brother is down in New Zealand right now.  He sings really, really, really good.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: I wished somehow he could--the industry is such--in such a state now that 'cause they always ask me, "When we're gonna have another one?  Why isn't there not another [HistoryMaker] Charley Pride," and et cetera.  So I try to tell them.  I say, "I got one.  You done tried all the other of us."  I got my brother, and of course my youngest son [Kraig Pride] is gonna open for me.  We're going--
Speaker 2: This week?
Speaker 1: --in Canada.
Story_ID: 572232
Speaker 1: Can you remember anything about your grandparents on your mother's [Tessie Stewart Pride] side?
Speaker 2: I remember my granddad, my mother's dad.  I remember him.  He was really--I think he was about 6'6".  He was very, very tall.
Speaker 1: Do you remember his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Ike.  Ike Stewart [ph.].
Speaker 1: Ike Stewart.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I don't remember what my grandmother's name was.  I don't--I'm sure I did at one time, but since mother died, I didn't put it down.  I think, I think it's probably my, my brother in Mississippi has a Bible and it might be in there.  My, my younger sister [Maxine Pride] is doing a genealogy thing right now, trying to go back and, and she's doing I think a pretty good job.  I've seen some of the--some of the research she's done and what she's come up with.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember or do you--have you had--did anyone tell you whether they were slaves or free Negroes or--?
Speaker 2: My?
Speaker 1: Great-grandparents.
Speaker 2: My great-grand--
Speaker 1: Your grandparents actually.
Speaker 2: Well, my grandparents, no, they weren't--they weren't slaves, no.  But, my dad's mother's dad was a hundred and--you think figure he got about--lived to be about 110 or 11 or something.  We couldn't--it was one of those deals where, you know, it, it wasn't too many birth certificates were done back in those days especially.  But no, as far as--I, I, I wondered how 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family'].  What's his name?
Speaker 1: Alex Haley.
Speaker 2: Alex Haley went and did--you know, went back and did all of that as, as I commend him, but I coul- as far as I can go back is Sledge, Mississippi, Ballentine [Mississippi] and Pickens, Mississippi from my mother and father [Mack Pride, Sr.] was born (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  That's fine.
Story_ID: 572233
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your dad, then.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me his name?
Speaker 2: Mack.  Well, actually his full name was Fowler McArthur Pride, Sr. [Mack Pride, Sr.] F-A-W--F-O-W-L-E-R, M-C-A-R-T-H-U-R, Pride, P-R-I-D-E, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell me about your dad?  How many--
Speaker 2: He was a very stern man first of all, and I'm looking at him now on the picture.  He was a--he was very strict on all of us, but he was a good man.  I mean, he, he--I think he had about a fourth grade education, and--but he was, he was very protective of us.  I mean, he would get a strap to us in a second, but no one else wouldn't--better not think about even touching us, you know, and that sort of thing.  And he, he--like for example, we had a cousin didn't live but like we called it, around the bayou.  I mean, it be like a half of block or a block maybe at the most and we'd like to spend nights--you know, sleep overnight with one another.  We're first cousins.  (Makes sound)  It had to be a big fight (laughter) just to get him to agree to do something like it.  But, but then on the other hand, he was so macho, but then on the other hand, he could cook, sew.  I mean, he was very--what, whatcha call that, very unpredictable type of--on one side, he was tough as nails and--but on the other side, he could cook some of the finest pies and cakes and (laughter), and sew and all of that stuff.  I don't know if I could hold a needle (laughter).  That's about all I know.
Speaker 1: What did he--how did he influence you personally?
Speaker 2: Well, he was like this.  Basically looking back now, it was sort of like a control--dysfunctional family in a sense.  I mean, yet, yet, yet was still intact, you know.  In other words, like he would--he, he--all right.  We would be in the country.  When you're five or six years old, you carried your load.  We'd have to pick up chips for mama [Tessie Stewart Pride] to start the fires in the morning to get ready to get in the field to the chop the cotton and things like that.  We grew up on a farm.  Chickens, hogs, and cows, we had that.  So, my brother and I when we got bigger, we'd--I'd milk in the morning and he'd milk at night.  So we had to split it up like that.  So those are the things I remember and so, he, he--my dad was like--he'd take you on his knee from the time probably you were a little--when you get out of diapers and start walking, up until you're about four or five, maybe six, he'd---you might be able to sit on his knee or something like it.  But after that (makes sound), he kicks you off.  It's like, it's like an old bear.  He'd go and take from that point on up until to leave, leave the nest, it's like he would tell you how to do it and train you like, like a bear training his cubs and when it gets a certain temp (claps hands), now go get it.  (Laughter) That kind of thing, you know.  Now you--not necessarily throwing you to the dog, but it's, "Turning you loose now, done taught you how to do it and here's what you do.  You must--," he said, "whatever you do, do it good, do it quick and do good--do it."  It'd be that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: What about his parents--your grandparents on his side?
Speaker 2: I saw my, I saw my--his dad.  I saw my daddy's dad when I was three months old so, but I don't remember it, so.  I only--I think it was two or three months old.
Speaker 1: Do you remember his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Ernest Pride [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you remember your grandmother on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Her name was Dotsi [ph.].
Speaker 1: Dotsi.
Speaker 2: My dad's mother was named Dotsi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, we're gonna now talk about your early childhood.
Speaker 2: Wait a minute.  Was it--yeah, Dosi.  I believe a Dosi or Doxi.  Dosi, D-O-S-I or D-O-X-I.  It's a D.  (Laughter) My sister, my youngest sister [Maxine Pride], I'm sure she's got it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If you want to--you want to call back here and get it--get it exact (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So now, I--we're gonna--I wanna talk about--you, you were saying that your father kind of kept you close until you got to be five or six.
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were some of the things that he (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, see it's, it's like--it's like--I don't know whether you were born on a farm or not, but let's take a--let's take a hen with all her biddies, little biddies after they have been hatched, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I used to watch when the wind comes up and like it's getting ready to be a storm or something.  It could be five miles away, but you could see her start getting ready.  The wind start blowing and no matter if she have five, ten or fifteen, she spread her wings like that and go whatever kind of (imitates chicken) for whatever clucking she does trying to get everyone of 'em up under her, her--
Speaker 1: Under her wings.
Speaker 2: --her wings so they won't--the wind won't blow 'em away or to protect.  So, that's the way my dad was.  He was--he, as I told you earlier, he, he, he protected us like that kind of thing, but boy he would--if you did something wrong, I mean, you was a (makes sound).
Story_ID: 572234
Speaker 1: So was he [Pride's father, Mack Pride, Sr.] the one that taught you how to milk?  Who taught you how to run the chores that you needed to do on the farm?
Speaker 2: He did.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And mom [Tessie Stewart Pride].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, we had to take care of the stock and you know, go.  Sometimes we have to take the cow out and stake her out while she can eat and we all had chores.  We had to go--like winter wood, we'd have to go and get the winter wood when it was very hot.  If we go out and cut down all the trees and saw and cut so we would--it was all--it's all orchestrated, all.  Every year as we grew up it just, it was a ritual.  I said a ritual, but it was a continuous thing 'til we got out of the nest (laughter), left the nest.
Story_ID: 572235
Speaker 1: So you were born in Sledge, Mississippi, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And were you born at home?
Speaker 2: Yes, all of us were born--
Speaker 1: Born at home--
Speaker 2: --at home except my younger brother.  Out of all the kids, just one born in the hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about your, your siblings.
Speaker 2: Got two sons [Dion Pride and Kraig Pride] and a daughter [Angela Pride].
Speaker 1: Your brothers and sisters.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh my siblings.  I'm sorry.  You said--you didn't say my offspring.  I'm sorry.  My siblings--well, we go--my mother [Tessie Stewart Pride] was married once before--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --and I say this.  Eight boys and three girls, but it's nine Prides and two Mc- McIntyres.  She was married to a McIntyre.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, my two oldest are McIntyres.  So, so after the two of them were born and she met dad [Mack Pride, Sr.], she bore eleven--nine of us, but she lost--twins were born still all completely, completely--
Speaker 1: Stillborn.
Speaker 2: Yes, stillborn.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But they were completely--
Speaker 1: Formed.
Speaker 2: --they completely formed, and then another one single completely formed, and then a miscarriage.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: So, it would have been fifteen of us had, had that not happened, but--.  So, it's nine Prides and two, two McIntyres.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So run down their names for me.
Speaker 2: So--all right.  So, you want me to start with the--her first marriage and go on down to each one the way they came in the order?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: All right.  The first one from my mother was Bessie, B-E-S-S-I-E, Bessie McIntyre [Bessie McIntyre Chambers].  Second was Jonas, Jonas McIntyre.  The third from my mother was Mack, Fowler McArthur Pride, Jr. [Mack Pride, Jr.]  The next one was Charley Frank Pride [HistoryMaker Charley Pride], the fourth one of mother's.  The fifth one was Catherine Pride [Catherine Pride Sanders].  The sixth one was Lewis Pride which he's passed.  That's--we're still all of us here but him.  That's Lewis.  Next one was Ed--Edward.  Edward [Edward Pride], then comes (pause) Joe, Joe [Joe Pride] and then Harmon [Harmon Pride].  Now, I, I don't know whether the miscarriage came between Harmon and Joe or the twins and my younger sister, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I'm just giving you 'cause I'm not sure whether she--but that miscarriage I was telling you about, it's either between Joe and Harmon or--  when I'm gonna finish it out now.  So after Harmon came the born still--the stillborn, single which was Mark [ph.] in 1947 it would have been.  Then Mark, after Mark came my sister that's doing the genealogy right now which is Maxine [Maxine Pride].  Okay, and after Maxine came the twins were born still between Maxine and Steve [Stephen Pride].  Steve is the last one--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --between the, the--after the, and stillborn twins (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Twins.
Speaker 2: --and Steve, '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: Okay. So--
Speaker 2: He was born in 1955.
Story_ID: 572236
Speaker 1: So let's talk about your childhood.  Now, you're on a farm.  You know you have chores that, that you must do.  What were your other activities that you did on the farm, because I know that you started singing real young?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Who was your audience then?  Did you sing to each other?  Did you sing together?  Did--?
Speaker 2: Well, my brother that--Mac, we call him Jr., Mack Jr. [Mack Pride, Jr.], that I'm next to, we used to do little things together like we'd listen to the radio and if they were a--if it was a harmony part or something like that, we--couples times--I mean a few times we've done things like that together as we were growing up, but as we grew up and got away from it, I guess I was probably the only one that kept messing around with it, you might say.  Like I say, I was going to be the greatest baseball player, but I--still I bought me a guitar when I was about fourteen years old from Sears, Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] and I didn't have no idea how to tune it, so I listened to the radio and tuned it up like that and that's where I--but--
Speaker 1: When you started listening to the radio, how young were you when you started listening to the radio?
Speaker 2: Well see, dad [Mack Pride, Sr.]--he--we, we had an old Philco radio and we never could put our hands on it.  He, he handled all the dials, all the stations.  Whatever we listened to is whatever he put it on.  He, he controlled the dial.
Speaker 1: Was he a country western fan?  Is that why you listened to--tell me why you listened to country western music (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because, because that's what he listened to.  He--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --he would listen to--but now--he would listen to that.  We listened to everything.  I mean, whatever you like, he--.  My mother [Tessie Stewart Pride] liked Frank Sinatra and things like that but, you see, those--back in those days the battery--they preserved those batteries because they cost (unclear).  They were tar batteries, you know, some people thought if you put them in the stove they'd last a little longer and so, so it was--it was--it was favorite stat- favorite shows that that he would save the battery for because he, he--that he liked and my mother liked.  She liked the soap operas.  They liked 'Fibber McGee and Molly' and, and Henry Aldrich ['The Aldrich Family'], and I'm sure the people that's listening if they still--a lot of them alive have seen--I'm sure that from--maybe from about fifty on up would be familiar with, with what I'm saying, that the shows that I'm saying on radio at that time.  These were the popular radio shows, like 'Our Gal Sunday', these are, these are soap operas like it would be 'Another World' and so forth now on the radio.
Story_ID: 572237
Speaker 1: So, my dad's [Mack Pride, Sr.] favorite show was--I could tell you--maybe I'll tell you a little story about his favorite show which--and, and, it's gonna be a little lengthy, but you can cut out what you want--
Speaker 2: It's okay.
Speaker 1: --but, it was a show called 'Mr. District Attorney,' okay.  Now, I don't know whether you're old enough to remember that, but I do.  And I'm a pretty good--I remember--trivia, I'm pretty good at.  I mean, not bragging or anything, but for example, when the show would come on, it would--and, and before I do what I'm about to do now--my band, when I first started in this business, a couple of--three of my band members lived in San Antonio [Texas] and what we would do, we would meet down there and get the show put together in San Antonio and we'd do our first day.  For five years in a row, we'd start in Corpus Christi, Texas.  And this, this, this last time we did that, starting in San Antonio [Texas], we checked into this hotel.  It was the Tropicana [El Tropicana Riverwalk Hotel, San Antonio, Texas].  I don't know whether it's still there or not, but, but next to the--to the bed was advertisement about who was coming to the theater there.  And on that advertisement was Marvin Kaplan and Vicki Vola and I looked and said, "That was Miss Miller on 'Mr. District Attorney.'"  I said--so I jumped on the phone and called, and I did.  They said, "Well, she--." They said, "She won't be here until next week.  She's in Austin [Texas] right now."  Ah (claps hands).  But we're going to play Cor- Corpus Christi the next day and Austin the next.  I said (claps hands), "Fine."  So we play Corpus Christi.  Get to Austin.  I get on the phone and I call her up, and I finally get her.  I said, "Ms. Vola!"  I said, "My name--."  See, the reason I want to tell you this is, is, is one or two stories in this whole thing by telling it this way.  I said, "I'm [HistoryMaker] Charley Pride.  I'm a country music singer.  I have--I'm playing here tonight," and she was playing, too, at a theater, you see because we, we were at The Coliseum [The Coliseum Austin, Austin, Texas].  So I said, "I'm Charley Pride," and I said, "Do you remember a show called 'Mr. District Attorney'?"  It was kind of a pause.  I said, "Hello?"  She said, "Yes.  Yes, I remember."  She says, "It was this number one show for ten years."  I said, "Okay."  I said, "Well," I said, "my dad [Mack Pride, Sr.]," and I told her about he controlled the knobs and that was one of his favorite shows.  And I said, "Where's--?"  I said, "Where's Harrington--Len Doyle?  He played Harrington, right."  She said, "Len Doyle?  Well, my goodness," she said, "he just passed away in a car crash out in Colorado."  I said, "Oh, I'm so sorry to hear that."  So the advertisement--and the time date is gonna come and when I finish this up, it'll be--the time factor will tell itself as I talked to her when I tell you what happened later.  I said, "Well, I loved the show, too."  I said, "I remember how you used to come on.  Used to say, 'Mr. District Attorney, guardian of the people.'"  And he said--and he'd come on, he'd say, "As shall be my duty as district attorney, not only to prosecute to the limit of the law, all persons accused of crime perpetrated within this county but to defend with equal vigor the rights and privileges of all its citizens (makes sounds)."  She said--so she's listening to me going through all of this.  I said--and he says, "Jay Jostyn in the title role, Len Doyle as Harrington and Vicki Vola as Miss Miller."  That was his secretary, see.  She said, "What'd you say your name was?"  (Laughter) I said--she said, "Well, I never heard of you."  She said, "You sing?"  I said, "You probably never heard of me," but she said, "My goodness!"  She said--I said, "Well, I'm, I'm sold out over at The Coliseum."  I said, "LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] and Lady Bird's [Lady Bird Johnson] gonna be at my show tonight," and she says--so what happened was, I'm going through all of these telling them about the way it comes on.  See this--I never had this on a tape and this has been in my head since I was a little kid.  That has been embedded there.  So she said, "You just--" said, "that's the way--?"  I said, "Well."  I said, "Let me tell you.  I can tell you a scene," and I did this scene for her.  I said, "Out on it was--it was a log cabin where some crooks were out there and the--," called, he called Harrington, which was Len Doyle.  He called him the Chief, Mr. District Attorney.  He said, "Wait, Chief.  Let me check it out."  (Makes sounds) Opened up the door and looked.  "Look out, Chief!" (Makes sounds) You know, so he knocked all the crooks out and got 'em all out.  "Well, you're safe now, Chief."  She said--and so, but, but, but, but prior to that they were going--before all that happened, they were--it was out and when I said in the woods, it was snow on the ground (makes sounds).  So I--see but--but see, I'm growing up to those sound effects, see.  You had to have sound effects, but, but I've always been interested in, in, in movies and people and.  In fact, I've entertained the thought I'd like to be a movie actor, you know.  Probably I might would've been pretty good, you know, if I had started (laughter).
Story_ID: 572238
Speaker 1: Where were we?  We were at the--
Speaker 2: You were--you had--were talking about the woman who was on the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Vicki.  Well, yeah.  What happened is, is that when I got through telling her about all the--I was going to tell you about a scene.  I did that one.  But, but in getting through and about LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] being at my show and all that, what, the, the key thing I want to say is we agreed to meet after her show and my show and I've kicked myself a hundred times.  I didn't do it.  I went with Dell Royal--Darrell Royal of the--of the Longhorns [University of Texas Longhorns] and James Garner.  All these are friends of mine and the Gatlin Brothers, Larry [Larry Gatlin] and all.  We have what they call a pick-in.  That's the--after the show got over, we'd go and sing and play all of the Willie Nelson--all the ones that just after the thing is over we'd go and sit.  And I, I wanted--I've, I've, I've tried to find her.  I'm hoping that she's still alive.  I--it's V-O-L-I, Vicki Voli [sic. Vicki Vola] was her name and I, I kick myself a ton of times, same as I did when we first missed Elvis Presley, my wife [Rozene Dohan Pride] and I.  We used to follow one another at Houston Livestock Show [Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo] and we were at the Astro Hotel [Astroworld Hotel, Houston, Texas].  I said hi to him coming up in the hallway in the hotel.  He spoke to the wife and I, but he got down on his knees and played noses with my daughter [Angela Pride], and I've never forgotten that.  I didn't have a camera or anything.  I would have loved to--and later on in life, I finally--the year that I won Male Vocalist [Male Vocalist of the Year] and Entertainer of the Year in 1971 [at the Country Music Association Awards] I followed him at the--at the Hilton International [International Hotel; Las Vegas Hilton] in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada], so.
Story_ID: 572239
Speaker 1: Well, we're gonna go back to you as a child.  So, you're around six years old and you're listening to the radio when your father [Mack Pride, Sr.] would allow you and he enjoyed country western, so who (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But see, see--go ahead and finish.
Speaker 1: Well, I was going to ask you who were the--?
Speaker 2: The people that sang?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well see, he, he--we still back even then, they had about three or four--if I could see if I could remember--fifty thousand watt stations.  See, we didn't have--back then was no FM and that sort of.  We had, we had fifty thousand watt--three or four big ones.  One of them was WSM [WSM Radio] in Nashville [Tennessee] which is still there.  WGN 'Barn Dance' in Chicago [Illinois], XERF [XERF Radio] in Del Rio, Texas and WOAI [WOAI Radio] in San Antonio [Texas] which is the only station the other side of the Mississippi River with a W, (laughter) WOAI.  I thought I'd throw that in.  So all of these fifty thousand watt stations, of course, they had one, I think, the 'Wheeling Jamboree' in West Virginia [WWVA Radio, Wheeling, West Virginia].  So, I looked--that, that--Philco radio could get those stations.  My dad could pick up 'cause we only were two hundred--we were only, we were only 275 miles from, from Nashville.  Probably about 250 really.  So we could pick up Nashville.  We could pick up WGN [WGN Radio, Chicago, Illinois] the 'Barn Dance' and that's--so, he liked Bill Monroe and, and Roy Acuff and I did, too.  In fact, I'm just finished getting ready to finish up a gospel album ['Pride and Joy: A Gospel Music Collection'].  I'm doing one of Bill Monroe's songs called "Mansions for Me" in the gospel album.  And so you ask how did I get--?  Well, I told you he, he controlled the knobs but again, you know, this is kind of hard because people say, "Well, Mississippi is a blues state," you know.  They'll hit me with "How did you come--end up singing country music (unclear)?"  And so what I try to do is explain.  I'll say to them, "Is it really?  This is a blues--is it really a blues state or is it--?  Let's just try to see," and this is the way I try to answer reporters, someone like that that's going to hit me with all these questions.  I said, "Let's take--all right, let's try some blues singing."  Let's say Muddy Waters.  I believe Sonny Boy Williamson or Lightnin' Hopkins, I believe was from Texas.  I'm not sure, but Muddy Waters was from Mississippi and [HistoryMaker] B. B. King and Albert King.  Let's see, I think John Lee Hooker, I believe, but, but--."  I said, "Let's just stop there.  That's four or five, so let's see if we can equ- equal this out a little bit."  I said, "Well, a guy by the name of Harold Jenkins, better known as Conway Twitty, from Friars Point [Mississippi], thirty miles from me where I was born."  I said, "Tammy Wynette born over near Alabama-Mississippi line, Tammy Wynette.  I saw Jimmie Rodgers from Meridian, Mississippi."  [HistoryMaker] Charley Pride from Sledge [Mississippi].  Oh, I just thought I'd throw that in.  I said, "Now, that kind of evens up country and blues."  I said, "Let's go a little--I can go a little further.  Let's say Laurel, Mississippi.  Let's go with Leontyne Price, Metropolitan Opera singer."  I said, "Oh, wait a minute.  Let's do another thing.  Let's go to Tupelo [Mississippi] or around Tupelo.  A guy by the name of Elvis Presley."  I said, "Seemed like maybe Mississippi produces what one person want to be in life, unless you want to just--if you stop going around trying to label 'em," you see.  "Well, yeah.  That's, that's--."  I said, but so, "But, but see--so you get--sometime you get things by, by labeling and so forth and not really looking at it from a--from another perspective, that's what you come up with.  You know how y'all are.  Y'all, them and us, you know."  That, that sort of thing.  You see, once you--so if we keep that--it's similar to--excuse me, I'm going have this for (unclear) (drinks from a glass).  You wouldn't believe the kind of questions I get asked.  I'm sure you might--if I give you chance or you're going to probably ask some of 'em, so.
Speaker 1: No, I'm going to let you tell the story (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well.
Story_ID: 572240
Speaker 1: It was really the type of music that you enjoyed?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So that's why you stuck with country music (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.  I stuck with it because I've always been a character.  I've always been an individual.  I, I, I never wanted anyone to tell me what you can't do.  I don't like the word period anyway, can't.  I don't like can't, hate, jealousy.  So certain words I don't like.  So, so don't come tell me, "You can't do that."  That's what I was told.  And I'd go (yodels).  "You can't do that."  I said, "Why not?"  "That's not your music."  I said, "Why not?"  Things like that.  "You can't do that."  I said, "Now, there you go.  Telling me what I can't do."
Speaker 1: What age were you when you got to that point to realize that you were singing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As soon as my dad [Mack Pride, Sr.] pushed me off his knee.  Soon as my dad pushed me off his knee because he was--that's the one thing I give him credit for giving me the grit to be and believe in yourself and be good at whatever you do and don't let nobody put you down or--see, for example, if someone call you a name or something or say--like for example, I've called--been called names.  I've been called just like anybody else, but I reached a point, I said, "Well, wait a minute.  Why is this person trying to put me down?"  So, I go to the mirror and I look and I say, "Well, I ain't the best looking, but I ain't the ugliest either."  If you're gonna go that route, you know, about who, who's handsome, who's (unclear), who's this.  I said, "Well, somebody told me I sing pretty good."  So, I'm looking at--I started looking at my attributes.  Pretty good ballplayer I was, too.  So, I said, "What's this person?  Maybe they might be a little jealous of me or something."  Time to put my (unclear).  I'm not putting him down or him or her or whatever.  So, that's the attitude I took from very small.  So once I--once I listen to the songs that I listen to and found out I could sing 'em just like anybody else.  Now, I can--see, I--they say well--people would come up and say, "Well, why country music?  A voice like yours, you could sing anything you want to sing."  I said, "Well, I don't know whether that's so, but I can sing anything I want to sing, but I'll tell you this.  I believe that I can do justice to the basic three things--the basic three musics of America."  I said, "I think the three basic music in America is country, gospel and the blues.  Not necessarily in that order, but they've all borrowed from one another.  So, maybe it's possible that you might be just looking at the epitome of American music and listening to it, too."  His voice as my voice you hear.  "Well, yeah. Yeah, well."  I said, "Well, I think being in the business, I should have my opinion, too, shouldn't I?"  "Well, but it's just that I--."  "Well."
Speaker 1: So, you're six, seven and you're singing--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and listening to gospel music?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 572241
Speaker 1: Tell me about school.
Speaker 2: To tell you the truth, I really liked school.  I, I, I liked going to school, but I, I had to do something more.  I mean, I, I didn't see that much in all of this great education I'm gonna--you know, is going to do me any good.  Summing it all up by growing in a very poverty type, very poor state like that [Mississippi], so.  But so I like, for example, I'll give you--I'll give you an example when it started.  I mentioned earlier that we had to do chores from the very time we were small.  I remember when I got up large enough to try to challenge my dad [Mack Pride, Sr.].  I had my two rows in picking cotton.  I was picking right along with him.  "I said, "I'm going to beat him this time."  So, tried to beat my dad, you see.  So, I'm keeping right up with him (makes sounds).  We get to the scales (makes sound).  Yeah, what we call a pea, you know, this little long scale and--you don't know nothing about it, but anyway.  His kept going (makes sounds).  You have to level it out to see how many pounds.  Got his done.  Put mine up there (makes sounds).  Twenty something pounds to thirty something pounds difference.  Same, you know--keeping up with him.  Putting it in my sack just like he was.  He said, "Now, come here, son."  Brought me, took me back to his rows and my two rows and his two rows.  He said, "See up under there?  You missed that one.  See up under."  See, the cotton opens to be picked.  It opens under the leaves, too, so.  I'm getting--he said, "You got everything in sight.  I got everything in sight and out of sight."  He says, "It's an art to everything."  I never forgotten that, you see.  It's an art to everything.  So the little things like that like I was telling you about my mother [Tessie Stewart Pride] planting those seeds and all.  So, these are things that I got from mom and dad.  I, I, I, I got it--I was--I was getting--I put--I was put to be ready by all--both of them and all the things that happened to me to go out in this world and try to compete.  So, what I did--but I would--as I was trying to beat him, I said, "Well, daddy, I'll tell you.  I ain't gonna be no cotton picker."  He said, "You don't know what you're gonna be.  Go ahead and pick."  (Laughter) Right now, that's what I am.  I'm a picker now, you see.  "Do the best you can."  That's, you see, he just--but--
Speaker 1: Were you allowed to go to school at all?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  See, that's another thing.  See, a lot of parents--a lot of parents at that time would keep their kids out of school, but my mother and dad said they wanted us to have education.  They would not let us stay out of school.  We, we'd come and do it after school, but we--he made sure that we went to school, both of them.  They said, "Nah, them I'm gonna to keep.  I'm not gonna keep mine out."  And that's a good thing.  I appreciate that.
Story_ID: 572242
Speaker 1: So, when did you get an opportunity to play baseball?  Did you play baseball after- in school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, that's another thing.  When did I get a chance to play baseball?  First of all, we picked cotton six and half days a week.  Well, actually--how, how do I put it.  From Monday through Saturday noon.  What's that, six?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So on Saturday mornings what my dad [Mack Pride, Sr.] would do, we'd pick all regular, you know, Monday through Friday.  On Saturday, he'd, he'd pay us.  For all the amount of cotton we picked, he would pay us a certain amount so that we could have money to go to town and buy ice cream and that sort of thing, you see.  So, but my dad was a fifty year deacon in a Baptist church, see.  He didn't believe--my brother and I loved baseball.  My uncle in Memphis [Tennessee] gave us a baseball and we start throwing it and got pretty good at it and he got to be one of the finest catchers.  At fourteen, he was playing with the men and people used to say to me, "What are you're gonna be?  You ain't gonna be nothing.  You're too skinny."  So, here again, they would tell me what you can't do, see.  So I said, "I'll show 'em."  So I went into baseball with a dare and I got all the way to the majors, too, but I didn't stay.  But I said, "Don't tell me what you can't do."  See, that's my thing.  You say my favorite phrase?  Maybe that's it. (Laughter) Don't tell me what you--I can't do.  That might be my favorite phrase.  You asked that--the other moment ago.  So, what we would do--my brother and I--that's Mack, Jr. [Mack Pride, Jr.], we take our gloves and hide them about a walk a mile or two from the house and let them pick us up on a Sunday and we go play.  'Cause see, we couldn't play on Saturday 'cause we picked cotton.  I mean, we worked I said Monday through Friday but, but enticed us to pay and we still picked--you know, we wanted to go to town sometime.  We picked 'til noon.  Got paid for that and go to town and comb your hair down real nice and groom.  Put on a nice starched, starched pants that mama [Tessie Stewart Pride] got ready and go down visit downtown, you see.  So, but all of you, you know what I mean, people that come through little towns like that.  So, but now come, come Monday morning, he strips one of those stalks and finds out we've been gone playing baseball, and he'd whop us, me--my brother and I.  So this went on for three, four, or five times and finally my mother said, "I don't think you should whip those boys.  They're going to play baseball."  And he stopped and she got so good before she passed away, she got--she, she would order and could figure math--averages, batting averages and things see.  She, she bought her a book on things like that.  See, my dad was very staunch.  My mother was kind of a--well, I guess I got--I was a character 'cause I's say I took more after my mother than I did my dad in terms of--but I do have some of his snorty-snort, tough, tough ways, but I mean, but mostly I think I took after my mother.
Speaker 1: Who did you play baseball with?  Where there others who (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  The Memphis Red Sox.
Speaker 1: No, I'm talking about as a kid?
Speaker 2: Oh, as growing up then?  Oh, it was a place--well, it didn't have no name.  It was--it was just people that got together.  Some youngsters--eight--teenagers and men, too that gathered.  When I say we go play on a Sunday, it was men and boys.  I mean, if you were good.  They didn't play for dif- like Winona, Mississippi, different--where I'd go?  I remember walking to Birdie [Mississippi].  I got so good about sixteen or seventeen years old, they paid me to pitch for 'em because I could--I could throw harder.  I think I did all of my growing at seventeen years old.  And so I got so a certain team would pay different ones if they were good enough to pitch for that team so they could win.  That's when--that's why I say, get back to daddy that I went and pitched over at Birdie, and Birdie from my, Sledge [Mississippi], Birdie was about to, to go to Birdie, Mississippi was about--now in walking, I'd say ten, fifteen miles.
Speaker 1: And you used to walk?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it was about that far.  I, I'd have to go back and check it out.  (Laughter) I looked, it seemed to me it was about that far.  Maybe it might have not been that far, but, but I remember leaving early enough to try to get there to pitch in--pitch the game and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: So, what about church on Sundays?  You said your father was a deacon.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I--yeah.  I think--I was baptized at fourteen years old.  And I'm gonna truly admit to you, I wasn't that much aware of what baptism meant in the--when it actually--when it, when I first did it, but I, I learned as I go to Sunday school and he didn't just bludgeon us to go or nothing like that, but we were enticed to go to church.  And I still go.  I don't really belong to any--I'm a Baptist, but I really don't belong to any--I go to whatever church I want to, you see.  I mean, but there's one Baptist that I go to here in Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 1: So, on Sunday mornings, you would go to church when you did go?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then you'd sneak off to go play baseball?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And that lasted until you were how old?
Speaker 2: Sixteen.
Speaker 1: Sixteen.
Story_ID: 572243
Speaker 1: So, now you're finished with school at sixteen and decide (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I, I did, but I went back and they let me come back.  (Laughter) I was tenth grade and they let me come back to finish the fif- the eleventh.  I finished eleventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2: I had signed with the Yank- Yankees [New York Yankees].  My mother [Tessie Stewart Pride] and father [Mack Pride, Sr.] had to sign 'cause I was too young.  I signed with the Yankees in '53 [1953] and I hurt my arm and all of that's--.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about it.
Speaker 2: Well, they sent me to Rio Vista, California.  I was going to--I just wanted--looked too good at first and I'd pulled something in the back of my shoulder and I--they sent me to Boise, Idaho.  I got four hundred dollars bonus and what I did, I got the four hundred dollar bonus.  I bought me a forty dollar suit and a forty dollar ring, and gave all the rest to my mom and dad 'cause I didn't--you know, I'm single.  I mean, I remember doing that, you know.  And so I finished spring training in Rio Vista out from Sacramento [California] and then they sent me to Boise, Idaho.  I stayed there, and you see, that's, that's when they had--that's when the, the teams had from--they had from D [Class D] all the way up to Triple A clubs, which they don't quite have that way now.  So this was class C [Class C] that I--that I was sent to in Boise.  Then my arm, like I told you, I hurt it in Lodi, California in spring training when I went to Rio Vista.
Speaker 1: What year is this?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-three [1953].
Speaker 1: Fifty-three [1953].  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I was about three years old then [sic.].  Well, I may--I might have been a little older.  See, baseball players are not never the age they are.  Well back then, you played under those rules.  So anyway--so they send me down to Fond du Lac, Wisconsin and I didn't do to well.  So they sent me back home.  Back to Sledge [Mississippi], and I get back to Sledge and I still want to play baseball.  Ah, the Negro League (snaps fingers), ah.
Speaker 1: So what year did you start playing in the Negro League?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-three [1953].
Speaker 1: Fifty-three [1953].
Speaker 2: So, I come back to them, see.  What I did--well, I'm gonna back up.  First of all, I came up to join the Red Sox [Memphis Red Sox] and I didn't make it and the team took us to--this is--I, I, I jumped to--I jumped ahead.
Speaker 1: Right.  That's okay.
Speaker 2: I jumped ahead.  When I first went to Memphis [Tennessee], I went to try out with the Red Sox and I didn't make it with them, but a guy took a team to, to Iowa in Iowa State.  In fact--in fact, it was Andy Williams' hometown of Wall Lake, Iowa.  All, all black team.  We were all colored then.  We were colored then 'cause see, the reason why I say it like that, Denise [Denise Gines], is that even now, especially our people, you know them--and I think this can sum up whatever reason I like to put this in because I get asked so much in all these years.  Says, "How does it feel to be the Jackie Robinson of country music" or "How does it feel to be the first colored country singer?"  "How does it feel to be first Negro country singer?"  "How does it feel to be the first black country singer?"  "How does it feel to be the first Afro-American country singer?"  I say, "Well, I feel the same way when I was colored.  I don't feel no different."  So, so when went up there to Iowa, it was an all colored team that went there to play in that league.  Now, we (unclear) percentage and it was beautiful.  In that Iowa--when we got to Iowa, the day--all day long the sun shining beautifully, but it seemed like every night (makes sound) she just rained.  So if we don't play, we don't get no money to eat.  And that's where--and this is all in my, I have an autobiography ['Pride: The Charley Pride Story,' Charley Pride and Jim Henderson].  It's all in my autobiography about how I pull up weeds and eating the bottom of weeds and the roots.
Speaker 1: That's how you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I'll tell it.  It was a guy--in fact, the guy [Jim Henderson] that helped write my book, he, he looked up.  It's in my book.  I forget the name of the fellow that he called--he's a popcorn king and earned a lot of money.  He took the team over and then start giving us money to eat 'til the rain stopped.  (Laughter) Now, so once we--once we--the rain stopped and we started playing, we didn't win.  So what they did--when I say they, the team and fellow and all--they went back to Memphis and raided the Memphis Red Sox pitching staff where I--where I had gone to try to make and didn't make--didn't make it before this guy took up there.  So what happens, when they come raided the team, they needed pitchers.  So I come back, now I join them.  I got a job and I stayed in that league until I went to--you know, with all of my experience and everything 'til I got--I got all the way.  I got--I made it all the way to the Los Angeles Angels, so.
Story_ID: 572244
Speaker 1: Let's do that progression from--
Speaker 2: From there to the Angels [Los Angeles Angels] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, that's, that's the part of-, that's the part.  Once I left and went to the Red Sox [Memphis Red Sox], that was '53 [1953].  That's, that's, that's--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --that's when I signed--my mother [Tessie Stewart Pride] signed me and now what we've caught up to it now from that to, to--from starting to tell you right at Rio Vista [California].  I was signed by a guy by the name of Dizzy Dismukes from the old Negro League that was working with the Kansas City Monarchs.  He signed me to a Yankee [New York Yankees] contract, and as I say they paid me four hundred bucks [dollars] and they sent me to Rio Vista, and--
Speaker 1: So you complete all that and then come back to play for the Negro League?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I came--yeah, I came back after, after they signed me and I didn't make it.  Yeah, I came back.  I came back and, and--
Speaker 1: Okay.  What league did you play in for the Negro League?
Speaker 2: I played the Memphis Red Sox from '53 [1953], '52 [1952] and '53 [1953].  Let's see.  Goodness, you got me confused now.  I was with the (unclear) well, now.  See, I--we--I wished I had the, the discography down through this.  Me and a guy by the name of Jessie Mitchell [Jessie J. Mitchell].  I just, ESPN.  We just did a ESPN thing ['ESPN Classic Vintage Live: Negro League Baseball'] with Willie Mays and myself and, and a guy named Jessie Mitchell.  We were sold from--well, let me put it this way.  In '53 [1953], I came back and signed with a team called the Louisville Clippers after going from that progression to that was a team that was put in the league that was brought into the league called the Louisville Clippers.  Well, now.  So, that was in, in 1954, '54 [1954].  So, I went down to Biloxi [Mississippi].  I worked out with them, myself and Jessie.  Then we end up being sold to the Birmingham Black Barons in 1954.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I played with the Birmingham Black Barons in '54 [1954].  Fifty-five [1955] I went to and I've, I've used clippings and things from and tried to go to El Paso [Texas] and different teams to try to let them look at me and things.  I would try--I, I tried to get signed.  I was in Nogales [Arizona], Sonora [California].  It just--I'd have to go back and get all the--get, get (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, that's fine.  Just tell--just tell me what you remember.  What about--you went to Montana?
Speaker 2: All right.  That was--that was '60 [1960].  See, in 1956--in 19--well, like I said, I didn't--in 1956, I played with the--I went back to the Red Sox.  I signed with the Red Sox in '56 [1956].  What happened is, is that I was with the--I was with the--with the Louisville Clippers, sold to the Birmingham Black Barons in '54 [1954], '55 [1955] I went to El Paso.  I went to El Paso to try out with El Paso and that's what I remember in Nogales.  I remember going in Nogales, but that's--like I said, I'd have to go.  But at '56 [1956], I signed with the--with the Red Sox again from doing that from '54 [1954] Birmingham Black Barons.  Plus, I wondered how did I get away from the Red Sox?  That's the thing you see 'cause I, I don't remember signing no release, but the manager started this team.  That's it.  Started this Louisville Clippers thing.  I was wondering why--how he could get me signed.  But anyway, I go '56 [1956], now I got to the [U.S.] Army.  I played '56 [1956].  I get a chance to go a big pick for the All-Star team to play against the Willie Mays' All-Stars.  And I got clippings over here that will help me (laughter) if you want to see those when we're done.  Well, what they call montage all this stuff together (laughter).  But see--you see, but this is 2000.  Remember, this is 2006 isn't it?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I mean, but I--
Speaker 1: Just give me what you can.  You're doing wonderful.  This is so interesting.
Speaker 2: But I do remember playing after in '56 [1956] 'cause that's when I went in the Army.  That's the year I got married too.  I mean, I had a lot of things happen to me in '56 [1956] and that was one of them, one of the big things that happened.
Speaker 1: Who did you marry?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: What's your wife's name?
Speaker 2: R-O-Z-E-N-E, Rozene [Rozene Dohan Pride].
Speaker 1: Rozene?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  I'll give you some paraphernalia on it.
Story_ID: 572245
Speaker 1: See, in 1956--from '53 [1953] - '56 [1956], I was under a contract to the Memphis Red Sox because once you sign with a team before Curt Flood killed that rule.  Yep, and that means these ballplayers should look up in heavens and thank him 'cause they gave him--he paid for it for, for changing that rule, Curt Flood did.  Well that, that was the same thing applied in the Negro League.  So I was owned by the Red Sox '53 [1953] through '56 [1956] and that's what I was trying to tell you why I tried to figure out how Memphis Red Sox manager get--got me away from that team (laughter) to get me over there with the Clippers, with the Louisville Clippers.  That's the thing that--but so.  But anyway, it happened.  But now I go and I play with, with the Louisville Clippers then they sell me and Jessie Mitchell [Jessie J. Mitchell] and I'm with this (unclear) was starting and working in the--work our way into '56 [1956].  They sent Jessie Mitchell and I to the Birmingham Black Barons to buy a bus so they can travel and play everybody else.  That's--so that happens.  So '54 [1954]--that was '54 [1954], '55 [1955], '56 [1956] I'm back with the Red Sox.  Now, I play with the Red Sox that year, and I have a pretty good season, and now I go to the [U.S.] Army.  I go to the Army in 1956.  November 19th, November 19th, I go in the Army.  I had met my wife [Rozene Dohan Pride] at that time, but I wasn't married when I first went in.  So, you asked about her a while ago what was here name.  Well, here it is.  I met her in July and December we were married and we still are.  Nineteen fifty-six [1956] and I'm only twenty-nine years old.  Now, so the thing I want to do here is, is, is say that in '57 [1957]--I was in the Army from '56 [1956] through '58 [1958].  I had a chance to go with the Denver Bears.  Now here we go back to this Curt Flood type thing.  And here where they weren't spending a whole lot of money with bonuses trying to get people and I'm still owned now by the Memphis Red Sox.  Remember this, I'm still owned by the Red Sox.  So I write the owner and ask him can I--would he let me have my release or I could go and take spring training with the Denver Bears' baseball team.  When I first met and came up and signed with you in '53 [1953], I was single.  So now, I'm married and I have a son [Dion Pride].  This is after, you know, when I'm finished my hitch in the Army.  You see, I'm writing.  Don't get no answer.  So, I called Happy Chandler [Albert Benjamin Chandler], commissioner of baseball, and told him my situation.  He said, "Well."  I said, "I wrote him."  He said, "But you didn't send him a--."  He said, "Well, here's what you do.  Why don't you send him a registered letter and if you get the letter back that he received it and you don't receive a contract on or before April 1st, you're considered a free agent."  I did that.  Now, this is going to be a story, Denise [Denise Gines], that you're going to see how this thing work.  I sent the registered letter, got it back, and now watch this.  During the meantime--see, remember this is 1958 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty-eight [1958].
Speaker 1: Not no big bonuses and not paying--buying players around like.  Then I didn't start 'til the mid-'60s [1960s].  So now, plus here's the way baseball at that time was.  Remember Jackie Robinson had only been in the Major Leagues [Major League Baseball] no longer than from '47 [1947] to '58 [1958].  What is that about?  Five, six, seven, eight years.  So, so now only one, then Larry Doby came the next year.  So here's the structure the way it was structured.  There were a quota from D [Class D] all the way up to the Majors.  Only two of us--when I say us colored, Negro, black, Afro Americans on these teams, you see.  So by the time I get my answer back from the owner--the registered letter that I sent, they're starting to break down from Major League, Triple A, Double A, A [Class A], B [Class B], C [Class C], D with a quota.  Now, I got my--I got my release and I go to--.  His name was Bob Howsam [Robert Howsam] which ended up with--I think he made it from Denver all the way to the Majors as a general manager, Bob Howsam.  That's his name.  Hi Bob, if you're looking at this.  So, when I go back upstairs there to me he says, "I got no spot."  Huh?  Now, so by the time I got out of the Army which was February and on or before April, well everything--they're, they're getting set.  Ever- all the teams are getting set from Triple A from Majors down to D.
Speaker 2: And when they had the quota where they can only have two Negro players.
Speaker 1: On a team.  On a--on a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now he doesn't have a spot for you?
Speaker 1: Not there on the Denver's.  Now, I got to start trying, he start trying to see what he could do.  Guess what?  They tried to get me Bellingham, Washington, tried to get me Saskatoon [Canada].  I remember that like it was yesterday, but--
Story_ID: 572246
Speaker 1: I got out of the [U.S.] Army and this is what I did.  And this is what I like--I'm gonna throw my wife [Rozene Dohan Pride] in here just a little bit because--see we, we hadn't been married that long, but we needed a car.  We needed a car 'cause I was in Fort Carson, Colorado where I got out.  That, that winter snow and everything.  I said--and I got out with two--nine--ninety dollars and I think that was mustered out with her with--I think we had the son [Dion Pride] then, it was about hundred and something and I said, "We're gonna need a car."  I said, "I've got to have--now between now and waiting for my--."  In other words, between waiting for the answer to come back for the registered letter, I still got to work, you see.  So we're gonna need a car.  So she came out with this big wad of dough.  I said, "Where did you get all this money?"  See, my wife was a lab technician.  "I made pretty high."  Lab technician and a--or and a--and a cosmetologist.  Well what she was doing--we, we had a--we had a--we had an apartment with my--with my sis- my sister, Catherine [Catherine Pride Sanders], that, that I told you was next to me and her husband, and what my dau- my wife was doing was keeping my sister's kid while they work.  My sister's husband's sister's kid while they work and doing hair and all.  I didn't--I'm up sixty something miles away or get--you know, in my Army hitch and everything.  I said, "Oh."  I said, "I'm going to need a car."  She said, "Well, we got a down payment."  I said, "What you get?"  I said, "From now on."  I tell you that's, that's--I said, "From now on, I'll make the money and you take care of it."  (Laughter) That's the way it's been all these years.  So, I just thought I would throw that in there.  But now getting back to the registered letter and now I have no place to go.  Guess where I get, go right back to?
Speaker 2: Red Sox [Memphis Red Sox]?
Speaker 1: You got it.  I can take it right out of my drawer there and show you where I, I--the agreement I had with them.  "To whom it may concern."  That's the release I got back.  When I got that--when I got back, the--when I--when Happy Chandler [Albert Benjamin Chandler]--when I didn't get the--I got my release.  In other words, I, I didn't throw that out.  I got my release after, after I wrote back and didn't get nothing, no contract on or before April, so.  So but now, I got the release.  Remember you just said it, back (unclear).  The quota is done, gotta go back to Memphis [Tennessee].  I go back to Memphis and I sign again, '58 [1958].  That's how I got--right there.  That's where you see--that's where it brings us right there in 1958.  I play '58 [1958], had a good season.  Played against the Willie Mays' All-Stars.  Only--now this is a goody.  I'm gonna give you a clipping on that.  The only time they had ever been beaten even when Jackie Robinson brought them down to the play the guys in the Negro League, they've never been beaten.  I was in the outfield in left field, missed a fly ball and I got all the people laughter at me and all that, but I came in and pitched four shutout innings.  Beat 'em.  Held them for four to two.  Sad Sam Jones, Willie Mays, [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron, all them names, they'll be on the lineup.  I'm gonna give it to you.  Now, just remind me.  I'll give it--I, I--now that I cherish.  I cherished it.
Speaker 2: You can remember who was on the lineup.  Who else?  Tell me--tell me who it is?
Speaker 1: Gene Baker.  That--Gene.  Oh, Gene.  This was the lineup.  George Crowe, Gene Baker, Willie Mays.  But now Willie didn't play that night because I couldn't get him out (laughter).  There, up in that--he hurt his shoulder the night before so that's what we talked about when I was at ESPN just a few, few months ago we went and did--they did a montage on, on, on the league that whites couldn't play and all that.  Really was--I'll get you a copy of that if you want to.  But anyway, this--that was the lineup.  I mean, it was no money early.  All of the people in 1956 just check all of the black players that have been playing.  Most of them came out--I mean, Larry Doby wasn't that year, but he was a year or two before that when he came out with Jackie, with Jackie Robinson.  But I wasn't even, when the year before that and [HistoryMaker] Ernie Banks.  That's the lineup.  Wasn't no--you heard about a weakness, well wait 'til you get to the weakness in the lineup, wasn't no weakness in that lineup.  But anyway, four to two.  Beat 'em four to two, Victoria, Texas, (claps hands).  I tell you I loved that.  I'll keep that clipping.  I might could buy three, four or five just to give out, you see.  I'm proud of that. So, so now '56 [1956] I get a chance to be on the--on the--I get a chance to be on an All-Star team to play against all them All-Stars.  End up beating them four to two.  Holding them.  Shutout--four shutout endings.  Now, '57 [1957] I asked for a raise.  Didn't give me a raise.  I didn't play.  I mean five--not '57 [1957], '59 [1959].
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959].  Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's fine.
Speaker 1: See I played '58 [1958], '59 [1959], I asked for a raise.  So, I went to work for a furniture, floor wood--hardwood flooring company 'cause now I got--you know, I got--I got a son like I said, you know.  We wasn't getting but two dollars a day, eating money and a hundred a month, but I loved to play, you know, anyway.
Story_ID: 572247
Speaker 1: What was going on with your music at that time--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --during this whole period of baseball (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I--when I got out, I took--and this is another story.  I took my guitar.  I had got me another guitar.  I went down to where--it's called Sam Phillips in Memphis [Tennessee] where Jerry Lee Lewis, Johnny Cash, all of them went through that Sun Records [Sun Record Company].  The name was Sam Phillips, Sun Records, and I took the guitar and I did--I did a song.  It's called 'Strollin' but I call--I said 'Walkin.'  I thought maybe I could make it my song.  I did, I had no idea about copyrights at that time (laughter).  So, you remember the song "Dum du dump.  There's my babe."  I'll play it for you if I can find it.  But it says (singing), "There's my babe walking in the door, ging, ging, ging, ging."  You see, I played the guitar straight open barcarole.  What they did they put a shuffle on it and released it over in, in Europe.  Now, I just got it back about ten years ago.  I didn't even know this had happened.  See, they taped me while I was auditioning.  I went down to audition, that's what I didn't say.  I went down to Sun Records to audition with all--well, I did say, I mean, and 'cause that's thinking you know and, and, and if I play it for you, it would sound like I played it for my daughter [Angela Pride] and some other people.  They said, "Sound like Elvis [Elvis Presley]."  Well that was the going, "I love my babe walking in the door, ba, ba."  You know, "Where's my babe walking in the--."  You know, see.  I just put that little (imitates Elvis Presley).  Anyway, I didn't know this had been done.  So, I have that too, and I'm glad--it came to me through somebody in research in trying to research songs and came up with this and brought it to me, you know.  But anyway, my music--
Speaker 1: What happened after the audition?
Speaker 2: Well, that's what I say.  He, he didn't say anything, he just said I sang pretty good.  He said that but, but I--but what I'm saying to you, I didn't realize that I thought they were just listening to me.  I didn't realize I was being taped.  But it's not bad when you--listen, when they put the shuffle on there.  I'm--I, I been trying to find--it's on a--I might have it, but if you want me to, I'll get you the address and I'll send it to you and, you know, you might can have it to put a background on this particular part of it because it's, it's something to hear.  I mean, it's back--that's forty something years ago and it don't--a lot of people didn't know that was me, you know.  So anyway, being too that I'm only twenty-nine years old--
Story_ID: 572248
Speaker 1: The thing here is, is that '59 [1959], don't play.  Nineteen sixty [1960], (makes sound), Montana.  What happened is that I looked Sporting News.  "Ballplayers capable of playing A [Triple A] ball, write this number."  (Makes sounds) I wrote.  I got a reply from Missoula, Montana.  "Get in as good a shape as you can.  Report.  If we sign you, we'll reimburse you."  (Makes sounds) I'm getting in shape.  This was '59 [1959].  When '60 [1960] rolled around, we had just bought some brand new furniture.  I went--I went and mortgaged it for--you know it says, "Ballplayers capable."  I reported.  Mortgaged the furniture for four hundred, left two hundred with her and took off.  Got up there, made the team [Missoula Timberjacks].  They said, "If we sign you, we'll reimburse you."  They did that.  Now, here we go now.  Remember about this quota thing and how other things were.  They sign me.  I go Pocatello, Idaho, Idaho Falls [Idaho], Billings [Montana], and back to Missoula.  Been up three times, drove in two runs.  Two for three, that's .750.  I'm hitting and drove in three runs.  Manager was Rocky Tedesco.  Rock--Rocky Tedesco.  You get that?  He says, "Charley [HistoryMaker Charley Pride], I like the way you run.  I like the way you hit, but I gotta let you go.  I like the way you've been."  Now, let's say--let me show you how that work.  Let's say you sig- you were the first--you're the person that scouted Mickey Mantle and you sent another potential to Missoula and you call up and say, "Hey Nick."  That's his name.  He's dead now.  Nick Mariana was the owner that, that I met when I got up there.  He says, "How about my--?"  Let's just say his name was George Humphries [ph.], Amon Sluper [ph.].  Just give out any names.  He says, "Well, we got this guy here, this free agent.  He came up here answered that ad in the Sporting News and free agent up here.  He's doing--."  "Oh yeah."  Well, now this is you now.  What if you were knocking out me another Mickey Mantle--knocking me out of another Mickey Mantle when I ain't--keeping my boy on up on the bench and gonna sign this guy.  But now, I'm not making any excuses.  That's, which is--which is a fair way 'cause they booked, the scout works.  He's working to pay to send these guys for that to happen.  So, now they got to try to get me somewhere.  They tried to get me in Bellingham, Washington and that's what I--that's where we didn't connect at while ago--Bellingham, Washington and Saskatoon, Saskatchewan [Canada].  These were the two towns--oh.  Couldn't get me no play.  "Hello."  Now, I done mortgaged that furniture.  I want to play baseball.
Story_ID: 572249
Speaker 1: They gave me two names.  "Oh, Charley [HistoryMaker Charley Pride], here's what you can do.  Go over to Helena, Montana."  That's where my two youngest [Angela Pride and Kraig Pride] were born.  Bud Sodder, Kes Rigler.  He gave me two names.  So I take the bus (makes sounds), you know, get out at the bus station.  Get to Helena, I called Bud Sodder.  "Yeah."  So they have already told him I'm on--.  You know, he [Nick Mariana] sending one over.  He said, "Yeah, we'll like to have you play."  I said, "But now do you have--they said you--whoever I play for they have to have a job 'cause they don't pay enough for semi-pro ball.  Semi-pro don't pay enough to take care of your family."  "Yeah, that's, that's, that's right, but that's the thing.  Right now we don't have no job."  I said, "Well, I'm gonna keep on going."  "No, no, no."  He said, "Come on down.  Let's talk.  You're not that far," but it was.  (Laughter) I started walking.  He had a sporting goods store, so I walked down there.  Now, here's what starts to happen.  See, these are stories I'm telling you.  I get there to the sporting goods store.  Now he wants me to play 'cause they told him about my, my attributes, you know, when they called him.  Now, he don't want Kes Rigler though to find out I'm there.  So he takes me put me in a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] (laughter).  I get to the YMCA, about ten o'clock, Kes Rigler shows up.  Now Kes Rigler runs the team called the Smelterites [East Helena Smelterites] where they have a smelter that processes zinc and all that which--now, I don't know this at the moment 'til he comes in and talk to me.  He comes in and he said, "Bud didn't want me to talk to you, but I found out.  See, they didn't realize they called both of us.  So, I had to find out where, where he put you," (laughter).  Okay, so he said, "I can give you job at the smelt."  I said, "I'm going to play with you then."  (Laughter) And that's what I did, and I called my wife [Rozene Dohan Pride] up and said, "You got get on up here."  I said, "And they told me how much it paid, twenty dollars a day."  I said, "I ain't never made twenty dollars a day in all life," so.  She said, "What we gonna do with the furniture?"  I said, "Put it in storage.  Just get on up here."  So that's what she did.  Now that gets me to Helena, Montana.
Story_ID: 572250
Speaker 1: Now, I start singing in nightclubs.  Then Wil- then here comes Red Foley and Red Sovine and this what get me to Nashville [Tennessee] and that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Well, let's talk about that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, I'm, I'm shorten 'em up, now.  I've got to short--I'm shorten 'em.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.  Certainly we can.  So now you're singing in--?
Speaker 1: I'll make--I'm, I'm, I'm putting Matt [Matthew Hickey] to sleep over there.
Speaker 2: You're singing in the clubs two nights a week in Helena [Montana]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Twenty dollars a night.  Two hours--
Speaker 2: And working in the zinc?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And playing baseball [for the East Helena Smelterites]?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: I, I start working there.  I start singing.  The thing is though it is a story 'cause when I went to the smelter--me selling the smelts, right?  That's where the singing started.  They found a guitar.  I did the National Anthem ['The Star Spangled Banner'] after each game and then I ended up singing after the games at nightclubs over there, and I get a call from the secretary of the American Federation of Musicians which I didn't know it was a such thing as an American Federation of Musicians.  He calls me up.  He says, "[HistoryMaker] Charley Pride?"  "Yeah."  He said, "I'm Ray [ph.]."  I forget his name.  I remember the last name but.  He said, "I hear you playing over in East Helena [Montana], passing the hat?"  I said, "Well, yeah.  I didn't tell them to pass it."  I said, "They like to sing, they pass the hat."  "Well, do you belong to the union?  I said, "Yep, I play for AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations] over here at the smelt."  He said, "No, no, no.  American Federation of Musicians."  I said, "I didn't know it was--.  You mean I have to pay to sing?"  I mean--he said, "Yeah."  Now, I'm thinking I--.  Uh, oh.  All the way up here in Montana he gonna hit me with an old discrimination factor here.  That's the first thing I thought.  I thought of it like that.  I said, "Well, how much does it cost to join that union?"  He said, "Forty dollars initiation and twenty-eight dollars a year."  I said, "I'm--man, that's three--that's three nights of work when I'm singing."  (Laughter) I said, "I'm not gonna do that."  He said, "Well, you can't sing."  Make a long story short, I joined, Local 642.  Guess what?  I still belong to Local 642, Helena, Montana (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 572251
Speaker 1: So now, what happens after you leave Montana?  What year were you leaving Montana?
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969].  So you were there for almost nine years?
Speaker 2: Well, we were there almost ten.
Speaker 1: Ten years.
Speaker 2: Lacked about three or four months to be ten years, so a decade.
Speaker 1: So where do you go then from there?
Speaker 2: Well see, we're back to baseball.  See, baseball played such an important part of my life and how I evolved out of that trying to get to the majors.  See, remember I went to the Angels in '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Los Angeles Angels.  That's-, and I was part of that expansion.  Jim Fregosi and Bubba [Bubba Morton]--
Speaker 1: So you left Montana and went there?
Speaker 2: I went to spring training.  I still lived there.  I just was saving--remember, I'm saving my money all and still trying to get into baseball.  So I'm working at the smelter, but I'm saving money to go there.  See, it's still (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  So this is spring training in '61 [1961]?
Speaker 2: In '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I did.  I know I hear that voice through a steel door.  So what I did, I tried to make the team and tried to do it too fast.  My arms were so weak, were sore.  Merv Grif- I meant Merv (laughter), Marv Grissom.  Marv Grissom said, "You don't have a Major League arm, Charley [HistoryMaker Charley Pride].  We got to send you home."  So he sent me packing with a tuna fish sandwich and orange back to Montana.  So, I get back.  Now, next--the next following year in '62 [1962], the Mets [New York Mets] expanded.  Now, I'm gonna send all my clippings against Willie Mays and all them guys.  I'm gonna give them a chance to go (unclear), but they broke this ankle.  You got a screw in that left ankle there.  They ran over me at that smelter and cracked--broke, broke that, called a malleolus bone off of that.  So now, plus remember I'm getting older.  That's gonna throw me back another.  But anyway, I got my bats together and called up Louisville company [Hillerich and Bradsby Company, Louisville, Kentucky].  Sent my bats down there corresponding with Casey Stengel and all of 'em.  I'll be there at such, such a time.  He's just talking.  I did it.  See, everybody wondered who's Charley Pride that sent these bats here?  Hank Fischer opened one of 'em and broke one of 'em before I got down there, but I get there.  Casey Stengel said, "We ain't running no retired camps down there."  I said, "Well, I'll send him a telegram and also the general manager, too."  (Laughter) So, I get there.  These are good stories, aren't they?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I get there and I walk up to the desk.  I said, "I'm here to join the Mets."  He said, "Are you with a team?"  I said, "Well sort of."  (Laughter)  So he said, "Well, we don't have no room."  I said, "Well, is anybody sleeping single?"  Well, Solly Drake's brother [Sammy Drake] was with the Cubs [Chicago Cubs] at one time.  That's where I had met him out there, and he was now with the--Solly Drake's brother was now with the Mets.
Speaker 1: Mets.
Speaker 2: So I went (imitates knocking on the door).  He opened the door, "Charley?"  He said, "Charley.  Oh, you the one that sent those bats down."  (Laughter) So, I slept on the floor as best I tried to sleep.  So down the hall comes Casey Stengel and I took my hand out to shake and tell him I'm Charley Pride.  "Now, get out (growls)."  Didn't shake my hand.  (Unclear)  "The bus will be going out pretty quick."  All he's gruffy, gruffy.  So now, I start hearing him when we get out there.  Matt the director of all--all of the--of all of the minor league teams in there named Johnson [ph.] and he's saying, "Casey, well he paid his money."  He said, "Yeah, we could look at him."  "Well, take him out here in one these fields here and look at him."  Oh, my old heart just sank down like, ah.  So, I took my five bats, headed back to Montana.  No, not actually to Montana but by way of Nashville [Tennessee], because see while I was in here, you asked me when I was singing in nightclubs up in Montana.  Red Foley and Red Sovine came there on a show.  That's all in there too, and I'll say it, and they put me and let me do two songs on the show and I was recommended to go to Nashville.  They never seen nothing like that before but go to Nashville.  So, what I got to lose.  I headed back to Montana by way of Nashville.  Walked in real nervous.  Got heard by the guy that eventually ended up being my manager, Jack Johnson, 'cause he was--his name was Jack Johnson.  He was public relations director for where Red Sovine told me to go.  So we--I was going to stop though and let everybody in Nashville hear me, but him and another guy named Dan Crutchfield [ph.] got me on the bus real fast and got me out of town.  (Laughter) He said, "You'll hear from me within two to four weeks."  So, I'm--got time to kill, I mean before I go back to work.  So, I headed back through Denver [Colorado].  I got two brothers and a sister live there.  But only one now.  My brother and sister live there.  The other one went back home to Mississippi, bought him a home down there.
Story_ID: 572252
Speaker 1: But so, I go back to Montana from the Mets [New York Mets].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  After stopping off in Nashville [Tennessee]--
Speaker 2: Nashville, okay.
Speaker 1: --to do--let this guy hear me name Jack Johnson and he put me on tape.  He went and played it for Jack Clement which I was just with four days ago where I'm doing my gospel album ['Pride and Joy: A Gospel Music Collection'] again.  The guy that all these records that I'm second only to Elvis Presley that sold the most records on RCA [RCA Records].  I went to his studio to do this gospel album just last week.  Well, he took that tape to him.  But now for a year, I've been writing back and forth.  I'm trying to see whether--I didn't realize he was going--what he was going through trying to sell, sell this pigmentation to the country music industry.  But finally I come back and within a year, I came back.  We cut, cut what we call a dub, cut a session and they gave me seven songs when I came through Nashville.  I went down to my mother-in-law's and worked them up.  Come back up to Nashville.  They heard me.  He said, "I got a session set for myself.  I think he's ready."  This is what Jack Clement said.  See, there were to Jacks--Jack Johnson and Jack Clement and Jack Clement was my producer.  He said, "Can you do a song?  Can you do a--can you do a song in three hours?  Can you do a session in three--?"  No, "Can you do two songs in three hours?"  I said, "I can do it in an hour."  (Laughter) I've never been in a recording studio but that one time that I told you about Sam Phillips and didn't know--I didn't know I was being, you know--
Speaker 2: Taped?
Speaker 1: --taped at that time, but anyway we did it.  Chet Atkins took it to RCA, Monterey, California.  They signed me September 28.  Here I am.
Story_ID: 572253
Speaker 1: About getting into the people that was instrumental in me getting into the business and helping me and all that is--I--it really--Red Sovine, Red Foley was the first go around.  I mean, what I mentioned earlier, them putting me on the show up there [Helena, Montana] with them and telling me to go to Nashville [Tennessee].  That was the key right there in getting there, meeting my--end up being my manager, Jack Johnson, meeting him.  After getting there and meeting Jack Clement, starting to record songs and like I mentioned earlier about the songs that I was given when I came down there and went down and rehearsed them came back up and got in front of him.  He said, "He's ready.  Cut the dub."  Chet Atkins took it to RCA [RCA Records], and then they signed me and.  The thing is, the songs they gave me were seven songs.  I don't remember all seven, but I can remember three of 'em.  'Take That Night Train to Memphis' [sic. 'Night Train to Memphis'], 'Atlantic Coastal Line,' and 'Just between You and Me,' which ended up being my first hit record.  So--and of course Jack Clement wrote that and that's the one I really wanted.  So, I used that particular song to gauge how I pick songs of the seven they gave me.  Which one did I like the most that was it.  So, I used that and still do, right at this--even at this juncture.  "Do you really like this song," or--that's kind of my measuring stick.  Used to say to myself, "Do you like that?  How much?  What percentage you like that?  Over this one," or whatever, whichever one you're listening to.  So, but, but, as far as the people in the business, they all have been nothing but--and it's, it's amazing sometimes people--when I tell people, they say it's amazing when I say this, they say it's amazing when I say, "I've never--I cannot sit here and say that the--."
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Sorry about that.  But he's--about the--'bout the--when I say to people that there's never been--it's no way I can sit here and name one person that I can say have said anything bad about me as my peers.  That I--that I can sit here I, I, I heard him or her say with my own ears.  Now, I have heard what some people said, some might of have said, but, but for me, if I was to be put on the stand and say, "Did you hear Joe? Joe blah, blah, blah."  Or and when I tell people there's never been one from the audience, none of--all my whole career, not one incident has happened for a name calling or whatever and, and when I say that, especially to reporters, they'll say--they'll give me that, I can't believe, you got to be lying, look (laughter).  I say, "Oh, oh.  You're giving me that 'I can't believe you got to be lying look."  "Well, yeah.  But why, why, why do you--?"  I said, "Well."  So I start naming all of my accomplishments.  There are a few of them, and I said, "Well, what do you want me to do?"  I said, "Where do you want me to start?" you see.  I said, "Three Grammys [Grammy Awards], second only to Elvis Presley that sold the most records on RCA?  Remember the Grand Ole Opry [Nashville, Tennessee]?"  I said, "Now in the Hall of Fame [Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum, Nashville, Tennessee]."  I said, "How far do you want me to go?"  I said, "I can find some more."  I said, "But it seems to me--." I said, "So my feeling is this, I think I said enough.  If I had been called the N word ever since to every time I walked on stage.  I'm a success, so why should I lie?"  "Well, that's right."  Now they come back here and said, "Well, why you think that?  Why is it you think that?"  I said, "Well, maybe it's because I've always felt that I was no different than any other American other than the practice that we practice against y'all, them and us and all that stuff.  I mean, as a (air quotes) in our society."  I said, "But individually, I've always--if want to call skirting around it or walking around it or any way you want to do it.  That's not just physically but mentally."  See for example, there's your door, and there's my door.  Okay, you can go through your door and I did it down in my home state of Mississippi.  You white and I'm--I went through mine, you went through yours, but I went through both of them up here (indicates his head) and in here (indicates his heart) and everything.  I said that--and I--all, every time I would look it that way.  Something like that happened, I say, "Boy, look what we're doing to each other.  Look how we're hurting each other."  And that's been my formula all of my life, and I will never change it because it works.  So, maybe those people--when I walked up and shocked so many of 'em, they say, "I don't care if he's green.  I like what I hear."  (Laughter) That's the best way I can put it.
Story_ID: 572254
Speaker 1: Well, it's 1960 is when you are finally getting ready to leave--
Speaker 2: Montana.
Speaker 1: --Montana.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you go on to sign the contract with RCA [RCA Records].  Now, in that period of time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, from '60 [1960] to '66 [1966], the civil rights is going on.
Speaker 2: Right in the middle.  My whole career.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me--tell me what you're going through during that time.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm aware--I can tell you I was aware that that was going on, but you can--I, I, I don't think the right word would be that I put blinders on or nothing like that.  I think that--I truly believe that certain people are on this planet to do certain things and it's a certain amount of destiny and a certain amount of fortitude, and effort and work and all goes together.  So in that sense, I think that's where I've been or where I am even now.  For example, I would hear things like, "How's he making it?  How are they accepting him?"  You see, "How, how how--?"  You know, these kinds of things.  And I can tell you exactly where I was when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.  I was in Big Spring, Texas.  I was working with a guy by the name of Guy Mitchell that had a song out called (singing), "Never felt more like singing the blues when I never thought that I would ever lose your love dear, you got me singing the blues" ['Singing the Blues'], and you know.  He was an actor, singer, so he immediately broke down and start crying.  I'm sure I--by him crying, too, I--you know.  He said--he said, "I can't go--I can't go and do the show."  So, I said, "Well."  So, I had to think about it and I did.  Sold out and so, you know, I didn't have to worry about what, what night it was does it that I'm talking about because all you got to do is look and see when that--I told you exactly where I was when it happened.  I mean, well, this was the night after, but, but I mean.  No, no it wasn't.  It wasn't because, 'cause I think it had happened to him that day 'cause I'm going to the show that night.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: So, so I got in the cab.  That's right, I got in the cab.  So in other words, I, I, I thought about calling my manager and I said, "Well."  I said, "This got to be--I believe something I've got to chew on myself and make a decision."  So, my decision was after talking with Guy and he's crying and I said, "Well Guy, I've got to go.  I've got to do the show.  That's what my heart, my mind tells me I've got to go."  I get in the cab on the way to the show, the dispatcher calls the driver, said, "They got him," and they said, "Got him?"  "Yeah."  He says, "Well I'll be."  He says, "Well, I've got one here I'm taking to the show here now."  I've got one.  I never will forget that.  So things like that, see.  "I've got one here now that's going to the show."  So he gets me there, I go.  Now, I get on that stage, I--and I do one of the finest shows I feel that could be done under the circumstances.  I get a standing ovation, but now all while I'm doing the show, it's in the back of my mind what has happened.  I haven't forgotten.  They haven't either.  But see, what's going through my mind and their mind and I'm standing there doing my show and, and, and hurting probably just as much as they are with the feeling of what's going on in each one's mind.  All--both, it's, it's in--it's there, that, that, that thing of just has, has happened.  And there he is up there right in the middle of all this, still singing to us and giving us a good show, the show that I gave them.  And I think if you get the--I think if you get the, the tape, you can--you can, of the--of the show--the documentary that they did on me.  The documentary if you get that I mentioned this, if you get that and [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory is on there explaining how he--because I guess he saw it, too, when they asked him the question.  He said, "Here was a person that--," and I don't know exactly how it's worded, but I liked it.  I liked what he--maybe that's what the way he said it what was going on.  I think--I think he's saying the same thing I'm trying to say here that the feeling of what had happened.  Each--everybody was hurting, but we had to keep going.  We had to move on.  We had to--you know.  The hurt was there, but maybe this will soothe ever- this was--this was a soothing effect for everybody, even the one that's giving the show and the one that's receiving, all of the sold out crowd that receiving.  And I think it was something like that he said.  And so--and I think that's sort of the way it was.
Story_ID: 572255
Speaker 1: Now when you say what was going on, well, I could name other things.  I could go on.  We could sit here as I told you.  I could sit here and name you, but they're going to be doing a--
Speaker 2: What's, what's one other thing that might've been going on?
Speaker 1: Hm?
Speaker 2: What's one other thing?  You said there's a lot--doing a lot of things going on besides that?
Speaker 1: A lot of things that I could tell you.  I mean, in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Well, just tell us one other thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'll tell you some of--some--all right.  George Jones and I--he, he was one of the first that I ever started touring with.  He wasn't the first, but one of the first and he said--I mean, I, I drank then.  I, I don't drink any more, but I was drinking then.  So we did a show and that we went over to the deejay that emceed the show.  We went over his house and George set down and said, "Now Charley [HistoryMaker Charley Pride], every time I take a drink, you gonna take one."  I said, "Oh, I don't know if I can drink--if I can do that."  I'm not that--you know, I wasn't that--
Speaker 2: Much of a drinker (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) much of a drinker you see, so I'm saying--so he said, "Oh, come on!"  He'd hit one and I'm telling you, I tried to do that.  He got me to keep doing it and I mean, I just got loaded, you know and thought about that's how fast I'd went on--I went home and laid down.  I just went to sleep, you know.  So the next morning, I'm laying here and he was laying there.  We both in the same bed (laughter) when I woke up.  So, the sun's up now and everything.  They wake me up.  They wake him up and everybody said, "Come on, Charley, I want to show you something.  I'll take you out of here."  On my car they had on each side of the car they had, KKK on the wind--painted on the windshield.  And then when I walked out and looked, I said, "Ooh."  I said, "Wait a minute," and they all start laughter.  I said--so, I said this.  I said, "Unh-uh."  I said, "This is--you guys did this to me."  I said, "If they had been here, they wouldn't have left me in here.  They, they would have made more of a ruckus than just putting, putting the little signs on my window."  So they said--they started laughing, so that's, that's all.  It wasn't--you know, it was a gesture of--I, I felt that it was like a camaraderie type thing, you know.  I mean, 'cause I figured it out right away when they told me to come out, you know, show you something or you need to see--
Speaker 2: Were these guys white or black?
Speaker 1: This was George.  This was--this was George Jones and all of the deejays--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --that we'd partied together all night (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  See, you see.  But, but, but once I've--George and I passed out, that's what they--the, the, the guy's house, the deejay and all that was--some of them did that.  They, they cooked it up.  In fact, maybe it might have been George, too, because I passed and probably went to sleep before he did, and they might have had him part of it, too.  But that's one of those things. Well then there's another.  I'm playing Texarkana, Arkansas and I think it's the VFW [Veterans of Foreign Wars] and I don't remember it being nobody there but me as being from the color factory.  And I'm getting ready to go on.  The guy comes over and he's looking at me and reaches his hand out.  He says, "Charley, I'm--," whatever his name was.  I, I wished I could've 'cause I like--would like to have authenticity you know, the name and everything.  He said, "But I think if we could find the year, maybe," unless he was kidding with me.  He said, "I, I--."  He said, "I'm--," whatever his name was, "I'm the grand wizard of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] here in Texarkana and I want to shake hands with a man."  Now, he could have just as well said, "Well, I want to shake hands with you but when you're through--when you're through singing, we gonna tar and feather you."  I mean, it--I was--I was just--I, I, tell--sometimes I tell people that, "Well, he could have just as well."  I had no bodyguards, and I had no nothing like that, you see.  So, so when I got through and, and I, I shook hands and said, "Thank you very much."  You want to shake hands with a man, I said, "Thank you very much."  Well, so but I don't--they say, "So what do you think about it?"  I said, "Well, maybe he might have been kidding."  That's what I said, "Maybe, but he might have been--he might have been sincere, too."  I mean, he might have been truly the wizard there.  I mean, I don't know, but I'm here, so but I--my thing--my comeback to a lot of people that if not he had said that after you get through singing, we're gonna--I don't know what I would've done, but I still think I would've still did my show.  I really believe that, but that's what he said.  So these are little--and when I told you earlier, you know, if you want to call that an incident a thing, but I said from the audience, I've never had--and I said that earlier and I never have.  But, I had--but he wasn't no audience.  That was backstage before I go on, so.  So, I, I thought in my mind to be able to make that statement, I thought.  Now, although from my audiences--I'll put it this way, in America.
Story_ID: 572256
Speaker 1: While I was in Germany playing for the, the troops, there was a group, four, four colored guys.
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: My first year.  See, there was no pictures released on me, nothing.  Just, "Country music, [HistoryMaker] Charley Pride's coming."
Speaker 2: Was that intentional?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, definitely intentional.  It was intentional.  So when I get there, I, I--at that juncture of my career, at that part of it, I would say, "Now I'm Charley Pride, country music singer.  I'm not--I'm not James Brown.  I'm not Michael Jackson.  I'm not--."  I said, "I sing country music and I'm gonna try to give you a real good show."  Bing, I hit it.  So, but just before you go out the door--this is at an NCO [non-commissioned officer] club--it was four colored guys, one of us if you want to put it that way with all of them.  That's the way you can get to it, y'all, them, and us.  One of us--four of us sitting there.  He says--so after I get through singing a song, the four of them was (laughter), just laughing and laughter and, and even when I'm into the song, I said finally--I said, "We're going to have to have a question and answer period here."  See, I wished that I could, you know, get--I had the names on that, too.  And so on this note--I'll tell you this and I'm gonna tell you one more and then I'm not gonna to tell you, 'cause I can go--I can tell you, I can go on and on with it.  But, but I'm telling you this one is that I'm gonna have--I said, "I'm gonna have to have a question and answer period here because it looks like there's a table way up the end, at the end down there having a problem or something."  I said, "I'm gonna just have a question and answer period."  But I said that--my manager, I could--I saw his leg.  He crossed his leg and went going like this (laughter).  I said, "That table in the very far back there," said, "what's, what's wrong?"  Well, about four of them looked at one another like that.  One--and the one gets up.  He said, "Well, yeah!  I'd like to know what you're gonna start doing something for the brothers--for your brothers?"  I said now watch this.  I said, "Well, I understand what you mean."  I said, "You see those--you see that outfit you have on there?"  This was '66 [1966].  I was in in '56 [1956], 19--same, you know, [U.S.] Army.  I was in--and I said, "I noticed when I came in here and made that statement.  It looks just like a line's been drawn here.  Y'all over here, and y'all over there."  I said, "But I tell you, you see I don't think that way and I came here to do a show.  Now anyone, and especially you, if you don't--you didn't pay to get in.  If you don't like the show because I'm here to do a show.  If you don't like it, go.  I won't bother you, and it won't bother you since you're laughter, you're talking."  And so after I said that, I did my show and everybody enjoyed it.  Now, at the end of the show, all four of them came up.  "Well, we wasn't trying to--we weren't trying."  It's a sergeant and I tell you.  Now what I liked about it, he was black, too.  He said, "We weren't trying to put you down."  "Yes, you were."  The sergeant jumps in.  Now, he's one of the--was one of the NCO guys.  He said, "Yeah, I saw you.  You were trying to put him down."  So, so there's a deal where I didn't even have to fight my own battles, see.  He said, "Well, all right."  They ended up saying they were sorry which I appreciated.  But now, the last one I'm gonna tell you is I think--I'm trying to think which one--.  See, I got to on and I'm--that's enough.  I mean.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's enough on that, I mean.
Speaker 2: That's fine.
Story_ID: 572257
Speaker 1: Now, we--we're--we have start--you left baseball--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you have a contract with RCA [RCA Records] and you have your first seven songs that you do--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you have a number one hit.
Speaker 2: No, no, no (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, not yet?
Speaker 2: No, not a number one.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me.
Speaker 2: My first hit record.  You see, it don't have to be a number one for it to be a hit record.  It went to number nine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so, I want to keep it (laughter) the way it was.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: 'Just between You and Me,' it went to number nine.  In fact, it was nominated for a Grammy [Grammy Award].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was my third single, so that, that's the one I said that I used for a measuring stick.  Do you like this song?
Speaker 1: What was the first--when was the first time that you went to the 'Grand Ole Opry'?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-seven [1967], January 1st.
Speaker 1: For New Year's?  New Year's show?
Speaker 2: It's like this (widens eyes).  Ernie Tubb [Ernest Tubb] brought me on (laughter).  I was nervous (whimpers).  Well, like my first song, I was so nervous and I thought when I heard that song, it was going to sound like my stomach was doing when I was recording it.  But if you go and hear it played back, it was just solid, just.  So I said, "Well."  So, I thought about this.  I said, "Well, what happens then with my mind and my, my whole being is when I'm getting ready to do something whatever it is, especially singing then or whatever it might be."  You got to do it again?
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: He said--in other words, I said, "Let's--I, I think I take the attitude that I'm nervous and nervous, but I'm gonna get it done and then fall to pieces."  (Laughter) Get it all done and then fall to pieces.  That's the only way I can explain it 'cause if you listen to it, it's solid right there.
Story_ID: 572258
Speaker 1: So tell about your career?
Speaker 2: It's wonderful.  I have a wonderful career, been very successful.
Speaker 1: When was your first Grammy [Grammy Award]?
Speaker 2: I think--I don't know if it was the gospel or the--I'd have to look.
Speaker 1: Your gospel album ['Pride and Joy: A Gospel Music Collection'] that you're doing now, this is going to be your second.  How many gospel albums do you have?
Speaker 2: No, no.  This would be my third.
Speaker 1: Third?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  This, this album would be my third gospel album.  I only--I've only done one Christmas album, so I need one of those.  I need another brand new album, so I'm gonna be having to do quite a bit of work within the next six to eight months along with all of my touring and all that.
Speaker 1: How many tours do you do a year?
Speaker 2: Well, we, we try to say or think--we try to come up with maybe saying, we're gonna do thirty-five or forty days.  But year before last, we went to England, Scotland, Ireland, and Norway, so that adds--we did the thirty-five or forty at home, but then you add up those, that's--and then when you get through doing things like that, what it's sixty?  So, and my wife [Rozene Dohan Pride] don't like that.  I love--still love what I do and--but we, we, we sit around.  We say we're gonna cut back and we're going--we're going do all that and we trying, but we turned down more dates than we're doing now.  So, that's on a one side of that coin it's beautiful, but on the other side, look at the fans that like we're going to Canada Thursday, and there are some places I haven't been in ten years, and I think we've pretty well sold out at everything.
Speaker 1: I know you have a fan club.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's very active--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --today, but in the '70s [1970s], we're, we're up to the '70s [1970s] and that's really the time that your career really took off.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was my hottest time was from '69 [1969] through seven--maybe '75 [1975].  I was Male Vocalist [Male Vocalist of the Year], Entertainer of the Year in '71 [1971] and repeated again for Male Vocalist in--or Entertainer of the Year rather in '72 [1972], I believe it was [at the Country Music Association Awards].
Speaker 1: So why are you saying it's your hardest time?  You had to do a lot of work (laughter)?  A lot of dates?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I said hottest.
Speaker 1: Oh, hottest.
Speaker 2: Hot.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: That was my hot- I mean, that's what they call when you're--when you're hot, you're hot. I mean, certain points in your career you get hot.
Story_ID: 572259
Speaker 1: And now you're in the Grand Ole Opry [Nashville, Tennessee].  Is there a hall of fame for the Grand Ole Opry?
Speaker 2: Is there a what?
Speaker 1: A hall of fame?  Isn't there--?
Speaker 2: Well, we got a Hall of Fame [Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum, Nashville, Tennessee].  I, I was inducted in there in 2000.
Speaker 1: In 2000.  Okay, that's what I was asking about.  Tell me about that?  How did you feel about that being back in the Grand Ole Opry from the twenty--how many years ago that was (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, you mean--no.  Well, see when I first appeared on the 'Grand Ole Opry,' '67 [1967] and--now, well I--no, I didn't join the Opry.  I wasn't a member.  I didn't join the Opry as a Opry member until '93 [1993].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so you were inducted--
Speaker 2: In the Hall of Fame.
Speaker 1: --in the Hall of Fame.
Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000].
Speaker 1: In 2000.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was that experience like?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was rough.  See, I didn't have no clue that that was happening to me.  The way it happened, I went in with a buddy of mine that, that--but he was one of the ones that I was told--when I, I met Jack Johnson he said, "We got to go Nashville [Tennessee]."  He said, "But it's some people you got to get past--," and I have to tell this one.  And I said, "Okay."  He said, "One of 'em is Faron Young."  I said, "Okay, let's go find him."  And so, we get to Nashville and we start looking.  We looked. Finally about two o'clock, we found him sitting.  I forget the place, but it's near Music Row [Nashville, Tennessee].  He had this bandana on with a Wollensak tape recorder with a microphone plugged in the Wollensak tape recorder (makes noise), really getting at 'em.  So he was sitting just like say I'm sitting here now.  Well, Jack and I came in just about like this.  And Jack Johnson said, "Faron, I would like you meet [HistoryMaker] Charley Pride."  He jumped and flinched like this.  So Jack told me he just subject to say the N word or whatever, you know, when you--when we were introduced.  I said, "Okay."  I said, "I'm going be ready for him, whatever he say."  He said--no, he said, "He might say anything."  I said, "Okay," which I figured that--that's what the ultimate, I guess.  So, he flinched like this and then all of sudden he, he gets up.  He said, "Charley," he gets up, "Sang a fine a song, Charley."  I said, "You do too, Faron."  Now, I don't know where they got a guitar from, but like after about fifteen, twenty minutes singing different--he'd sing one, I'd sing one.  He said, "Well, I be darn.  Here I am sitting--who would've thought I'd be sitting here with a jig singing, singing country music."  And I said, "Okay."  I said, "I thought it was going to be something worse than that."  I said--I said, "You know what I was gonna conversate to you like I'm now?"  I said, "You little puckered mouth bandicoot."  He said, "You was going to say that?  You was going to say that?"  I said, "Yes, that's what I--."  Now, I had heard this again, see.  I'd heard that he said 'cause they were asking would I--you know, people--see, everybody have--you have to have someone to take you out and introduce you on the road because nobody had ever heard of me like anybody else.  I'm just like anybody.  Nobody heard 'cause I opened for--I opened for Ernest Tubb, the Texas Troubadour.  And by the way, you're asking me when, when was I on the 'Opry'?  Nineteen sixty-seven [1967], January 1st and Ernest Tubb brought me on.  Now, I opened for him.  He was one of the ones I opened earlier.  But now, go back now with Faron, but hadn't--I hadn't opened for nobody when this is going on what, what I'm getting back to now about "Hello, Faron."
Story_ID: 572260
Speaker 1: So Faron [Faron Young] says--they tried--in about, you know, people taking the unknowns out like Ernest Tubb did me when I backing up.  I had never been out with anybody.  They had been talking to Faron and asked him what he think about taking [HistoryMaker] Charley Pride out on the show ['Grand Ole Opry'], and my understanding is that, "Ah, I make over two hundred thousand dollars a year.  I ain't about to go out on no--take, take no jig out on--take no chances on no jig out on my show."  Now, I don't know whether he said--I never--before he died, I never asked him or nothing, but I heard that, you know, that he--and he probably might have.  But guess what?  He was one of the first that took me out.  We both--I said that to say this.  Now we both go into the Hall of Fame [Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum, Nashville, Tennessee] with his family and mine at the same time.  How about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  How about that?  That's great.
Story_ID: 572261
Speaker 1: So now, the '70s [1970s] was your hottest time, and you're moving up to the '80s [1980s] and you start to divide your time because now you're getting into broadcasting, banking, all the things that you diversified now, so.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I always want to be as good a businessman as I was an entertainer and I think, I feel that I've pretty well achieved it.  I've had some, you know, losses and all, but I don't like--everybody--you know, I didn't want to lose at nothing.  I didn't, but you be as careful as you can but you still end up investing in, you know, getting hurt and some few, few shysters you know around and all that but, but I always look at this way that I'm still not--I'm not in the soup line, so.  I, I had, in other words, I've had more successes than I have had bad--
Speaker 1: Disappointments (laughter).
Speaker 2: --bad, bad deals and that sort of thing, so.  Plus I have somebody that's--with her by my side, I mean, it's kind of hard not to be successful, and that's my wife [Rozene Dohan Pride], so.  I didn't--I didn't do all these accomplishments by myself and so I've had a lot of help, so--and I admit that, so.
Speaker 1: Well what about the radio stations and--
Speaker 2: Well that was a loss.  That--it, well, we've--
Speaker 1: Well, okay.  So (unclear)--
Speaker 2: That was one of the things--the radio station.  Well at first, the first two in Wichita, Kansas was a success.  Then I, I feel we got--when I say we, my partner and I and partners felt that--got feeling in the same way a lot of other people and that was during the time they thought oil was going to shoot through the stratosphere and all of a sudden, all these--everything went, went south, you see.  So and what banks were doing at that time was loaning money on even equipment like you could go out and drill and all that which ended up rusting after--but our bank that we were involved with did nothing but mostly commercial loans, so it was the--I think--I think I said that my wife sit on the board of directors for about twenty years on that and we, we have--we own about 65 percent of it.  In- well, I, I--my wife didn't want to sell and she's still kind of pat and hit me a little bit about going along with it, with the other people that wanted to sell but.  And, but the thing is that was one of my biggest investments and I, I felt--it, it was, it was solid.  It, it was successful, but I, I wanted to get my hand on my own nuggets, you know.  A little--my nuggets are a little too far from ended for somebody controlling them even though I owned the percentage that I did.  In fact, I was told at one point, I think our bank was about the fifth largest minority bank in America at one point (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was number one in Texas.
Speaker 2: Was it?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Well, the first Texas owned.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 572262
Speaker 1: What about the Charley Pride Theater in Branson [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Well, I was talked into that and that was a--that ended up not being too well.  Bad, not--management, bad management, relationships with, with, with management and ownership and et cetera, CEOs and et cetera.  It was--it was a clog in that.
Speaker 1: But these were things that you, you wanted to try?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: To--
Speaker 2: And then I had a grill company.  Outdoor grills.  I got--I got backed into that the same way I got backed into the theater (laughter) in, in Branson.  It was--it was--it was in Franklin, Tennessee and they said, "If you invest two hundred thousand [dollars], we'll give you 25 percent of the--
Speaker 1: So that's (unclear).
Speaker 2: --of the company."  So we did.  The next thing you know, they said to come back, see because they need capital.  So, they said, "Well if you invest another two hundred thousand, we'll give you 35 percent."  I said, "Ooh, that's almost a half mil [million] now.  We better start looking at this thing."  So anyway, we moved it here and every now it's--and, and we start--.  We had the best grills in America.  It wasn't making no money though.  Have you got it ready (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it barbeque grills?
Speaker 2: Oh, are we still going?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're still going.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: I thought we'd put Matt [Matthew Hickey] to sleep over there.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) No.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Matt, put down 'cause you gonna have to do some editing around some of this stuff.
Speaker 1: So, the, the grills--how long did that last?
Speaker 2: Well, they come say, "Charley [HistoryMaker Charley Pride], we need another seventy-five thousand we can make it."  I said, "Oh boy," you know.  Kiss an angel good, ba, ba, ba.  Another seventy-five.  We even got the Sears, Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] account, of course all that stuff is Kenmore [Kenmore Appliances], you know.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: But I'll tell you whe- when I woke up.  When I went up to McCormick Place in Chicago [Illinois] where everybody demonstrates their, their products (laughter), I never seen so many grill companies in all my life.  I said, "Oh, my goodness.  What did I get into?"  I said, "I better get out of this."  I'll be singing for this grill company.  So that's some of the loss, but the bank, my offer for real estate and the ranch, the property (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me about the ranch.  Tell me about the ranch.
Speaker 2: Well, it--we bought it about twenty-some years ago and now I think--I think it's being sold right now.  (Yawns) Excuse me.
Speaker 1: Did you live there?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: So you just bought it?  What kind of ranch was it?
Speaker 2: We had white face heifers on it and 247 acres up on the other side of McKinney [Texas].  That's it.  And I think Trammell Crow's son-in-law, I think, has offered to buy it or are buying it.  I have people that takes care of all that for me, like my wife [Rozene Dohan Pride] and my attorney and all that.  I sing.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I'll make the money, you take care of it.
Story_ID: 572263
Speaker 1: So of all the things that you have done, what stands out the most for you if you think back over your life?
Speaker 2: I, I, I, I tell you, I think it's kind of hard to pick any one thing. I, I think it's a combination of, of, of all of the struggles, all in the whole, the whole ball of wax.  The appreciation.  I, I, I truly feel that I can say that I appreciate everything from my beginning to this point of success in traveling from there to here.  There's, there's been beautiful things all along the way and I could pick out the Grammys [Grammy Awards].  I can just--the blah, blah--being in the Hall of Fame [Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum, Nashville, Tennessee].  I could go on and on and specify but overall, I've been a blessed man.  I'm, I'm a very blessed person to be able to have come from and did the things and what it took to do it and to look back and, and, and appreciate my efforts and the help that I've had from--so, so it comes in the heading of appreciation and hard work, and, and fortitude.
Story_ID: 572264
Speaker 1: Do you watch 'American Idol' at all?
Speaker 2: Some, not--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) What, what do you think about the industry today?  How, how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's in, it's in trouble.  It's in--it's in disarray.  I, I wish--I wish that it could be better.  But I think it'll rebound--I think it'll rebound.  It's gonna have to because if we keep going.  See I, I just--I don't, I don't downgrade anybody or nothing like that, but there's, there's, there's what you call singing and there's what you call talking.  There's what you call running.  I mean, it's what you call music and the definition sometimes has done got a little bit jaded, I think.  And I'm not--I'm not--I'm not--I'm not singling out anyone, but collectively it's, it's, it's--it needs--it's, you know, it's gonna have--needs some fixing.  Yes.
Speaker 1: If someone wanted to start in the business, what advice would you give to them?
Speaker 2: I don't give advice.  The only thing I can say it's a lot different than when I started.  You could--if you had the talent--like you mentioned 'American Idol.'  When I came along, if you had a good song that even if it was done in your basement and it was good, the voice was good--not no tweaking with to electronic tweaking and nothing like but a, a, a good, natural voice coming out at you and you go and say you're driving by this radio station, you say, "I think I'll stop here at WWW," whatever the station is and say to the deejay, "I got a song that I'd like for you to listen to.  Would you see what you think about it?"  And they would say, "Okay."  So they'd play it.  Say, "Well wait a minute.  That sounds pretty good.  Let's see what the people think."  All right?  (Air quotes) See what the people think.  Now, don't--that don't work anymore.  You got to through the consultant, consultant to consultant and the other consultant, consultant and the other consultant and the, the, the, the director and then the music director and the other director of the director of the next director of the director of the director, so.  Now, this is what you will hear.  "Well wait a minute.  Let's see what the people--."  No, you--this is what you will hear.
Story_ID: 572265
Speaker 1: Are there any musicians, singers today that you think are good?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  It's, it's hundreds--it's just as many (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, tell me who you, who you like, just--
Speaker 2: I like--I like anyone that, that can sing and as a singer that has--.  When you say 'American Idol,' there're some peop- some wonderful talent.  I mean, Studdard [Ruben Studdard].  Oh, the, the guy that came from the, and the, and the girl from North Carolina.  It's some--lot of singers, but it's a lot of other singers out there will never be heard.  Maybe could even be, be better--sing better than them, or just as good, will never be heard.  Then you got some that, that they got to tweak their voice up and do--and, and you pay enough money, they'll--well, you've seen the old venue where people that they didn't even sing, they just manufactured them.  I mean, I forget but it's been--
Speaker 1: Milli Vanilli.
Speaker 2: Was that what it--Vanilli.  Well that's--well, I'm--I don't--I don't like to specifically--I'm not putting anybody down, but I said, "If that was the--if that's what came to fruition--what came to be--to like to be true, then there, there it is."
Speaker 1: Well, let me put it this way.  What's in your CD [compact disc] player?  Who do you like to listen to?
Speaker 2: I, I got--well, a buddy of mine--and that's where this came from here.  My, my booking agent just walked in again.  I have a, a, a, a, a CD with Ray Price.  His, it's--Ray Price is--he used to be my neighbor.  Of all of his Cherokee album, Cherokee--they called it Cherokee album with all of the--when he was singing "Heartaches by the Number" and "You Done Me Wrong" and all of those.  I play those--that's one of my favorites.  Then I've got another mixture of George Strait and then I've got Sam Cooke, a part of him.  I got Brook Benton.  I try to play some of--you know, little bit of him.  Had a little Lawrence Welk if I can find, you know.  I was just getting ready to try to order songs that Nat King Cole had, one called "Ramblin' Rose" was on Life--it's called 'Lifetime Love Romantic Songs' [sic. 'Lifetime of Romance - It Must be Love'] or something like that.  And there was Mel Carter, Bobby Vinton and Al Martino, Connie Francis.  It's, it's on right now on and I'm, I'm thinking about ordering that right now 'cause see those were songs--and "Mack the Knife" by, by Bobby Darin.  So, I love music.  I mean--and I think that's music but, you know, I'm my age of what I am, but I just, I, I--you know.  I, I--as I said, I don't want to kick anybody, but there's certain kind of music that's supposed to be music ain't music today to me.  I mean, but now you said, "Well, get specific."  I just said it while--I said there's music and if, (pause) I mean, they say--well, people will say, "Well, what do you think about rap?"  I said, "Well, I, I don't understand it first of all."  I don't understand rap no more than I do just jazz.  I don't understand jazz.  Dixieland I can understand if it got words with it, but I've tried to--they said to appreciate jazz music, you have to--I, I was told you have to listen to all of what's going on.  I said, "Okay."  So I've tried that, but seemed to me that's all what's happening is something's going on, but I haven't connected what was going on to the sense of what I've been--what's been tried to convey to me to, to, to absorb, so.  And it's to each his own.  There's a lot of people--they don't like--they don't like country music.  They don't like blues.  They don't like--but see, I'm, I'm a person, I said it earlier.  I love the three basic ingredients of American music: country, gospel and the blues.  And then all the other that's good, that, that seems to be the do it in their craft and do good that I can understand, I love that, too.  So that's just my answer right there.
Story_ID: 572266
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I'm a pretty nice fellow.  I think I'm a good person.  I try to be.  I don't--I don't--I don't try to hurt anybody.  I try to help people before I'll hurt anybody.  I pray a lot.  I think--I would hope everybody else would think of--if they don't but think about doing it because I do--I do feel that my accomplishments here where I am today was not only--wasn't, wasn't accomplished just by my own--just 'cause I was so good, or I was--it has to be some more to it than that.  As I said, I think I was mentioning that earlier that I think you hear from more than just--there's a certain amount of destiny.  There's a certain amount of fortitude and effort you put in to.  When you're on this planet--I just don't believe nobody if you try to find that niche or that--find that thing for you, I choose to believe that there's no one on this earth was just--was born to just get up, eat, sleep and then get up to eat and never do anything.  I mean, there's some that does it, but I, I think that if you try to find a place and, and, and, and, and, and try to rely on trying to achieve whatever it might be, I think you--I think you--I believe you'll be helped by the one that can help you.  And now that's, that's the best way I can put it.
Story_ID: 572267
Speaker 1: You have a new album coming out soon, a new gospel album ['Pride and Joy: A Gospel Music Collection'].  After that, you're going to do less touring, but you are going to be touring so that your, your fans (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Well, yes.  My thing is is that when people ask me "Have you retired" or "You haven't retired yet," and I answer it like my wife [Rozene Dohan Pride].  She used to--this is the way she usually answered.  It's like this.  She says, "Ever heard of Bob Hope or George Burns, people like that?  Well, that's--my husband is in that."  In fact, that's my, kind of my mentor is Bob Hope.  I kind of like his success and all, and I've met him and worked with him.  Say, "Well, my husband's kind of in that--."  See, people like that in that category, they don't retire, they just die.  So I guess I'll be--and, and for example, too, my bass player, we were sitting in the--in the airport in Minneapolis [Minnesota].  I think it was Minneapolis, and he's reading the paper.  He says, "Ah, [HistoryMaker] B. B. King just turned eighty and he's still doing a hundred and fifty."  I said, "How many dates?"  He said, "Well you see, sure can--it can be done can't it," and he looks over at me.  When he says that, (laughter) I said, "Why are you looking at me?"  "Ah, well I like my job."  (Laughter) So, you know, we'll see.
Speaker 1: So you're not looking to retire because you like what you do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not looking to--.  I love--I don't like--I, I--
Speaker 1: No, you love what you do.
Speaker 2: I love to sing and get in front of those people, still do.  And, but I, I, I'm getting to the point now where I am thinking about--you know, when am I--you know, I'd like to smell the rose a little bit, too, and do a little more golf--playing a little more golf and doing a few other things than just still grind--still, still holding the nose to the grindstone.  The thing here is that I--and I've started thinking a little differently.  When I was twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, fifty-five, sixty, ooh.  Hold on a minute.  Okay.  Now the next decade, seventy, eighty and ninety, wait a minute.  When these next ten, twenty, thirty years, I'm gonna be way up there.  Now what do I want to do other than just keep on, 'cause I have my fans.  You got to keep singing.  When we were twenty-five and thirty, that's another thing they'd like.  I'm, I'm not able to get--have a big stomach and spread out like this and, and retire and do what they're doing.  They said, "When we retire, we're gonna go to--we're gonna go to Hawaii next week."  They said, "But when you're gonna come back and sing for us?"  I said, "But I'd like to go to Hawaii and do a little--".  (Laughter) So it's that--it's, it's a matter of making a decision.  I'm-, but I think it'll be fine.  It'll be.  I'll be all right.  I think it'll be a point to where the right decision will be made.
Story_ID: 572268
Speaker 1: Any final thoughts about your life, your career?
Speaker 2: I, I think there's always going to be another, another plateau or another, another something you'd like to accomplish.  I think that if you're healthy and, and you're--what I mean by healthy and you're, you're thinking and your mind is, is solid and your body is in pretty good shape, I mean, I think you can do a lot of things.  You might not--I'm not, I'm not, I'm not able to run as fast as I used to, but I can run.  I--my fans think I'm singing better now than I ever sang, so.  But I don't say that's gonna last forever or nothing like but so far, I like to hear that when I go on stage and get through and they come out of those seats and standing ovations and all that.  I say, "Well, I'm--I, I will try to keep singing for 'em as long as I can."  But if I ever get to where I'm not able to do that though now, then that's when you'll see me exit.  I will exit.  And if it's not me doing it, it'll be somebody else around me that will do it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, we're going to look forward to seeing your life on the big screen.
Speaker 2: I hope so.
Speaker 1: That's going to be something that America needs to see.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And we're just so happy that you have taken this time, because we know your time is precious to sit down and document your life so that generations and generations will be able to hear and see you talk about your life and know that they can accomplish.  They can come from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Sledge, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: I just went back two years ago and talked to the fourth and fifth graders.  It was a wonderful experience.  I mean, they, they just--they gave me a--they chanted and chanted and standing up dancing and when I came to the school and I talked to them all and did a couple of songs for them.  Then they left in the buses.  They left in the buses chanting, "Charley [HistoryMaker Charley Pride], Charley, Charley" as they were driving off.  Where I used to walk four and five miles to get there and back they, they had buses, you see.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So this is going to be wonderful and we, we thank you so much for the opportunity.
Speaker 2: By the way, I didn't charge them to go down there and do that.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 572269
Speaker 1: Oh, Bogie Busters up in Dayton, Ohio.  Used to go to that quite a lot.  It lasted from about--I'd have to paraphrase.  I'd have to--I wish to--you know, I could tell you how long, but it, it was a very, very successful tournament by a guy by the name of Cy Laughter in Dayton, Ohio, Bogie Busters.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Ready.
Speaker 1: Royce, he's a state senator, I believe.  State cong- state senator, I believe.  This is state senator named Royce Clayton [sic. HistoryMaker Royce West].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Ready.
Speaker 2: Yep.  You want a--that one there?  That's my good buddy, Nolan Ryan, The Ryan Express.  He's now in the Hall of Fame [National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum, Cooperstown, New York].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Now, ready.  Okay, Mr. Pride [HistoryMaker Charley Pride], can you tell us (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that, that picture there--and I can tell you when it was--it was in Shreveport, Louisiana at the Independence Bowl.  I forget what year, but these--that's General Omar Bradley, one of the five star generals.  One of the five that we have--five, five star generals.  He's one of 'em that was in World War II [WWII] with Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] and George Marshall and, and the like.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's me on stage somewhere.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Do you know when?
Speaker 2: Probably fifteen--at least fifteen, twenty years ago.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  Ready.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This picture is from Bogie Busters, so the very first picture that was taken was at the tournament.  This picture was taken at that tournament where George Bush [President George Walker Bush], number forty-three, and Jackie Sherrill as the coach for the--once was SM--I mean, for Texas A&M [Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas] and also Mississippi [Mississippi State University, Starkville, Mississippi]
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right and ready.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this picture was from Albuquerque, New Mexico at my tournament, the Charley Pride--SunWest Charley Pride golf tournament Senior Golf Classic [Sunwest Bank Charley Pride Senior Golf Classic].  Bob Hope came that year.
Speaker 1: That--this is a picture that Willie Nelson and I we were both on the board.  I think he was on the board, too, of the CMA, Country Music Association board--CMA board and we went up to Washington [D.C.] to give--present President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] with a--with a bowl from the CMA and also a proclamation that I have in my hand, and I think that was in 19--.  What year he was in '78 [1978], '79 [1979]?  Somewhere in there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This was in Albuquerque, New Mexico.  I think that he was there to fight.  The guy lived--he lived in New Mexico.  He was really a lightweight--light heavyweight and of course Ali [Muhammad Ali] beat him.  I forget his name, but I think you can look it up, his opponent.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I got your mother [Tessie Stewart Pride].  Now.  Okay.  Do you know--I have the--I'm focusing on your mother's picture.  Do you know when that was taken or approximatly?
Speaker 1: There was a--see, she would be alive today, she would be ninety-eight?  She was forty-seven when she passed.  The year she passed right there.  She don't look forty-seven, but.  So forty-seven from--it was 1956 when she passed.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And that's your father [Mack Pride, Sr.]?
Speaker 1: Yep.  He was born in 1907.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Do you think that picture was about the same time?
Speaker 1: No.  He was about thirty something.  They were trying to get him in the [U.S.] Army in World War II.
