Story_ID: 668750
Speaker 1: I'll begin by slating.  I'm [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole.  I will be the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Today is October 5th, 2016.  We are at Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP] at 4 Times Square in New York City [New York, New York].  And, judge, I'd like for you to say and spell your name and tell me your birth date, please.
Speaker 2: Barrington Daniels Parker [HistoryMaker Barrington D. Parker, Jr.], B-A-R-R-I-N-G-T-O-N, D-A-N-I-E-L-S, Parker, P-A-R-K-E-R, and I was born August 21st, 1944.
Speaker 1: And what do you do?
Speaker 2: I am a judge on the United States Court of Appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit].
Story_ID: 668751
Speaker 1: So, we're gonna start with what we call People magazine type questions, easy, quick ones.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Hamburgers.
Speaker 1: And your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Season?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And is there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm on vacation all the time.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I take lots of vacations.
Speaker 1: Do you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite quote or saying?
Speaker 2: I did the best I could with what I had.
Story_ID: 668752
Speaker 1: So, now, I'd like to talk about your family and we'll go--we'll talk about both sides of your, your family, but let's start with your mother.  Could you tell me her name, her birth date, where she was born, and tell me about her?
Speaker 2: Marjorie Holloman Parker.  She was born in Winton, North Carolina, December 21st, 1917, I think.
Speaker 1: And can you tell me about her?  Tell me--so, she was born there.  Does she have siblings?
Speaker 2: As I said, she was born in Winton, North Carolina.  My grandfather, her father, was a Baptist minister.  Mother was a schoolteacher.  They moved to Washington, D.C., shortly after she was born.  She had three sisters [Carolyn Holloman Troupe, Jessie Holloman and Grace Holloman Davis] and a brother [John L.S. Holloman, Jr.], all within ten or twelve years of each other.
Speaker 1: And is she the eldest?
Speaker 2: No.  She was the--in the middle.  She was the third in terms of age.  So, they moved to Washington.
Speaker 1: Do you know why they moved?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My grandfather in addition to being a minister, before he--actually, before he became a minister, was a Latin teacher in a normal school in North Carolina where he met my grandmother.
Speaker 1: And what was his name?
Speaker 2: John L.S. Holloman [John L.S. Holloman, Sr.].  He had gone to Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia].  My grandmother had gone to Hampton [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  She was class of 1908.  She was one of--she had three sisters, so all four of them graduated from Hampton before World War I [WWI].
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: They moved to Washington because public education in that part of North Carolina essentially ended at eighth grade and if you wanted further education, you could pay--you had to pay for it, so they were attracted to Washington by the public schools and by a professional opportunity for my grandfather.  He was called to be the pastor of Second Baptist Church in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: So, I wanna--let's go back to your grandmother.  What was her name?
Speaker 2: Rosa Victoria Holloman [Rosa Holloman].
Speaker 1: And she and all of her sisters went to Hampton.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What--can--do you know from their parents?  So, what did her parents do?
Speaker 2: Her father was a farmer and postmaster in a small town outside of Charlottesville [Virginia].  I don't know anything about her mother who died while she was relatively young.
Speaker 1: Did, did you know your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Very well.
Speaker 1: And so did she talk about the, the, the notion of everyone going to college--such an early time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, everyone in the family--I mean, I, I (unclear)--everybody in my family went to college.  I mean, I--on both sides of my family, all of my grandparents had college degrees and we're talking roughly before 1920 or World War I.
Speaker 1: And, so they--the sisters all went to Hampton.  You mentioned the--your--their father was a farmer.  How far back can you trace your mother's family?  Can you go back to slavery?
Speaker 2: It's--yes.  He, as I recall, was born into slavery and then--
Speaker 1: Your grandfather.
Speaker 2: Yeah--no, great-grandfather (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Great--excuse me.
Speaker 2: Great-grandfather, and then made--was, you know, a free man in the late 19th century in rural Virginia.
Speaker 1: And so educational opportunity is what brought your, your grandmother's family to--
Speaker 2: Washington (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) D.--to Washington, D.C.--
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 668753
Speaker 1: And, please tell me your father's name and birth date and where he's from.
Speaker 2: My father [Barrington D. Parker, Sr.] is--I, I was originally junior, but since he passed, I don't use the junior, and he was born in Rosslyn, Virginia, in 1915, died in 1992.  My mother [Marjorie Holloman Parker] died in nineteen ninety--in--I'm sorry, in 2004--2006.
Speaker 1: And did your--can you tell me about your father's family?
Speaker 2: My father's father was born in Rosslyn, Virginia, but he lived most of his life in, in Washington, D.C., in Georgetown.  Georgetown until I'm not sure of the date was actually a separate community and was one of the principle African American communities around Washington through the 19th century.  So, he worked various jobs there, but was always active in the Republican Party, so he became the--it was the [President] William Howard Taft administration appointment.  He became the postmaster in Georgetown.
Speaker 1: And this is--
Speaker 2: G- this is George A. Parker [George Parker] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) A. Parker, right.
Speaker 2: He was a very--as I said, he was an active lifelong Republican and the job he got was a patronage job from the William Howard Taft administration.  And so he had this job until Woodrow Wilson [President Thomas Woodrow Wilson] came in, and Woodrow Wilson basically purged African Americans from the Washington, D.C., civil service and he was a victim of that purge.  But, he was going to law school at night at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], which at that point still had a night law school, so he continued and passed the bar and practiced for many years and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so let's go back for a second because the fact that he was a Republican, this was around--what, what year are we talking about?
Speaker 2: We're--well, 1910, 1920, in there.
Speaker 1: And can you give some context on blacks in the Republican Party at that time?
Speaker 2: There, there were a lot of very active African Americans in the Republican Party.  The irony, of course, is that in those days, the much more progressive of the two was--parties was the Republican Party because all of the virulent southern racists who essentially not only controlled the Democratic Party but controlled [U.S.] Congress were Democrats.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, which has sort of flipped over time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 668754
Speaker 1: So, your father [Barrington D. Parker, Sr.] went to law school at Howard University [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: This is my grandfather we're talking about (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, your grandfather, when Howard University had a night school.  And then after a while, the school was closed, was it not?
Speaker 2: The school was closed, so there were a lot of African Americans in Washington, D.C., who wanted that kind of professional credential, but Howard was clo- Howard closed its night school--
Speaker 1: Why?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: No.  But, if you go to--I think they had accreditation problems and I, I don't know--I mean, I, I don't know why they closed it to be--to be perfectly frank with you.  And he ultimately in the mid-'20s [1920s] opened a night law school for African Americans, the Robert Terrell Law School.
Speaker 1: Right.  And the--he--did he open it with partners or?
Speaker 2: There were but I can't give you any details on that.  But, he, he until the school closed was, was the dean of the school and, you know, he was referred to in Washington as Dean Parker [George Parker].
Speaker 1: And so, this--I believe that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So if you worked in the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] or worked in the interior department [U.S. Department of the Interior] and one aspired to be a lawyer, that's where you went--
Speaker 1: And this was a--
Speaker 2: Geor- Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.] had a night program, but it was segregated.
Speaker 1: And this was the Robert H. Terrell School?
Speaker 2: Robert H. Terrell Law School [Washington, D.C.] .
Speaker 1: And who was Robert H. Terrell?
Speaker 2: He was a lawyer in Washington who later became a judge and he was one of the early black graduates of Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His wife was a very prominent activist in Washington named Mary Church Terrell and his father-in-law was a major political figure in Tennessee politics called Robert Church [Robert Reed Church, Sr.].
Speaker 1: And how long did that school stay open?
Speaker 2: Until I think it was 1948, 1950, whenever Georgetown integrated.
Speaker 1: Ah, so it was as a result of integration that, that it wasn't needed?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, that was--that's your grandfather did he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His wife, my mother's--my father's mother was a music teacher.  She gave piano lessons.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Maude Daniels [Maude Daniels Parker].
Speaker 1: Did she teach at her home?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Graduate of Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio].
Speaker 1: And how far back can you trace your father's family?
Speaker 2: I don't know much.  I haven't looked at that.  You may get some help from that, but don't know much about any specifics about--
Speaker 1: You don't--do, do you know if you can trace them back to slavery or do you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --you don't know that?
Speaker 2: I mean, I assume I--I, I assume they're traceable.  I haven't done it.
Speaker 1: So, his family, what did George Parker's father do?
Speaker 2: Don't know.
Story_ID: 668755
Speaker 1: When did your parents [Marjorie Holloman Parker and Barrington D. Parker, Sr.] meet?
Speaker 2: They met in--
Speaker 1: When or where?  You know, do you remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They, they, they met in Washington [D.C.].  My grand- my grandfather--both of my grandfathers [John L.S. Holloman, Sr. and George Parker] were friends.  I mean, those people--everyone--they sort of knew each other.  And I knew they went to--I think they may have been in Shaw Junior High [Shaw Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] together, but they were certainly classmates at Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], class of 1932.
Speaker 1: And this is at--this is obviously still when schools are segregated, so--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in D.C., there was--other than Dunbar, was there any other school that the people--that black folks were going to?  But that was the main--
Speaker 2: What do you mean any other school?
Speaker 1: Well, in terms of--this was high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, was that the main high school for, for blacks to attend?
Speaker 2: I don't know what you mean by main.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was Dunbar--I mean, there was Dunbar, there was Armstrong [Samuel Chapman Armstrong Technical High School; Armstrong Manual Training School, Washington, D.C.], and there was Phelps [Seth Ledyard Phelps Vocational School; Seth Ledyard Phelps Architecture, Construction and Engineering High School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Those were the three--
Speaker 2: Armstrong was a--was a technical school and Phelps was kind of a voc- vocational high school.  But, Dunbar was the academic--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --school.
Speaker 1: Thank you for clarifying.  And when did they marry?
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-nine [1939], September 1st.
Story_ID: 668756
Speaker 1: Can you tell me a little bit about your mother's career?
Speaker 2: Well, she [Marjorie Holloman Parker] graduated from Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] in 1932, then she went to Miner Teachers College [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] and she graduated in 1936.  She taught elementary school in Washington [D.C.] and over the course of that, she went out to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and got a master's degree, I'm not quite sure when, but ultimately in 1951, she got a Ph.D. from the University of Chicago.
Speaker 1: So, she was in school as you were growing up, in part at least (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In part.
Speaker 1: In part.
Speaker 2: She was still teaching.  She would go--I know--I remember she'd go out to Chicago [Illinois] for the summers and there was a period when she had to be in residence for her graduate studies.  I don't remember that.  My father [Barrington D. Parker, Sr.] was a classmate of hers at Dunbar as I--as I mentioned.  He went to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania].  He was class of 1936 at Lincoln.  He was the salutatorian of the class and he was captain of the football team.  And then from Lincoln, he went to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where he was intending to do a Ph.D. in economics, didn't like it, so he got a master's degree and was recruited to the relatively new Dillard University in New Orleans [Louisiana] by very good friend of his from D.C. named Allison Davis [W. Allison Davis].  And he taught at Dillard for a couple of years and then he went up to Chicago planning to finish his doctorate, but switched to the law school, and then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was he teaching?
Speaker 2: At Dillard?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know the specific courses.  And then he graduated from law school I believe it was in 1948, and went into practice with my grandfather [George Parker].
Speaker 1: So, economics, he, he didn't care for.  Was law the natural approach since that was his--his father did?  Or do you know why he chose law?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I mean he wanted to be a lawyer.
Story_ID: 668757
Speaker 1: You were born in '44 [1944].  Are you--so tell me, where were you living when you were born?
Speaker 2: I was living with--
Speaker 1: You're--I mean, where--no, so tell me, where--like, where did you grow up?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My grandparents lived at 403 P Street, which was basically New Jersey Avenue and P.  I frankly don't remember exactly where I was living when I was born.  But, the first residence I remember was at 125 T Street, so that's right--basically 2nd, and 2nd Street, Rhode Island [Avenue] and T Street all basically come together.  So that's the first home I remember, although we spent lots of time at my grandp- mother's house 'cause we would go there after school.  And my parents [Marjorie Holloman Parker and Barrington D. Parker, Sr.] then after they got off from work would go over there.  We would all eat dinner together.
Speaker 1: At your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And then I had cousins, so all the cousins were there also.
Speaker 1: When you look back on your childhood, what--what's your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Living on T Street.
Speaker 1: What was the neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: It was a wond- it was a good neighborhood.  You know, I have very fond memories of growing up in D.C. I, I--you know, I, I assume my, my parents' memories would've been quite different from mine, but we had a--we had a, a, (pause) a vibrant, terrific community.  People went to the same churches, went to--everybody went to pub- the same public schools, new people in the neighborhood.  People in the neighborhoods were, you know, actively engaged.  There were these civic associations that people belonged to.  All the parents in the school, you know, joined the PTA [Parent Teacher Association].  And I remember the--you know, the neighborhood I lived in in Washington, you know, as a consequence of, you know, racial segregation, you had this wonderful, you know, mix of people in the neighborhood.  There were people who taught at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], people who worked--I mean, my parents had a very good friend who was a waiter at Chevy Chase country club [Chevy Chase Club, Chevy Chase, Maryland].  But all--you know, the professionals all, such as they were, lived in the same neighborhood, school teachers, some small business owners, a lot of, you know, mainly government workers.  And, you know, such as it was, it was a kind of a solid middle class neighborhood.
Speaker 1: And you say it was integrated at--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It was not?
Speaker 2: It was not.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  So, it was a, a middle class black neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Middle class black neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: No--the irony is--my, my grandparents lived at--as I said, on, on, on P Street.  When they moved into the neighborhood, which was around World War I [WWI], it was integrated, so there was--the next door neighbor was a white man who was a colonel in the [U.S.] Army, and there were whites on the--on the block.  This is the 400 block of P Street and so I assume that would've been the same in that general area.  And my mother had--says one of her, her early recollections of the neighborhood was there was a major Ku Klux Klan [KKK] convention in Washington, D.C., and they, they marched down Pennsylvania Avenue, 1922 [sic. 1925], and so she remembers coming out of the house as the people she knew on the block (laughter), folks in white sheets.
Speaker 1: And knowing who it was?
Speaker 2: Well, they had sheets on (laughter), but there is circumstantial evidence (laughter).
Story_ID: 668758
Speaker 1: When you look back at your neighborhood growing up [in Washington, D.C.] and it could be at, at, at your grandmother's or at your house, I want you to recall the sights, sounds, and smells that you remember from kid.  Like, the food, what, what--it--are there any--
Speaker 2: It was just regular food.  It was--
Speaker 1: What was regular food for you?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the dinners were typically, you know, meat or chicken, a vegetable, which was typically canned, and a starch, and bread and butter, and same food everybody in the neighborhood eat--ate.  I mean, the--this was before cooking became a--you know, a hobby or anything special.  I mean, my grandmother was basically each night cooking dinner for like a dozen people, so no one paid much--I mean, you--it just wasn't expected to have gourmet food.  The food, you know, was perfectly wonderful, perfectly nice.
Speaker 1: What were the special occasions that you celebrated together as a family?
Speaker 2: Oh, Thanksgiving, Christmas, birthdays but nothing like, you know, involved our kids.  A lot of the special occasions were around, you know, church events [at Second Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.], you know, the Baptist mission picnic, things like that.
Story_ID: 668759
Speaker 1: Were you actively involved in the church as a child?
Speaker 2: I mean, we had to go.  I don't know whether (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it going Sunday?  Was it--did you--were there other days of the week that you had to go too?
Speaker 2: It was a--this is the way it worked.  We had to--we were expected to go to either Sunday school or church on Sunday.  On those days, there was an eleven o'clock service and a four o'clock service.  The only thing that involved us was the eleven o'clock service.  And so my [maternal] grandfather [John L.S. Holloman, Sr.], the minister, would drive around Washington [D.C.] and pick up all the grandchildren for Sunday school, and then having gone to Sunday school, we didn't have to go to church.  So, what happened very often was we would get dropped off at the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.], so we would just wander around the Smithsonian for a couple of hours and then one of--either my parents [Marjorie Holloman Parker and Barrington D. Parker, Sr.] or one of the aunts would come pick us up.
Speaker 1: And who was part of this group?
Speaker 2: My cousins.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me who they are?
Speaker 2: My br--well, my brother, Jason Parker, who is a year older than I am, my cousin, Otis Troupe.  We had cousins, Welford [Welford Jackson (ph.)] and Wilbur Jackson [ph.], and the--that was essentially--later, there were--I mean, there were a couple of younger cousins, but at, at that point, that was the--that was the crowd.
Speaker 1: And, so you were dropped off at the Smithsonian, so were you then wandering around looking at the art?  Did you--did you grow (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I was at the museum.
Speaker 1: Oh, so--
Speaker 2: And it was great.  I mean, I--it was--you know, it was quite--it was--it was different than it is today.  I mean, in those days, the museums basically just had, you know, a series of glass cases, but it was endlessly interesting.
Speaker 1: Were there any favorite things that you would visit in the museum?
Speaker 2: We'd go--we'd go to--what do you mean favorite things would you visit?
Speaker 1: Well, there's so many things to see at the museum.
Speaker 2: Well, that's the whole point.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you, you, you--it was endless exploration.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I mean, it wasn't like we went back to the same thing and looked at it every Sunday.
Speaker 1: Got it.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: You could just--I mean, you could just spend days and days wandering the halls.  And then rare--sometimes, after being picked up, what is now the National Gallery which was then the Mellon art gallery [National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.] had a cafeteria that was integrated, so I remember going to that.  Occasionally, we'd go to Union Station [Washington, D.C.] where the restaurant was integrated.  But, you know, people didn't--we didn't--you know, there was no great restaurant scene in Washington.  People really didn't eat out very much.  But, I do remember going to those places.
Speaker 1: But the fact that there were those couple of integrated restaurants was unusual, was it not?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Yeah.  I, I don't remember--I couldn't tell you when the Mellon gallery was opened and the, the--can't give you the back story on Union Station.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, but--so around what age are you when you're--?
Speaker 2: We're talking five, six, seven, eight, in that--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --in that age group.
Story_ID: 668760
Speaker 1: Where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: I went to Monroe elementary school [Monroe School, Washington, D.C.] where my mother [Marjorie Holloman Parker] taught.  Early on, she taught at--then went to teach at Miner Teachers College [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], but don't, don't remember the exactly the time.  Then, I went to Banneker Junior High [Benjamin Banneker Junior High School; Benjamin Banneker Academic High School, Washington, D.C.], and then I went to McKinley High School [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.] where I graduated in 1961.
Speaker 1: And, so you were very young, you're in elementary school when you're at the school where your mother taught.  Did she teach you?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No.  How was it going to school and having your mother teaching there at the same time?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I mean, it was not a big deal.  All the teachers were--they were her friends (laughter).  Everyone knew one another, so it wasn't--you know, they were all either AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] or Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] and they'd all grown up together in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] by and large.  So, you know, it wasn't really remarkable or nothing that I remember about it.
Story_ID: 668761
Speaker 1: What kind of a kid were you?  What, what was fun for you?  I mean, as, as, as a kid in school, what did you enjoy?  Any particular subjects?
Speaker 2: It was elementary school, so it was all--you just sat in class all day.
Speaker 1: And were--and then when you--when you went to junior high school, it was--
Speaker 2: Banneker [Benjamin Banneker Junior High School; Benjamin Banneker Academic High School, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Banneker.  And was this still a segregated school?
Speaker 2: No.  I graduated from Banneker in 1958 and the school was integrated in 1954.
Speaker 1: So you, you--when you started there, it was just shortly after it had integrated.
Speaker 2: No, Banneker had always been an African American school.  McKinley [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.] had been a white school.  By the time I got there, it was--certainly by the time I left it was probably 95 percent black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I remember, we were in Monroe elementary school [Monroe School, Washington, D.C.] and we were just sitting in our classroom one afternoon, and the school had two blocks, and it was almost as though there were two school--two smaller schools that had been combined 'cause there was a, a, a block that had eight classrooms and then a--sort of a--another building that had eight classrooms and it was joined by a corridor, and we were sitting there one afternoon and I remember hearing cheering, clapping.  And the principal had been working her way classroom to classroom, and the prin- this--so, this was May 17th, 1954, and the principal told us that the [U.S.] Supreme Court had just ordered--declared school segregation unconstitutional [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  So, here we were elementary students and, you know, there had not been any discussion about it.  We hadn't--I mean, it wasn't anything that was, you know, discussed in school or anything like that.  I don't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And had your mother [Marjorie Holloman Parker] ever discussed it as it--
Speaker 2: I don't--I don't even remember discussions about the pending--you know, the, the litigation that ran up to it, but we all kind of instinctually knew that, you know, every--things had all--had, had in a moment changed for us.  The principal was a woman named Mrs. O.D. Brown, Olivette Davis Brown, and if memory serves me correctly, her brother--
Speaker 1: Was Brown?
Speaker 2: --was Benjamin Davis [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.].
Speaker 1: And tell us who Benjamin Davis was.
Speaker 2: He was a colonel in the Army Air Force [U.S. Army Air Corps; U.S. Air Force] in World War II [WWII] and he was later secretary of transportation in Ford's--President Ford's [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] cabinet, and before that, he commanded, I believe it was the Third Air Force [sic.] in the Pacific, and he also commanded the Tuskegee Airmen during World War II.
Speaker 1: So, after this announcement, and you, as a young, kid knew that there would be change, then, then what did the change look like?
Speaker 2: Well, all of a sudden the restaurants and public accommodations in Washington [D.C.] were desegregated.  They actually may have been desegregated just before that.  I think Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] came in and did that.  So, the movie theaters, all the restaurants and so forth opened up.
Speaker 1: Do you remember before?  Do you remember seeing the signs for colored and white and--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You don't remember that?
Speaker 2: No.  There were--there were three movie theaters along U Street and that's where we went to the theater.  And actually, there was one right across from us on T Street, the Sylvan Theater [Washington, D.C.], so the fact that the ones down on F Street were segregated was of--was really of no consequence to us.  You'd see all the movies--
Speaker 1: And so since (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you wanted.
Speaker 1: --since you had your places where you went anyway, did it--did this desegregation affect you?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I mean, it didn't physically affect us.  What--you know, what you--what--I, I think what affected us, certainly me subsequently, was, you know, the desegregation battles were all on the media, on the TV and so forth.  So, those affected us, you know, 'cause once you saw those, you know, what those kids had to go through, you know, going to school in New Orleans [Louisiana] and places like that, you knew--
Speaker 1: So, the--you saw the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) there were--
Speaker 1: --context--
Speaker 2: --there were problems.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 668762
Speaker 1: But in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], at least in your experience, it, it wasn't--it wasn't a dramatic shift because you were still going to the places that you went to before?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we went to the same schools, but, but in--but, all of a sudden, we went to McKinley High School [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.], which had been a white high school, and the whites had started to leave Washington, so the, the African American school--colored schools were crowded and, and had inferior (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is what year when you started McKinley?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-eight [1958].
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And the facilities at the white schools were much better.  So, McKinley was--people stopped going to--I mean, McKinley kind of replaced Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.].  It was much bigger, it had much better facilities, and they had the--it was--it was--it was a magnet school.  The other big change in Washington which I don't recall but I know about it is there was a [U.S.] Supreme Court case in 1948 or 1949--I'm having (unclear) and will come to me in a minute, that, that outlawed racial covenants, real estate covenants, and there was a companion case involving the District of Columbia, which I'll--name will come to me in just a minute.  And, I think it was Hurd versus Hodges [sic. Hurd v. Hodge, 1948] was the case, and the major Supreme Court case was Shelley versus Kraemer [Shelley v. Kraemer, 1948].  So, as a consequence of those decisions, Washington started to desegregate residentially.  So, I--vague--I remember that the dividing line was like 14th Street.  It was either 11th Street or 14th Street; I can't remember quite when, but if you went west of that, it was all white.  And then in the '50s [1950s] after these deseg- school desegregations, racial covenants were no longer enforceable, so if you could get a willing white seller you could buy the house.  So, people were gradually spreading out.  And so that's why McKinley was important because they had this government funded pre-engineering program.  I mean, nobody was much interested in being an engineer, but every--but would like--if you said you were, you could go to McKinley Tech (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So, people from all over town came to McKinley and it was--you know, it was a great--it was a good--
Speaker 1: And, and so did you say you wanted to be an engineer?
Speaker 2: Probably.  My brother [Jason Parker] was there--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then, you know, a lot of the teachers knew my parents [Marjorie Holloman Parker and Barrington D. Parker, Sr.] and I just sort of showed up one day and--
Speaker 1: There you were.
Speaker 2: And there I was, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, so while it's a different school, did you get a sense that there was--how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had white teachers.  Those were the first big bunch of white teachers we had.  (Unclear) they were great.  They were good.
Story_ID: 668763
Speaker 1: You know what, people often talk about when the schools--when, when you go to the white school, the books are better and the--did you have--did you sense that be- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I remember--
Speaker 1: --you were in a different school.
Speaker 2: Let's see, this would've been--this was at Monroe School [Washington, D.C.].  I remember one time in the cloak room, there was a big wooden storage cabinet, and inside of the cabinet, I don't know how I happened to be looking at it, but there were boxes of books and they had been books that had been--the white--the white schools were called division one and we were division two, and there were--there were boxes of books that the white schools no longer wanted that they'd sent to us, but our teachers wouldn't give them to us.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Because they just thought it was demeaning.  And so we had a, you know, Parent Teacher Association and so forth.  We had our own--you know, we got our own books.  They didn't wanna--this was--you know, I don't--these were the books in one teacher's office, so I can't give you more than my reme- recollection of seeing these books untouched.
Speaker 1: Do you recall--
Speaker 2: Great teachers.  These were--these people were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At McKinley [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: I'm talking about all through.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Monroe.
Speaker 1: Banneker [Benjamin Banneker Junior High School; Benjamin Banneker Academic High School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Banneker.  I mean, they cared about us.  They taught us stuff.
Speaker 1: Any teachers stand out for you?
Speaker 2: There are a lot of them.  You know, there weren't any discipline problems.  Teachers taught everybody, you know, from the people who, you know, were--parents were Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] faculty to there was essentially an orphans home near, near Monroe, kids were there, didn't--you know, they were--wanted to see them learn.  The problem is today, all of those women--there were, you know, probably 95 percent women, today all those women would be lawyers or professionals, you know, other professions--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but there were limited opportunities for them; and the--you know, I got a wonderful, you know, send off.
Story_ID: 668764
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.], what were your favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: History, (pause) but good math teachers.
Speaker 1: When did you have a sense of what you wanted to do when you grew up?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know until I was coming out of college [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] whether I wanted to go to graduate school or law school.
Speaker 1: But, did you have a sense as a--as a kid what you wanted to do for work?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Not really?  While you were in school, both of your parents were continuing their education, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, my mother [Marjorie Holloman Parker] finished in 1951 but, you know, the last couple years essentially writing a dissertation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember she would--she was working on that, doing the research down at the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.], and so I remember my father [Barrington D. Parker, Sr.] taking us to pick her up and we'd play--I vaguely--vague recollections of playing in those fountains in front of the Library of Congress.  So, by the--when they were actually in residence and not there, I mean, I was really young.  We were--my--lived with my grandmother then.
Story_ID: 668765
Speaker 1: And your mother [Marjorie Holloman Parker], during--you had mentioned earlier about many of the teachers being Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] or AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]; and your mother was an AKA, and can you tell me about her role in the AKAs?
Speaker 2: Mother and all of my aunts were AKAs and the--throughout their lives, the organization was of great importance.  I mean, it was like--I mean, it was not just simply--it was--it was much, much more than a high--a college social organization.  I guess the nearest analo- the only analogy I can think of, it was--I mean, there was more like the UJA, United Jewish Appeal.  These were just major social service organizations that did--the college component in many respects was the least important, although was quite important, and these folks just did great work their entire lives.  And the organization was, you know, important and meaningful, and they were all dedicated to it.  So, my mother became the supreme basileus, I think it was around '58 [1958].  She wrote the history books.  One later iteration of the history book of Alpha Kappa--AKA history ['Alpha Kappa Alpha: In the Eye of the Beholder,' Marjorie Holloman Parker] is dedicated to my oldest daughter.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: She also is the official--Christine [Christine Parker].  She's also the official historian--she wrote the official history of The Links ['The History of The Links, Incorporated,' Marjorie Holloman Parker].
Speaker 1: Your mother?
Speaker 2: Yep.  Very active in The Links [The Links, Incorporated].
Speaker 1: Was--
Speaker 2: So, I remember going to AKA boules, great fun (laughter).
Speaker 1: You went all over the country?
Speaker 2: You know, I--we were in high school and there was one in Chicago [Illinois] and it was--this was like 1958 and they took over the--it was like the Hil- the--maybe the Hilton down on the Loop [Hilton Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and it was so much fun.  You know, there were just AKAs from all over the country going to Chicago.  I think it was around Christmastime.  Yeah, and me and my brother [Jason Parker] went.
Speaker 1: Lots of pretty girls (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you mention that your mother was an AKA and a Link, and so it--in middle class black society, there were many--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) organizations, these two not just social but certainly very--
Speaker 2: They were public service oriented.  I mean, they--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The, the--I think the, the social component was--I mean, they would--you know, they would get together with and, and the people who came to the meetings were their friends, but they--you know, they, they weren't--the, the, the point of the meetings was to do AKA business.  It wasn't just to socialize.
Speaker 1: Did your mother belong to any other groups?
Speaker 2: I mean, those were the principal ones.
Speaker 1: Were you in Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 668766
Speaker 1: You go to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].  So, so you do not choose to go to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Was--how, how did you choose Yale?
Speaker 2: Well, my brother was a--went to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], so--Jason [Jason Parker] was really smart.  He was--you know, he was just a really, really smart guy.  So--
Speaker 1: And how much older is he?
Speaker 2: He's a year older.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, he had gotten into MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  He was--he was very, very strong in math, among other things, but he had gotten into MIT, Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and Princeton, and nobody--and, and we never visited any of the schools.  I don't think my parents [Marjorie Holloman Parker and Barrington D. Parker, Sr.] even looked at any of my college applications.  I never visited a school before I--and I, I never visited Yale before I got in there.  So, he went to Princeton and, you know, and Princeton was--of the big three was probably the least progressive.  I mean, they didn't desegregate Princeton until I think after--it was well after World War II [WWII], and it was the southern school.  But, he went there and he sort of--he had a--he liked it.  You know, it's always--for every--anybody going from--you know, to one of those places, there's a significant adjustment.  But, you know, Princeton seemed okay.  I didn't want to go to the same school he was going to and I knew one other black at Yale and he, he lived up the street from me.  And (laughter) I talked to him and he said it was okay, so I said, well let me try it out.  And I had applied early and gotten into Williams [Williams College, Williamstown, Massachusetts], and the Williams connect was that my mother's Latin teacher at Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] had gone to Williams, so my mother sent me over to see him, and he talked to me and the next thing I knew, I was in Williams.  And then I'd sent my money in and so forth, but then at the--you know, in the regular admission cycle, I got to--got into Yale and I decided, well, you know, maybe I should go to Yale instead of Williams.
Story_ID: 668767
Speaker 1: You go to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], what is your experience like there?  Like, how--what is the ratio of black students (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it's like landing on the moon.  So, I think all total there--I mean, there were, one, two, three--there were three other African Americans in my class, one of whom was from Washington [D.C.] and his parents and my parents [Marjorie Holloman Parker and Barrington D. Parker, Sr.] were very good friends, but I didn't know him 'cause he'd gone away to prep school, and then there were two guys from New Haven [Connecticut].  And then in those days, there were all these guys from prep school and they were all from the same four or five prep schools, Hotchkiss [Hotchkiss School, Lakeville, Connecticut], Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts], a lot of guys from Andover, some--Exeter [Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire], and then a lot of kind of miscellaneous prep school guys.
Speaker 1: Did you feel prepared with the education that you'd had at McKinley [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Barely.  Barely.  So, the first year was kind of a struggle and--
Speaker 1: Had you been a good student at McKinley?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was light--lights out.  But, you know, Yale, you, you, you were--you had four or five hours' worth (laughter) of homework every day.  At McKinley, you really didn't have to--you just didn't have to work that hard.  You know, there's--McKinley, you know, there were some very--there were--there were, you know, about twenty, thirty really small--there were a lot of very able people at McKinley, but twenty, thirty really smart people, and if, if, if the pedagogy had been just a step up and had been a different edu- you could've sent a half dozen guys to Yale or Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and you could've sent a dozen women to, you know, Pembroke [Pembroke College in Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] or Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts]and some really smart ones to Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  So, instead of a handful of people going to elite schools, you could've sent twenty if you'd had just a--you know, a different English--it would've only taken four or five different--four or five classes to make the big difference, just the kind of--if, if, if you had five classes like they taught at Exeter, those kids would've been good to go.  But, I mean a lot of them did very well.  And, you know, in those days, there was not the obsession there is now about brand name schools, you know.  But, a lot of the kids did well.  There were--I have very fond memories, a lot of fun at McKinley High School.
Story_ID: 668768
Speaker 1: But, so, you're at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and you say barely getting by.  What did you do to get up to speed?  Did you--
Speaker 2: You just worked, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you--
Speaker 2: --and finally you caught on.
Speaker 1: --have tutors?  Did you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  You know, you just figured it out.  You had to--you, you needed to figure it out.  You figured it out.  The big game changer for me was--at, at, at Yale, all the freshman are in this big quad called the Old Campus, so that was kind of difficult because, you know, there were a thousand type A guys and everybody is the same age.  And, you know, I--subsequently, there, there were a lot--you know, I, I wasn't alone.  There were just lots and lots of people who--I mean, Yale was just a big step up from almost everybody's high school.  The big game changer for me was sophomore year when you go into the residential colleges.  So, I was in Ezra Stiles [Ezra Stiles College], and in the entryway where I lived, there were three seniors, and they--I just became very good friends with them and they sort of adopted me.  So, I would eat with them.  I was a sophomore, you know, just trying to--still trying to figure it out.  And I would eat with these guys and they would talk to me.  And so other than Charles--other than Charles Marshall [ph.] who was the guy from D.C. [Washington, D.C.], I mean, I didn't--I knew guys.  I rode freshman crew, so I, I, I got to meet guys, but I wouldn't say any of them became--a couple of them--one or two of them became very close friends later, but I wasn't really close friends with them freshman year.  I subsequently became very close friends with them.  I mean, two guys I see--I mean, I--are close friends to this day from freshman crew.  The three guys who I'm referring to in Stiles, one was a guy named Dick Grandquist, and he was an English major, he was Phi Beta Kappa [Phi Beta Kappa Society], he went to--I think he went to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  He was a--then later, spent most of his career as a partner at Davis Polk [Davis Polk and Wardwell LLP] and then, unfortunately died prematurely, but really smart.  The other guy was a fellow named David Gergen, he was chairman of the Yale Daily News, and he later became Reagan's [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] communications director and also worked in the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] White House.  And, you know, he was a very smart guy.  And I would--I would show Gergen my papers and he would say well, you know, "Change this.  This is terrible.  Rewrite this.  Rewrite that."  He says, you know, you gotta--, "If you're really in a hurry, it looks like you were in a hurry, just make sure the first paragraph is strong and the last paragraph is strong."  But, you know, that's, that's what counts a little bit more in these things.  But, they--you know, the--you know, he, he--and it wasn't--he was just a friend, so I would--he would just read--he, he, he did that.  So, that--you know, gradually, my, my skillset rose and my self-confidence rose.  The third guy was a fellow named Michael Reed [Michael C. Reed].  Mike was an English major also and he won the big Shakespeare [William Shakespeare]--he was a Shakespeare guy, so he'd run the--won the big Shakespeare prize.  He won--in, in, in those days, the smartest guys that I knew went to--smartest guys in the class went to graduate school.  Seven or eight years later they were going to law school.  So, Reed was--all these guys were--I think were Phi Beta Kappa, but Reed decided he didn't want to go to graduate school in English.  So, Michael then went to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] and got a Ph.D. in math and recently retired--it was either Stanford or Princeton [sic.] and got a Ph.D. in math, I forget which, but recently retired as the--he was for a while the chair of the math department at Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina].  So, these guys are smart (laughter).  And the- you know, they were my friends.  And so we just--I mean, they were--we were only together for that year, but they--you know, that made a big difference.
Story_ID: 668769
Speaker 1: And what did you major in?
Speaker 2: I majored in history.
Speaker 1: That was your interest from--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --high school [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] had a terrific history department.  No interest to speak of in--only, you know, the most ephemeral interest in African American history and it was, you know--you know, it was just kind of an old fashioned story.  But, some of the people, you know, C. Vann Woodward was--you know, revolutionized the writing and thinking about southern history.  He was there, but he didn't teach undergraduates.  But, so, the information about African Americans in all the American history course was, was real limited.  But for some reason, I mean, that didn't matter.  I remember I think I was like freshman, sophomore, and I was somewhere up in the stacks, and I discovered The Crisis, and The Crisis had all these--you know, every week or two, there was an essay by W.E.B. Du Bois.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I would just sit up there and read that stuff.  And so the fact that, you know, the American intellectual history, you weren't reading anything about blacks, it just didn't matter to me.  I mean, I knew--
Speaker 1: Because you were.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, and I knew what--you know, and then that was the time that African--that, that the new history books started to come out like, you know, Elkins' book on slavery ['Slavery: A Problem in American Institutional and Intellectual Life,' Stanley Elkins] and, and things like that.  So, so, American history was starting to get rewritten.  So, we read that--all those.  And, you know, the history--with, with that limitation, the history department was, was terrific 'cause I--by the time I got out, I, I mean, I just knew American history.  I mean, I just knew what the events were.  I knew what the arguments were.  We read a lot of really good books.  So--and then by the time--by the time I was getting out, the university had changed and big catalyst for change is Kingman Brewster [Kingman Brewster, Jr.] became the president, and Brewster just forced so many positive changes at Yale.  And the other huge catalyst for change was William Sloane Coffin who was the chaplain.
Story_ID: 668770
Speaker 1: It's great that the school [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] had The Crisis, I mean they could have--
Speaker 2: I mean it was a resear- it was a major--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, We're rolling.
Speaker 2: Excellent.
Speaker 1: I mean, it was a major research library [Yale University Library, New Haven, Connecticut].  It would've been unu- highly unusual if it didn't.
Speaker 2: Right.  You mentioned Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] and your--can you tell me his relationship to your [paternal] grandfather [George Parker]?
Speaker 1: During the McCarthy [Joseph McCarthy] era, they came after Du Bois 'cause he had--you know, he was--he was--they, they came after all the progressives and as he traveled, he criticized the United States, so they lifted his passports.  So, my grandfather was involved in litigation to try to get his passport back among other things, and the same thing happened to Paul Robeson, who had this kind of, in retrospect, quite unfortunate affinity with--you know, with Russia, and the Communists, but they lifted his passport, too, and then--and my grandfather was involved in that litigation.  I think they both were unsuccessful.  Robeson was able to travel in this hemisphere.  I don't think he was able to go to Europe or anything like that.  But--
Speaker 2: Do you know around when that was?
Speaker 1: This would've been late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.  So--
Speaker 1: Height of McCarthy era.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Story_ID: 668771
Speaker 1: So, let's go back to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].  You mentioned that there were two things that happened that really changed the course of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Yale.  And would you talk about that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, so, while I was there, you know, civil rights activity really just exploded.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you, you--what years were you there?
Speaker 2: I, I came in the fall of 1961 and I left in the spring of 1969, and I took a year off between college and law school [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut] to teach [at Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire].  But, there were school desegregation battles.  There were the Freedom Rides, there were the sit-ins, and William Sloane Coffin went on a Freedom Ride and all the alumni went crazy.  And then Brewst- Kingman Brewster [Kingman Brewster, Jr.] backed him up, and that was just a huge statement.  And Coffin was just--Coffin was just a great man.  He was very--
Speaker 1: And he was the chaplain.
Speaker 2: He was the chaplain.  He was visionary, he was courageous.  He in the '70s [1970s] after he left Yale was the senior minister at Riverside Church [New York, New York], and all the guys I knew were pa- who had nothing to do, interested in church, every--you could see everybody up on--at Riverside on Sunday to listen to William Sloane Coffin.  Of all the ministers I know with maybe possible exception my [maternal] grandfather [John L.S. Holloman, Sr.], you had a really good chance if you went to Riverside Church on Sunday of coming away with something important you didn't already know before.  He was just a brilliant, brilliant preacher.  The, the, the chaplain--the chapel at Yale was Battell Chapel [New Haven, Connecticut], and I forget whether it was sophomore year--maybe--it was early on.  I can't remember whether it was freshman year or sophomore year, I remember sitting up on the second row in Battell Chapel and preaching was Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  And, you know, that was just--you know, Coffin had him there, Brewster was sitting in the front row, huge message.  So, the--you know, those were the beginnings of change and then, you know, of course change takes, takes years, takes time.
Story_ID: 668772
Speaker 1: But, you're at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] when, you know, the assassinations begin (laughter). I mean, the--
Speaker 2: Law--I'm at law school when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is killed and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh.
Speaker 2: --law school when Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] is shot.
Speaker 1: So, what were your years at the law school?
Speaker 2: I was class of '69 [1969]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so, I started in the fall of '66 [1966].  When I was at law school also, when I was at college, the most interesting place around campus was Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut] because there were these just fabulous students there who were very involved in civil rights activity.  Haywood Burns [W. Haywood Burns], real good friend of mine, Eleanor Holmes Norton, Marian Edelman [HistoryMaker Marian Wright Edelman], Timothy Jenkins [Timothy L. Jenkins], and there were faculty, the, the dean, Louis Pollak, was very involved in civil rights activity.  I mean, he basically wrote the briefs in, for example, Loving and Virginia [Loving v. Virginia, 1967], the case that--you know, the--that outlawed racially restrictive marriage laws.  But--and Charles Black [Charles L. Black, Jr.] who was very involved with the, the Inc. Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.].  So, there were just all these interesting panels and speakers over at the law school.  So, the, the--you know, the college was just much more stayed and conservative but, you know, the law school was like two blocks away.  So--
Speaker 1: And so you spent a lot of time there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause these--Haywood was a really good friend of mine.  But, it was just--you know, I--it was an interesting place.  The people were much more interesting than the people at Yale Coll- the, the, the people at Yale College.
Story_ID: 668773
Speaker 1: Did you find yourself involved in civil rights activity at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, they had this group there called the--I think it was called the Yale civil rights research council [Law Students Civil Rights Research Council] or something like that--I forget the name of it, and so, that was a group of people on campus who were interested in civil rights activity, so I was involved in that.  But, summer of 1964, I'm back in Washington [D.C.] and I got this gosh, horrible job that my father [Barrington D. Parker, Sr.] got me working in the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] stuffing second class mail for Virginia.  It was just horrible (laughter).  So, that was the, the summer--that was the summer of the Mississippi Summer Project [Freedom Summer], so you would go back home and sit down and watch television and, you know, the, the point of that project was to get white volunteers down south to focus the media on conditions in places like Southwest Georgia and Mississippi.  So, I mean, I'm sitting here looking at this and, you know, why am I here?  And so I, I forget what, what happened.  Our parents were away someplace and somebody told me that they were--they were organizing a second tranche of volunteers to go and they were doing training at All Souls Church [All Souls Church, Unitarian] on--in Washington, so I went down there, and then the next thing I knew, I was in this carpool.  We went to the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] office in Atlanta [Georgia] and then they kind of gave you your assignment and told you where you were going, so I ended up in, in Hattiesburg [Mississippi], and that was a--that was another sort of game changer.
Speaker 1: What happened there?
Speaker 2: Met all these absolutely extraordinary people.  So, I was in South Africa before Mandela [Nelson Mandela] got out of jail, so I'm sitting around this dinner party with all these guys who are getting out of Robben Island [South Africa] and it's always been a close call in my mind about whether the most impressive group of adults I've ever met were those guys or the young SNCC guys I met in Mississippi, [HistoryMakers] James Forman, [HistoryMaker] John Lewis, Robert Moses [Robert Parris Moses], Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture].  They were all these guys who were just visionary and courageous and, you know, they made all--they made all the difference.  And, and, you know, guys whose names you never heard of anymore--
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) who, you know, worked in these dangerous towns.
Speaker 1: Well, and so when you decided to go, did you get any resistance from your family?
Speaker 2: They were--no, not at all.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And as you're traveling--
Speaker 2: My mother [Marjorie Holloman Parker] told her--all her AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] friends (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, she was proud of you.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: As you made your way--that's fine--as you made your way down, did you encounter any dangerous moments?
Speaker 2: No.  I think--I, I can't--I think we went to--no.  I mean, Hattiesburg was relatively calm.  I mean, there were things you didn't do.  You know, you didn't--you know, you, you, you certainly didn't go around town with white women and so forth.  But what we were doing in Hattiesburg was we were teaching at the Freedom Schools and then encouraging people to register to vote and then encouraging them to--you know, and telling them that the--you know, that there's a statewide school of desegregation suit that had been won and they could send their kids to, you know, the nice school down the road and so forth and so on.
Speaker 1: But, I mean, those were game changing things down there that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you're--the heavy lifting was done--I don't mean heavy lift- but, there were places that were just dangerous to be in and they were up in the Delta [Mississippi Delta] and in the Piney Woods area.  Hattiesburg was not a Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] town.  I don't--I can't explain why, but it was just--I mean, you could kind of walk around downtown in Hattiesburg and nobody would--I mean--and so forth.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But--
Story_ID: 668774
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How long were you there?
Speaker 2: Six weeks.  (Pause) So, I met--as I said, I mean, there were all these just extraordinary--and I, I--they put you up with local families, so I stayed with this farmer who's outside of Hattiesburg [Mississippi] in a town called Palmers Crossing, Mississippi.  And, you know, Washington [D.C.] had slums and so forth and, and, and so forth, but, but I never--you, you know, nothing in this part of the country that, that rivaled, you know, the, the rural Deep South.  I mean, this--these were people who were--lived under very, very straitened circumstances, but courageous people, happy that we were there, supported us.  And, you know, they knew at the end of the day, we--and we knew, you know, we were going back to where we came from, but they were still there, made among the other southern--among the other volunteers, you know, very dear, lifelong friends, legendary SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] volunteer was David Kendall [David E. Kendall].  So, actually, we were in London [England] with him two weeks ago, so I mean, I talk to him all the time.  One of the great stories was that David had (laughter) two or three--they were short, but he had a bunch of arrests, which caused him--I mean, not really much problem, but when he came to get admitted to the bar in Washington, you know, he clerked for--clerked on the [U.S.] Supreme Court and worked for the Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], I think.  But, then he--so he went to get admitted to the bar and (laughter) the judge presiding at the admission service ceremony was my father [Barrington D. Parker, Sr.] (laughter).  And he knew David and so he gave him a hard time about it (laughter) and so forth.  But, David, you know--you know, as you know, he's the Clintons' [Hillary Rodham Clinton and President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] lawyer, he was down there.  When we were in London, we met a friend who had been at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] with me.  He was a Brit who was on a Mellon fellowship at Yale and he went down.  He was in--he, he worked in a very tough place.  His name is Nicholas Bosanquet, and he worked up in Holmes County [Mississippi], which was tough.  And he is a professor of economics at Imperial College in London [Imperial College London, London, England].  And there was another guy who is a real good friend of mine named Jonathan Steele who is actually coming over to visit in a--to cover the election.  So, he wrote for the Yale Daily News.  He was a--he was also a--he was from Cambridge [University of Cambridge, Cambridge, England], he was on a graduate fellowship at Yale, and he was gonna be a journalist, so he wrote for the Yale Daily News about the Yale students who were at the summer project, and ret- he's sort of semi-retired, he's not fully retired, but he was The Guardian's Moscow [Russia] correspondent, then The Guardian's Washington correspondent, and he retired.  He was the chief foreign correspondent for The Guardian.  But, we all bonded at Yale.  We all--I sort of knew who they were, but then we got back to Yale together.  This would've been the fall of '64 [1964], and we--you know, we were real good friends 'cause we'd all--you know, we just traded Mississippi stories together.
Speaker 1: So, were they--were--what was the racial mix of people who went down to Mississippi?
Speaker 2: I think--I--a very high proportion of the--of the summer volunteers were white, and great bunch of people.  And it made a--you know, it meant a lot for the--I mean, I don't want to romanticize it, but, but, a couple white guys and I, a farmer had invited us to dinner (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A black farmer?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And he said he never thought he would live to see the day where he sat down and had a meal with a white man.
Speaker 1: And for you, obviously you made a lot of long lasting relationships from this--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --experience.  In terms of--
Speaker 2: And changed--you know, you knew what the real deal--you know, I knew what the real deal was before, but you were not confused about after you saw--after you were there.
Speaker 1: And did you feel that you could affect change?
Speaker 2: I mean, I don't--you, you--it's not--you never know what the results of your efforts are gonna be, but you knew, you know, you had to do whatever you could.
Speaker 1: (Pause) This was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You knew this was your responsibility.
Speaker 1: And this was when you were still in--?
Speaker 2: College.
Speaker 1: You were in still in college.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 668775
Speaker 1: When did you figure out that you wanted to be a lawyer?
Speaker 2: I--after I graduated, I took a job in the history department at Phillips Exeter [Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire] and I was trying to figure out whether to go to graduate school in the history or law school.  And I liked the place.  It was a great school.  And I mean I--I'm not--I'm not sorry I didn't go there 'cause I just--I mean (laughter) there were these sort of ruling class white kids there and they were--(laughter) most of them were miserable.  I mean, it was just like an intellectual boot camp.  I mean, they just worked hard.  They had fabulous teachers.  It was academically very demanding.  And I, I, I sort of wish--I mean, in, in the--you know, quickly kind of didn't matter, but I said, you know, if I had a couple of these teachers, if I had just a syllabus, if they taught this, just used the same books and asked the same questions at McKinley Tech [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.] that they were asking at Exeter, it made a big difference.  And the people in the history department could not have been nicer to me.  They wanted me to go back to graduate school and they--you know, they said, you know, you--, "If you--ever you want to come back and teach here--." I thought that the most interesting--the most exciting years in teaching tended to be the earlier ones and I thought that as--a career as a lawyer would get progressively even more interesting, and that assessment in retrospect was the correct one.  So, instead of going to graduate school, I went to law school--went back to Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut].
Story_ID: 668776
Speaker 1: Well, and you had also spent--been attracted to the activity at the law school [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut] and the people and the minds (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I went back to Mississippi the next summer.  I worked the Gulf Coast, Biloxi [Mississippi] and Gulfport [Mississippi], and when I was first--when I was in law school first--
Speaker 1: What are you doing there?
Speaker 2: Recruiting kids to go to schools that were to be integrated in the fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they figured that that was--if it was gonna work anywhere in Mississippi, it would--it would work down there 'cause the Gulf Coast was--it was kind of a tourist area and it was not a whole lot of, you know, maniacal, Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] loving white supremacists (laughter).  And then the summer after first year of law school, I worked for the Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] and they sent me to Montgomery [Alabama] where they--they'd won a school--a statewide school desegregation suit there and they sent me to work, to monitor compliance with it.  And so I worked for one of their cooperating attorneys, a guy named--great civil rights lawyer named Fred Gray.
Speaker 1: This is in '67 [1967]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, your choice to go back to Mississippi, then to the NAACP Legal Defense Fund--
Speaker 2: Summer job.
Speaker 1: Right, summer job.  But, I mean, you could've chosen something else.  Were you making the conscious decision to do things in civil rights phase?
Speaker 2: It was the best summer job I got.  I mean, I--and I had friends there.  I think Haywood [W. Haywood Burns] was working there at, at the time, two or three other people I knew very well, Jim Nabrit [James M. Nabrit III].  Nabrit's parents were very good friends of my parents [Marjorie Holloman Parker and Barrington D. Parker, Sr.].  I mean, Nabrit senior [James M. Nabrit, Jr.] was--he may even have been dean of the law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and then I think he was--may even president of Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] at the time.
Speaker 1: And he was--he was what--
Speaker 2: Jack Greenberg's number two at the Legal Defense Fund.  So, I, I don't--I don't know how I knew him, but I knew him.  And then there were a bunch of other people I knew there who I had met in the South--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --'cause they were basically the lawyer--the law firm civil rights workers.
Story_ID: 668777
Speaker 1: So, when you went to the N double--NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], where was it headquartered?
Speaker 2: 10 Columbus Circle, Wash- in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Right.  But they deployed you to the South?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And on these trips to the South, were you ever afraid?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did you ever see the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK]?
Speaker 2: I remember--I, I had a--I'd even forgotten about this.  I kept a journal, and my daughter [Jennifer Parker], the one who works for The Times [The New York Times], was asking me about it.  I totally forgot about--that I even had it, so I dug it up for her, and it turned out I was driving from Jackson [Mississippi] to Hattiesburg [Mississippi] one night and there was a big cross burning along the side of the road.  But, I mean (laughter), I just wasn't afraid.  I don't know, I just wasn't.
Speaker 1: As (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember down there, we went--when I--when I went down there, the three civil rights workers who were murdered were missing, and when I think I was down there, they found them or at least they--maybe they had found the bodies and, and so forth.  So, Philadelphia, Mississippi, was maybe an hour north of Hattiesburg.  And we went up one day, they were having a memorial service for them.  These guys had gone to, to investigate a church burning at Zion Baptist Church [sic. Mount Zion United Methodist Church], I think it was, in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: And these were the white folks who were killed.
Speaker 2: Well, one black.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Chaney [James Chaney] was black and Schwerner [Michael Schwerner] and Goodman [Andrew Goodman] were white.  And maybe twenty feet away from us leaning on police cars were two of the murderers, Cecil Price was there and one of his deputies.
Speaker 1: (Pause) And you were twenty-three, twenty-four years old at this time?  Young man.
Speaker 2: No, let's see.  That's--twenty.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  And how do these experiences of being in the South in the summer and, and working on behalf of civil rights affect your--affect your choices in your--in, in your work?  Like--well, let me ask you.  So, in school, are--when you're in law school [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --are you in the midst of study?  Are you also studying civil rights as it's happening?  Or it--you really--it's really not as it's happening?  I--I'm not--I--I'm trying to get a sense--not asking the question well.  Just for you, how were you affected by these experiences that you're having and what choices are you making as a result of it?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, in, in forums, you're understanding what this country is about.  And, you know--(pause) you know, as Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] always used to tell us, you know, from those to whom much is given, much is expected.  So, it's important--you know, you, you, you do what you can.  I--you know, I spent a lot of time reading and I, you know, still read lots of history.
Story_ID: 668778
Speaker 1: I think what I was getting at, you talked about the people who were at the law school before you were there and who were very actively exploring what's going on, what was happening when you were at the law school in terms of talking about current events while you're studying?
Speaker 2: I mean, there were still students there who were very involved in civil rights activity.  The problem with law school was--I mean, it was real hard (laughter), lot of really smart people.  So, you spent your time working a lot in law school doing--I mean, trying to learn the stuff you needed to learn to be a lawyer.  It wasn't a lot--you know, college by junior, senior year, you had a fair amount of leisure time.  You know, it wasn't until like senior year you had leisure time at the law school.  The, the big thing with--by the time I got to law school, the number of African American students had really escalated.  I mean, when I got there, there were maybe four.  When I left, there were maybe a hundred in all the classes.  And I was a--last two years of law school, I was a freshman counselor, so I lived in a freshman--I was a freshman proctor, so I lived in a freshman dorm.
Speaker 1: And how did that--what was your role?  What did you do by living in the dorm?  You were--
Speaker 2: Kept the freshman from--trying to make them study, kept them from tearing the place down on the weekends.  Oh, one of my freshman counselees was Howard Dean.
Speaker 1: Oh, wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: What was he like as a young man?
Speaker 2: He was smart guy, nice guy.  He had two African American roommates who I think he'd actually asked to be placed with them, and they were great guys, just--it was a great--they had a great room.  One of the fellows, Ralph Dawson [Ralph C. Dawson], I see is a--just retired.  He was a lawyer, partner at Fulbright and Jaworski [Fulbright and Jaworski LLP], very successful lawyer.  The other is in the book you gave me named Don Roman [ph.] who--lawyer in, I think, Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: And when you were at Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut], were you roommates with whites, blacks, both?
Speaker 2: In Stiles--the way Ezra Stiles [Ezra Stiles College] was set up, the majority of the rooms were single rooms, and so--and when I was a counselor, they assigned you a roommate.  So, one year I had some guy who was in the classics department.  The other year, I had a biologist.  So, they wanted the freshmen to get exposed to people who were studying different things.  But, you know, we, we--you know, a lot of white friends, a lot of black friends.
Story_ID: 668779
Speaker 1: So, your, your second summer, you--which is 1968, you were at the office of corporate counsel.  Is that your--
Speaker 2: Yeah, worked for the mayor's office in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: And what did you do there?
Speaker 2: Res- legal research.
Speaker 1: But, '68 [1968] was a huge year.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: You came home and watched kind of city after city explode then you had the Democratic convention [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: And King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].
Speaker 2: And King.
Speaker 1: Do you remember--where were you when King died?
Speaker 2: Don't remember.
Speaker 1: What was the climate like at, at Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut] during this time?
Speaker 2: What, what do you mean?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, the, the country is exploding, as you say --
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and in the North, I--is it more observing 'cause you see it on TV.  I mean, it's obviously not, not (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A lot of this was going on during the summer when school wasn't in.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so--I had gotten out of school before things got really challenging at Yale 'cause I, I was--I was out of school before the whole Black Panther situation [Black Panther Party] and so forth.  So, things were--and, and, and paralleling this was increasing concern about Vietnam, and that had only just started to take off when I was there, and then it was a really hot issue on campus.  It was kind of after I--just, just as I was--just after I left.
Speaker 1: As you left the--
Speaker 2: Law school.
Speaker 1: --law school.
Speaker 2: And was in--
Speaker 1: And, so, you graduated in '69 [1969]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --right?  So, as the--that's heating up, were you--were you at risk of being drafted?
Speaker 2: Yes, but I was at--had--I'd gotten out of school--I'd gotten into law school at a time where if you had a graduated deferment, you could keep it, and then I was clerking for a year.  So, I clerked for Aubrey Robinson [Aubrey E. Robinson, Jr.] on the U.S. District Court [U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia] here, and--
Speaker 1: In New York?
Speaker 2: No, here at--in Washington, D.C., I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: And he was an African American (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  So, I don't know how it worked out, but there were a couple of judges who had law clerks who were in jeopardy of being drafted and somebody told--I don't know what happened, but all of a sudden, we weren't in jeopardy of being drafted.
Speaker 1: 'Cause that was a frightening time for, for many reasons--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --including--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that.
Speaker 2: So then by the time the clerkship was over, there was--the lottery came in, so I was no longer in jeopardy 'cause of my lottery number.
Story_ID: 668780
Speaker 1: Being a law clerk for Judge Robinson [Aubrey E. Robinson, Jr.], what did--what were your (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Great year.  He was a terrific man, as they say, kind of all grown up, very mature.  He'd had, you know, experience, solid, smart, great (unclear)--liked him a lot, going to Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York], played on the baseball team, was in the [U.S.] Army during World War II [WWII], very kind of orderly, disciplined, great trial judge.  Learned a lot from him.
Speaker 1: And what did you do as a clerk?  What was your--
Speaker 2: You, you helped him with his work, whatever needed done, draft--helped do draft of opinions, pull cases for him, help--anything he needed help doing, we did it.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a very interesting year 'cause there were a lot of guys from law school who were clerking on the district court with me.  There were guys who were clerking upstairs on the circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit] and there were guys we knew who were clerking down at the [U.S.] Supreme Court, so we would go down, listen to Supreme Court arguments, and things like that.  And, it was a very exciting year.  I mean, I just grew a lot professionally.
Speaker 1: When you say you learned a lot from him, what kinds of things did you learn?
Speaker 2: Law.  I mean, how to think like a lawyer and do--
Speaker 1: And can write like a lawyer, too, all of that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And he was wonderful--you know, he's very--he--very orderly guy, had his same golf game, same time of the week, I mean, you know, Saturday morning, didn't change.  He would do things like--with me.  He, he didn't like--he had two daughters [Paula Robinson Collins and Sheryl Robinson].  He didn't like to bowl, but every Wednesday night, the four of them, he and his wife [Doris Washington Robinson] and the two girls went to bowl.  And, and the rationale was everybody had a handicap.  So, the youngest daughter had a chance of winning.  I mean, she couldn't play golf, she couldn't play tennis, but the handicap leveled the playing field.  So, he thought it was just an important experien- family experience.  I mean, things like that.  He was just--just knew what he was doing.
Speaker 1: At--this was in '69 [1969] when, when you--
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969], '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: That same year, '69 [1969], was when your father [Barrington D. Parker, Sr.] was appointed to the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --United States District Court [U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you go to the--what is it called?
Speaker 2: Investor- invest- I don't--I--I'm not sure whether--I think I went to his confirmation hearing and, of course, I went to the investiture.
Speaker 1: Was this something that--what, what was he doing right before that?  Was he still in his--
Speaker 2: My grandfather [George Parker] had died by that time, so he was basically a solo practitioner for several years, always active with the Republican Party and had friends who were close to Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon], so he got the appointment.
Speaker 1: And a year later, your grandfather [John L.S. Holloman, Sr.] retired from the church [Second Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: No, he died.
Speaker 1: Oh, he died.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Did--never retired.
Story_ID: 668781
Speaker 1: So, you've graduated from college [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], you've done your clerkship, what, what do you do next?
Speaker 2: Oh, I go to work as an associate at Sullivan and Cromwell [Sullivan and Cromwell LLP].
Speaker 1: And what type of law firm is that?
Speaker 2: It's, it's, it's sort of the law firm in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: And as an associate, what's your day like?  Is this the, the--
Speaker 2: You know, the hours are long, the work is--the work is demanding.  I, I felt a little bit at home 'cause they were a bunch of guys I knew from law--friends of mine from law school [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut] who were there.  A lot of very, very good lawyers, some of whom I'm--you know, remain--you know, some of the partners I remain friends with to this day.
Speaker 1: How long did you work there?
Speaker 2: I worked there from--until I think it was '75 [1975], and then with another guy from Sullivan and two guys from Paul, Weiss [Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton and Garrison LLP], we started a law firm [Parker, Auspitz, Neesemann and Delehanty, P.C.; Morrison and Foerster LLP].  I think it was in '76 [1976].  But, I mean, I really grew as a lawyer at Sullivan and Cromwell.  I mean, I--you know, it was--it was--you know, a lot of the people were, you know, conservative, Republican, but a lot of the people were--you know, were not, but it was the first place I, I had been where I made--up until that point, what someone's political views were determined whether I had become--you know, where I would be friends with them.  And Sullivan--(laughter), a lot of people who had, I thought, odious political views, but I got to be really good friends with.  We worked together.  I liked them.  And so, that was kind of a change for me.  I mean, I became a, a little less judgmental.  Then we set out on the--with the law firm and we didn't--I mean, in, in retrospect, it was kind of a really risky thing to do, but it really turned out well.  I didn't know--I knew one of the guys pretty well; the other two I didn't know, but we all became--
Story_ID: 668782
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How'd you make that decision?
Speaker 2: There was another fellow who was supposed to go with us who actually had put the group together and then at the last minute, he bailed on us, Gordon Davis [HistoryMaker Gordon J. Davis].  I mean, his loss.  He (laughter), he--and, you know, it--so, so, we had just a great group and, you know, the firm [Parker, Auspitz, Neesemann and Delehanty, P.C.] did okay.  We, we grew and--
Speaker 1: So, as you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) business grew and so forth.
Speaker 1: --as you form a law firm and, and decide on who the partners are gonna be, are you--does each of you have a specialty in a particular area?
Speaker 2: We all did essentially the same thing, general commercial litigation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we're all--you know, we're all roughly the same age, roughly the same experience.
Speaker 1: And why did you want to leave?
Speaker 2: You know, we had some--I had some--this good friend who was at Sullivan and Cromwell [Sullivan and Cromwell LLP], and he'd started off a law firm about three years before and he had like about twenty-five lawyers with him, and I said (laughter)--and I talked to him and he says, "You know, here's the deal."  He says, "There's all this business around that Sullivan and Cromwell is not interested and Paul, Weiss [Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton and Garrison LLP] is not interested 'cause it's sort of below their threshold, but we are just feeding on it and, and, and, you know, there are people who give out this business who want to be sure it's well done, but it's not, you know, the--of the--you know, doesn't have the extra zeros that Sullivan and Cromwell and Paul, Weiss would be interested in," and that turned out to be true.  I mean, we just started growing and we had a great time, real, real fun, lot of fun.
Speaker 1: How many years did you do that?
Speaker 2: We did that until 1987 when we merged with Morrison and Foerster [Morrison and Foerster LLP].  So, we were up to, you know, twenty-two, twenty-three lawyers, but it turns out in New York, there's just a tier of business you can't break into unless you got numbers and broad based departments.  I remember in Sullivan Cromwell, I had a case with co-counsel Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP], and I don't think Skadden had more than twenty-five lawyers at that time.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 668783
Speaker 1: While you were at Sullivan and Cromwell [Sullivan and Cromwell LLP], you got married.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Tell me, who did you marry?
Speaker 2: Toni Trent [Toni Trent Parker] was her name.  I just met her at a party in New York [New York], so we got married in '73 [1973].  Her dad was a guy named William Trent [William J. Trent, Jr.] who was the founder--a founder and the first executive director of the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] and her mother was a woman named Viola Scales Trent and the Scales was a big family in Winston-Salem, North Carolina.  He owned, you know, the colored bail bondsman business, the movie theater, apartment buildings, and things like that, so they were prominent in the African American community in North Carolina.  Bill's father [William J. Trent, Sr.] had been president of Livingstone College [Salisbury, North Carolina] and when--the year my father [Barrington D. Parker, Sr.] was at University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia Pennsylvania], Bill was there also at Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], so I think they were among the, you know, handful of blacks in graduate school in University of Pennsylvania in the mid-'30s [1930s].  So, they'd known each other since then.
Speaker 1: And so when you met at the party, obviously, you didn't know all those connections, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: Figured those out.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, you had three children together?
Speaker 2: Three children.
Speaker 1: And who are they?
Speaker 2: Christine [Christine Parker] who was born in 1978 who--we grew--we were living in Stamford [Connecticut] at that point.  I think she--when we were--when she was--we, we were living on the Upper West Side [New York, New York] and moved out of town just when she was born, which would've been like 1978.  We lived in Larchmont [New York] for a while, then we moved in Stamford.  So, she went through the Stamford--she went to Greenwich Academy [Greenwich, Connecticut], then sh- off to boarding school at St. Paul's [St. Paul's School, Concord, New Hampshire], Yale College [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], captain of women's rugby, New England women's rugby federation player of the year (laughter).  My wife wouldn't watch the games.  Then, she worked for Schumer [Chuck Schumer] and so she's very close friends, very close to Schumer.  She was a legislative assistant or--the first time through.  And then she went to Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut].  She TA'd for Harold Koh [Harold Hongju Koh] who's the--who was--later became dean and then was Hillary's [Hillary Rodham Clinton] undersecretary of state, and he officiated at her wedding.  And she met her husband at class--first, first year at Yale Law School.  Then after law school, she went back to Schumer and was his foreign policy person.  And his--he was also in the energy department [U.S. Department of Energy], on the energy committee.  And the energy committee oversaw an agency called the Commodities Futures Trading Commission [sic. Commodity Futures Trading Commission].  And so for the first year and a half or so, her main responsibilities were foreign policy.  I mean, I said once, you know, "Christine, what are you doing for New Year's?"  She says, "I can't tell you," (laughter).  And I said, "Oh, okay."  And then (laughter) I said, "Well, have a good time."  So, she either called me or emailed, I forgot which, which it was.  So, she says--I, I knew something 'cause she says these two--she was living in an apartment in Brooklyn [New York] and these two military intelligence guys came to her door to whisk her off, and she said, "Dad, we're in Oman," and this was when the Iraqi war [Iraq War] was going on.  And she says, "Chuck is showing up shortly and we're going to Baghdad [Iraq]," (laughter).  So, they had this [U.S.] Army helicop- this Blackhawk helicopter took her and--took her and Senator Schumer into Baghdad and they ended up having dinner with Crocker [Ryan Crocker], who was the ambassador and Petraeus [David Petraeus].  Anyway, so she came back and worked at--has, has been working ever since at Sullivan and Cromwell [Sullivan and Cromwell LLP] doing commodities regulation, derivative regulation, Dodd-Frank [Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010], work like that and her husband is in, in a law firm that's also a foundation, but they represent countries in negotiating environmental treaties.  So, he has a--it, it, it was about five, now it's about thirty countries that he represents in the cli- climate talks.
Story_ID: 668784
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: What's his name?
Speaker 1: Dennis Clare.  He's from Louisville [Kentucky].  His dad's a lawyer in Louisville.  His grandfather was mayor of Louisville and was a representative from Louisville.  So, his mother grew up six months in Louisville, six months in Washington [D.C.] when [U.S.] Congress was in session, yeah.
Speaker 2: And your other two children?
Speaker 1: Kathleen [Kathleen Parker] who is the middle daughter worked in the theater in New York [New York].  She went to Greenwich Country Day [Greenwich Country Day School, Greenwich, Connecticut] and then Earlham College [Richmond, Indiana] and worked for half dozen years, you know, trying to make it in the, the theater, and recently moved to Las Vegas [Nevada] and is starting in school out there, business school.  Youngest daughter is a--with Toni [Toni Trent Parker] is Jennifer [Jennifer Parker].  So, Jennifer also went to St. Paul's [St. Paul's School, Concord, New Hampshire] and Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], ran track at Yale, and is assistant op-ed page editor at The Times [The New York Times].  She worked--she was a communications director at LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] for a while and before that, she worked at the New America Foundation [New America, Washington, D.C.].  So, we lived in Stamford [Connecticut].  Toni got sick in 2004 and then died a few months later.  And then I married Ann [ph.], so now we have five daughters and seven grandchildren four and under.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so your two other daughters are?
Speaker 1: Ann and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Ann and Michael [ph.]--Ann and Michael had been very, very close friends of ours.  We all got to Connecticut about the same time, so my Jennifer--I mean, my Christine and her Jennifer [ph.] were best friends in high school--I mean, best friends starting about the fifth grade, and so we all met as sort of new parents.  And when we would go out of town, our kids would stay with them.  And then Christine and her Jennifer, eighth grade, went off to St. Paul's together and they were in each other's weddings.  And Michael got sick about the same time Toni got sick and so he died I think in 2007, so we got married in 2014.  So, Ann is from Connecticut and her--most of her family are lawyers up there.  Her grandfather was in the senate and was--then spent the bulk of his career where he knew my father [Barrington D. Parker, Sr.] on the D.C. circuit.
Story_ID: 668785
Speaker 1: In addition to your work at your law firm [Parker, Auspitz, Neesemann and Delehanty, P.C.], which--what was the year that you started it again?
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976].  And when did you--when, when was it purchased?
Speaker 2: We merged in 1987.
Speaker 1: Right, '87 [1987].
Speaker 2: And I was--I was a partner at Morrison and Foerster [Morrison and Foerster LLP], which basically was a San Francisco [California] based firm.  At that time, it had maybe 250, 300 lawyers, and we became their New York [New York] office.
Speaker 1: Got it.
Speaker 2: And so I did that until I was appointed to the bench in 1992.
Speaker 1: So, during the time that you were with your firm, you also joined the board of Harlem School of the Arts [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that's an important institution in, in New York.  Can you describe what, what it is?
Speaker 2: It was started by Dorothy Maynor who was a very close friend (laughter) of Bill Trent [William J. Trent, Jr.].  Her husband was a guy named Shelby Rooks who was a pastor of either Presbyterian or Episcopal church [St. James Presbyterian Church] up on--right down the street on Convent Avenue [sic. St. Nicholas Avenue, New York, New York].  And it was started as--it's--you know, it was a, a multidiscipline school, music, dance, art.  Dorothy Maynor was--had gone by the time I got involved and the head of it was this extraordinary woman, super talented woman named Betty Allen.  And so our job was to run the--her job was to run the school.  I was on the board; I was president of the board and, you know, just fundraising and trying to do what we can to, you know--you know, help the school grow and develop.
Speaker 1: How long were you on the board?
Speaker 2: I know when I got off--I got--the day I got confirmed, I wrote letters resigning from all the boards (laughter).  You know, I sort of felt--you know, you can't do that.  I, I was--I, I must've gone on the board in the early '80s [1980s]; I don't know when it was.  But I--
Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, so, you know, I was very involved.  The, the board used to meet at my off- in conference room in my office.  You know, the heavy lifting was done by Betty who was very, very talented and, you know, went through a rough spate after I left, but then a bunch of folks took it over and I think it's probably--from what I can tell, it's better than it's ever been, which is what--how things are supposed to be.
Speaker 1: Of course.
Speaker 2: But I--you know, I--
Speaker 1: I mean, it closed at a certain point--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and then I know Yvette Campbell [Yvette L. Campbell] came in as a CEO and really brought (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, good for them.  It's just great.
Speaker 1: --great change.
Speaker 2: Great--yeah.
Speaker 1: And glad that it's back.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Because the--
Speaker 2: Bloomberg [Michael Bloomberg] was very helpful to them.
Speaker 1: It's primarily--it--it's for the children in the community, correct?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And, and--
Speaker 2: Very talented people around there.
Speaker 1: And at a time when--
Speaker 2: The--
Speaker 1: --public school doesn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) public schools were cutting--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --were cutting back on, on arts education.
Story_ID: 668786
Speaker 1: I was also very involved with the Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.].
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was on the board.  I was vice president of the board.
Speaker 2: And at, at the time--so, you joined the Legal Defense Fund board in '80 [1980].  What--at that point, you know, and what's going on in our country, what are the key things that you guys are working on?
Speaker 1: You know, the [U.S.] Supreme Court was changing, the administration was changing, so it was trying to hold onto gains that had been made and then trying to figure out what to do when the prospect of making significant progress through litigating court experi- court cases was disappearing.  It just wasn't possible anymore given the Supreme Court and given all the republican nominations to the federal bench.
Speaker 2: And so, given those changes, at--as a--as a board member because you're--that's a different role than being (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I also did work for them.
Speaker 2: But did you--
Speaker 1: I was a cooperating attorney for them.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I did pro bono stuff all along.  You know, I had--I did pro bono cases in Sullivan and Cromwell [Sullivan and Cromwell LLP].  When I was an associate, I had a Supreme Court argument out of a pro bono case.  And I did death penalty work for them when I was in Parker, Auspitz [Parker, Auspitz, Neesemann and Delehanty, P.C.; Morrison and Foerster LLP] and in--also in--essentially at, at Parker, Auspitz.
Speaker 2: And so death penalty work for--can you describe one of the cases or what you remember?
Speaker 1: There, there--we, we had, you know, guys on death row and we were trying to just litigate and litigate to get them off.  And, you know, one of the cases, a former partner of mine won after I'd been on the bench.  This guy had been on death row for dozen, fifteen years.  Important case was, I think the name of it was Spencer and Zant [Spencer v. Zant] and the, the Legal Defense Fund had gotten foundation money and had done this exhaustive multivariable study of who got the death penalty, and it was pretty conclusive that race of the victim and race of the murderer were the driving factors, so--but the study was so good, the strategy was to get it introduced in as many death penalty cases as we could.  And so I remember I had a big argument in the Fifth Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit] over that.  And, you know, we just back and forth in southern courts doing various things.
Speaker 2: And so, I'd like you to explain that a little further.  Getting it introduced like in the record, in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --many different cases.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: What would--
Speaker 1: I had a--I had a co-counsel--there, there, there were two cases that the Fifth Circuit heard en banc.  That means in those days, it was--now the--it's--the Fifth Circuit split and there's eleven circuits, so I had this argument before like twenty-two judges and we were both trying to do the same thing.  We ultimately won and so I got--we got the case--we got the study called the Baldus study introduced in my case and was also introduced in a case called McCleskey, McCleskey versus Zant [McCleskey v. Zant], I think it was.  My guy got a writ of habeas corpus, so he got off death row.  A fellow named Jack Boger [John Charles Boger] who later became dean of University of North Carolina [University of North Carolina School of Law, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] argued McCleskey in the Supreme Court [McCleskey v. Kemp, 1987], and it was a huge defeat for death penalty opponents because the Supreme Court basically said, "I don't care how bad these statistics are. Unless you can show that the, the, the, the disparity was present and affected your case, the generalized statistics aren't gonna carry the day," so, you know, it was a big defeat.
Story_ID: 668787
Speaker 1: The one other board that I want to address bef- before the benches, you joined the Central Park Conservancy [New York, New York] in 1981, and this was just after--?
Speaker 2: I was one of the founding trustees.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So, Gordon was the--was the commissioner.
Speaker 1: Gordon?
Speaker 2: Davis [HistoryMaker Gordon J. Davis].
Speaker 1: Right.  And can you just describe what--what were you doing?  What was--what is the Central Park Conservancy?
Speaker 2: The, the city had gone through a financial crisis, so one of the things they stopped doing basically was really tending to the parks.  So New York [New York]--I mean, Central Park [New York, New York] is one of the great public spaces in the country and so the mission was to try to find some way to substitute for withdrawn public resources.  And the idea was that the Central Park Conservancy would basically take over or at least partner with the park service in managing the--managing and restoring Central Park.  And the arrangement was--with mayor, I think, Koch [Ed Koch], was that as the conservancy raised money, the city had to agree not to drop its support.  So, we weren't just, you know, filling a hole that was being dug deeper as we were going.  And, you know, it worked.  There was a very, very talented administrator, a woman named Elizabeth Barlow [Elizabeth Barlow Rogers].  Bill Beinecke [William S. Beinecke] who was a major Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] presence was the chair of the board along with a fellow named Lewis Bernard [Lewis W. Bernard] from Morgan Stanley [Morgan Stanley and Company; Morgan Stanley Wealth Management].  And then, of course, Gordon was parks commissioner.  And they were just very--the, the conservancy was very successful in raising a lot of money and redid Central Park and have maintained it, and are now--kind of have to--you know, it's ready for a major--another major due (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 2: But no one--
Speaker 1: It was dramatic.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Nobody knew what was gonna happen you know, how well this thing was gonna go.  But, you know, Central Park was--you know, it just turned into--I mean, it's one of the (laughter) problems with (unclear), you know, it's success.  I mean, you have a nice day, you know, the great lawn, you can hardly get a place to sit down, it's so--it's so crowded, and the bicyclists, and, you know, it's a--it's just a fabulous, fabulous urban space.  So, Betsy and Gordon and Bill Beinecke, you know, just did a terrific job.
Story_ID: 668788
Speaker 1: The next year in 1981--well, '81 [1981]--'81 [1981] to '82 [1982], your father [Barrington D. Parker, Sr.] presided over the trial of John Hinckley, Jr., who--for the attempted murder of President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That was a huge case.
Speaker 2: Huge case, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did, did, did you talk to your father about this case?
Speaker 2: Oh, all the time, yeah, yeah.  You know, he was a very talented trial judge and it was--you know, he did a terrific job on it.
Speaker 1: As your father was being a judge, did you have the desire to be a judge before becoming one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't--you know what I wanted to do?  I wanted to do a stint in the government and I didn't know exactly what.  I mean, one of the problems was, you know, I was on the Legal Defense Fund board [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] and, you know, the Reagan administration was not about to appoint me to anything.  And so--and also, you know, I was so involved in trying to build this firm.  I mean, I was not certainly in a position to leave it.  So, that possibility really re- resurfaced when President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] got elected.  And I remember that summer, I was up on the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] and Vernon was very--Vernon and I were very close, and Vernon was immensely helpful.  Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] was immensely helpful in getting my law firm [Parker, Auspitz, Neesemann and Delehanty, P.C.; Morrison and Foerster LLP] started.  He was on like a half dozen boards and he sat down and wrote the general counsels of each of those companies and said, you know, give us business, and it was just--you know, it was--he, he was just so generous with his time and advice and so forth.  He was Toni's [Toni Trent Parker] father's protege.  So, Toni's father--Vernon first came up here to run UNCF [United Negro College Fund], and Vernon--and, and Bill Trent [William J. Trent, Jr.] kind of walked him around town, introduced him to people, gave him suggestions on fundraising and stuff.  Bill Trent was also on the Urban League [National Urban League] board.  And then Vernon did UNCF for a couple years and then when Whitney Young died, Vernon became head of the Urban League.  So, that was the other family connect.  He was just a close--I mean, known--a very--a close friend forever, and he was just terrifically helpful in trying to start the law firm.  And anyway, so we were up in the Vineyard, and this was August--
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: When was the election, '92 [1992]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was Clinton elected?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So, I--you know, he knew I had some interest in government, so he asked me what I wanted to do when Clinton became president (laughter).  And (laughter) I said, you know, "Let me think about it," and I said, you know, "The election is just--the election is still four months away."  And he says, "Oh, this is in the bag.  We're gonna win this."  So, the, the Democratic insiders knew early on that Clinton was, was, was gonna win.  And so at that point, I had--I was close to fifty and so I had a decision between whether I wanted to go into government and the federal bench in New York, there were like twenty-two seats and eleven of them were vacant, so I could either go into the government and then I'd have to sort of come back out and figure out what I'm gonna do, or go at that point on the bench.  So, I decided to go on the bench.
Story_ID: 668789
Speaker 1: And so telling Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] that you wanted to go on the bench, made that happen?
Speaker 2: Well, yes it--I mean, he's always been helpful, but Moynihan [Daniel Patrick Moynihan] was the senator and Moynihan had a judicial selection panel, and the process had gone back to Javits [Jacob K. Javits].  And the deal was, you couldn't lobby Moynihan.  District court judgeships are essentially senatorial patronage, court of appeals judgeships, White House patronage.
Speaker 1: Got it.
Speaker 2: So, Moynihan had a judicial selection panel, and so you just had to go through the, the committee.  But, I mean, there were eleven vacancies.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, you know, by that time, I had kind of--you know, I had been very active in bar stuff.  I had done a lot of pro bono work and, you know, was a--thought I was a reasonably competent lawyer, and I--you know, a bunch of the people in the selection committee I knew.
Speaker 1: And so you were appointed by President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], correct?
Speaker 2: Well, you're nominated by Clinton and then confirmed by the [U.S.] Senate.
Speaker 1: And confirmed by--in '94 [1994]?
Speaker 2: Ninety-four [1994].
Speaker 1: Now, transitioning, you were still owning your law firm, right?  Or partners?
Speaker 2: I was a partner at Morrison and Foerster [Morrison and Foerster LLP].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Going from being a partner in a law firm to a government job is a huge difference, one of them being pay.
Speaker 2: Right.  I mean, I had prepared for it.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, that was a nonissue for you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 668790
Speaker 1: Talk about the, the role of being a judge on, on that court.  It was the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, correct?
Speaker 2: Which basically is Manhattan [New York], the Bronx [New York], Westchester County [New York], Rockland County [New York], Orange County [New York], Suffolk--not Suffolk County [New York], there's another one that's--Dutchess County [New York].  I'm sorry, yeah, Dutchess.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it's a big--
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: --large area.
Speaker 2: Right, a large area, most of the businesses obviously in New York City [New York, New York].  And there was a--they, they had opened a new branch of the court up in White Plains [New York] where they sent me and it worked out okay 'cause I could still live in Stamford [Connecticut] and, you know, it was--I'd drive the girls to work in--to school in the morning and then go to court.  And it was a, you know, small courthouse.  There were four judges there, but the work was real interesting.  The criminal work was real interesting, in many ways more interesting than the work downtown.  And it was a great place to be.  I thoroughly enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: What--are there any highlight cases that you recall?
Speaker 2: I had a--the, the, the U.S. attorney indicted some Texaco [Texaco, Inc.] officials for destroying documents in the course of a race discrimination case, so I had that case.  They indicted Darryl Strawberry for tax evasion; I had that.  This Russian woman [Rita Gluzman] who was married to a very prominent scientist [Yakov Gluzman] out at Cold Spring Harbor [New York] murdered him, cut up his body and so forth.  Anyway, I had that case.  But, the thing about the federal bench is that there are--you know, those are high profile cases, but a lot of the cases that are not--wouldn't be considered high profile, none- nonetheless, you know, very interesting, very challenging.
Speaker 1: And you--there was a case, at least one regarding terrorism where you and a fellow justice seemed to be at odds, Michael, is it Mukasey [Michael Mukasey]?  Is that how you say his name?  So, the--this is--the--what I'm reading is that you went--you were on different sides of the debate on what rights must be afforded to terrorism suspects detained by the federal government.  Do you recall this?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So, we don't have to talk about that one.  Do--in terms of--do you--in terms of dealing with--because it's federal government and this is during a period where--well, I guess we're always in some kind of war, but do, do you remember at all any of your work having to do with terrorism?
Speaker 2: That was later.  That was on the court of appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit].
Speaker 1: Oh, was it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so there's--it's marked in the wrong place.  The--on, on the court, can you describe the process that you're working through when, you know, you were preparing for a case when you were talking to the other judges on the court?  This was a small court; you said there were three judges?
Speaker 2: You, you--district courts, you're basically working by yourself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, if you had a real problem, you walk down the hall and talk to someone, but cases get filed in the clerk's office and they get wheeled out randomly to the--to the judges, so you are--you know, you manage the case, you supervise the development of the case.  If the--most of the cases settled, but if the case is tried, you pre- you know, you--you're presiding at the trial.
Story_ID: 668791
Speaker 1: What is your relationship as a judge to the attorneys, to the--you know, the--in, in--how, how does it work?  How does the courtroom work when you're presiding over a trial?
Speaker 2: Well, you sit up on the bench and you make rulings and they call you your honor (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, in terms of--are there mainly the same attorneys who are coming before you?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean, Westchester [Westchester County, New York]--out, out in Westchester, you saw--you know, some attorneys were, you know, had, had practices that got them into federal court.  I mean, you, you, you obviously don't know, who's not coming, so you can't--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --tell whether they're typical or not.
Speaker 1: And what was the adjustment like going from being litigator to being a judge?
Speaker 2: Being a judge is a great job because you, you--all of a sudden you don't--you have--you, you, you sort of create your own structure.  You don't have committee meetings to go to, you don't have reports to write, you don't have to keep track of your time, you don't have to interview new hires, you don't have to worry about office matters, et cetera, et cetera.  So, it's a--the work is super interesting as a trial judge.  You see stuff that you just would never see any place else.  It's just--stuff you hear, I mean, the stuff you read in the presentence reports in connection with sentencing, you know, the criminal stuff, you know, about drug operations, about money laundering, about fraud, fraudulent business schemes and so forth.
Speaker 1: And what type of research are you doing or your clerks doing on your behalf to get ready for these cases?
Speaker 2: What do you mean, what type of research?
Speaker 1: Well, so, you know, you mentioned several topics like money laundering (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You get briefs from the parties, so your job basically--your, your--you're kind of a referee, so the parties bring you the issues teed up in the form of, you know, brief from the government or brief from the defense counsel or brief from the plaintiff or brief from the defendant, and so you--that--that's basically your--the foundation of what you have to think about and what you have to work on.
Speaker 1: And you're reading--you're being an avid reader helped?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There's a lot of--and there's a lot of--you have a lot of cases, so you gotta--you've gotta stay organized, you've gotta--you gotta be efficient.  Otherwise--if you get behind, it's very hard to get, get caught up.
Speaker 1: How many cases do you have in a week typically?
Speaker 2: On the district court?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, it varies.  We--if you're on trial, that's basically all you're doing.  You'll have a docket that may have 100 cases, and so things are popping up in all those cases all the time.  So, you may have a hearing that will take a couple days.  You may just be in your office doing written work, and some of the written work is easy and straight forward, some of it is complicated and relatively time consuming.
Speaker 1: How long did you serve on that court [U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York]?
Speaker 2: Until 2001.
Speaker 1: So, I'm looking at one of the cases.  I believe this is where you wrote the opinion for Trinity United Methodist Parish versus Board of Education of Newburgh [Trinity United Methodist Parish v. Board of Education of the City School District of the City of Newburgh].  Do you remember that case?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: There are lots of cases, right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No recollection of it at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 668792
Speaker 1: Well, actually, I want to ask you--couple more minutes.  I'll ask you this one last question.  This is actually about your wife, Toni's [Toni Trent Parker] work, because in, in '98 [1998], she published the first in the 'Black Books Galore!' series?
Speaker 2: She started this business in the '80s [1980s] and it was essentially promoting and later--promoting African American children's books.
Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, she would have these fairs.  There was a big one in The Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.], big one at the Cathedral of Saint John the Divine [New York, New York], and one in Stamford [Connecticut], and she would have auth- she would have illustrators come and illus- draw pictures and explain what they were doing.  She would have celebrities come and read children's books and she would have authors there selling and autographing the books.
Speaker 1: And this, what impact did that have on the--on, on the market, on the black children's book market, do you know?
Speaker 2: I can't tell you that, but these fairs were very successful.  I mean, people were lined up down the street when the one here in New York [New York] opened, you know, and big crowd at The Kennedy Center.
Speaker 1: And they went from the '80s [1980s] to the '90s [1990s]?
Speaker 2: She could--once she got sick, she could no longer do it, but she had all of her pals reading them.  I mean, Spike Lee would read, Al Roker would read.  Down in Washington [D.C.], [HistoryMaker] Alma Powell would read, Arthur Ashe would read, and they were very successful.  I mean, people all--you know, every black author and illustrator of children's books in the country knew about 'Black Books Galore!' (simultaneous).
