Story_ID: 666609
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am could you please state your full name and spell it for us please.
Speaker 2: Gwendolyn Denise Quinn [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Quinn], G-W-E-N-D-O-L-Y-N, Gwendolyn, Denise, D-E-N-I-S-E, Quinn, Q-U-I-N-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 12th, 1960.  I was born in Augusta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a celebrity publicist, a media strategist and writer.
Speaker 1: Now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is March 29th, 19--I mean March 29th, 2017.
Speaker 1: And you're not the only one that has done that.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In New York City [New York, New York].
Story_ID: 666610
Speaker 1: There are five lightweight questions we always ask in the beginning as kind of a warm up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: First one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  I love food, all kinds of food, but I love pastas, and starches and fish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I love colors, just beautiful bright vibrant colors, yeah.  I mean I would say probably red maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring, yeah, and fall.
Speaker 1: Fav- okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, South Africa, Cape Town.
Speaker 1: And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Oh God, scripture, part of it.  I'm gonna say, "No weapon formed against you shall prosper" [Isaiah 54:17].
Story_ID: 666611
Speaker 1: All right now I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'll ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Lonnie Quinn, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's birth name is Queen E. Bradshaw, but her name is now, after marriage, Queen Esther Quinn [Queen Bradshaw Quinn].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth?
Speaker 2: December 30th, either she was born in 1930, 1931 or 1932.  Her records reflect all those dates, yeah, 'cause you know back then they had problems with documentation for birth certificates, you know, so.
Speaker 1: Now was she born in Abbeville, Georgia?
Speaker 2: She was born in Abbeville, Georgia.
Speaker 1: That's A-B-B-E-V-I-L-L-E?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family.  How far back can you trace that side and what are the stories--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Larry [Larry Crowe], do you have your microphone on?
Speaker 1: And what are the stories associated with your mother's side of the family?
Speaker 2: I remember going to visit my grandmother, my mother, at the time we were living in Newark [New Jersey] and every summer I would go visit my grandmother, Fannie Lou Bradshaw [Fannie Bradshaw].  She was a seamstress.  I remember going to church every Sunday and--
Speaker 1: Well that's great.  That's not growing up, I'm asking about what do you know about that side of the family, your mother's side?  How, how far back can you trace them and what do you know?
Speaker 2: Pretty much, I don't have any memories of my great-grandmother, I just heard a lot about her.
Speaker 1: Well do you have stories about where the family, was the family originally from Abbeville or can you go back (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, a lot of my family's from Augusta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother's side of the family is from Augusta, yeah.
Speaker 1: Does anybody on that side of the family have any stories about slavery or any survivals of Africa or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --stories about I guess what life was like in during the first part of the century, or?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.  None that I recall.  I know there's stories, but none that I really recall.
Speaker 1: Well what kind of work did your mother's family do in Abbeville?
Speaker 2: I don't, see after my parents, well my mother, they both were born in Abbeville, but after my mother moved from Abbeville, they moved to Augusta, so I think she was there for like a very short period and she moved to Augusta right away.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, so did she finish school in Augusta?
Speaker 2: She finished school in Augusta.  She went to school, I remember with James Brown, my mom, the same school.  She went to Paine College in Augusta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Well did she have any stories about James Brown?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Just that he would come to school and she just would talk about him all the time, you know, she, nothing really specific, but, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, was she--
Speaker 2: I won't repeat.
Speaker 1: Well did he show any promise as a musician?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think, you know, he was just a young kid at school, you know.  Later, I think, that's when it happened.  She was with him very early.
Speaker 1: I mean, I guess, well, if I ask this question it may not be too bad.  Did she consider him, I mean did the other kids consider him somebody that was gone be somebody?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  Yeah, definitely, I don't think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's interesting that, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to see what people--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not, so not everybody looks like they're gonna be somebody.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 666612
Speaker 1: So Augusta, GA [Augusta, Georgia]. Yeah. So, so your mother [Queen Bradshaw Quinn] went to Paine College [Augusta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: She went to Paine College--
Speaker 1: Right, so--
Speaker 2: --for a couple of years and then she moved to Chicago [Illinois] for a couple of years, and, yeah, but my mother is a, she started off as a LPN and became a nurse with LPN, licensed practical nurse.  I don't even know if they still use that term anymore, but.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A registered nurse is when you have to go to school longer to become--
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So she's a licensed practical nurse.  In those days a lot of black people could not become a registered nurse, they wouldn't let you.  They would let you be an LPN, they would almost put a cap on how far you could go.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you know you couldn't work in the white hospitals where, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Not in Georgia.  So that's probably (unclear).  Did she study in Chicago when she went to Chicago?
Speaker 2: She went to Chicago, yeah, she did go to school there.  I can't remember the name of the school now, but she did go to like a trade school or college or junior college or something, but she went there as well.
Speaker 1: Was it a nursing school, or?
Speaker 2: It wasn't nursing.  It could have been more liberal arts, I'd have to, you know, it escapes me right this, at this moment.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know they had a couple of medical schools for black people in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was hard to get in any of them.  I mean the doctors couldn't practice at white hospitals for years.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, so.
Speaker 2: She stayed with some family members out in Chicago and she stayed out there just for a few years, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And so, so she wanted to become a nurse, right?
Speaker 2: She wanted, she's been a nurse all her life (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) Okay.
Speaker 2: --before she retired.  She was a great nurse.
Story_ID: 666613
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father now.  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Lonnie E. Quinn [Lonnie Quinn, Sr.].  And it's L-O-N-N-I-E, and his middle name is Edward, E-D-W-A-R-D, Quinn, Q-U-I-N-N.
Speaker 1: Now was he born in Abbeville [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: He was born in Abbeville too.
Speaker 1: And what year was he born?
Speaker 2: He's eighty-seven this year so I think that would make it, 1932, I believe, maybe, 1930.
Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty [1930].
Speaker 2: Thirty-one [1931].  You know they, that whole '30 [1930], '31 [1931], '32 [1932] was always very sketchy, yeah.  I think my mother [Queen Bradshaw Quinn] may be one year older than him, yeah, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so again, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family?  What were the Quinns doing?  What were they famous for, what kind of talents did they exhibit, you know.
Speaker 2: It's a, it's a long story because my father sort of adopted that name from another, another source.  I think we were supposed to be Wilcox [ph.].  So that's a very, and you know, every time, well, I was supposed to talk to you some of my, my father now has dementia so a lot of the questions that I have now I can't really get answers on.  He survived, although he remembers a lot of his childhood, you know, and a lot of my other uncles and aunts that was sort of trying to put the story together for me, they passed on, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what is your understanding of this?  I know it's got to be a story as to why he changed his name from Wilcox to Quinn.
Speaker 2: I, I'm not sure.  I don't wanna say 'cause I'm not sure.  I just know that my grandmother, I'm not sure, I can't say with certainty so I don't want to say at all.  I'm just very cautious about it.
Speaker 1: You don't have to be certain, but it is a clue for whoever come behind you to find it.  That's why your relative wants to know what are the stories so they can have a clue about it.  Not all the stuff is clear.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's really unclear to me.  I'm sorry, but I just--
Speaker 1: Somebody get in trouble or something?
Speaker 2: No, it was nothing like that, it was nothing like that.  I never got it was anything like that.  I just know that my, Quinn came out of the blue for some reason.  Yeah, it came out of the blue for some reason.  But I know Wilcox is something that was supposed to be part of our history.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And I remember it had something to do with my mother, my grandmother on my father's side.  I'm sorry I can't give you more information, but it's just, you know, I've heard these stories as a kid and it just, some of the stuff I just, you know, I don't recall accurately.
Speaker 1: Well everything we're asking for may not be accurate 'cause it's a story.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: As long as it's framed like that, that's what it is then (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, still a mystery.
Speaker 1: At any rate, so, now, what about his, were his parents named Quinn as well?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: He named himself Quinn?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I believe that's what happened.  My grandmother, Alene Lacey [Alene Lacey Lempley] of Kissimmee, Florida, she was involved with the Wilcoxes.  I think that's the connection there, but her last name in, and I'm not sure if it's her maiden name or a married name.  I think it was her married name, was Lacey, Alene Lacey of Kissimmee, Florida.  But my grandmother, she had my father when she was young and so my father spent a lot of time with her mother and his aunts, and his mother, too.  They were all like sort of raising him, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he wasn't raised as a Quinn, he was raised as a--
Speaker 2: No, he was not raised as a Quinn.
Speaker 1: Was he raised as a Wilcox?
Speaker 2: No, I don't, no, I don't think so.  No, I don't think it was a Wilcox, I don't wanna sound weird, but I just, you know, but Quinn came in longer--later, later.
Speaker 1: Well, you know what his parents did for a living?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, she was a domestic, and my father, my grandfather he had eventually moved up to New Jersey, Perth Amboy, New Jersey.  And he did, was it, you know he worked in the garage.  He did garage work.
Speaker 1: Mechanical?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sort of like a mechanic, yeah.  That's what I remember.  I remember visiting him.  Every summer we would go to Perth Amboy, New Jersey.
Story_ID: 666614
Speaker 1: Did your father [Lonnie Quinn, Sr.] get a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't go to college, but he was very well read and he worked also in a hospital and my father always worked two jobs.  So his day job he worked at St. Elizabeth Hospital [St. Elizabeths Hospital], in Washington, D.C.  He was a mental health counselor there.  And then he worked at Providence [Providence Hospital, Washington, D.C.] and Washington Hospital Center [MedStar Washington Hospital Center, Washington, D.C.] and they called him, I think like technicians is another name they use for them now.  Almost like an aide now, they call it.
Speaker 1: He worked as a counselor without a degree?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean they were, they were mental health counselors back then, that's what they were called. Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah. At any rate, well--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, that's what they were called (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, (unclear) I've never heard that before.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 666615
Speaker 1: Well at any rate, ho- is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were both born in Abbeville, Georgia and I think they met like around six or seven years old, when, yeah, they met at six or seven years old and then they became friends and I remember my father [Lonnie Quinn, Sr.] asked my mom [Queen Bradshaw Quinn] to go to the movies with her and they would go to church together.  It was a church in Abbeville, Georgia, they would go to.  And then my mom, yeah, my mom had moved away.  She was born in Abbeville, but a few years later they had moved to Augusta [Georgia], so she would come back over the summer or during vacation and that's when she met my father.  My father was still living in Abbeville, Georgia, and, and then they met around when she was six or seven years old.  And they went to the movies, they went to church; so that's how long they've known each other.
Speaker 1: Hm. Okay, so a long time.
Speaker 2: Long time.
Story_ID: 666616
Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities, their talents, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walked, how they talk, what they look like--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably my father [Lonnie Quinn, Sr.], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, why?
Speaker 2: A lot of people say I look like my dad.  I mean depending, a lot of people think that I, I certainly have traits of my mom [Queen Bradshaw Quinn], but my father, you know that independent, strong will, you know, determined, you know.  Both of my parents had, you know, great work ethics, so I definitely got that from them.  Yeah, I would say my dad probably.  My mother would say, "You act just like your father."
Speaker 1: What's your mother like?
Speaker 2: My mother, she's sweet.  She's very soft spoken, very, she's a great mom.  She's very creative.  She always just took care of her family.  She worked really hard and just, you know, took care of her family and just was a sweet Christian woman.  She's a sweet Christian woman, you know.  Very supportive.  She always put her family first.  She always put her kids first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was one of them, like it was all about us, you know.
Story_ID: 666617
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about your--do, do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have a sister.  I'm the, I'm the youngest out of three.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have a sister, Vanessa Quinn; and a brother, Lonnie Quinn, Jr.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us something about them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my sister, she works for FEMA [Federal Emergency Management Agency], [U.S.] Department of Homeland Security, and she has a master's degree, and she's very active.  She skies.  She's very active, dancer, skier, you know, very smart, educated.  My brother had a career in the [U.S. military] service and he's retired now.  He does some works, he does some work for the Department of Homeland Security now and he lives in Florida now, Orlando, Florida, yep.  Great brother, great family, you know we're all really very close and, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you're the oldest?
Speaker 2: I'm the youngest.
Speaker 1: Youngest, okay, you're the youngest (unclear).
Speaker 2: My brother is the older, the oldest--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and my sister is the middle child.
Story_ID: 666618
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh god. I jus- no, I just saw, you know I think it's more I saw a lot of pictures and I remember I was born in Augusta [Georgia] but we had moved to Newark after the, after I was born so my memories are more from Newark, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember cutting the chairs.  I was a little girl.
Speaker 1: Cutting the chairs, with a, a knife or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I used to get in trouble.  I used to cut the chairs and, yeah, I remember our neighbors, the Stricklands [ph.], who are still living in Newark, New Jersey, and they were best friends with my mom [Queen Bradshaw Quinn].  I remember, you know, my mom, she, even when she was going to work as a nurse, being very beautiful and glamorous, I remember that.  I remember swallowing a penny once, had to be rushed to the hospital, but I think a lot of kids did that. I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 1: They did, yeah.
Speaker 2: So I remember a lot of the social, social movement going on in Newark at the time, you know, because they.  We moved from Newark, I think right after the riots, but prior to that I remember my mom, 'cause my father [Lonnie Quinn, Sr.] always worked two jobs.  He really always worked, you know.  And, but I remember my mom, she would, she would be out protesting and then she was in the paper, the local paper.
Speaker 1: Does she work with, does she, do you know the group that she was with?
Speaker 2: No, but she was--
Speaker 1: At the time I know the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was doing something, then you had like (unclear), you had Amiri Baraka's group--
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: --who was there.
Speaker 2: I just remember it was the early '60s [1960s] and when it was time to go out and protest, she was there, you know, and I remember her being in the paper and all that.  And I remember my father always being at work, but always you know, just a great dad.  I was the baby so (laughter) I was the special one in the house (laughter).
Story_ID: 666619
Speaker 1: You started school in Newark [New Jersey], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And where did you start school?
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: I don't even remember the name of the school I went to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember the school I went to, I remember more when we moved 'cause after Newark and after the riots, we moved to Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Now did you, do you have any memories of the riots?
Speaker 2: No, I just remember my mom [Queen Bradshaw Quinn], you know, making sure we was in the house all the time and, and, you know, just making sure we were okay, and, you know, that was pretty much what I remember, and, you know, of course, the radio, listening to everything on the radio and the television, and the neighbors and everybody gathering you know, 'cause it was a, we lived in an apartment building at the time, so I remember that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well you were seven years old and you're still little you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As far as school went, I remember school more when I moved to Washington, D.C.  And I think I started school there in the second or third grade.  I think it was the third grade when we moved there.  But I know things had gotten really bad in Newark and it wasn't the same and my dad [Lonnie Quinn, Sr.] was like, "We're leaving," and that's when we moved to Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you left Newark in '67 [1967] and in '68 [1968] Washington, D.C. had the worst riot it ever had, after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Southeast D.C. [Southeast, Washington, D.C.] where you all lived was devastated.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  But we lived on the, I don't know what section of Washington they call it now, but we literally lived right on the border of Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wait, Southeast--
Speaker 1: It says Southeast here, but I don't know--
Speaker 2: It was Southeast but if you walk right across the street you were in Prince George's County in Maryland.  So Southeast, I lived sort of like almost like at the end of Southeast, but right across the street from Maryland, so I remember the areas that were, you know, where they rioted in Southeast.  Yeah, I remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't live, I didn't live near those areas.  We, you know, I guess it was close because Washington is very small, but like we didn't live in a lot of the public housing, we didn't live there, we had like pri- you know, apartment buildings that we lived in; and I think a lot of that happened at a certain section of Southeast Washington.
Story_ID: 666620
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the name of your school there in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: It was Draper Elementary School [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: D-R-A-P-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.  And did you like school?
Speaker 2: Not, I wasn't, I wasn't a bad student and I wasn't the number top student in the class but I was good at certain things.  I, you know what?  I was really good when I applied myself.  And sometimes I didn't want to apply myself.  But, I mean honestly that's, that's how it was, but I was, I was above average.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was a little up, definitely.
Speaker 1: What were you interested in?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I think I was more interested in, back then I was interested in music and entertainment, you know.  That was always bubbling under for me because my sister [Vanessa Quinn], she was, she's part of a dance group and my brother [Lonnie Quinn, Jr.] was my real introduction to music because he just, he knew everything about music, you know.  That's when I discovered Earth, Wind and Fire and all of those groups of the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] and, of course, I grew up in Washington, so he would hear all of that on radio, you know.  And concerts that come through the city so I was just exposed to music very early and entertainment very, very early, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, was the radio on in your house a lot?
Speaker 2: No, we actually had a lot of albums.  We played the 45s [45 rpm record] and the LPs [long play record].  And we actually played music.  I mean I listened to WHUR [WHUR Radio, Washington, D.C.] in the evenings.  I remember that being on in the evening 'cause I was just fascinated with Melvin Lindsey and Quiet Storm on the radio.  I just, you know, I used to go to sleep to his station every night.  I remember the songs that they used to play, 'cause they played music that most radio stations, I discovered later, most radio stations never played, and they also played a lot of music that we didn't own, we didn't have in our own households, so, yeah I was listening to music very, very, very early.
Speaker 1: What kind of music did your parents [Queen Bradshaw Quinn and Lonnie Quinn, Sr.] play on the albums?
Speaker 2: They played a lot of soul music, you know, a lot of soul music, pretty much soul music, a little blues, not really jazz, but just a lot of soul music, the music of the '30s [1930s], '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s], but as, when I was born, of course, it was always soul music, the Motown [Motown Records] era, the Philadelphia [Philadelphia International Records] era.
Speaker 1: Gamble and Huff [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble and HistoryMaker Leon Huff]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, just anything that was R and B and soul, that was what I listened to.
Speaker 1: Did you have favorite artists?
Speaker 2: I think, yeah, I loved all those artists.  I remember Earth, Wind and Fire, New Birth and Chi-Lites [The Chi-Lites], and--
Speaker 1: And you met New Birth, right? Now I remember reading that.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: I got in trouble but yeah, that was much later when I was in high school.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But, yeah, I just loved all of the music that was out (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) As a kid, I guess you're--
Story_ID: 666621
Speaker 1: You're a, a grade schooler from I guess eight to, from about '68 [1968] to si- '72 [1972] or so--
Speaker 2: I don't recall (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you're in school, elementary.
Speaker 2: I don't recall years, but I know Draper [Draper Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] was up to the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then I went to high school at Hart Junior High School [Charles Hart Junior High School; Charles Hart Middle School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Hart?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, and that was from seventh grade to the ninth grade, and then the tenth grade I went to Ballou High School [Frank W. Ballou Senior High School] in Southeast [Washington, D.C.] and then we moved to Maryland and I graduated from Potomac Senior High School [sic. Potomac High School] in Oxon Hill, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, now were there any special teachers or mentors in school or otherwise when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember a teacher named Miss Sutton [ph.] in elementary school.  She always had that Afro and she was always encouraging to us.  I remember a Latin teacher.  I had taken Latin I think in the third grade, I remember that teacher, can't remember her name, but her, you know, face.  And then when I was in junior high, I remember this teacher named Miss Amaker [ph.].  She was really just wonderful.  She was just gorgeous and beautiful.  I just thought she was the most prettiest woman.  And I remember also, what grade do you takes civics in?  I think it was--
Speaker 1: Civics would be eleventh or twelfth grade.
Speaker 2: No, we took it at like in the sixth or seventh grade, and I remember this white man who was, he taught us civics.  I learned so much about civics and government at a young age.  I think I was in seventh grade.  I had to be in seventh grade 'cause I had left Draper and I remember, and I was so good at those classes, you know, later as I went to high school, those political science classes, things like that I always found an interest in those courses.  And I always made like A's in those courses, yeah, and I just, there was something about him that I just learned so much and he kind of helped me understand a little bit of the world at a very young age.
Speaker 1: This is junior high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Seventh grade civics.
Story_ID: 666622
Speaker 1: So when you're about, I guess about thirteen or so was when Watergate was going down.  Was that a topic in school, in middle school [Charles Hart Junior High School; Charles Hart Middle School, Washington, D.C.], they talk about the Watergate (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was--
Speaker 1: --situation, Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] resigning and all that was going on.
Speaker 2: I don't know so, I don't remember so much of it being a heavy topic, I just remember it dominated the airwaves.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I would guess if it was gone be in a civics class, and all that was going on--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I think we talked about it, but, you know, it was, it was heavy duty stuff.  I remember that.  I remember like that whole period.  It was like, wow.
Speaker 1: Those were the days you only had like maybe four or five TV stations.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Three of 'em would be on the Watergate hearings.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  It was ABC, CBS and NBC.  I don't even think we were looking at FOX really back then, I think it was just--
Speaker 1: Probably hadn't even come out yet.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was those networks, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I remember Walter Cronkite, you know CBS was a big news station, yeah I remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they didn't emphasize that?
Speaker 2: I think he may have emphasized it, but it wasn't, you know, we were learning about the structure of government and, you know, we probably did some things about that, but, you know, we had to read papers and, and report back to him and certain things, watch television, but he was really, he really, the teacher really wanted us to read more and that was always part of the homework assignment, we had to read The Washington Post.  I guess that's why I still love that paper so much.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: I loved it.
Speaker 1: Now, did you get--did you get a chance, I mean, did you get the Afro at home?
Speaker 2: Oh, everyone did the Afro, yeah.  I did, I had a beautiful Afro.
Speaker 1: I mean the Afro paper [Afro-American Newspapers].
Speaker 2: The Afro, no, I didn't read the African American papers there.  It was always, I think I was reading Jet.  I liked Jet because at the time because you can learn about what's happening with black people all over the country, opposed to just in your city.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Jet magazine.
Speaker 2: You know, Jet was to me like a, a collection of key stories in the African American community from black newspapers.
Speaker 1: Did they also have that great entertainment section with the weekly Soul Brothers Top 40, Top 20, or whatever it, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah, 'cause your, your parents, right, that was their chart because they didn't know anything about the Billboard chart, it was the Jet chart; and if you was in the Jet chart, you was happening (laughter).  I remember that.
Story_ID: 666623
Speaker 1: This is a time also when there is a lot of black movies being made in Hollywood for the first time in a long time.
Speaker 2: The black exploitation [blaxploitation] period.
Speaker 1: That's what people have called it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But a lot of black talent was on the screen and you could go to the neighborhood theater and see the movies there.
Speaker 2: Well I wasn't really, I remember my parents [Queen Bradshaw Quinn and Lonnie Quinn, Sr.] dragging me to a couple of those movies that I was not supposed to see, you know, necessarily, it wasn't rated X movies, you know, but it was not something you typically, you know, some other kids were in there too.  But I remember, yeah, I definitely remember that black exploitation period because it was, I remember, I think this was probably in high school, I don't wanna jump around, but I do remember that period 'cause it was the Coffee Browns [sic. Foxy Brown] and it was the Jim Kellys and it was the James, James, Jim Browns and Fred Williamsons, and, you know, I remember that, you know, I remember that.
Speaker 1: All right, so this is that, oh, and--
Speaker 2: I remember that period.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, I guess funk music was the most popular music I guess.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, 'cause I, you know, we had go-go music in Washington [D.C.], and I remember one of the founders of go-go music, Sugar Bear [Gregory "Sugar Bear" Eliot], they called him Sugar Bear, from, he was in a group called E.U. [Experience Unlimited], and he went to high school with my brother [Lonnie Quinn, Jr.] or sister [Vanessa Quinn], I don't remember, but it's amazing, like he's still around touring, and he looks the same as he did when I was a little girl.
Speaker 1: Okay, now many people naturally remember E.U. from the Spike Lee movie 'School Daze.'
Speaker 2: Oh, I remember him way before that.
Speaker 1: He had a song called 'Doing the Butt' [sic. 'Da Butt'], that was the big--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that was a big commercial hit for them, but I remember him way before that when they used to play at the recreation centers and the high schools.  They were pretty big back then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean they were not pretty, they were not big commercially, you know, but they were local stars for us.
Speaker 1: Now what is go-go music anyway?  What was it?
Speaker 2: I don't know how, it's, it's, I don't know how it's described from a music, from a music point of view, but it was just a lot of the drumming I think.
Speaker 1: Well correct me if I'm wrong.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But a record is played and then you have like the live drummers playing along with the record.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That's, that's go-go, right?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Was that, was there another something?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, you know, the way to explain it.
Speaker 1: The deejay might be playing a record and then, now I'm asking you, I want you to tell it, but I.
Speaker 2: Go-go, I mean, you know, I loved go-go music when I was a kid.  I didn't appreciate, I'll put it to you this way, I know it was a sound that came from Washington, D.C., but I don't think I started appreciating the music until I moved away.  You know what I mean?  When I worked with other recording artists, later on when I was involved in the industry and people always revered that sound, and I remember that from a lot of the artists I worked with.  They said, "Aw, you grew up in the town that created go-go music," and I was like, "Yeah." I mean, so I remember it as far as going to the different concerts, but I wasn't, it wasn't on my playlist every day.  I was listening to soul music.  It wasn't on my playlist.  And funk music, Parliament-Funkadelic and Bootsy Collins and, you know, I remember that.
Speaker 1: Did it have to be a particular kind of record to be a go-go record, or could you just, you could get some kamba drums and play along with anybody making it go-go, or some bells and stuff and (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, at the time I recall, I mean no one was playing go-go music but the, the creators of go-go music, the musicians at that time.  I mean it had not spread out into the mainstream at all, so I had never heard anyone else play it.  But you know, Sugar Bear and the guys, the guy that just passed away, the godfather of go-go, what is his name?
Speaker 1: Oh, Chuck Brown.
Speaker 2: Chuck Brown, yeah.
Speaker 1: Chuck Brown, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So I was, I just remember it from parties, it was the party music.  It was always, it was definitely the party music for D.C.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Bustin' Loose,' Chuck Brown's.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But you gotta remember when 'Bustin' Loose,' 'Doing the Butt,' and all that came out, that was years.  These guys had been doing that for years prior to that, like decades.  So we were very proud when we heard those songs on the radio, yeah, and the songs, you know, translated all over the world, eventually.  But I remember just them doing it at the high school dance, that music was played.
Story_ID: 666624
Speaker 1: Ballou High School [Frank W. Ballou Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], is it B-A-L-L-E-W, or, or?
Speaker 2: B-A-L-L-O-U.
Speaker 1: O-U. Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ballou.
Speaker 1: Ballou, and now was this an all-black high school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I thought it might be.  And the one in--
Speaker 2: At least when I was there.
Speaker 1: Oxon Hill [Maryland], Potomac High.
Speaker 2: Potomac High School.
Speaker 1: Potomac High School.
Speaker 2: That was mixed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were probably 60 percent white and 40 percent black.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now at Ballou High School, had you, where were you, now you started braiding hair, I think at some point right, for income (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I think I, yeah, I think I had started learning around the eleventh grade.  They had this gallery in Washington, 'cause we were introduced to braiding hair as an art form, not as, not as a, like cosmetology.  It was never presented to us that way.  It was a art gallery in Washington, D.C. called the Meyer Art Gallery [ph.], and, and because it was a natural hair process, you know, he started, in the back of his gallery he had a shop where women would be there braiding hair in the back, and it became a issue because you know, at one point we were not licensed hairdressers, and so his argument was you didn't have to be a licensed hairdresser, this is art, this is natural, we're not using chemicals, you know, we're not washing hair.  The customers had to wash their hair before they got there.
Speaker 1: Now this is something, this is an African art of braiding hair that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --seems to have been done somewhere down south and when African American females and little girls, their hair is braided, but as you grew up, you know, particularly until the late '60s [1960s], you know a lot of hair pressing and that sort of thing going on, with--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --girls' hair and even the black males that could afford it got their hair conked, as they say, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --processed or whatever, so the natural, I mean natural hair was not valued, you know, like that, and I think hair braiding like really gets started after the Afro comes out and people discovered you can braid your, if you braid your hair you get a bigger Afro when you unbraid it.
Speaker 2: Right, I remember that too, yeah.  And, but I think Washington sort of helped to revolutionize that whole movement back then.  It was in the late '70s [1970s], and, mid-'70s [1970s], and I, I don't know how I really got involved.  I just was good at it, and, but at that point, we were putting extensions into the hair, so it was about putting the hair extensions in and the beads and the ornaments that it was part of the whole look.  And I remember, we made, you know, but you would spend hours, you would spend anywhere from like eight hours to over twenty-four hours, two and three day intervals doing hair.  And it depended upon some people wanted it all the way down their back.  You could put, you know, somewhere between two and three hundred beads on it.  It depended on the job, but the average job was between eight hours and twelve hours.  So I always remembered making like somewhere between one hundred fifty to two hundred and fifty dollars on average, and more if the job was more elaborate.  And I was, I was just good at it and I was young.  And I was like wow, so it was a skillset that I developed.
Speaker 1: Even by the late '70s [1970s], correct me if I'm wrong, but I think [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor had braids in Essence.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't remember when she had hers, but of course, she wore her braids for years.  That was her signature--
Speaker 1: She still wears them now.
Speaker 2: Right, that's her signature look.
Speaker 1: There was a movie called '10'--
Speaker 2: Yep, Bo Derek.
Speaker 1: --blonde, Bo Derek had her hair in cornrows.
Speaker 2: And that's when they tried to make it seem like it was popular, it had been popular for years.  But you said decades or so.
Speaker 1: Like it was new, right?  But it was, had been around for a while.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, I mean it's something that, it's a skill and a style that--
Speaker 2: And, and actually when I left, I had gotten accepted in the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] to go to college there, but I wanted to move to New York [New York], so.
Speaker 1: Well I don't want to jump over all that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: --so fast.
Story_ID: 666625
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were you thinking about as, in terms of a career when you were at Potomac High School [Oxon Hill, Maryland] and, and what was the change like going from Ballou [Frank W. Ballou Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] to Potomac High School?
Speaker 2: It was, you know, I think it was, yeah, it was the first time I had really been to school with, with a lot of white kids.  It was good, actually I met some really wonderful friends there and it was a very good time.  I think I became more focused on, you know, school.  I started really liking school more then, and I think it was true because I knew I had to go to college, and I knew I had to get serious about my life.  So I think that's why probably it was better for me, and I was, you know, in school with people who were, everybody was really more focused with their education.  That's what it was about then, so, yeah it was better for me in that regard.  I had started kind of going down the wrong path in the tenth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think I had smoked weed [marijuana] or something I did.  I don't think my parents [Queen Bradshaw Quinn and Lonnie Quinn, Sr.] ever found out about it but, you know, I could, I could see what could have happened I guess if I stayed in that environment.  I guess that's when my father decided, we got to get you out of here.
Speaker 1: Now what kind of counseling did you get at Potomac High School?
Speaker 2: Counseling?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in terms of college, I mean--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they were--
Speaker 1: --counselors.
Speaker 2: The high school counselors?  They were good, they were calling us.  I remember, you know, being called in about that when I first arrived at the school.
Speaker 1: Did they encourage you to go to college, to take college prep courses?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: College and prep courses?
Speaker 2: They did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They did that and then they also like, I assumed it was something they expected, like one of my teachers was like, I forget what course I wanted to take, it could have been a political science course I wanted to try to get in.  For some reason I couldn't get in, and she wanted me to take typing.  And I was like, "Typing, I'm not gonna be a typist, you know, I'm not gonna be a secretary."  So, and I didn't understand at the time that the World Wide Web and importance of learning how to type.  I was so glad I took that typing course because (laughter), right now I, everything is on the computer.  I mean if I didn't learn that language, the computer keyboard language at that time in my life, I don't think I would have survived anything, you know, in the '80s [1980s], and not to mention that I was an excellent typist, and so when things got really rough for me years later when I moved to New York [New York], I was able to get jobs at law firms because I had excellent skills, you know, I mean I typed a hundred and something words a minute so, you know, when you go, when you have those skills you could go to a major law firm and make great money.  I wasn't a legal secretary that would just bring me in to do that 'cause it was a lot of contracts, but so I remember that.  They, they were always encouraging us to figure out what we wanted to do with our lives.
Story_ID: 666626
Speaker 1: What was your fix then in terms of career?  Did you have a career goal in high school?
Speaker 2: I didn't really.  I was, I know I had just gotten acc- you know I was accepted into the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] which is a very good school, but I didn't want to be in Washington [D.C.] anymore because starting from the eleventh and twelfth grade, I would spend my summers, at that point I was spending summers in New York [New York], and I was just fascinated about being in that city, and I just wanted to be there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So who'd you spend the summers with in New York when you--
Speaker 2: My cousins.  My mother's sister's kids, my first cousins.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah.  This would have been--
Speaker 2: I went to New York in 1980.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I graduated in 1978 from high school [Potomac High School, Oxon Hill, Maryland].  I--
Speaker 1: Did you go to University of Maryland?
Speaker 2: No, I got accepted.  I left right after, I left like that August after graduation.
Speaker 1: Oh, you went to New York?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, with three hundred dollars in my pocket (laughter), on a Greyhound bus.
Speaker 1: What did your parents [Queen Bradshaw Quinn and Lonnie Quinn, Sr.] say?  Did they think you were just visiting or what?  What did they think?
Speaker 2: No.  Well, you know, again, eleventh and twelfth grade I had spent, maybe it was even the tenth and eleventh grade, but I had spent the summer, and the twelfth grade, I had spent the summers in New York so I was convinced that that's where I was going to be, that's where I was moving.  I didn't care what my parents thought about it.  I got accepted in college, but I was not going there, and I moved to New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Like that August, that August or something, after graduation from high school, that's, you know, and I moved there, maybe like that August, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because I remember my father had a really hard time with that.
Story_ID: 666627
Speaker 1: New York City [New York, New York], what was it like in New York City.  What did you, you already knew about it, and, and what did you think you were going to do?
Speaker 2: Well I knew I had my skill as a braider, a professional braider, so I decided, well, New York was a different, a different city, and that if I was at the time going to use my skills as a hairdresser, hair stylist or whatever you want to call it, that I needed to get my license.  I needed to like do that immediately.  So I delayed going to college for about two years and I went directly to cosmetology school when I got there.  And I did that for about a year.  I had delayed that process after I met some celebrities and I went on the road with them, but that's another story, but I did enroll in cosmetology school and I think it was like a, it was either a ten month or twelve month program.  And I was really good.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you get a certificate or something back then, a license?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you had to take the state license, but I didn't want to be a hairdresser though, I just, I did it because I knew I was moving, it was a different environment in New York and if I was going to try to take care of myself at that age that I needed to have some money coming in, and I did that.
Speaker 1: Something to fall back on in case (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, because my father [Lonnie Quinn, Sr.] didn't want me to go so he wasn't sending me any money.  And, and actually to back up for a while, while I was in school, that first year in cosmetology school, I was going back home every weekend on the Greyhound bus, because I still had a lot of clients there.  And that's how I made my money.  So I would go home and work Saturday and work Sunday and go take the 3:30, my father would take me to the, to the Greyhound, Trailways, I would take the 3:00 or 3:30 bus and I would go back to New York and I would be there for school on Monday morning.  I would do that, I did that for like a year because I didn't have any clientele up there.  I still had a lot of clients in Washington [D.C.], so.  I would make anywhere from like three to five hundred dollars over the weekend.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's a lot of money.
Speaker 2: Well, I had, and then I moved, when I started school there, cosmetology school, I had moved in one of those residential hotels, so I needed to make that because you had to pay them weekly.  It was like a hundred and something dollars weekly.  And that's how I was able to pay my rent every week.  It's amazing that I did that at that age.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--now you worked with, I have a note here that you worked for, let's see, now did you work for the Robert Fiance?
Speaker 2: The Robert Fiance, Robert Fiance school of hair design [Robert Fiance Hair Design Institute, New York, New York] was the school that I attended.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay, all right, so, okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think it exists, it no longer exists.
Story_ID: 666628
Speaker 1: Now at some point you get a, some kind of introduction to Gloria Gaynor's tour, right? Is that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  I--
Speaker 1: What happened?  Now this is, music is changing really to disco at this point.  I mean this is in the disco era I guess.
Speaker 2: Well, it was disco era, around the, the--
Speaker 1: Late '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Eighties [1980s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Early '80s [1980s].  But I was introduced to her from one of my clients.  She was a doctor in Washington, D.C., and she went to, they used to call them fat farms back then, you know, I guess it was like a spa, you know, where you go and diet and get healthy, and have a program there really for women that's trying to lose weight, so she met her, the doctor client met Gloria Gaynor at this place in New Jersey, and she just, she said, "Oh my god, you hair is beautiful.  Who did your hair?"  And she said, "Oh this young girl, she just, actually she just, she just moved from Washington and she just moved to New York [New York]."  So Gloria had asked for my telephone number, and I was so stunned, you know, you gotta, you know, imagine, you know, me just moving to New York and getting a call from a big celebrity like that was a big deal, so she had invited me, she had asked me to come and do her hair which I did, and she loved it, and at that time she had a big song, she was traveling all over the world.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'I Will Survive' was a big hit.  They still play it.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was mega, it's a mega hit.  And so I had worked with her, I did her hair.  I would do her hair like once a month, you know, because she was always on the road and she got her hair done more regularly than normal clients because of her, you know, being on stage or whatever, so she then asked me to go on the road with her and she took me to, I toured Europe, certain parts of Europe and South America with her.  So I--
Speaker 1: This is 1979 or '80 [1980]?
Speaker 2: This is like 1980.
Speaker 1: Eighty [1980], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause at that point I had, and see I was in school at the hair design school [Robert Fiance Hair Design Institute, New York, New York] and it was so cool because when I got the first opportunity to go out of town, they said, "Well okay, Gwendolyn [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Quinn], if you, you know, how it works here is if you are out of school, you just have to start the next month."  So if I was going to be away for a week in June, I just had to come back and start in July, you know.  And it really delayed, I didn't graduate with the class I came in with because I was constantly traveling.  So, yeah, that was a pretty big deal back then for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when did you, how long did you do that, travel with Gloria Gaynor?
Speaker 2: I traveled with her probably about a year, or less than a year, and then I had to, you know, and every time I had to go back to school, I was less motivated to go because I was in South America, I was in Europe and then I, I, I already knew that I did not want to do hair, but I had to finish school.  I had to do that.  So I finished school, and then I landed a job at one of the top hair salons in New York City.
Story_ID: 666629
Speaker 1: Now this is Vidal Sassoon [Sassoon Salon, New York, New York], right?
Speaker 2: Vidal Sassoon.
Speaker 1: All right, so--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --that's a name everybody knows.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And did you do braiding at Vidal?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was training to become a stylist.  And they had two different areas.  Actually three areas you could go into, the barber area if you just wanted to cut hair, if you wanted to be a stylist that was, for women, that was another area, and then if you wanted to learn about hair coloring.  That's the area I went into.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Because it was, you know, again I just had, I was gifted in that area, you know, when I was working with the head of the coloring department.  And he just worked with me.  He said you know, "You're really gifted in this area," and I stayed there with him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now were there celebrity clients at Vidal Sassoon's?
Speaker 2: Well, it was some I consider, not as part of New York's elite, I would say, so I mean, they had a few celebrities in there, but it was the very wealthy old school money of New York City [New York, New York] that came into that salon.  It was a very good insight into New York society for me back at that age.  They had a few celebrities but it wasn't celebrity driven, but people with a lot of money and wealth would come in there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how--
Speaker 2: And it was at the time, it was the best, it was considered the, because of their training program, it was, it was a very intensive, like two year apprenticeship when you worked at Vidal Sassoon.  So you had to know that if you worked in that place, it was gone be at least two years before you can get on a floor to do anything.  And it was the best apprenticeship that they had in, in, in the country, especially New York City.  Like working at Vidal Sassoon was like, you have arrived.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I never forget the counselors at the, the hair school [Robert Fiance Hair Design Institute, New York, New York], was like, "Gwen [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Quinn], we have this black salon called the John Atchison hair salon [John Atchison Salon; John Atchison Salon and Spa, New York, New York], and he was a product of Vidal Sassoon, and maybe you should try that."  I said, "No, if I'm gonna do this, I wanna go work for Vidal Sassoon," 'cause at that point [HistoryMaker] John Atchison, who turned out to be a very successful hairdresser in New York--
Speaker 1: Yeah, we interviewed him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you interviewed John?  So you know.  He was the only black person that really came through that, that program, and I think I was second, but I didn't want to do hair, so.  But I, I remember meeting him and hearing his whole story and he told me to hang in there.  He was very nice.  I remember that.
Story_ID: 666630
Speaker 1: Now you left Vidal Sasseen--Sassoon [Sassoon Salon, New York, New York], after how long? How long?
Speaker 2: Probably not even two years, 'cause I was like, I can't do this anymore (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you just, so you didn't like coloring hair?
Speaker 2: I didn't, I was good at it, but I never wanted to do it.  I just wanted to get my license, and the thing was that, you know, you, after you graduated from, from hair school that you go and do an apprentice or work at a salon and then you get your license.  So I was just hanging on for that.
Speaker 1: Soon as you got it, you were done.
Speaker 2: I was done.  I never renewed it, that's how done I was.  I was done with braiding hair, I was done with looking at hair.  I was done, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: --'cause I still, you know outside of my initial contact with Gloria Gaynor, I felt like I wasn't getting any further into the business.  Remember I wanted to, at that point I wanted to work for a record company and I wanted to get in the business, so, you know.
Story_ID: 666631
Speaker 1: Okay, now at some, now you, you took, took a job with ASCAP, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --here in New York [New York].  Now, how, was that the next thing?
Speaker 2: I think that was my, I would say Gloria Gaynor was my introduction to the music industry, but ASCAP was my first job into the introduction into the music business.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  So how did that hiring take place?  How did you get, join ASCAP?
Speaker 2: I think just back then you used to be able to walk into the personnel department at the companies and fill out an application.  It's nothing like what they, you have to do now.  So I think I went into that company and filled out an application and I got a job.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So what did you do for ASCAP?
Speaker 2: I worked, you know, ASCAP they accrued royalties, payment for royalties to publishers, music publishers and composers, so I had worked in the television division and I had really learned a lot about the business but we had to pay composers for their music, their works on television, like for programs from like 'The Andy Griffith Show,' 'I Love Lucy,' all those shows of the '60s [1960s], the '70s [1970s], you know the theme song that you would hear every night, yeah.  So they would get money for that or their estate.  You would have to, you know, approve the money for that for the estate, and, the same thing they did for radio, but I didn't work in the radio department, I worked in the television department.  And that's pretty much what we did there, three years.  I think I stayed there like three years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Any stories from that time, I mean from that job?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that was a great time because I was, I was officially in the music industry, you know I worked for ASCAP, and it wasn't the sexiest job in the record industry but it was a very important job because it was about the business of music.  So, again, I learned a lot and I also was able to go to different industry parties at that point.  Everybody said, "Where do you work?"  I said, "Oh I work at, I work with ASCAP," you know.  So it was good in that aspect because on my off hours, I was able to go to all these industry functions, concerts and things like that, so that was important for me at that time.  It was great.  I used to hang out.  That's when I met T.S. Monk [HistoryMaker T.S. Monk, III] back then.  I met a lot of musicians back then.  A lot of, lot of crazy stories, I mean artists would come up there because they hadn't received their royalty statements or royalty checks or, where's my money?  I remember Bohannon [Hamilton Bohannon] came up there once and he went nuts because he, he said, "I heard you guys had a lot of money for me up here," and it was true, you know, a lot of, you know, particularly black artists, they didn't have the business set up, so once they discovered that, you know, or they knew that their music was being played on the radio, sometimes they, you know, they may have had a lawyer or a manager that was really kind of supposed to oversee that and sometimes they didn't.  You know that's when I would see them.  They would come and complain about their royalties, or they haven't received a statement and their music is all over the radio.  So I remember those kind of stories.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 666632
Speaker 1: What prompted you to leave ASCAP [The American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers]?
Speaker 2: I had met Beverly Johnson, the fashion and beauty model, and I went and worked with her a couple of years as her assistant and that was a very interesting time in my career.  So I stopped and I did that and that was my real introduction into the fashion and beauty industry.  I learned a lot with her.
Speaker 1: Beverly Johnson was one of the top black models--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --top models--
Speaker 2: Period.
Speaker 1: --in the world, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I, I worked with her when she was sort of, for a lack of a better word, I guess trying to make a comeback, you know, because she had been off the scene for a while and she came back and she still had it, you know.  She did a lot of covers when I was with her.  I mean she was still doing Vogue.  She was still doing Glamour.  She was doing all those major covers so, and I got a chance to meet, I mean she was friends with, of course, all the fashion designers, so that's when I met and went to the homes of like Fernando Sanchez and Calvin Klein and Halston.  You know a lot of these people, you know, Calvin Klein is still here, but, you know, Fernando Sanchez is no longer here.  That's when I met Andy Warhol.  I met Keith Haring, the artist.  And these were her friends, like I have some of their, like I have some, something by Andy Warhol.  I have something by Keith Haring that Beverly had given me.  So I met all of the, you know, the shoe designer, Kenneth Cole.  He was just sort of like in his infancy of developing his business.  I remember all of that.  It was just fascinating.  And, of course, I met all the models, you know, from Iman to Christie Brinkley and everybody in between, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I just remember that was a time, that was also during the time of the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] crisis too and a lot of people in the fashion industry was getting, I think, well it seemed that way to me at that time that they were getting hit the hardest.
Speaker 1: It was to be stereotypically a gay disease, or what they were calling a gay disease.
Speaker 2: Right.  At that time they were calling it the gay man's disease, but, you know, literally like all those people I met through her, even like some of her closest friends, they all, they're not here anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, from the top hair--
Speaker 1: Was it because of AIDS?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, and these were like top, even like the top hair stylists and the top makeup artists.  I remember that.  I remember her always being devastated by that, someone passing away and it was just, it was a lot.  And it was a lot for me because I was like, you know, to see that at such a, you know I was young.  I was in my twenties.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now you were with Beverly Johnson how long?
Speaker 2: Probably a few years.
Speaker 1: From what year to what?
Speaker 2: Hey I'm not good at remembering years, but I know it was, when I got there it was in the '80s [1980s]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I stayed there for like three years probably.  That was always my number to check out (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 666633
Speaker 1: You joined ABC Capital Cities [Capital Cities/ABC Inc.; Disney ABC Television Group] at, at some point, right--next, is that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did.  I think, I think it was ASCAP [The American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers], I think it was Beverly Johnson and then I think I went to ABC television network, which was called ABC Cap Cities at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So what role did you play at, at ABC?
Speaker 2: I was a coordinator.  I worked in the, I worked in the, wow, I worked in the telecommunications department and who knew that was like the, the advancement of satellites and transponders and how they, you know, was able to get the signals out and get the shows on the air there.  It was a very interesting department.  I don't know how I wound up in that department.  That's where they had openings, but that's what I was working.  It was very interesting, but I worked, I loved that.  That was one of the best jobs I think I've ever had.  One of, not the best, but it was on the top five, you know, 'cause I worked in the news building with Peter Jennings and that's how I developed my love for news and I remember Sam, Sam Donaldson, the news anchor, and David Brinkley.  They were like the in the Washington [D.C.] offices, but I would see them all the time, and all the big iconic news people like worked in that building.  Then right across the street you had all the soaps [soap opera], and you had the long form unit, you know all the ABC soaps were taped just right in that like circle.  And that, that's when I met all of my friends, the camera people, the tech people, the (unclear) people, the engineers.  It was just amazing.  I used to, I was so in love, I had the biggest crush on Peter Jennings.  I was so, I was crazy about him, and I would go down to the newsroom at least twice a week and just watch his live broadcast ['ABC World News Tonight'].  And then when a job became available in his office, I applied for it.  He knew I had a crush on him, he was just really, just a very, you know he knew.  I mean a lot of women in the building had a crush on him, but he particularly knew that I had one on him, and he was just a very, very gracious, generous, you know, guy and it's just, I just learned so much from him, watching him do that broadcast every night.
Speaker 1: And that was the age of 'Nightline' too, when 'Nightline'--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Ted Koppel.
Speaker 1: --was so popular then.  I mean it's still on the air, but--
Speaker 2: It's not the way it used to be.
Speaker 1: --it was at its height.
Speaker 2: And see at the time when I worked at ABC Cap Cities, they were number one in news, they were number one in sports and they were number one in entertainment.  So it was the best network to be at, and this was before CNN.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Before all the cable shows, this was, you know, they were, they really was number one.  Barbara Walters were there, was at the network.  I mean it was just--
Speaker 1: Cable is just starting, well it starts in the late '70s [1970s] cable television, but it's not everywhere.
Speaker 2: It was not everywhere.
Speaker 1: Still starts--
Speaker 2: And people wasn't paying attention to it.  I mean like people were still watching network television then, you know, so, I remember that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember that (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 666634
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were with ABC [Capital Cities/ABC Inc.; Disney ABC Television Group] until what, 1991 or so? Is that true?
Speaker 2: I can't remember, I'm like I'm really bad with time frames, but I stayed there probably longer than three years.  Now some of those years, and you probably did your research, you may see some gaps because that's when I didn't get a job in a recording industry and I went to go work for a law firm, like a temp agency, and I did some of that because, again, I had really great typing skills.  I didn't wanna do hair anymore, so I was able to go and make really good money at the time doing that, so I kind of bounced around at different temporary agencies and law firms.  You know, six months here, seven months there, but I left the, I left ABC because I just felt like at the time, you know, I mentioned that I used to go down to the newsroom and watch Peter Jennings.  He embraced me.  I met the producers in the sports department.  I met the producers in the long form unit department and they did as much as they could.  They would take me under their wings, you know, but I just, those jobs back then, there just were not that many black people in those positions and when you became a producer or associate producer and you started your career there, you just didn't leave, you know.  People stayed there for a long time, so I just got frustrated with the, I had no doubt that if I was still there, Bob Iger the guy who is president, I don't know what his title is now for ABC, the head guy for Disney now 'cause it's really the Disney company [The Walt Disney Company] now.
Speaker 1: Oh, Eisner [Michael Eisner]. Eisner?
Speaker 2: No, I thought it's Bob Iger, I think it's Iger, but anyway--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He started out in the same division I did.  I mean in the same area I did back then.  I remember he was a young executive at the company at the time.  He just, and I thought years after I left the company and found out he had become president, I was completely gagged.  It was, you know, it's when Disney and ABC merged and, you know, and he was like that top guy at the company.  I was like oh, wow, I remember him from the broadcast engineering department and working with us.  He was just very, he was in entertainment but the company, you know, the departments are so intertwined and I remember him, like, so you, you know, I didn't have the patience to stick it out there.
Speaker 1: Okay well what, when, was there an incident or something that made you leave or did you just--
Speaker 2: No, I just was like worked, no, it was nothing, it still, you know, I still go up there all the time, I still love that company, I still have a lot of friends.  Like I said those people who get jobs up there, they don't leave their jobs, you know.  I'm still with the credit union there.  I still get loans there sometimes, that's how, it's a great company.  It was a great company.  And back then they were paying for you to go to school, so I would take classes sometimes in the evenings.  It's very good, very good company.  I mean, I just didn't feel that, I just didn't have the patience.  And then I was still like, I thought I wanted to be still back in the recording industry, you know, so I had taken a detour and I couldn't get, 'cause at the time it wasn't easy to get in the recording industry, to work for a record label.  It was, you know, I had some experience under my belt, I had worked for ASCAP [The American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers] and I knew people, but I didn't really get my foot in the door then, you know, it was, you know, I was at, you know, I left that industry and went into the television industry for a while and then I said well I don't want to do this either, you know, or I can't wait around that long; and then that's when I said, "Well, I'm gonna to try to get back in a record company," and I did, and that's when I, you know.
Story_ID: 666635
Speaker 1: That's when you started--this is like '91 [1991], you're thirty (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, whenever I started, yeah.
Speaker 1: When you started with Mercury/PolyGram [Mercury/PolyGram Records].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was my first--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --record industry job.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you became the pro-?
Speaker 2: So I had finally arrived at the record company.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what, what title did you enter as?
Speaker 2: I was a publicity coordinator.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: A publicity, I had arrived, I was like, I didn't stay at the job long though.  I got fired.
Speaker 1: Now this is a story, I saw this in here and, you know, I was shocked, didn't know what to think about it, but you said you made a lot of, kind of some silly mistakes or something in an interview you had.
Speaker 2: Right.  So.
Speaker 1: So what happened?  So your job, you're publicity coordinator for a number of different artists, right--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: And my roommate at the time hired me, and she's my mentor still to this day, Jackie Rhinehart.  And she was like, you know, she hired the director of the department, and he needed an assistant, coordinator, and it was me.  So I, you know, that's when I didn't really, I thought I knew a lot more than I did about the corporate culture (laughter), but you know the black music division was different from the, the--
Speaker 1: White.
Speaker 2: Right, white music division, so I didn't have to report to the people in the white music division.  I had to report to the people in the black music division.  So it was just like tension that was going on.  So instead of me, you know, at the time being the kind of person to get along with everybody, which would have been much easier and I wouldn't have gotten fired, I just did some things that I, you know, I had a bad attitude.  I had a bad attitude and I was very, you know, pro black and it just wasn't probably the best, I didn't take the best position that I, you know, now I know was, you know, but you live and learn so.  But everybody told me when I got fired, they said, "Aw, you officially (unclear), you got fired from your first job.  You are official," and--
Speaker 1: So some of the artists you represent, I want to get to the cause, but you represented Vanessa Williams?
Speaker 2: Vanessa Williams was signed, see I was a publicity coordinator, so there were some artists I had a lot more direct contact with than others, but I did a lot of the tour press, that's what I learned, learned how to do tour press there, 'cause artists stayed on the road back then, they were always touring.  So Vanessa Williams had just come out of her big scandal.  She was married to Ramon Hervey [HistoryMaker Ramon Hervey II] who's a good friend of mine as well, and she was signed to that label.  So she was one of the artists that was signed to our division, but we shared her also with the white division.  You know we had Oleta Adams, she had that big hit, 'Get Here.'  She was another artist sort of signed to another label in Europe but she was part of our division.  We worked with her, we worked with Jon Lucien.  I worked with Tony! Toni! Tone!, Third World.
Speaker 1: And they were really big then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it was a couple, we had Brian McKnight.  Yeah, he, he was, that was his, he did his first album ['Brian McKnight'] at Mercury.  So it was really, I mean we had a, we had a really great roster back then.  It was just amazing.
Speaker 1: So was there any particular incident you got fired around, or was it a--?
Speaker 2: There was this woman that, woman who was head of the publicity department.  She could not stand, well no one liked her, but she didn't like me either.  'Cause I, although I had a different report instruction, she didn't like that, that I had to be in her station in her department, but I didn't have to report to her, so that was already a conflict.  And I can understand that now, you know, years later, I understood that.  But, again, I didn't try to--to get along with people like I probably should have; and so she was able to kind of get me fired, to get me out of there, so.
Story_ID: 666636
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I was so depressed after that--
Speaker 1: You--
Speaker 2: --I had to go back to work for a law firm, but the people at ABC [Capital Cities/ABC Inc.; Disney ABC Television Group] had called me and told me I could come back there (laughter) and that was so sweet I just cried.  I was like oh, that was so sweet.  But I didn't go back.  I said, "No, I'm gonna get another job, I'm gonna stick with this," but I wound up going to work in a law firm again because, again, you know, being in your twenties in New York [New York], the rent was high and I had to make some money to pay my rent, so.  I was stilled involved though.  I was a little bit, I had a bigger footing in the door.  I knew a lot of people in the industry.  I knew a lot of musicians and producers and executives, so although I was not at a record label, I was still networking, you know, but I had a job outside of the music industry, for a few years until my roommate, the one who hired me for Mercury [Mercury/PolyGram Records] and my mentor [Jackie Rhinehart], called and said, "Oh, I just got a call from Shakim Compere and Queen Latifah, you know, they had called me because they wanted me to, to go work at Flavor Unit, but I took another job working for someone else at Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]," she said, "and I told them about you."  And I was like, I was like, "I don't wanna go work over there at Flavor Unit with all those rappers."  But that was my initial thought, you know.  I was crazy.
Speaker 1: Now this is, real now, the popular TV show 'Soul Train,' basically (unclear) because of rap music.  Don Cornelius didn't like it and he made it clear on the air he didn't like rap music, but rap music was selling and his youthful audience wanted to hear rap and that ended his, that basically ended the show.  So--
Speaker 2: Well, he didn't embrace it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably, you know, like he should have.
Speaker 1: He had some of them on the show, but he didn't seem to like it very much.
Speaker 2: And then you gotta remember, fast forwarding though, back in, they just celebrated the twentieth anniversary of Notorious B.I.G.'s [Biggie Smalls; The Notorious B.I.G.] death.  That was a big public relations nightmare for him.  'Cause although the shooting took place at the official 'Soul Train' after party, it just left such a bad mark, I mean he just, you know, that was not good.  But Don Cornelius, I mean he really, I mean he was the one who supported our artists.  He was just amazing what he did back in that time.  But you know what, he's not the only one, a lot of people didn't know, didn't understand hip hop, and didn't know what it was at that time, and didn't, you know, and a lot of people we were losing, you know, felt like we were losing R and B music, you know what I mean?  We hadn't lost it at that point, but it was changing considerably with the, with the emergence of hip-hop.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you're working with a lot of hip hop musicians involved--
Speaker 2: Well, the Flavor Unit, Flavor Unit Entertainment was Queen Latifah's and Shakim's company so yeah, they had all hip hop artists on there, with the exception of one group they had and that was Zhane at the time, and I, I adore, I mean I love Queen Latifah.  I mean, at, you know, she was, I just adored her as an artist, but I came at a very interesting time because that's when she, she was all, she already, she had already had a very successful recording career, but she was, she had just secured a television series, 'Living Single,' and she started getting roles in movies.  And then I worked for Naughty by Nature who was, you know, the premier hip hop group at the time.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It was fun great music.  It wasn't like gangsta rap or anything like that.  I mean I just had the wrong attitude.  I mean my heart was set on, you know, first of all getting back in another major record- not understanding that it was a good idea for me to go to a smaller company.  I had an opportunity to learn a lot more there.  And I had more freedom there and I had more freedom to do what I wanted to do and really to learn the business because Queen Latifah and especially Shakim, really supported me, and they supported me in a very big way.  And I was like a great employee there.  I did a great job.  They gave me opportunities that I wouldn't have gotten at a major record label, so.
Story_ID: 666637
Speaker 1: Now in 1995, you were named national director of publicity and media relations at Capitol Records, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So when I left, when I went to Shakim [Shakim Compere] and told him that I was leaving [Flavor Unit Entertainment], he was so disappointed, but I just felt at that point in my career that I needed to be at a major outfit to really just sort of develop my skillset.  So I went to work for Capitol.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's 1995.
Speaker 2: For a year.  Before they got, they fired the whole black urban music division.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now this, so, so far you worked one of these jobs the last year or two.
Speaker 2: Two or three.
Speaker 1: Two or three, maybe.  And then, that's the nature of the music business?
Speaker 2: That's the nature of the business.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But back then it was different because, you know, it's like if you left one company you wasn't gonna be out of work long, not if you were good and you had a good reputation and I was landed at another company.  And I was sort of like, you know, once I started moving around every two years, you know, you sort of like on the fast track, you may leave one job making a hundred thousand, the next job is a hundred and seventy-five thousand, so that's kind of how it was for me at that time.  And it was for most executives moving around at that time.  So, being at the job for two years wasn't a bad thing (laughter).  That meant that you had a better job making more money, and a bigger title.
Story_ID: 666638
Speaker 1: Any stories about artists, any difficult artists, or?
Speaker 2: At which company?  Which company we on now?  We're on--
Speaker 1: Capitol [Capitol Records] now.  But, but, but before even, I mean, you know (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, there's a lot of stories.  It's a ton of stories.  That's a whole 'nother interview, but no, there's always stories.
Speaker 1: Well, you could tell us a few of these anyway.  Is there something you could tell us about, I guess the Mercury group [Mercury/PolyGram Records]? Or any?
Speaker 2: No, Mercury I was just getting my feet wet, so--
Speaker 1: Or with Shakim Compere and Queen Latifah?
Speaker 2: At their company?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Flavor Unit [Flavor Unit Entertainment].
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was a lot of, well some stuff I cannot say on air, it just would not be appropriate as a publicist and I wouldn't do that.  But yeah, I mean I was in the hip hop business and it was just, they did things differently I have to say that, and, you know, I think I became more exposed to not so much not working, I want to make this clear, not working with Queen Latifah and Shakim because they had their style of music and rap and it was different.  It wasn't like gangsta rap.  It wasn't what N.W.A. [Niggaz Wit Attitudes] was doing back then.  But they, but still being in that environment, you just witnessed so much, you know, with violence and just things like that, so that part was just like--
Speaker 1: Did that kind of permeate the business then, I mean (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of the business, yeah.  But it wasn't anything that I was like afraid of.  These were just really, I tell you though and I say this all the time, all the hip hop artists I ever worked with were just the most wonderful people.  The biggest heart.  They had a heart of gold.  They just wanted to, they just wanted to do their music.  They just wanted to be successful.  They wanted to help people.  I didn't have any problems with them and I guess because most of 'em I was like ten years older than them and I had to always remind them, "I'm ten years older than you but we're still in the same generation."  You know, 'cause sometimes that group, that group, they thought that a generation was ten years.  I said no a generation is thirty years.  Just because I may be ten years older, I'm not in another, you know, we're in the same generation.  I had to always explain that to them.  But they were just always, always willing to learn, always wanted to, you know, advance their careers, always wanted to take care of their families and take care of their crew, their people, and they were just wonderful people.  I mean I, I love all those artists, I really do.  And you know, for me, you know working in the business for so long, you work with so many artists and some of the artists are not around anymore, you know, so it's interesting to see like some I see, I run into some of those same artists and they're doing different things now.  They're in a totally different career and, you know, but they were some of my favorite artists back then.  I, I think Queen Latifah is one of the, she's one of my favorites still.  I just, I just adore her.
Story_ID: 666639
Speaker 1: So you're the national director of publicity and media relations at Capitol Records, which means you have, you're, now does this mean that you're the director of national, you're really directing all this?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So this is a, this is a big, the biggest responsibility you've had so far, and, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean I had a big responsibility working at Flavor Unit [Flavor Unit Entertainment].  What was special about working at Flavor Unit was that I learned how to do video promotions.  I wouldn't have had an opportunity to do that.  I learned an awful lot about management at the time.  I worked both on the record label side of Flavor Unit, and the management side, so--
Speaker 1: Now who did you report to at Capitol?
Speaker 2: First time I was at Capitol I reported to Audrey Strahl.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was the head of the PR [public relations] department.
Speaker 1: Now how do you spell her name?
Speaker 2: Audrey, A-U-D-R-E-Y, Strahl, S-T-H-R-A-H-L [sic.].  I probably messed her name up.
Speaker 1: Strahl.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, all right.  So, and, you had--
Speaker 2: I almost didn't get that job.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, that, this may be a good story for you--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but, see this segues into why I love the hip hop artists I worked with, because they were really good people.  So I had interviewed for this position and then one of the guys, Kay Gee [Keir Gist] of Naughty by Nature's brother, Pookie [Pookie Gist], he said, "Gwendolyn [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Quinn], I heard you were, I heard you had an interview up at Capitol Records."  I said, "Yeah."  He said, I said, "Don't say anything."  He said, "Well, you know, somebody said something bad about you."  I said, "Really?"  And he said, "Yeah."  And it was this journalist.  I said, "Really?"  He couldn't tell me who it was.  He said, "You know, you may not get the job, you, you should call her up.  You should call Audrey up.  She really liked you but this journalist said something, sort of."  I said, "Really?"  I was just stunned.  I was completely stunned, you know, because then I had, I had an attitude adjustment by then.  I didn't think that, you know, people had something negative to say.  So I call Audrey one day and just talked myself right back into the job.  She told, I told her, I said, "Listen, I spoke to Pookie and he told me what you said and I'm just calling you to straighten the record out, set the record straight."  And, and we talked for a while and she, she said, "Can you come back in?"  I said, "Sure."  So I went to see her and she actually told me who it was and what they said.  And, you know, and I got the job, so that's how I had to, you know, I got the job, 'cause I fought for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you convinced 'em that--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --the concern was not a (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Now you were--
Speaker 2: And it was a, and I hate to say it, it was this white racist journalist, you know, and I think he probably was surprised because he probably was like (laughter), "Oh, I, I, I did her in," you know, but I, I got the job.
Story_ID: 666640
Speaker 1: Capitol you worked with Bebe [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans] and Cece Winans [Priscilla Winans Love], The Whispers, Rachelle Ferrell--
Speaker 2: (Pronunciation) Rachelle--
Speaker 1: Rachelle Ferrell.
Speaker 2: --Ferrell, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Ferrell, okay.  And I guess, well tell us about the, you know--
Speaker 2: The roster.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I mean some of the things you were able to do for 'em.
Speaker 2: There was a group called Portrait.  It was, I remember them, I remember Rachelle Ferrell at the time when I had come to the label the first time she was, she had been like two years into her first album project, which was quite successful.  The Whispers, I remember working with them.  There's another artist that was around at the time.  She's no longer around.  Her name is Tracie Spencer.  Then we had soundtracks.  Then they did president's soundtrack.  It was a good roster.  You know Bebe and Cece was, you know, I think they were, yeah, they were on the tail end of a project, you know.  It's just, we always had artists.  It was just always work to do, you know, but those were some of the artists that I worked with.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You mentioned soundtracks.  There were a lot of soundtracks in those days, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of soundtracks and it was, we had like the number one soundtracks.  It was, it was a good time, and it was a great job, I mean in that I had a bigger expense account, you know, so when you said this was a bigger job, it was only that, it paid me more, it paid me more than Flavor Unit [Flavor Unit Entertainment], but I was still relegated to just, you know, the publicity department, so, but I had superstar, no I had mainly established artists, not so many superstars to say.  I started, you know, I worked on the same floor as Blue Note Records, which was a jazz, premier jazz label, and the president at the time, who since then passed, Bruce Lundvall, sort of taking me under his wing.  He used to come in the office, not daily, but nearly daily when he was in town and he would bring me all of these jazz records, 'cause he know I was in R and B.  I had a nice big beautiful office and I would have on my urban music and he would, you know, come to my office or he was walking past, he would always wave.  He's like, "Oh, we got a new project coming out Gwendolyn [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Quinn] I want you to listen to."  So he really exposed me to more jazz music that way.  He was a wonderful man, sort of like a heavyweight, like one of the most revered like music executives, you know, in the industry.  So I loved Capitol Records because, you know, I, they had a very, you know, that's the house that Nat King Cole built.  You know The Beatles was signed there, The Beach Boys.  So they had what they called the dinosaur labels that, you know, the labels that been around for a very, very long time.  A lot of rich history there, you know.  But that didn't last long because they, you know, every time it was, you know, when it was time to cut, they always dismantled the black music division, so I was out of work after a year and something working there.  But that was sort of, you know, the, the industry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: With a few companies that you can work out, work at and possibly retire, like Warner Brothers [Warner Brothers Entertainment, Inc.] was a great company to work at for people, 'cause most people just stayed at that company for years, they retired there.  But other companies it was like (gesture), and I think Capitol, I had a contract. That was, I think maybe that was my first contract position.
Story_ID: 666641
Speaker 1: Now you went to Island Records next, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was back and under the PolyGram system [PolyGram Records], but it was under Hiram Hicks and Chris Blackwell.  Chris Blackwell is a rock and roll hall of famer [Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, Cleveland, Ohio], and Hiram Hicks is very well established in the black music industry.  He had The Isley Brothers there, Dru Hill, War soundtracks.  I didn't stay there long because I had gotten another, I didn't like that job as much, and I knew I had to get out of there, so that's when I went to go work for Arista [Arista Records].
Speaker 1: What, what, what made it pressurized?  What made it, you know, made you feel like you had to get out?
Speaker 2: I didn't like some of the people I was working with at the time.  I just decided--
Speaker 1: Did they make unreasonable demands or were they just have (unclear).
Speaker 2: You know I'm probably gone get in trouble for saying this, but sometimes working with all your people is not always the best option, you know.  I've been in some situations where it's been an entire black staff and it was cool, but then sometimes it's not cool at all.  I just knew that with my temperament, it wasn't gone work.  So I started looking to get out.  I wasn't pushed out, I moved.  And my roommate at the time, the one that, the one that actually had been responsible for all my key executive positions, Jackie Rhinehart, she, she, we were on the phone one day and she was complaining, she was at Arista, and she was like, she was ready to go into, she was in publicity, but she was ready to move into marketing, and she had a big job offer as a senior VP, and she was ready to go, and, you know, she couldn't get out of her contract, and, 'cause her boss hadn't found a person that she wanted to hire.  So we, she was on the phone complaining about that, and I was on the phone complaining like, "Oh, I'm not gonna be able to work here.  I've got to get out of here."  And then she said, "Do you wanna, I mean do you wanna interview for my position?"  And that was the house of Clive Davis.  That was, you know, that was like the ultimate place to work, you know, Whitney Houston and everybody else, Aretha Franklin, and I was like, "Do I wanna--yeah." So I said, she said, "I'm a set up an interview for you, you ready to come in for an interview?"  I said, "Girl, I could come in tomorrow."  So she set up an interview for me, 'cause her boss who at the time, Michele Cucci, well her name was Michele Mena but her name was Michele Cucci.  She had saw all these different people and she just was not, you know, ready to hire anyone.  So I went over that day.  I had on my big fur coat (laughter), I had my big hair, my big fur coat; and she told me, we laughed about it later, she said, "When you walked through that door with that big fur coat and that big hair, I knew you was perfect for this job."
Story_ID: 666642
Speaker 1: It was a very interesting story how I got out of my contract with, with Island Records to go to Arista Records. But--
Speaker 2: Well, what is it, tell us the story (laughter).
Speaker 1: So anyway, I went, I, I knew that the guy I was working with, he was gonna, if I performed enough he would let me out of my contract, I mean he knew that I was unhappy.  And, but I was still under contract.  So he could have demanded that I stay and work out my contract and that was the same situation my friend Jackie [Jackie Rhinehart] was in.  She couldn't get out of her contract, so I wanted to avoid that.  So I, I pretended that I was just on the verge of a nervous breakdown basically, and I, I got out of the contract.  And I just told him, "I'm not gonna be able to do this," I just went through a whole performance, and I got out of the contract.  So he said, "Okay, I'm gonna release you, you know, so you got to talk to Larry Mystel [ph.]," who was the business manager.  So I went and Larry adored me so when I told him that, you know, "I have to leave, this is not gonna be great," you know.  And Arista couldn't approach me about officially working for them because I was under contract, so, he said, "Okay."  Well, long story--a couple of weeks, "We'll send you, we'll get your lawyer on the phone and we'll do release papers."  So my lawyer at the time sent the Arista paperwork, he had some Arista paperwork and he sent it inadvertently to the people at Island, so the business manager--I was like, "I'm getting out," I was all excited, I was happy that week.  So he called me into his office.  He said, "Gwendolyn [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Quinn], I need to see you for a minute, can you come in?"  I said, "Sure."  I went down there and he, he was so sweet to me.  He said, "So you're going to Arista." And I was like, I was shocked.  I was like, and he said, "You gotta talk to your lawyer, he inadvertently sent the wrong paperwork to my fax machine."  And I was like, "What?" And he showed me, and he said, "It's all right, you know."  He handled, he was very, just very, very nice about it, and that's how I got out of the contract and I went to go work for Arista. I had a two year contract, I didn't stay, I did like, eight months.
Speaker 2: At, at Arista?
Speaker 1: No, at Island (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) At Island, okay. All right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so they could have made it--they could have made it difficult for me, you know.
Speaker 2: So, all right, but they--
Speaker 1: So that was great.
Story_ID: 666643
Speaker 1: At Arista [Arista Records], now, was this one of your, your favorite jobs? Or what did you?
Speaker 2: The best--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --ever, in the entire record industry, was working at Arista and working under Clive Davis.  It was just amazing.  We had superstar artists. I got a chance to work with the joint ventures that was very popular back then.  Clive had did joint ventures with L.A. Reid and Babyface [Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds], had one with Puffy [Sean Combs] and he had another one with Dallas Austin, and so, he was just number one records, you know, often six to eight top ten records on the Billboard 100 every week, you know.  Superstar artists, I mean really superstar artists.  And hits, after hit after hit.  It was just, it was great.
Speaker 1: Did some of the artists, Aretha Franklin--
Speaker 2: Aretha Franklin, Whitney Houston, oh god.
Speaker 1: Prince, right?
Speaker 2: Prince came and I got to work with Prince on a, he did a one, he did a one album deal with, with Clive.  He wasn't really Arista artist like that.  They just did 'Rave Un2 the Joy Fantastic.'  That's the album I worked on with him.  But then I got to work with all the joint ventures, like Puffy.  I was his publicist.  I had a opportunity, just, you know, to work with Notorious B.I.G. [Biggie Smalls; The Notorious B.I.G.], you know after his death, unfortunately, but.  I worked for Faith Evans.  I worked, I got a chance to work a little bit with some of the LaFace [LaFace Records] artists.  They had like Usher and Toni Braxton, and you know.  So I had Deborah Cox, I had Monica under the Arista label. I had like all the top artists.  That was a great time.  I got to chance to work with Carlos Santana, Kenny G, a little bit.  I did some PR [public relations] bookings for Kenny G.  It was just a great time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: The golden era, I called it, the golden era.
Speaker 1: Who did you report to there?
Speaker 2: Michele, the woman I mentioned earlier, Michele--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Mena, but she's now Michele Cucci.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And we're still great friends to this day.
Story_ID: 666644
Speaker 1: What makes a good, I guess promoter for a--
Speaker 2: Publicist?
Speaker 1: --yeah, a publicist for a--
Speaker 2: I think it's a lot, a combination of people skills, great communication skills, creative skills.  You have to be able to, you know, great relationships, you know, with journalists and TV producers you know.  Well great relationships with journalists across the board, but especially in broadcast and print, you know.  The ability to have creative ideas about pitching people, because you know these artists get pitched.  And back then it just, it was the golden era so you had so many artists that were doing great and everybody was pitching to get in the publications, and being an African American publicist at a record label back then, you were expected to not only know the mainstream journalists and outlets like Rolling Stone and Entertainment Weekly, you had to know all the black journalists too.  So I would say great relationships, creative skills, great communication skills, definitely great writing skills, personable skills to be able to deal with the artists and not confuse the two.  Like you're not friends with the artists.  You work with the artists, you know.  And that was very important 'cause I've had, I think I for the most part had very good relationships with my artists, but I never really considered them friends.  Like some of the people I worked with thought they were friends.  I never really thought they were my friends, but I built strong relationships with most of them.  I think that's what makes a good publicist, you know.  It's a pressure cooker job, you know, 'cause you always had to deliver, you know.
Speaker 1: A lot of traveling going on.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was definitely a lot of traveling.  Yeah.  Long hours.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite press contact?
Speaker 2: In the media?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Not all of them, a lot of them, you know. But I did, I did love the people at Johnson publications [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] at the time because no matter who you worked for, whether it was a superstar artist, but sometimes you have superstar artists that, you know, they were on that whole trajectory of doing mainstream media.  So sometimes maybe the management or the team would think, "Oh we don't have to do an Ebony cover."  I'm like, "Yes you do, still have to do an Ebony cover."  So it was that end, and then I had an artist like Aretha Franklin who she, she loved being in Time and Newsweek, or People, but she wanted to know when she was gone be in Jet, and when she was gonna be in Ebony.  That was more important to her.  So, so I would have to say the Johnson publication people because it was important to maintain, no matter how big your artists became, that they still came back home to do important media, and then it was important for the new artists to get in those publications too like an Ebony.
Speaker 1: We interviewed [HistoryMaker] Lynn Norment.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she called me about two weeks ago.  I've got to, I haven't called her back.  But she was great.  I did a lot like Whitney [Whitney Houston] covers with her.  I did a lot of magazine covers with her.  And you got to remember back at that time Ebony, it was Ebony and Essence.  To be able to get your client on the cover of Essence cover was very important.  And to get a client on the cover of Ebony--and this was at the height of their success too, you know.  It was very important.
Story_ID: 666645
Speaker 1: Who appeared on the most covers you think?  I mean just, I mean I don't expect you to give a scientific answer, but?
Speaker 2: You mean in terms of the artists that I worked with (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the artists that you worked with, yeah.  Who was popular in terms of the covers?
Speaker 2: It had to--I guess at that time it was Whitney [Whitney Houston], you know, 'cause I remember going to Whitney's house with [HistoryMaker] Lynn Norment, you know.  It was important for her to get Whitney on the cover.  See Whitney and her team understood that, so that was never an issue.  I've never had, you know, that was never an issue with them.  They knew.  But it was important because, you know, I guess she sold a lot of covers for Ebony.  So at the time I would say, you know another important cover for me was when I was able to get Puffy [Sean Combs] on the Essence cover.  That's a woman's magazine, you know.  I love Puffy 'cause he would, he would say, "Look I wanna be on the cover of Rolling Stone, I wanna be on the cover of Essence and I wanna be on the cover of this and I wanna do that."  I mean he would, you know, I had, I always felt that I always knew where the artist should be in terms of like what was really realistic 'cause sometimes when you work with artists, they want things that are not realistic.  But I had a good, a good gauge on that, and Puffy was the kind of artist.  For instance, he would say what he wanted, and we were able to secure two, eventually two covers for him for Ebony, I mean for Essence.  That was a huge deal that, that for Essence, back then, and he was the hip hop mogul, I mean, so that was big.  So I would have to say, I'm just always partial to the black media.  I just am because it's just I've witnessed, I witnessed artists becoming big celebrities and feeling that they didn't need the black media anymore.  And, and I witnessed black artists having a lot of white celebrity publicists, and they didn't give a damn about the black press.  So I didn't have to fight with them about Rolling Stone, Entertainment Weekly, I had to fight with them about the black press.  So I've always been partial to the black media, for that reason.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sure the media is grateful too.
Speaker 2: Well, they were very, but they don't know.  I, I couldn't go to them and say my artist really didn't want to be in the magazine, or that people didn't think it was necessary.  It was the same thing with Don Cornelius.  I mean I built a strong relationship with him, God rest his soul, because you know, we had the American Music Awards, you had the Grammy Awards, you had all these major award shows, so around the time that his show would be broadcast, it was like in March.  And they had spent up the budget for the Grammys, and the budget for the American Music Awards and all these shows, and I had to always go in there and make a case on why a artist should do the show when they would come back and tell me they had stats that we're not selling any records putting So and So on 'Soul Train,' you know.  And I had to say I don't care if you not selling no record, you still, that's her base, you still have to make sure, you know.  So, yeah, I'm very partial to the black media.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, very partial to them.
Story_ID: 666646
Speaker 1: Now you were saying earlier it didn't last that long. It--you were there about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Arista lasted a while.
Speaker 1: About, what about five years?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: About four, almost five.
Speaker 1: Four, almost five.  And what happened with Arista Records?
Speaker 2: That's--
Speaker 1: Oh, they were acquired by LaFace Records, right?
Speaker 2: That's when L.A. Reid came in, and that's when BMG [Bertelsmann Music Group] sort of, all the media was out about them pushing Clive Davis out, and I had a job offer to be vice president, and that was the first vice president position I was offered, and it was the most money I ever made, and it was one of the, one of Clive Davis' lieutenants, Roy Lott, and he brought me over there.  So I went there.
Speaker 1: This is at Capitol, right?
Speaker 2: I mean after I left Arista that's where I went.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you go over--
Speaker 2: Which was a bad move for me.
Speaker 1: So back to Capitol as vice president this time.
Speaker 2: Right.  But which was not a good move--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --for me because again Capitol Records routinely dismantled their urban music division and I felt like a fool.  I'm like, I can't believe this happened a second time.  That's why I knew it was systemic like racism in that, within the organization that that can happen, you know, the second time.  But that, you know, that's the nature of the beast, but.
Speaker 1: There's a project that you were involved in with Oscar De La Hoya, the boxer, right?
Speaker 2: That was at Capitol Records.  He, oh, he was so wonderful.  He, he had his whole team of people, but he did a recording and they were just great, you know.  They were like, "What do you need Oscar for," and most people were so excited that he was doing something in the recording industry.  I'll never forget I took him up to BET [Black Entertainment Television] and they just rolled the red carpet out for him.  It was just great, you know.  I had very specific targets for him, and he did everything I asked him to do.  That's one of the things I like about, and I had told a friend of mine just recently you know I really, probably should have worked in the sports business.  The athletes are so, they are so disciplined in terms of just, their, you know, just when you need them to do something, I've never worked.  I mean they're the nicest people, first of all, that I've ever worked with my entire life was athletes.  And when you tell them no drama, they are disciplined.  They come and do what they have to do.  They always come earlier than you request, and that's with Oscar De La Hoya, he was the same way, just great, great.
Speaker 1: So any other stories from this time at Capitol before, as they're fading out the (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There is just, you know, sometimes I guess when, you know, they look at the profit and loss statements and, and you know, they could make a case that the urban music division wasn't bringing in enough money.  And when it's time to cut a particular area, and I mean, I, you know, I didn't have access to the profit and loss statements.  I don't know if it was under good intentions or not.  But they, you know, thirty or forty people in the department, a division, they just dismantled it.
Speaker 1: So yeah (unclear).
Speaker 2: But this time around, the second time around I was really taken care of.  I had a very good contract.  The president of the company really took care of me.  I started my own company and I was able to still collect my compensation because I was still under contract, and I was still able to work within the whole EMI system [EMI Group Limited] and I had more clients, so it worked out really good for me actually.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It wasn't a bad deal.
Story_ID: 666647
Speaker 1: So this is 2002 when you found GQ media and PR, public relations (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, GQ Media and Public Relations [GQ Media and Public Relations Inc.], yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Now, you didn't get into trouble with GQ magazine did you, or?
Speaker 2: No, I used to get all their calls though.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got all their calls.  For some reason, my company came up on the directory first and I used to get all their calls.
Speaker 1: All right.  The firm is now known as just Gwendolyn [Gwendolyn Quinn].
Speaker 2: It's not really, it's just me and I take on clients and its much smaller now.
Speaker 1: All right, now one, one of the big artists that signed with you was Aretha Franklin, right?
Speaker 2: Well she was, yeah because, you know, we had a pretty good relationship at Arista [Arista Records] and after I left Capitol [Capitol Records], after I left Arista I went to Capitol for that period the second time and we lost contact.  We didn't lose contact, I just, you know, I didn't follow up with her and then when I started my company I called her.  I think somebody told her I started my company.  She called me and said, "You know I'll sign with you."  She was so sweet.  That is so Aretha, you know, and 'cause that's one thing I do love about Aretha, It's just a few artists out there that really believe in hiring black people.  And I tell people the same story, you know.  That's what I love about Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles Carter], she's had her black publicist [Yvette Noel Schure] for years.  That's what I love about Jay-Z, he's had his black publicist for years, and I love that, and Aretha is similar in that way, you know. She, she's very supportive in that way.  So she said she would sign with me and that was great.  That was great for my company.  I always remember Clive Davis saying, "You always need at least one marquee client," and she was my marquee client.
Story_ID: 666648
Speaker 1: So other clients, you have Shirley Murdock.
Speaker 2: She's the first, my first client signed to the, my new company [GQ Media and Public Relations Inc.; Gwendolyn Quinn].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I had signed her through EMI [EMI Group Limited] and that was the great thing about my deal when I left Capitol [Capitol Records] was that I was still under contract with them, and they still had to honor my contract.  But I also was able to work with other artists with their system and still get paid again.  So that, it was a great deal for me and she was the first signing I had to the company.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Chaka Khan as well, right?
Speaker 2: Chaka came later--
Speaker 1: Did she, okay.
Speaker 2: She, but yeah, I worked with Chaka for about three years, with other artists.  I had a ton of artists I worked with.  I, I started doing a lot of artists in the gospel community when I started my company because of the introduction the president of Capitol made with the, the president of EMI and I just was, they all felt that, you know, I was new to the business in terms of gospel, but what they did like about it was that I had did a lot of mainstream media and that was very attractive to them, for, you know, to work with the gospel artists, so that was good.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now your corner was saying the calls you get on Aretha Franklin, you just don't get for anybody else.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Because at one time the White House called and Condoleezza Rice wanted (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I mean you get calls on Aretha from all over the world.  I mean, you know, I would never, I've never gotten those kind of calls on any other artist I ever worked for, ever.  Because of who she is, I mean she's a, she's one of the most iconic artists that I ever worked with.  But yeah, the calls that you get and the, the, the level of media (laughter) that you get is, you know, is pretty (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --pretty amazing.
Story_ID: 666649
Speaker 1: Tell us about, there's something called the 'VH1 Divas' taping that--I, I mean, tell us that story.  Is there a story there?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Did I say? Oh. Yeah, VH1 taping. That was the first time that VH1, they have 'VH1 Divas,' yeah.  And that was the first time that they had started, that was the first taping and Aretha [Aretha Franklin] was a part of that taping.  And it was Mariah Carey and I can't remember.  I think maybe Shania Twain.  I can't remember exactly all the other artists, but she was the premier diva of the group.  And I just remember when we, it was at the Beacon Theatre in New York [New York], and she was going for the sound check, you know, and her agent, and the Arista [Arista Records] publicity department had told them what temperature that it needed to be, you know.  She couldn't have any fans blowing on stage.  You know it was a whole rider--in her riders, certain things.  So when she got, when I walked in first, I said, "Oh," I said, "feels kind of nippy, you know, a little cold in here."  I said, "Oh my god," but I didn't walk on stage so I didn't know if, you know, how the temperature was on stage.  I just knew how it was when I walked into the house, so when she walked in there and it was fans blowing and it was cold, she, you know, she walked right out, and told them she'll be in the car and they needed to come and call her when they fixed it.  But, you know, I just was, they were just, you know, obviously this is their first taping of 'VH1 Divas' and it was panic.  They were just like, "Oh my god, we've gotta get her back in here.  She's gotta do sound check."  I said, "Well y'all better fix that, you know."  I said, "We sent that information over and it's like that's not a game for her, like that's, that's important for her.  Everybody in the world knows that, like, you know.  Did you guys do what you were supposed to do?  Apparently not."  So that was pretty much the story, so, it was funny, it was hilarious.
Story_ID: 666650
Speaker 1: It's commonly thought, it's just a value judgment, of course, but it's commonly thought I believe that Aretha Franklin has one of the strongest voices--I mean, I, I--in show business, I mean just a pure voice.  And Chaka Khan, you know, when we had this discussion sitting around the living room, people bring, raise Chaka Khan too in their discussion, having this gift of a voice.  And at one time, Whitney Houston was in that discussion.  And it seems that somehow in the, mid-2000s, her voice left her.
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Whitney Houston.
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: It wasn't like it used to be.  I don't know what happened, but it was just, people noticed that and they would discuss it.  I don't even know what the question is, but just, these are, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, I don't have anything to say about that other than that, you know, some of the, they are all three, Aretha for sure has been named one of the greatest voices of all time, over Bob Dylan, and over every other artist on the planet.  I mean she has, she has earned that, but all three of them, Whitney and Chaka and Aretha, you know, I'm just fortunate that I had the opportunity to work with the three best voices in the world.  I mean just think about it, I mean like I, I was fortunate.  I've worked with some real singers, you know, from, like I said, Aretha, Whitney, Chaka, Rachelle Ferrell, Deborah Cox.  There's just so many great voices and I'm so honored that I had an opportunity to work with them.  And I know a good singer, look, I know a good singer (laughter) when I see one, that's for sure.  But, no they're the best, they're the best.
Story_ID: 666651
Speaker 1: You have had your own, you've operated as your own business [GQ Media and Public Relations Inc.; Gwendolyn Quinn] for, ever since two thousand and--
Speaker 2: Two [2002].
Speaker 1: --two [2002].
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: After 9/11 [September 11, 2001].  Oh that was the reason why they got rid of us the last time because they said that they tried to blame it on 9/11 happened in September, so they dismantled a lot of people in the New York [New York] office in October.
Speaker 1: Did, were they housed in the World Trade Center [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) But that was part of the reason, you know after 9/11.  I'm like, "Okay, I don't see the connection here but okay," you know.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite client?
Speaker 2: I do but I never say, but I love all of my clients, I do.  I really mean that.
Speaker 1: Well who's one of your favorites?
Speaker 2: I no longer work with two of my really, really favorites, which is CeCe Winans [Priscilla Winans Love] and Queen Latifah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I do, I love all of my clients.  Like I adore Chaka [Chaka Khan].  I love all of them.  I love them all so much for so many different reasons, you know.  I do, I really love all my clients?
Speaker 1: Is there one particular one, other than Aretha Franklin, that's the easiest to promote, to publicize?
Speaker 2: Whitney [Whitney Houston] was.  You know you don't have to do a whole lot of heavy lifting with you know, artists like that.  But even when you think that the artist is easy, they're not always, you know.  They may not always be an ideal situation because someone like Aretha, who at one point, you know, secured every, you know, pretty much everything on the planet, that was available to her, you know.  As she got older, there were certain like media outlets that, you know, may not have put her on the cover because, you know, she maybe not fell out of that demographic, so you had to watch that shift, you know.  I remember when Ebony or Essence stopped putting her on the cover, you know what I mean, because they were going for a different demo or when you have an artist like Aretha, who has done pretty much everything, and she turns down really big press.  "Oh my god, you're not gonna do that," and she's like, "No." But then she'll turn around and do the L.A. Sentinel [Los Angeles Sentinel] or the Chicago Defender, you know, or Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News], you know, or Jet.  She loved Jet.  So, so even when they, you know, they're big artists and, and you don't have to pitch as hard, you still have to be strategic at the things, with the things that you have them do, you know.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you have to be smart about it, because if not, a lot of outlets, you know, a lot of outlets just want certain artists because they can, you know, they can sell magazines, obviously.  So you got to always be careful about what kind of stories they're gonna do and, you know, you always have to be involved in the pictures and imaging of that.  It's, you know, they have to be handled differently than opposed to like an established artist or a new artist.
Story_ID: 666652
Speaker 1: Now you launched, in 2004, you launched the AAPRC monthly, right?
Speaker 2: It--well it's the African American Public Relations Collective.  It was a group that I started of African American publicists across the board, so it was film, television, music, government, medical field, just from every industry and it was a group and we had a list served and we shared information and ideas.  It was a wonderful.  So that, I started that.
Speaker 1: Now was this the first time African American public relations and marketing people like them organized into?
Speaker 2: I won't say it's the first time, 'cause you had the black public relations society [National Black Public Relations Society].  They are organizations.  They are 510--501 [501(c)(3)] organizations.  I didn't get mine registered as an organization.  It was more like a group, a collector of individuals that we, our main goal was to support each other in our different areas.
Speaker 1: And now the magazine is entitled the Global Communicator?
Speaker 2: Right.  Which we haven't published anything in several years.  Yeah, but it was a really great magazine.  I mean we were fortunate to, we covered a lot of great people, like I, we did, I'll never forget that day we called Ed Bradley and he answered his phone.  And wait a minute, and he was just so kind and generous and I, I think I had wrote him a note.  I don't even know if he got the note, but I talked to him and he was like, "Yeah, I'll do the interview."  And I think he knew, like these are young journalists and I mean Ed Bradley was a big deal.  I mean he didn't do that kind of stuff, you know.  He certainly, and it was a digital magazine and we, I couldn't tell you what the circulation was.  We didn't know that, but he, he knew it was a group of publicists and let me tell you the most profound aspect of that story for me is he did the interview and was gracious, very, very gracious with his time.  But when he passed away, we got a call from someone who is a very close family member, and he, they personally invited me to the funeral 'cause they said that, she told me, Maria Brown [sic. HistoryMaker Marie Brown] told me, she said, "You know what Gwendolyn [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Quinn], he was, he was actually sick, started getting sick at the time that he did the interview, but no one knew he was sick."  So she said he was not even doing interviews with anyone really.  And, she said, "I don't know what you said to him on the phone, but, you know, he didn't really do any interviews and, and, and," she said, "We, his family read the story and we could tell that he really, really wanted to do the interview, and that we wanted to invite you (background noise), we wanted to invite you to the service."  And I was just blown away from that.  That was just, I was, I got a chance to interview [HistoryMaker] Gwen Ifill, another one, a top notch journalist.  You know we interviewed all the top publicists too, you know, from [HistoryMaker] Ofield Dukes to, you know, [HistoryMaker] Terrie Williams, and all of the publicists in all industry, but the journalist I was most impressed.  I mean we had [HistoryMaker] Soledad O'Brien, we had all these like big broadcast people, like, Gwen Ifill, you know.  It was just amazing that people really respected what we were doing.  It was just, I'm going to start it again one day, but I just need a budget.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: We did, you know, we did Ava DuVernay, she was just like a budding publicist at the time.  I said, called, I said, "Hey Ava."  She said, "Hey Gwendolyn."  She was a publicist and she was working in film.  I said, "Ava you want to do a story?"  She said, "I love that magazine,' and she did the story and, look at her now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she's the--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Just look at her now.
Speaker 1: --director and producer for 'Selma' (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my god, 'Selma' and '13th'--
Speaker 1: And '13th,' right.
Speaker 2: --and she was a publicist just like the rest of us.  So it was, it was great, we had some really amazing interviews.
Story_ID: 666653
Speaker 1: You had a birthday celebration in 2012 which was like, fantastic.  I guess that's why they have it listed here.
Speaker 2: Ah, okay.
Speaker 1: With Ashford [Nickolas Ashford] and Simpson [HistoryMaker Valerie Simpson] and (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I had it at, I had it at their place.  It was a nice birthday celebration, yeah.  It was great.
Speaker 1: All right.  So all your colleagues were there?
Speaker 2: Well, just a lot of friends came and it's a small establishment.  It's not a really big place, but what was special to me was that the people that came out, you know, was important, but, you know, I'm a budding songwriter, so one of the things that one of the guys did for me is he took all of my songs that I wrote, he's the musical director for Whitney Houston.  He's now with Maxwell.  He works for all the top people, worked for Aretha [Aretha Franklin], whatever.  So he put together a medley of all of my songs and brought in a singer, a session singer and he did a whole medley of my songs at my birthday party and I was completely blown away.  It was like, first of all my songs sound so beautiful when he got finished with them.  I was like oh my god.  And that was, that I think was the most special thing for me was that--
Speaker 1: Hm. Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know.  And then a lot of the artists came out to perform and sing and stuff like that, so it was good.
Story_ID: 666654
Speaker 1: Now 2012 was the year that Whitney Houston passed.  She passed in California, but she was buried here in Newark [New Jersey] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And yesterday we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Carolyn Whigham whose funeral home [Whigham Funeral Home, Newark, New Jersey] handled the body and everything.  What are some of your reflections on Whitney Houston?
Speaker 2: Well it was just like, you know when I worked, when she, when I worked at Arista [Arista Records], you know sometimes we would get calls back then that, you know, we just want to verify and see if Whitney Houston had a heart attack or did she die, did she have an overdose, so we were accustomed to those calls, you know.  So when I was out that year, what year did she pass, it was two thousand--?
Speaker 1: Twenty twelve (2012).
Speaker 2: Twenty twelve [2012].  Yeah I was at the Grammys [Grammy Awards].  I was supposed to go to the party that night, to the after party that night, and I was working with another, I was out there working with another artist but I was gonna come to the party later that evening, and I started getting all these calls from like, on my cell phone, from like CNN and all these different people calling me, because even though I didn't work for her, they knew I was still in contact with some of her, her people, and they wanted to know if I knew and, did I hear anything, and I was like, "No, I didn't really hear anything, you know, blah, blah, blah."  And then somebody said, "Well Gwen [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Quinn] you should--," I said, I was so accustomed to hearing these stories, I just didn't believe it.  So I had someone in the car, I said, "Please Google Associated Press and CNN," and then it came up.  And I said, "Oh my god, you know, this must be true."  And then I started getting all these calls and then I called a few people and heard, then I found out it was true.  It was terrible.  It was sad, it was very sad.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you know her very well?
Speaker 2: Well, I worked with her.  She knew me.  I worked with her on her projects and she had her, she had her own management team, but yeah, she knew me, she knew me as the label publicist, but she was so generous though.  I remember like the holidays and things like that, she would send many wonderful gifts to, like the team that worked on her projects at Arista.  She was just, you know what, I tell people this story, she was one of, she probably ranked as one of the most professional artists that I worked with.  Like she didn't do, you couldn't like, you know, get her on the phone and say, "Can you do this and do that?" But when it was time for her to promote a project and it was time for her to do media, she was always on time, she was always ready, she was just, you know, she was very old school like that.  And she gave, gave it her all.  She was very good about that.
Speaker 1: When you say old school, I, I thought, well it just raises a question, do new, the new generation of artists, are they--they're not as--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, she just knew how to (unclear). She come in here and light this, suck all the air out.  She knew how to, she just, she knew it all, she was just a pro, how she greeted you, how she looked at you.  She did her interview, and, she just came, you know, she just came prepared, and ready, ready for duty.  She was excellent that way.  And everybody fell in love with her (laughter) (unclear).  She was just one of those artists.
Story_ID: 666655
Speaker 1: You represent some actors too, right, now (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  Who do I have on there?
Speaker 1: Idris Elba.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: That's not you?
Speaker 2: I never worked with him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had said in some interviews that I would love to work with him.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I would love to work with him, yeah.
Speaker 1: Anybody else that you, I mean--
Speaker 2: I don't know, just, you know, someone's interesting, someone I, you know, that's nice.  I don't like working with mean and evil people.  I don't do that anymore.  I don't care how much money you have, I'm not interested in that.  But I like what he's doing.  First of all, I think he's handsome and that just, you know, like most black women on the planet, we all love him.  But I just like his direction of his career and what he's doing, the work that he's doing, very thoughtful guy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I would work, if I got a call from Denzel [Denzel Washington] or any of them, I mean who wouldn't work with them you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  It, you know, it's a--
Speaker 2: But wait, let me back up, what I really want to say is if there is something that I can do to encourage African American celebrities to work with more African American publicists that would be an achievement for me.  Because although it happens more in music, it happens less in film and television.  And now that I'm writing for Black Enterprise and some other publications, Huffington Post [The Huffington Post], and EURweb [Electronic Urban Report], when I contact the celebrities, they all have white publicists, you know, and it's just, and I'm, I'm not angry about that, I'm angry about, I'm not angry about them hiring white publicists when they're doing a great job.  I'm not angry about that, because you know, if you feel like that person is the best person to do the job and they're doing the job, then I can live with that.  But there's been far too many cases where that's not the case and I just think that a lot of our African American celebrities have a, they think that sometimes hiring a white publicist is better for their career.  And sometimes when you, you know, they out in Hollywood and they have these agents and these agents recommend their accountants, and their doctors and their lawyers and their publicists, you know, it's, that, that has been an issue for me, you know.  So when you say, would I like to work with So and So, I would like to because I think it's important.  I think that I ran into too many situations where a lot of the white publicists are not culturally sensitive to our artists, you know, and see I was never trained like that.  When I worked for big celebrities I had to know the mainstream media and I had to learn the black media.  But they don't have to learn the black media.  They don't necessarily treat our artists the same way they do and it's--it's a problem for me.  It's--it's been a problem for me.
Story_ID: 666656
Speaker 1: Have you ever handled an artist that wasn't African American?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean I worked with white artists at other companies, yeah, like Kenny G.  I did a little, but I wasn't his (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, but right, right, right--
Speaker 2: I wasn't like his front publicist, but he was very cool, you know, you know I did schedule a few things for him, but I wasn't his main publicist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sometimes at the record company [Arista Records] if it was a, a big white superstar and they had a particular project and they wanted to get that particular project in the urban media, then that's when they would call us in or something like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, like Kenny G, Boney James, there's a couple of these guys that really--
Speaker 2: There's one artist, white artist I worked with Lisa Stansfield.  She was from London [England].  She was like everybody regarded her as a black artist, so, you know I wouldn't necessarily say she counted.  Her music, she definitely did black music, you know.
Speaker 1: Something really, I know they make a lot of money in the black community.  They are consumed by black people.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Kenny G would definitely be one.
Speaker 2: Oh, black people loved, funny thing about black people, black people definitely loved Kenny G, but the funny thing is that they think they are real jazz heads if they buy Kenny G.  You know what I mean?  They don't know about Monk [Thelonious Monk] or Coltrane [John Coltrane], but they know about Kenny G.  I'll tell you, it's the funniest thing.
Speaker 1: Right, I know people that use that as a guide.  I mean their gauge.  If you, if you, when they ask you about jazz and you say Kenny G, they say you don't know nothing.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) (Unclear) you know, but Kenny G, you know, I'm not mad at him.  He carved out a great niche for him and, and you know, he, he's not Monk or Coltrane, but let me tell you, he has ushered in people, black people, who don't know anything about jazz, he's opened up their ears a little more, for some of 'em, you know, who wanted to explore past Kenny G.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know what I mean.  See Kenny G, at the time Kenny G was out, you had Najee and some other, the other saxophonists, but they, you know Kenny G was--
Speaker 1: He's like a, he's reminiscent of Grover Washington [Grover Washington, Jr.] on some level, but--
Speaker 2: Who, Kenny?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I, I won't, well I, you know, I won't say that, to me, I won't say that, but I will say that he resonated (laughter) with a lot of black people in this country and around the world, so I'm not mad at Kenny G about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: God bless him.
Story_ID: 666657
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean--yeah, I mean there's always some things, yeah.  I think I probably would have become a little bit, I would probably have been more active in trying to change the views of black publicists in the industry, like I spoke of earlier.  Like one of the things I'm excited about, a group of black publicists emailed, included me on an email list last week.  You know they have all these black girls missing now, these stories about black girls missing so and, and, and I think it was a large group of them in Washington [D.C.] like where I'm living now, in Maryland, and I'm like, this is happening right in our backyard, like this is crazy.
Speaker 1: Like nine of them.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, so I responded and said, "Guys I'm in," you know, that's gonna to be like our pro bono efforts to help their parents or get the, you know, get the word out about it and if it's like nine, ten or twelve of us doing it, it's not gonna be taxing, you know, on us, you know, we can all figure out what we're gonna do and just deal with it, but we have to have a meeting about that, so I'm excited about taking on those, on that, those kinds of projects, pro bono projects, helping people in the community that really need it.  I think that's important.  So I, I've always had pro bono projects, you know, and sometimes I just get so passionate about what people are doing, I just want to help, and they don't have the money, so I've always done that, and I've always extended myself beyond the contracts I have with my clients.  I mean it's like when I want that (unclear).  For instance, I'm not working with Chaka [Chaka Khan] as her publicist, but three or four years later I still get a lot of her requests that comes in for her because people, the media remembers that I had been her publicist of record recently, and so I still get a lot of requests for her.  Same thing with Aretha [Aretha Franklin] and I, when we go in and out working together, I get everything for her.  Like I, if I look on my computer now, my emails, I probably got at least five requests for Aretha and I'm not officially working with her right now, so, yeah, but I'm, you know, looking to move in another direction now.  I'm looking to write for television now.  That's what I wanna do right now, so I don't know how much longer I'll be doing PR [public relations].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Full time.
Speaker 1: So have you written plays?
Speaker 2: No, I haven't written a play, I'm more interested in writing for television and then possibly later movies, but I am going into a screenwriters program, a playwright program that they have in Ohio, for a whole week, because I don't know anything about that medium at all.  Like I've written scripts before, spec scripts before, but I really want to get into playwriting and see how that whole process comes together so I was invited to this program in June.  I'm gonna be there for a whole week.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm excited about that.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I'm gonna to attempt to write my first one act play.
Story_ID: 666658
Speaker 1: Where's the business going now?  I mean how's it changed and--
Speaker 2: The record industry?
Speaker 1: Yeah and, well, well, the, the publicity--
Speaker 2: Oh, well I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) industry, in terms of promoting, you know publicizing these, these artists, and?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that publicists are still doing very well out here overall, depending on what industry you're in, you know.  There's always a need for really strong PR [public relations], but what has changed is the, how companies and industries and corporations are incorporating traditional public relations with new media, okay?  So that's, that's, you know, 'cause I remember when the bubbling of Myspace, the social media even started, that was a whole 'nother, you know the publicity part, we're like, we're not doing that, that's not publicity, you know, but now social media is just as big and in most companies in the record industry, they have a whole digital department now, you know.  And social media is extremely important to all the industries now, you know, and some companies have downsized their traditional media, and incorporated more social media, but the business part of PR is, I think it's still great.  But as it relates to the record industry, you know, the business is different, they're not selling records.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So it's gonna eventually have a trickle effect for marketing people, PR people, radio promotions people, you know.  I remember at one time getting hired by a company and staying on a particular project for two or three years.  That's unheard of now.  They hire you, the minimum is like three or four months now.  Like, and after that, unless the record is doing exceptionally well, which is not normally because they're not selling, you're off that project.  So things are slow right now for me for music, you know.  If I'm gonna, if I, if I have to continue doing PR, I'm gonna have to go into other areas because you just can't make a living off of it as much in the music industry.  And to keep chasing clients like every three or four months is a lot.  I never had, I never ever until this year had to do, I never had to chase, I always had people calling me about work.  I never had to like go pitch anyone.  I just never had to do that, so now I'm like oh, wow, it's really slow out here.
Speaker 1: Now recently I have a friend with a new television--making Internet channels on TV and a lot of these are promotional channels for different, for one thing or another.  That's a whole new way, I guess, of getting the word out, Internet channels.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I guess (unclear).
Speaker 2: No, it's great.  I mean, you know, I had, I had, you know, it's really interesting, certain clients, especially the, the, the more established clients, they, they, you know, a lot of people have been late, I've been late getting in with the social media, but it's something very tangible that people love about traditional publicity.  They love to still go to a newsstand and see their, see a magazine or go pick up a newspaper and see themselves in that.  There's something about that that I find that the artists still love.  They don't really understand getting a link from a New York Times article [The New York Times].  They, for some reason, don't think it's the same thing.  So, it's, it's, it's a learning curve on that, it's a huge learning--especially with, like I said, the most, the more established artists--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --it's a huge learning curve.
Story_ID: 666659
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point again, what would you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: Music PR [public relations] and working with some of the, being fortunate to work with some of the top artists in the industry, and also making a difference in building a brand, you know, and not just working with them, but just really contributing to who they are, you know, like I could look back at stuff and say wow, I was involved in that, I was responsible for that.  I got that cover, I did that, I did this, I did that, so that, but I don't think it's over with.  I'm gonna see what happens with this group that we're gonna put together with helping black families pretty much, and these black attorneys out here, or attorneys out here fighting these cases, you know, for these black girls missing, you know.  So that's, we're gonna definitely do that, so, I mean, that may be part of my legacy, who knows.
Speaker 1: Okay, and help with that effort (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 666660
Speaker 1: We always ask too, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Just overall, that we continue I mean, you know, I don't think it's all gloom and doom, you know.  I think there's a lot of things that, as you know, we don't hear about every day.  Black people don't make the news, you know.  They cover us in certain ways, so we hear about all the bad stuff, but it's a whole lot of great things that I think that are happening in the black community.  I look at the glass half full, not half empty.  So I think that black people are continuing to break down doors across all industries, and I think we're doing some really great things and I just pray that we continue to do that.  And continue to mobilize more together, you know, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I mean this is not the first time, I mean with Donald Trump [President Donald John Trump] this is not the first time, you know, it's like, we, we've had this before.  I mean we've seen this before.  It's in a different format, but we've seen it before.  This is not the first time we've been challenged by history and racism and sexism and all the other isms that we've had to experience, so I mean this is not the first.  This is not new.  But I do hope that with all this new so called activism that folks really, you know, participate and really do something and not so much rhetoric.  I'm tired of all the rhetoric, you know.  When you think of people who back in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], like [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis and the Black Panther Party, and all those people, those people risked, was willing to risk it all.  Those people went to jail.  Now these black people out here protesting, they're not willing to go to jail.  They not willing to spend one night in jail (laughter), and you know that's true.  They not willing to do that, so I get kind of, you know, disenchanted sometimes with all the rhetoric, 'cause we, we can talk and we got a good game, but, you know.
Story_ID: 666661
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well tell us about your family. Now, do you have any children?
Speaker 2: No children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just a bunch of godchildren.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.
Speaker 2: I just adore them, and I just love them to death, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's good.
Speaker 2: I wanna get married, well, I, you know, I met somebody I like so we'll see.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: We'll see how that goes.
Speaker 1: And your parents, are they?
Speaker 2: My parents [Queen Bradshaw Quinn and Lonnie Quinn, Sr.] are in their eighties and thank God they're doing pretty good.  My father has dementia and that's been very challenging.  It was very challenging for us.  I had to leave New York [New York] and move back to Maryland because I needed to be with my parents, you know.  And I guess we all experience that to some level, you know, when your parents can no longer really, they need your help.  You become the parent and they become the child, or children, so yeah.  That's, that's been the heaviest thing I think on me because, you know, you're so used to your parents being vibrant and doing everything for you and then, you know, you gotta do everything for them.
Speaker 1: What's been their view of your career?
Speaker 2: They enjoyed it.  I mean, you know, I don't really talk about my career like that with them.  I think, I think, you know, they know what I do, they sort of get what I do I think, you know.  They know I work with Aretha [Aretha Franklin], they know I work with this one and that one, but you know, I don't really talk about that with my parents.  Like they'll say when they want tickets for something.  "Can you get me some tickets to see--," you know, "So and So," but you know that's not what it is about with family.  At least my family, they don't really care, like did you clean up, like pay these bills, did you go get mommy's medicine, or you know, you need to go to your father.  That's really the whole center of conversation in my family.  Not what story I wrote for Black Enterprise or Huffington Post [The Huffington Post], no one cares about that.  I asked my sister [Vanessa Quinn] the other day, I said, "I have you on my mailing list, have you read some of my stories?"  She said, "No, I haven't read it yet, but I will," you know, so it's like, you know, family is just (laughter), it's family.
Story_ID: 666662
Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked you about we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, we talked about--no that's it, I think that's it.  I think we covered a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay, last question, similar to legacy but a little bit different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As someone who really tried to help people, encourage people, and inspire people, or for someone who really believed in really giving people a hand up, you know, as best I could.  That's what I hope I'm remembered for because that's what I always tried to do.  I do really believe and I know, you know, God blesses all of us with different talents and skills and that those gifts that he gives us is for us to share with other people and not to be selfish and, you know, to, to give back to people, and I, and I believe that.  Like I believe people with money are supposed to give people without money, money.  You know that's why you were blessed.  You wasn't blessed to like keep all this, to hoard all this money for yourself.  You're supposed to do that, so I just think, you know, with the gifts that God gives us that we are supposed to share them and bless other people with it in some form or fashion.  I just, I really believe that and I, and I think that, I know that I do that.  I just hope that I'm remembered that way.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Yeah, thank you (laughter) (simultaneous).
