Story_ID: 188536
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am can you please state your name and spell it for us please.
Speaker 2: Ruth Quarles.  Perhaps I should give you Ruth Brett Quarles, R-U-T-H, B-R-E-T-T, Q-U-A-R-L-E-S.
Speaker 1: And ma'am what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 23, 1914 in Winton, W-I-N-T-O-N, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: All right, and ma'am what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Retired (laughter), retired, perhaps I, I retired as an associate professor of education and director of counseling for Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today date is November 11, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  You don't have to give your full address.
Speaker 2: We are in, we are in an Episcopal Life Care community in, located in Mitchellville, Maryland.  Do you--can I give you more of the address?
Speaker 1: No, no that's fine, that's fine.
Story_ID: 188537
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions that we always ask and they just require a brief answer, and the first question is, ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I think at the moment my favorite food is poached salmon, perhaps because I, I need because of my high cholesterol, and I use that so much had come my favorite thing to eat.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite is some shade of a lavender to, lavender to, to darker colors in lavender or purple going toward that.
Speaker 1: Okay, much as what you have on today?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Oh dear, I would say spring when everything is coming out, the buds come out, and that's why I like being here we have trees and birds, too many birds even on my patio at certain times, but I would like, I like to see the blooming of flowers and things that just burst forth and the tree buds, spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I'm afraid I don't have a favorite vacation destination because as we grew up and as I even as in my married life our destinations were wherever we were and we were in Baltimore [Maryland] after I married and we were always going to North Carolina to see my parents and to Boston [Massachusetts] to see Ben's [Benjamin A. Quarles] parents, so that places nearby Boston we went to and places near, from here, between here and North Carolina.  So, that we, we, we didn't really ever have a spot where we went each year at all and not even until now we did not a lot of traveling anywhere in the summer.  Ben and I did a little bit after the kids were out of school and their own families.
Speaker 1: Okay, now ma'am do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase, that's fine.
Speaker 1: That's fine.
Speaker 2: That's fine.  I think that is one of the phrases--I never thought of it in terms of favorite phrase, it's something I seem to use and thank you very much, and I got that from my husband.  He, he was always a person who used that phrase a great deal and I think I didn't get that in use, I got it from him and I use it a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 188538
Speaker 1: All right well tell me about what you know about your ancestors?  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give me your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's full name is Julia, J-U-L-I-A--you want a middle name too?
Speaker 1: Sure, may as well.
Speaker 2: Rosetta, R-O-S-E-T-T-A, Pierce, P-I-E-R-C-E, and of course Brett, B-R-E-T-T when she was married.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I know, I have it right there in that material too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, oh my mother's?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah my mother's date of birth--my mother was born August thirtieth, nineteen--, no 1893.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Do you want date of death?
Speaker 1: Oh yes, when did she die?
Speaker 2: And she died February 12, 1989.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She lived a long time.
Speaker 1: Yes, she lived to be--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Almost nine--, almost ninety-six.  She was ninety-five and half.
Speaker 1: Go ahead, okay, now what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace the Pierces--
Speaker 2: Well, not very far.  Her father and mother and her father and mother both died when she was three years old, so she didn't know ever very much about them except she knew her grandmother on her mother's side and I heard her talk about the grandmother on her mother's side, but she was reared by an aunt, her mother's sister, and she was the oldest.  She then became the oldest child in that family because she was older than the aunt's children, so that she became the oldest of my aunt's children.
Speaker 1: What was your aunt's name?
Speaker 2: My aunt's name was Fannie, Fannie Hair, H-A-I-R.  That's all I can remember of the name, Fannie Hair.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about her ancestors that she knows?  Did, did she ever pass down any stories about where they came from or what they, or if they were from the same part of the country or?
Speaker 2: Yes, we know this.  I was born in Hertford County, North Carolina, a rural county, and I was born in an area of the county which was primarily mulattos.  It was free Negroes.  That was what they had called that and so that county was really divided into three-way segregation even almost in my time was getting better, but the schools were separate early on because the schools were set up for free--my mother [Julia Rosetta Pierce Brett] and father [Arthur Henderson Brett]--for free Negroes and they were, the other schools were set up for others later on.  Those schools were earlier.  And they all came from that area, from that area of North Carolina so far as you know I think they all were either English primarily English decent, but also Indian in my mother's side.  It was--and she did know her one--I don't think she knew him, but she knew well who he was.  One of the grandfathers was Indian and so there's a bit of Indian mixed with that too.
Speaker 1: Do you know what tribe or what, what group of Indians?
Speaker 2: I should know that because just recently they've sort of, but I don't know whether it was the same tribe.  It might have been Chowan, C-H-O-W-A-N.  I'm really not, 'cause I never, you know--we never talked about it when I was a child.  They never said anything about your ancestors and that I think was a part of sort of the tradition in the families they just, they just didn't discuss anybody because you didn't know your people beyond maybe, like my mother, my mother was fortunate to know both her mother and daddy.  When I come to my father's side, it's a little different.  Many of the people didn't know anyone except people in that community and they just sort of--everybody was sort of related to everybody else.
Story_ID: 188539
Speaker 1: Now, did your grandmother talk about her mother and father or talk about what they were like and what they did?
Speaker 2: Well you see I just said that my grandmother, my mother's [Julia Rosetta Pierce Brett] father and mother died when she was three years old, but all of the people in that area, I think, when, even when I came along were for the most part farming, was a farming area and everybody prided himself on having a home and owning his own land and that was sort of the sacred thing and church and Sunday school were the primary things that people would, you know, could go to.  There was no much of anything else, the home life, the church life, and school.  That was about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Even in, almost even in my day.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there aren't any--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --significant stories or about--
Speaker 2: No, no about the, about the family stories.  I really never, you know--I learned more about it, about some of the things after my father [Arthur Henderson Brett] died and my mother, you know, we didn't, the family sort of talked about it then and asked more questions, but we still didn't learn too much because my mother hadn't been told much about and didn't talk much about it.
Speaker 1: Were there any stories about how the family became free in the first place?
Speaker 2: Well, you don't need a story for that.  As I understand it, when, when, and I really don't know I think that's a very strange way of putting it because you really don't, didn't know who, who was except that I say in this community it came, it came about most of the people--see that's why I can't go back to generation you didn't know them because the people were either common law and didn't really live together for too long or they were, they were not married at all and so when I come to my father's side I'll tell you why they are on that side.  But, like I said he knew his mother and his grandmother, but he never knew his grandfather, never knew who he was or where or what he was except that later on--well that's about--that's on his mother's side, but on his father's side he knew his grand--he didn't know anybody.  He--let's see did he know anyone?  No, he knew his, he knew is father who is my grandfather and he and his father and mother were married and, but he never knew the others further than that.
Story_ID: 188540
Speaker 1: Okay, well can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, and then I'll tell you something else about the county itself on the question that you just asked.  My father's full name was Arthur Henderson, H-E-N-D-E-R-S-O-N, Brett, B-R-E-T-T.  That's his full name.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born on December twenty-third.  What day is Christmas?  December twenty--
Speaker 1: Twenty-third.
Speaker 2: What, what day is Christmas?
Speaker 1: Twenty-fifth.
Speaker 2: Twenty-fifth.  He was born the 24th, I thought it was wrong.  He was born December 24, 1891, and he died on July 12, 1968.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 188541
Speaker 1: Well what about the county, what about the county [Hertford, North Carolina] history.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the, I was saying that this county in the 1960s [sic 1860s] and '70s [1870s] or a little later than that it really happened I think and I still don't know much about that, but there was so much, such a quagmire about who was this or who was that, who was white, who was African American, Negro 'cause that's the words they were using then Negro and who was not, and, and that year or whichever year it was there and in that period the county census permitted people to register whatever they wanted, so many people, some of my cousins, many of my cousins I know registered as Indians.  And many of my cousins registered as white and many of them or just left whatever designation was there, which was probably Negro, I guess, on their, on their record, but they just, they just didn't know.  I mean, that was how--and the whole area of the county, not just the little town we lived in, in Winton [North Carolina] around, you know, our, our country seat was Winton and another part of it that was called Archer Town [Winton, North Carolina] and all those people were in the same county as we were, but not in the same community and they were all, they all declared themselves white and they were white.  You could see it in people, whiter than those people, but how they had ever been thought of as being free Negroes or, or Negroes or mulattos or anything you can't imagine how anyone could have.  And so those people, but all, all that--I knew them, their mothers and their daddies and they were classmates of mine.  Some of them were classmates of mine and at that time they were coming to the segregated schools and so I don't know what happened after this whether they have gone to the other schools because the county itself, of course, now has non-segregated schools now, you know, after the '50s [1950s].
Story_ID: 188542
Speaker 1: You grew up, you know, in Winton [North Carolina], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the neighborhood of Winton.  We were about one mile from the county seat, which had a courthouse and some stores and some funeral homes and things of that nature.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were--did you basically grow up on a farm?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, actually yes.  My father was an independent farmer, had his own land and his own farm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And a surveyor, he was a surveyor for the government part of the time too.
Speaker 1: He was a farmer for a living basically?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, that's how he made his living.
Speaker 1: And what was he like?  What, what were some, some of the things that he liked to do?  What do you remember?
Speaker 2: He liked to work, and he liked to own all the farm equipment (laughter) that came about.  It was hard sometimes to get him to buy anything for the house, but if you, if any, any invention came whether it was a better peanut picker or a better tractor or better whatever they called it in my lifetime when I was home he, he wanted to be, he wanted to have it.  For instance, he had, we had a car, T-model Ford and I can, I don't remember when we, you know, when we didn't have it and that was not true of many people at that time who, who got cars that early.  It was about, well I'm sure it was about nineteen--had to be about 1919 or 1918 that period you know when the Fords first came out.  So, he wanted, now that was because he could get around you see.  He could, he could places otherwise it was a little faster than the buggy and the fair, what they called the other kinds of transportation, the wagons, whatever they called them that they could move in and they travelled in was faster and so he had that car from the beginning.  When we were very so tiny, we just didn't remember when we didn't have a car, but, so he wanted that, but he wanted to--because he wanted, because that was the way he earned his living and he wanted to be up on it and catch up with it, but there were things that happened that made it difficult for him were two things.  One was of course when I was home and that was the [Great] Depression and that was because he had invested in so much land and so much that, then he lost a bit of it and it was hard on him then, very hard.  He was very depressed himself for a while.  And then the next thing that was, when he was really back on his feet and doing well again our house burned at Christmas, on Christmas Eve.  I wasn't there and that was '41 [1941], and I wasn't there, but I was the only child who wasn't there, but nobody was in the house because we always had church, special Christmas Eve program and they were all at the church, and the house burned and before, before the fire, the fire people--I don't who notified the fire people, but somebody did and daddy got there from church just about time they did because they had to come from Ahoskie [North Carolina], which is, Winton didn't have no fire engine, that was about eight miles and I guess they didn't get, I don't know how quickly, as I say someone notified them.  And that was a great tragedy for him.  So, those were the two things that made his life very tragic in, in that sense.
Speaker 1: Did he ever get another farm or--?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, yes, oh yes.  He didn't, he didn't lose everything to the extent that he didn't go on and--(unclear) and did more, so as I say by, by, after he got over that--oh, oh you were talking about losing it during Depression because the house was just lost during the farm when he you know--
Speaker 1: --Yeah, in 1941.
Speaker 2: --that, that was just the house, so he just moved to another house that he had and that's where he built, sort of rebuilt it, from one he had rented.
Speaker 1: Did he lose any, any land during the Depression?
Speaker 2: Well yes, I'm sure he did.  I really, I, I know he did because I know that he, he kept buying small places and accumulating them and trying to get more so that he did have, so that, that's why by the time oh I don't know I guess by the '50s [1950s] he was in fairly good shape again and that was why it was hard for us to go to college because in the Depression he couldn't make enough on the land that he had to send us to college and so, but we all went to college, all of us except my oldest sister who didn't want to go.
Story_ID: 188543
Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother [Julia Rosetta Pierce Brett].  What was she like and what did she do?
Speaker 2: My mother was an angel really.  She was really a wonderful woman and I guess a lot of it came from the fact that she had, had no mother and I know that she used to tell us that she didn't know her parents and she was the oldest in the other family, that the school kids would say she has no mother, she has no mom, she has no mom and dad, and that hurt her a great deal because of course she did have, you know, those people her aunt and uncle, aunt and her husband felt like her family to her.  So, she was, you know, thinking that that was very hard, but she was a red head and very, very fair, very, very fair.  Therefore, she, you know, she didn't seem to belong quite to the other family.  They, they were a little, a little more mulatto than she.  And so that was hard on her, but she was always so good and kind to us.  She was also there for us.  She, she--we never went home from school except mama and you knew she was there.  We never, I mean even when I finished high school and well even later on with even the youngest child she was always there when, when we got home from school.  She was always there to do for you and take care of you because early on I do remember that our grandmother lived with us.  That was our, no that was our, that was my, that was my daddy's [Arthur Henderson Brett]--no it wasn't my daddy's mother--my daddy's grandmother, because my daddy was reared by his grandmother and he, and she died at our house and so I do remember her and she didn't die until about 1925, I think, sometime in that time.  So, I do remember her as my daddy's grandmother on his mother's side.  His mother and dad--his, his mother married someone from that county and they moved to Hampton, Virginia, when he was one year old and his grandmother wouldn't let him go; she kept him.  And I guess the daughter I think she was expecting another child, so and they were, this was going to be quite something to pick up and go there and go to another place, so I think they, you know, didn't mind, but he was reared by them and so and they lived in Hampton always.  We went to see them some, but not very much in the early days when I was coming along, but later on they went more frequently.
Story_ID: 188544
Speaker 1: Tell me about growing up.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up for you?
Speaker 2: Well I think I liked, I liked the, the water.  I remember we had a--the first place I remember that we had was too far away from school and from, and from church.  We had always gone, but was too far away and that was when, and we called it over the creek because they had a bridge which they built themselves, my grandfather.  He was called my grandfather, my grandmother's husband, and he, he came then to, you know, so that he moved from there, but I liked the bridge and the water, but I didn't like to get in it or get near it in the sense of anything except to seeing it and hearing it.  And then when we moved the next place there was a big pond, a big place on the farm that I liked.  And then the next place we finally had was the, where, where I really grew up from about ten was near a school, near the high school then 'cause the other school had been near the first place, second place we lived, and I really liked there again, the water, and the trees.  There were a lot of pine trees around as I remember and walking into the corn, the corn, the, the cornfields.  When the corn got very tall and you couldn't be seen walking through the cornfields and all the sort of sounds of the, of the things that you heard and so I, I remember those things and I, I liked them.
Story_ID: 188545
Speaker 1: Now what kind of little girl were you?  What did you like to do when you were a little girl?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I very early on sort of took the leadership in my family of children.  I had one sister who is older, but she was more quiet in terms of going out and seeing what there was to be done and being aggressive, so, but there was nothing--I was more aggressive than she, wanting to do things and get out and so as I remember we were both, we both started school the same day because in this process of moving from place to place she was seven, I guess, and I was six and we started school the very same day and I pushed a little harder than she did and did better in school and so I sort of took over, not at home where she was the boss of the children, of the other children because we were all like stair-steps.  And she took care of the other children and watched out for them and, and we say was bossing them and, but I took charge of--we didn't have anything to do except school, so I was doing very well in school and would help do things in school and then on Sundays we didn't have anything to do, but go to Sunday school and church and when we came home we had a little community group and so we had our own Sunday school and I was always in charge of that and getting that started, Sunday school and some of the activity, different activities and so I was--and that really lasted pretty much until my oldest sister started, I guess, about fifteen she became interested in having a boyfriend and so I, I would go with them as soon as, as soon as whoever she was going with was able to drive.  I would go with them on Sunday afternoon, ride around with them or go visit somebody else, but those, that was about the thing until I, until I actually finished high school [the Waters Training School, later C.S. Brown High School, Winton, North Carolina] at sixteen and then I, that's when I left Hertford County [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 188546
Speaker 1: I don't wanna get you that far, that part yet, but tell me now you mentioned off camera the church and Sunday school and all that, so church was a big part of the family life?
Speaker 2: Yes it did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, my father [Arthur Henderson Brett] was--well you were asking about me what I was like, but my father was a church superintendent for fifty years and then he was also a trustee and a deacon and all the other offices, different offices he held in the church and so all of us, my whole family, from the time we were born really literally we went to Sunday school every Sunday, but we didn't have the actual church services in those early years every Sunday, but we, we went to Sunday school, nevertheless, every Sunday.  And my mother [Julia Rosetta Pierce Brett] and daddy went, my mother and daddy took us when we and they with baby, I mean a baby in arms and small baby and all the rest of us went.  That was a part of the family life, and that was the most important part of the family life I think to them and then to school.  He, both my parents were so interested in our going to school and that was why he really moved from one, you know, from one place to the other.  When we finished fifth grade, I think, the elementary school they moved a little closer to Winton [North Carolina] then, so before that we had gone to the same, the same church always and school, but when we then moved nearer Winton and so then went to high school a little nearer there so that they were interested in education.  And then--
Speaker 1: Did they have a chance to go to school much, to get any schooling themselves?
Speaker 2: Both of them had about what at the time I was in school we would have called an eighth grade education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 188547
Speaker 1: Now, did you like school?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I loved it, yes, yes.  And my parents [Julia Rosetta Pierce Brett and Arthur Henderson Brett] both liked school too.  They both, they both were interested in school and I guess that's why we were and the fact that they emphasized that we should go to school because some of the people in the, in the community got about fourth grade and they would drop out of school.  But, we would never have a chance to drop out even if we wanted to, so that school was--it was church, school, and that was it and family.  We would visit some families.  One family visited another.  We would visit some of our cousins.  My mother had a sister was not too far away, a few miles, and my, and a brother.  Mother's, it was always my mother's people.  And she had a brother and they had and we would always exchange Sundays and we would go to their house for Sunday dinner and one time we go to the other and they would come to us and that kind of thing.  You had that kind of family, so it was still sort of family, family thing with all of the families getting together, but--
Story_ID: 188548
Speaker 1: I wanted ask you about music, I guess. A lot of black people consider music--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right--
Speaker 1: --a big part of growing up--
Speaker 2: --but we didn't--
Speaker 1: What kind of music did y'all--
Speaker 2: We didn't have much by way of music.  There were people who played the piano and people who there, but there was, there was not, not, there were not many people who really knew music and who, who did much with music.  That was true at least until the time I left.  I think there were more, many more, but after that.  But, see that was back in 1931 when I left and so much happened after that.  But, up until that time we didn't have very much music at all except but music that you had in Sunday school and church and--
Speaker 1: No radio--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well radio.  When radio came some families had radio.  We had a radio, but as I remember yeah when I left we had a radio, yeah, but that was, that was all.  And I think, I was trying to think of how early we got a radio, but my parents [Julia Rosetta Pierce Brett and Arthur Henderson Brett] always took a newspaper and the newspaper came from North Virginia [Norfolk, Virginia] and--
Speaker 1: Was it [The Norfolk] Journal and Guide?
Speaker 2: The Journal and Guide and the Norfolk paper [The People's Free Press or the Norfolk Phoenix], the Norfolk, whatever they called the Norfolk paper, the regular Norfolk paper.  They took both those papers and so as far as I could remember we had the newspapers always.  Whenever they got that I can't remember--yeah I think they were delivered on a rural route and so they got there to the post office in the winter and they were delivered by--I don't know, I don't remember whether they were the same day or whether the day after they were delivered, but yeah well it was dif--it's different.  So much happened after I left, but they told me about it and I knew about because my mother was still there.  It became a really modern community.  At that time, it was really nothing else to do.  I didn't know anything except to go to church, Sunday school-
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) Sunday school--
Speaker 2: --and visiting.
Speaker 1: Now did you visit a lot?  Did y'all visit a lot?
Speaker 2: Well, the relatives primarily, but also the people right in the community there were we lived [Winton, North Carolina].  People your own age you got together on Sundays.  The boys usually played softball, but since we were all girls except my one brother he, he was about the fourth in the family and he was younger than us, so that I still didn't know much about what he, what he was doing on Sunday, but there was not much to do.
Story_ID: 188549
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about school?  Now you--did--were there any teachers at school or, or people at school that stand out as important in, in your development?
Speaker 2: Yes, in high school.  Well, even in elementary school I remember I guess the first teacher I had Ms. Addie [ph.].  I remember we called her.  She was I thought--well I just remembered her all the time I guess because it was the first teacher, you know, but then in high school we had a very excellent, well we had some very excellent teachers.  It was a county [Hertford County, North Carolina] where people came, teachers came from outside of the county for teaching.  For instance, I remember one teacher was from New York and another was from Pennsylvania, and I think it was because as I understood later that many African American teachers weren't able to get jobs in the North or they had a relative there or something and they came to teach, but we had some good teachers, good high school teachers whom I remembered for their solid work with us.  One of them, of course, was right from the area and she was, she taught English and had a great influence.  And the principal [Dr. Calvin Scott Brown], I think, was a person who had the most influence.  Well, I know he had the most influence on me because he had graduated from Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina], and he had started a school, and he had started a school, a private school [Chowan Academy, later C.S. Brown High School], that's the Winton [North Carolina] School I went to.  He started that school himself as a, and built it up and it was a private school as I say.  It had become public. By the time I went there, it was a public school, but it had been private all the years and so he had, you know, had this school and had good teachers because I think they came from different places and so he, he not only from--he influenced me to the extent that he and another person who was a pastor of my church who didn't come from there, but from a nearby county, a pastor of my church the last, in my last years of high school they were the two people who were responsible for really seeing to it that I got to college 'cause they got a scholarship for me and that kind of thing--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) Now, now did you--
Story_ID: 188550
Speaker 1: Excuse me but did you know in high school what you wanted to do in life?  Did you have the idea that you wanted to be a teacher in high school--?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, I, I didn't ever had the idea that I wanted to be a teacher, although I admired the teachers and they were about the only people I had, but I wanted to be somebody different from a teacher, especially a teacher in elementary or high school.  I knew that I wasn't interested in, although I thought they were wonderful people, I wanted to get out of it and it was only when I got to college that I could see a possible field for me.  I knew in high school, I even said in my, I think it was really because we--I don't why I got that idea that I might be a missionary, but I wanted to be something different.
Speaker 1: Where did you want to be a missionary?
Speaker 2: To Africa--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I think that came through people, pastor had, had been, a person who had been to our church, a pastor, in my mother's [Julia Rosetta Pierce Brett] days that she named me Ruth and Esther, two of her children for two, for two of this woman's children and this woman Ruth came there as a missionary.  She was a missionary and I heard her speak two or three times.  So, I thought that's something else you can be, if you, you know, that, that was a teacher and then he was a person who was a missionary, so maybe I'd be a missionary, so I thought about that, you know, I mean that was just something until I got to college.
Speaker 1: Okay, now were you popular in high school?  You were very popular or, or were you shy or?
Speaker 2: No, I was never shy (laughter).  Well, I was aggressive, but I was and, and popular in a sense that you know that I was the best student in the class and that kind of thing and got along well with everybody.  Nobody, as far as know nobody disliked me, but my sister Glynnis [ph.] who was in my class all the time was much more popular with the boys--
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --as much more--yeah and she got married the year after we finished high school, right after we finished high school, but and the only one who didn't get to college.  So, yes popular in a different way from what she was, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay know you were valedictorian of you class?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, okay and you graduated in 1931?
Speaker 2: One.
Speaker 1: And they, they called the school Winton High School [formerly the Waters Training School, later C.S. Brown High School, Winton, North Carolina] there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, wasn't called Winton High School--what was it called?  I guess--it wasn't called the C.S. Brown High School either, although it was named, that was the principal [Dr. Calvin Scott Brown] and that was, it was named for him later.  It was called Waters Training School then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's when it had just, I think a few years before that had been made a public school and they changed the name from whatever it was before, something--Normal School 'cause they had, they did have a high school and, and they trained people for normal school, to go into normal schools something--
Speaker 1: For teachers--
Speaker 2: To teach us yeah.
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 188551
Speaker 1: Now how did you get into Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]?  What happened?
Speaker 2: Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Shaw.
Speaker 2: Not Fisk.
Speaker 1: Shaw.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to, I went to Shaw because the summer after I finished high school I went to Norfolk [Virginia].  My mother [Julia Rosetta Pierce Brett] had a sister who lived in Norfolk, and I went to Norfolk to get a job.  We'd gone there to visit her a good bit anyway and went to get the job and my, my aunt was a social worker.  She had finished Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio] in 1919, so she was the star light of you know somebody in our family who had gone--
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: --to college very early.  Her name was Brownie, Brownie Pierce Omohundro and she had, had, had, and she was old, a little older than my mother, so she was sort of on her own with one family to another while she was growing up because she, she did stay with one aunt for a period, but she just sort of grew up on her own and went out to get work and went to, went to Hampton [Institute, later Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], I think, and got work and went to school and then went on to Oberlin College and that was quite, quite something in that day.  And so I went there--she was a social worker in Norfolk and I went there and she got me a job to go to Maine with a family to take care of three little boys and so that was my first really long trip by car and this [U.S.] Navy man drove us up to Maine and his parents had this--his mother--I think his father was staying, so the mother had this wonderful camp, you know, really a first-class place estate on the water in Maine, in Wayne, Maine, and I was to take care of those boys.  But, she had a library like I had never seen 'cause we didn't have much of a library in school, and we had no library, no public library to speak of in, you know, in the county [Hertford County, North Carolina] 'cause they had some, something they called a library, but not really much.  And so this was a wonderful library, so I, and I had enough time to spend reading a great deal because the mother, the kinds of things she did with the kids took a good deal of the time and I didn't have, it was not difficult for me at all and then I had a lot of time to spend in the library.  So, I spent a good bit of time in the library reading and I got a lot of ideas that summer of what kind of things could happen to people, you know, people could be.  But, I didn't meet anyone except some of the people who were caring for families in the area and I used to go on the day we had off, one or two of those people drove, had cars, and drove, so I saw a good bit of the area with them.  But, they were not people, they were not even, well many of them were not even Americans, they were people who --Irish as I remember for the most part.  So I--but then that was when I got back at the end of summer I stopped in Norfolk [Virginia] and bought my clothes and I had every penny that I had earned and I bought my clothes to go to college 'cause I knew I was going we'd been talking about it, but nothing had actually been sealed.  But, the minute I got home we, the pastor of my church and Dr. [Calvin Scott] Brown, who was the principal of the high school [formerly the Waters Training School, later C.S. Brown High School, Winton, North Carolina], again the one I told you about, had gotten, had seen to it that I got a scholarship and I got a scholarship and I got a job in the president's [William Stuart Nelson] home to work for room and food so I could live in the dorm, get room and food and I could also have tuition paid.  So, all my college was paid for in that way by me by my work and my tuition and so I, that was at Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] and Shaw was the fifth oldest college that was set up by northerners for African Americans in the South.
Story_ID: 188552
Speaker 1: Shortly after you got there Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] got its first black president [William Stuart Nelson].
Speaker 2: Shaw got its first black president the year [1931] I went, and I was working in the president's home and after the first year the dorm actually moved into his home so that I could answer the phone at night or evening or whenever, and also gave me a chance to get much more work done myself, 'cause that wasn't a difficult job.  And so, but I had, but I, that's the way I earned my college there and that's the way I got a great deal of my insight and whatever from what I wanted to do and where I wanted to go 'cause I met everybody all the guests who came to Shaw to speak and whoever they were from Mordecai [Wyatt] Johnson from Howard--to Howard Thurman, all the outstanding people who came, stayed in the president's house.  So, I had a chance to meet them and see them and talk to them perhaps more than anybody else on campus.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have a chance to meet William Leo Hansberry?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't meet Hansberry until I was married and been--knew William Hansberry and we met him in Baltimore [Maryland].  I met him yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Who else came--did--were there any women speakers, women that came?
Speaker 2: There weren't, there weren't many women speakers as I remember in the moment.  Let's see who--there were not, not before I left there.  We had women teachers at Shaw, many women teachers and excellent ones and I was trying to think of women speakers.  Well, these names stand out at the moment anyway in my mind.  I probably will think of some after awhile.  We did have YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] people who were in charge of the YWCA and who came, you know, and that--they were area people, people from that area and that was when I met a lot of people there.  So, I knew that YWCA was another kind of thing that was another kind of work to do, but I really got interested in the dean of women's job, student personnel work and that's what I finally ended up doing--
Story_ID: 188553
Speaker 1: --you see, but I, I didn't like what the dean of women was supposed to be doing 'cause the idea was to watch the girls and take care of the girls and I didn't like that.  I thought that was, that could be a better job.
Speaker 2: Let, let, let's go through that in some detail 'cause college life's a lot different now than it was--
Speaker 1: Then, yeah.
Speaker 2: --in the nineteen--in the 1930s.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, what was college life like on a black college campus for the students, for students?
Speaker 1: Well, for us at Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] because it, we were, in a segregated city [Raleigh, North Carolina] it meant that you were sort of limited to the campus.  And even though they had the--actually the city auditorium [Memorial Auditorium, Raleigh, North Carolina] was built when I was a senior at Shaw and we had our graduation exercises in the auditorium that year I graduated.  It had just been built.  It was right there at Shaw, but Shaw was still a very segregated place, I mean, the city was very segregated and we did go--I wouldn't go, I wouldn't go to a movie 'cause I couldn't, wasn't going to go to a segregated movie and once in awhile I think primarily the boys went to the movies perhaps with some girls.  I can't remember that many though.  The boys went to the movies, but we lived on the campus and had our own activities.  We had sororities and fraternities and all that.  There was YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], Missionary Circle and Honor Societies did I say and I was president of the [Alpha Chi] Honor Society, president of the YWCA.  I, I did all of those things.  I was very active in all of that activities of the college.
Speaker 2: I, I've read that it was very strict in those days.
Speaker 1: Well, you, you said what--(unclear)--but it was strict in the sense that well for Shaw it had to be strict we didn't, there was no dancing at Shaw still when I went there.
Speaker 2: No dancing at all?
Speaker 1: No dancing, no.  No dancing.  We had socials.
Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 1: We had socials that you sort of held the hands or crossed hands or something.  You didn't dance.
Speaker 2: Was music playing, was music playing?
Speaker 1: Well, let's see what did we play?  I guess it was a music player, but we did have at Shaw a very excellent choir and had a very excellent choir director, but you know they did mostly sacred music for chapel or whatever for the program.  We had chapel every Sunday at 4:00 and everybody was sort of expected to go.  And we had a laundry where you did your own laundry, but you had a director of the laundry to help you.  So, every phase of your life was sort of circumscribed even then.
Speaker 2: Self-contained to the university setting?
Speaker 1: Yes, the university had, you know, you, you, well we had to have speakers because, you know, in the city we couldn't, we couldn't go hear those speakers and then, so you really in that respect--but that year we started getting very outstanding African American people coming there, teachers and big speakers because of the new president [William Stuart Nelson] who was quite an excellent person and had been at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] for several years as head of the school religion and I think also in some other capacities before that--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) Who was that?--
Story_ID: 188554
Speaker 1: William Stuart Nelson.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: William Stuart Nelson, so he was--so I would say he was a great influence in my life, very great influence because he not only when I finished college he, he got a place for me to go, to go on because by that time I had decided I wanted to do something in the area of social work or personnel work in colleges, but sort of since they didn't have anything but the title of dean of women I didn't necessarily want that title, but I wanted--really, had a great feeling that that position needed to be changed and there needed to be somebody who could really work with the people as sort of counselor and helper rather than me thought of as only a dictatorial person who disciplines students, but under William Stuart Nelson he had a committee at Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina], and that committee was a discipline committee and that sort of took it right there off that particular dean of women and dean of men.  They had a dean of women, dean of men that would have took it off them, so I learned early there that, that position should be one of working with students and helping students rather than--develop their own lives rather than somebody who was gonna discipline them.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause there were very strict codes in term, terms of hours that you can be out--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: --outside, especially for women, right--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, right, yeah especially for women because we went, we went outside on Sunday.  Well, Sunday afternoons for instance when we have, when we'd be going to Vespers, you know what are you gonna do after that.  Well, you gonna walk around the campus in groups or sit in groups or talk or move around the campus, but mostly restricted to the campus because you weren't gonna go to anything in the city [Raleigh, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Okay, there's a curfew at night, right you had to be in at a certain time at night do you know?
Speaker 1: I think so, I think so.  You see that didn't bother me too much after my first year when I didn't live in the dorm and the restrictions were greater on freshmen anyway and, but it didn't bother me so much after I lived in the dorm because I didn't, I didn't have to, you know, I was on my own to go the president's [William Stuart Nelson] house, but I was always there and I didn't go anyplace unless I was gonna let her know, the president's wife know where I was, so and they knew that, so I was--they knew I was gonna be trustworthy, so I never had any problem with that.  But, we had lovely things on the campus with the Nelsons.  They had the junior/senior had kind of receptions for each of the classes, and we had outdoor things beautifully set up so that, and I think the students did feel--it was a small student body and so you could really work with them, you know.  Every teacher could work with every student because we were so small and they knew you so well and so we did have a lot of really good relationships there to teach us.
Story_ID: 188555
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about the graduation from Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina].  When did you graduate from Shaw?
Speaker 2: I graduated from Shaw in 1935 as the valedictorian of my class, and the exercises were held in the City Auditorium [Memorial Auditorium] of Raleigh [North Carolina], which was built as I said right next to Shaw.
Speaker 1: Okay, where there any teachers at Shaw that really stand out as being important to you in your development out, outside of the president [William Stuart Nelson] who we already talked about him--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, okay well there were a couple of others, Foster Payne who was an English teacher, and he was the dean of the college, and Hilda Davis who was the dean of women, who was a wonderful woman and a kind, thoughtful person.  And I kept in touch with her always until her death, and she was a member of the associations that I joined, so she was one of the African American people who was a member of the national associations of personnel workers [ph.] before many other African Americans were pres-- were in them, she was.
Story_ID: 188556
Speaker 1: Okay, okay now when you graduated from Shaw you were--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I, I through [William] Stuart Nelson he got me into Hartford Seminary Foundation [then Hartford Theological Seminary, Hartford, Connecticut] where I took a master's degree in the School of Education, and here I was going to a seminary and taking a degree in religious education, but I was really going there because that was the place where I could be admitted, where I could get money enough and work.  I worked, waited table to, to go, to go on to graduate school, and I wanted to go on right away to get some work in the field and I knew enough to know that the kinds of things you learn in religious education and the character building and the counseling and all the courses, 'cause there were courses in psychology and sociology and in personal relations.  That that would be the kind of foundation that I could use and I did.  I went and got my master's and that's what I used as a foundation and left there and went to Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] 'cause I had to go to work then.  You know I had, had, up to that time I had somehow made it without doing the work, but I had sisters, sisters and my brother too, I think, by that time was in college and I had to help them.  So, I started at Spelman.
Speaker 1: So, so you started helping other members of your family--(simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: Yes, I helped some from that time on.  That was 1936 that I graduated from Hartford and went to Spelman College in Atlanta, Georgia, as assistant to the dean and then I was there for two years only, but I worked there as assistant, which meant really assistant to any of the administration that needed assistance.  I was advisor to the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] and a couple of other claims that I did to help out with supervising the drama groups and the, which gave me a wonderful opportunity there.  I really enjoyed being at Spelman because that's a great system.  They had a great Atlanta University System, but the Spelman Atlanta University system had the, they had band and choir and they had outstanding drama, Ann Cook, Sterling Brown, and some of the other people who were outstanding came there in the summer.  That's where, and Ann I think stayed all year one year while I was there.  So, that that's where I really got a lot of good college help and what I should have gotten in my own college, but we didn't have that kind of resource.
Story_ID: 188557
Speaker 1: Was Dr. [W.E.B.] Du Bois on campus [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] with you?
Speaker 2: Dr. Du Bois was at Atlanta University [later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  I met Dr. Du Bois.  I had lunch with Doctor--breakfast with Dr. Du Bois.  Once he took a couple of people, friends of mine and me to lunch, to breakfast, and after that he took us to, I guess he did finally take us to something else, and so I, I did know him.  And I knew him after I moved to Baltimore [Maryland] because his daughter [Yolande Du Bois Williams] lived one door from me in Baltimore, and he came there to see her when she was ill, and he came when she died and so I, and I, so I knew him well, fairly well in terms of those occasions.
Speaker 1: What was he like?  What, what can you tell us about him?
Speaker 2: Well, about Du Bois to me, see because of the way in which I met him was sort of personal basis thing I was, I sort of, he was a likeable person.  He was very, you know, it was a different relationship because at Atlanta University I would go often to Atlanta University to the dining room where I would, when I was at Spelman and he, he was eating along and he was very aloof and you know and the people knew that, but he taught and the thing that happened to me at that time I met the person, [Ellen] Irene Diggs, who was his assistant and secretary and she moved to Baltimore and had moved to Baltimore at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] before we moved to Baltimore, before I married, married and went to Baltimore and she, I lived right next door to her.  So, I learned a lot from her about him, but I was, you know, she, she was sort of didn't talk much about him at all and she didn't give people much information.  She just let it be known that she had been, she had worked for him all these years.  But, she--
Speaker 1: She, she's got a little pamphlet called Great Black Inventors ['Black Chronology from 4000 B.C. to the Abolition of the Slave Trade'], I think, Irene Ellen Diggs.  Black--it's about black inventors I know that.
Speaker 2: Well, she, she was also considered very aloof, you know, in Baltimore and, but we lived next door and so I got to know her pretty well, but she died there, still, and had retired and was very aloof and very away from everybody.  But, I wasn't still in Baltimore when she died.
Story_ID: 188558
Speaker 1: What about Benjamin Mays.
Speaker 2: Yes, well I knew Benjamin Mays when I was at, when I was at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], of course.  I knew Benjamin Mays.  I knew him very well.  I went, I went to a number of activities there and I went to, with him and his wife [Sadie Gray Mays] to some, some things.  And I knew his wife. I was trying to think why, how I knew her and some other things that meant.  When I went back to Baltimore [Maryland] after that, I always saw him and he was one of the persons I always admired.  He was a great man, a great speaker, but a great person and so was his wife.  And he really pushed hard to, to get things done and to get places open.
Story_ID: 188559
Speaker 1: So, were you able to reform anything at Atlanta University [later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] when you worked there or, or did you--
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't--
Speaker 1: --see things that you wanted to change that you ended up changing?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I was not--
Speaker 1: At Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], I'm sorry, Spelman.
Speaker 2: Spelman, Spelman.  Well, at Spelman no because Spelman was my first job and I, while I was interested in really in what was happening to segregation and had actually been to some of the meetings, well that was a little later I think too that I went to most of those, I was not out for reform.  I mean I was not then on my reform path as I was later on.  I, I felt that at Spelman I learned a lot as I say from the whole setup and the whole being a part of that system and I really appreciated being a part of that system and the president at Spelman, Ms.[Florence] Read, was wonderful to me and I was always, always doing some things for guests and things there, so I got to meet large number, Mrs. [Mary McLeod] Bethune, people like that, other people who came to Spelman just as I had met the people who came to Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina].  And so I appreciated my time at Spelman very much, kept in touch with her until she died and she--
Speaker 1: --Now, what was she like, what was Ms. Bethune--
Speaker 2: --and she always reminded me that she had offered me a job to come back to Spelman to, to Spelman four years after I left.
Speaker 1: Now this is Mrs. Read? Read, right.
Speaker 2: Ms. Read.  She offered a job to come back to Spelman, but I left Dillard after awhile.  I went to Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] after I left Spelman and I was at Dillard for four years, and she offered me a job to come back and she always reminded me that I didn't take it and I went someplace else rather than go with Spelman.  But, she was, she was a very strong person, and she did everything herself.  She was the president and the dean and took care of the academics of everything and teachers and everything else and I, I suppose she set the rules too for the, for the dormitory directors, although I was supposed to be working with them some and I did some, talk with them some and we worked some together, but the rules I didn't ever get into it, I didn't never touch except that I did have charge of, of what they called a social hour when the Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] men could come and visit the Spelman woman.  Now, I had to be supposedly in that room, and there was a little place there, a little, it was a nice room and a couple of nice big room and the men could come and visit Spelman women and I was supposed to be right, sitting right there with them.  I didn't always do that.  I sat a little away from them.  I wasn't gonna sit under them, but did get to know the Spelman, the Morehouse men and a lot of those men whom I kept as friends for a long time, new them well like Nix [ph.] I know became dean of men at--well he became dean of men someplace else and I--
Speaker 1: You said Nix--(unclear)--.
Speaker 2: His name was Nix, yeah.  Where did, I'm trying to think.  Well, anyway I knew him for many years, kept in touch with, and not only he I knew several of the men well.  So, I got to know some of the Spelman men, the Morehouse men like Spelman women since I kept in touch with the Spelman women who were students more than I kept in touch with the Spelman teachers other than the president 'cause I kept in touch with several Spelman students and they, three of them who were my closest friends have died.  They were students, but they were just about my age 'cause I was rather young when I went there.
Speaker 1: So, so you, you were at Spelman until 1938?
Speaker 2: I was there from '36 [1936] to '38 [1938].
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 188560
Speaker 1: And then that summer I went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] to study because Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] required that I go to, that I in order to come to Dillard as dean of women I had to teach history, survey course in history, American history, and I had, I was not prepared to do that, so I had to go to the University of Chicago and take history that summer, but I also took a course, my first course actually in student personnel administration under Brumbauer [ph.], so I got in what I wanted to get in there by being there was oh really from about fourteen weeks.  It was a long summer for you know the inner sessions and then the regular sessions.  So, that was how I got prepared to go to, to Dillard where again it showed the shortages of the African American colleges.  Here again now when I went to, when I went to Dillard the president of my college, [William Stuart] Nelson, had been at Dillard for one year, so that's how I went to Dillard.  Again, the president of my college he was there, and he--Dillard--
Speaker 2: He was the former president of Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: He was at Shaw when I was there, so I say he was my president, then he went, he, he went to Dillard and he offered me this job, but he required that I go and do this because there wasn't money to pay a dean of women just for a dean of women's job.  So, they worked you to death, I mean, they really gave the teachers--he had excellent teachers, but Dillard was a merger from two of the original African American colleges [Straight College and New Orleans University, New Orleans, Louisiana] and Dillard was just four years old then and they never had the president until the year before and then Nelson was there and I went there and that--he left there too after two years when I was there two years because there again they, they weren't willing to have the kind of experimental college that was really getting at the curriculum so that teachers and students worked together.  He was interested in having a college where you worked with the students and where you worked on curriculum and where you worked personally with them and he didn't, that didn't develop--they didn't want to do that.  So that the trustees apparently thought they did, the one trustees who had chose him, but it didn't last, so they wouldn't finance it that way.  He, he left and went back to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] as vice president of Howard.  So, that the way that that went with Dillard.  And I stayed at Dillard.  I didn't like that idea that because there were some wonderful young teachers, physics teachers, math teachers.  Charlie [Charles Wesley] Buggs, have you ever heard of Charlie Buggs?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He went to California after that from Dillard years after I did and Mason who was the, Clarence [T.] Mason who taught chemistry and he was, he went to Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  He left Dillard and went to Tuskegee.  All these young teachers--and Herman Branson who became president of Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] was there, just beginning, and he was just beginning his work there then and--
Speaker 2: I think he was president of Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] too at one time.
Speaker 1: Was he?  I thought--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.
Speaker 1: No, no, just Lincoln I think.  Yeah, I think just Lincoln.  Though he might have--I don't know 'cause I, I didn't keep up with Central State very much, a little far away, but anyway he was an excellent person and wonderful physics teacher, you know.  He was a wonderful teacher also and then became president.  So, I got to meet all these young African Americans who were about my age, some a little young, some a little younger, but I guess many of them I would say.  Charlotte, well you didn't know Howard--Charlotte Crawford who went to Howard and married somebody there who was a sociologist.  He was an outstanding--Charlotte Crawford [ph.].  So,--
Speaker 2: Charlotte Frazier [ph.], not--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know you know Frazier, but there was a Frazier, wasn't the person.  So, yeah I do know Frazier.  Frazier's wife [Marie Brown Frazier] was from Winton, North Carolina and--
Speaker 2: --Oh, same town--
Speaker 1: --and his wife, yeah his wife was Dr. [Calvin Scott] Brown-- my school principal I was talking about, was his, was his, was his daughter.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I knew them well.
Story_ID: 188561
Speaker 1: What's your impression of E. Franklin Frazier?
Speaker 2: Well, I think he was a good person, sociologist, as far as I was concerned.  I didn't follow him much or anything or keep up with him very much except that I knew them and knew her, you know.  I was trying to think of--did I say his wife, his wife?
Speaker 1: Right, his wife was from Winton [North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Well, let me see, wait a minute now.  That's wrong.  He was--she was at--he was, he was at Saint Aug in Raleigh [North Carolina], St. Augustine's [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] in Raleigh [North Carolina].  I better check that though.  She, she was the wife, she was the wife of the outstanding sociologist and I'm trying to--I think that's right though, I think that's right.  I'm not sure.  Well, I've go to, I'd have to recheck that, but Marie [Brown] Frazier was the wife of an outstanding sociologist, and she was from Winton, so I have to check that, check it, I'll check it and tell you.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: 'Cause it's important and I shouldn't make that mistake, which one it was and whether it was somebody who was very outstanding.
Story_ID: 188562
Speaker 1: You were at Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] until '42 [1942]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then you went--now why did you leave Dillard?
Speaker 2: Well, I said a few minutes ago that Dillard was trying to be a special kind of school where faculty and students were going to be working together and where you wanna keep a small student body where faculty could work with them and they could, they were able to develop the kind of curriculum that you could take each student individually and work with them in a curriculum, which would mean that they would be successful and the trustees didn't see that as a thing to happen and [William Stuart] Nelson left and then a lot of other teachers left and I certainly wanted to change.  And then also that year the war broke out in '41 [1941].  That was the year our house burned at Christmas in '41 [1941], and I thought it would be good to be near my family, so I went to Bennett [College, Greensboro, North Carolina], which is a girl's college, Methodist college in North Carolina and I did two years there.  And Bennett was a very good school for women, and it had a--David Jones was a good president and had been there for years and had worked well with the women, but I wanted to go on and finish my degree.  See, I had been going to summer school every summer, every summer trying to work and still improve student personnel, but I hadn't gotten back for a full year.  So, I went back from--left, left Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]--Bennett in '44 [1944] and went on to, I mean left Dillard in--
Speaker 1: '42 [1942].
Speaker 2: '42 [1942] and went to, went to Bennett and then stayed at Bennett two years and then left Bennett in '44 [1944] and went back to Teachers College, Columbia University [New York, New York] for that summer and that year and the next summer when I got my doctorate degree in '45 [1945].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, that's how I managed that.
Story_ID: 188563
Speaker 1: What was it like in New York [New York] during that period of time when you were working on your, your doctorate degree [at Columbia University, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: There again and I on my statement that I had made here this talk on, at Collington [Continuing Care Retirement Community, Mitchellville, Maryland] on know your neighbor.  I pointed out that I was surprised again even when I got to New York there then that late I couldn't get a place.  I had always lived in the summer in terrible places until I lived, once I moved with a friend in an apartment nearby, but--because you couldn't live in dormitories on the campus.  But, by the time I got there in 1944, got back in '44 [1944] I had been in International House for  one period there and then I got into one dormitory at Columbia Teacher's College [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York] where they have, where the African Americans could live, but no meals were served in that dormitory.  So, you see again I felt that I was still in the South.
Speaker 1: Now this is Columbia University in New York City and they still have segregated on campus?
Speaker 2: That was then.  They did not have then, that's right.
Speaker 1: A lot of people would be surprised--
Speaker 2: So that--
Speaker 1: --to know--
Speaker 2: well yes that's the--and I said the same thing.  I didn't say it a few minutes ago perhaps, but when I went to Chicago [Illinois] in 1938, when I went to [the University of] Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] I couldn't live in the camp--on a campus except one dormitory and that was had no food served in Chicago in 1938, and I lived on campus.  But, I lived in a dorm that was, you know, not a very good dorm and also didn't serve any food.  So, I was saying that those experiences in the North when I was going to segregated everything all my life and at least when you were segregated you know where you were, you know.  But, you went to these places and you expected to see that there was something different; it wasn't.  Well, that's why I think about my husband [Benjamin A. Quarles] he was born in Boston [Massachusetts] of interracial parents and, and he went to English high school.  He was an excellent student.  Nobody ever mentioned going to college to him, and he would never, and he didn't go to college for five years after he finished high school and then he came South to college because somebody, he had a friend who said come on to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and I think he came down to Howard and it was too late to get in that year.  He said well I'm going to Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina], so he came to Shaw and that's how he got to Shaw.  And so that you know all my life I have seen this business of what it was to be African American at that time in, in these places, and he never had an African American teacher.  There were no African American teachers in Boston when he went to school.  They were all white teachers.
Speaker 1: What about at Shaw--were those his --first black tea, teachers at Shaw?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well yes, yes, because they had white and black, you see at Shaw.  All, all the African American colleges started that I speak of where I worked stated in the South had white teachers first and then they had African Americans added, and so Shaw had African American teachers--
Story_ID: 188564
Speaker 1: Now what was your Ph.D. [degree] in?
Speaker 2: In student personnel administration.  That's what they called it student personnel administration, which really means sort of human relations with students, I mean in student work and it includes things like counseling and that was why at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] I was able to build the program I did at Morgan.  I stayed there long enough to build a program, a comprehensive program in student personnel administration.  So, when we get to that with Morgan, which we are near I'm sure I'll tell you about that.
Speaker 1: --I just wanted to ask you a couple of more questions on New York [New York].  When you were in New York did you have a chance to participate in some of the, in some of the intellectual life in the city, in Harlem [New York, New York] or other--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: I am, I went to, I went to Harlem a couple of times for things and then--who was the doctor who, who died in, in, from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] who was killed going South and segregated hospital didn't take him and he, he died.
Speaker 1: --Oh, uh--
Speaker 2: You know I, I really--
Speaker 1: Charles [R.] Drew.
Speaker 2: Charles Drew.  I went with Charles Drew.  I knew Charles Drew and his wife [Minnie Lenore Robbins] very well, and he, his wife was they had just had a baby at the time one of the summers I was there, one of the times I was there, and he took me to, a couple of times we went to some place in Harlem to see things in Harlem, but I did have during those times I was in New York a chance to go to play.  That's the one thing I got.  At Columbia [University, New York, New York] you could get tickets and things to go to a number of things and plays and things and all the cultural things so that New York from that way was different for me and so always after that when you spoke about vacation spots that was a vacation spot really where I went.  Ben [Benjamin A. Quarles] and I always went to New York.  When after said family, but I mean it was a regular thing that we planned every summer to go to a certain place, but New York was where we went when we went to and that was when I got introduced, you know, when I was going to those places.  So, I had a good life in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you received a PhD in 1949 right?
Speaker 2: It was doctor of education in 1945.
Speaker 1: Okay '45 [1945] all right, okay.
Story_ID: 188565
Speaker 1: So then you went to--your next job was at Tuskegee Institute [later Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I went to Tuskegee and I worked at Tuskegee from '44 [1944] to '49 [1949].  And Tuskegee was different because Tuskegee had all these different separate schools, you know.  They weren't set up as a liberal arts college as the other places were.  They were set up with different schools, a school of trading school, industrial schools by Booker T. Washington.  But, at the time I was there they would be getting a good general college, trying to get a good general college, so my work was in that area to set up there again student personnel orientation courses for students and working with the heads of those schools to get them to agree on curriculum for all the students rather than just students in their schools to take their students immediately in school, you see, and so that they could get general degrees, so they could get a general college degree and that was as late as that time, well I guess it's a long time ago '45 [1945] when Tuskegee became that and then Tuskegee is a great university now.  Of course, they had a school of veterinary medicine, graduate school of veterinary medicine when I was there, and that was one of the graduate schools they had when I was there and now they have others of course.  And they have very excellent people there I've met to.  Luther King [ph.] who became president, and President [Frederick Douglass] Patterson himself was a wonderful person I knew well.  See that was the one thing in the African American schools when you were on the faculty you got to know the president pretty well.
Story_ID: 188566
Speaker 1: --When we were talking you were at Tuskegee [Institute, later Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and--
Speaker 2: And I went from Tuskegee--
Speaker 1: To, to Europe.
Speaker 2: To Europe '49 [1949] to '51 [1951] with American Friends Service Committee.
Speaker 1: Okay what did you do there?
Speaker 2: I worked--American Friends Service Committee is a really, I think Peace Corps--I know Peace Corps got a lot of its ideas from that, but it's been, it's several, well much older than any other organization that I know about.  But it started by Quakers, a sort of Quaker organization where they work, most of the people work, work as volunteers for them, and they go to countries to people--even in this country I've been to at least six work camps in this country where they work with people.  They believe in is that you must work with people, live with people, and all people must help each other and so when you, somebody you can give your volunteer time to, to work with somebody in the--and when you said Harpers Ferry [West Virginia], I went to Harpers Ferry for one summer with the American Friends Service Committee and we did work on the school ground there where [HM] Mr. [Richard I.] McKinney then was president of that school and I know him well, of course, 'cause he's a Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana], I mean Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  He came to Morgan and is still there.  He's still 100 years old, I guess, about 100.
Speaker 1: Ninety six or ninety-seven.
Speaker 2: Yeah and he's, he, he just--
Speaker 1: We interviewed Mr. McKinney.
Speaker 2: Oh, you knew him?
Speaker 1: We had interviewed him about a year or two.
Speaker 2: Oh, you did?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You did, oh yes, oh yes, well you know who he is, yeah.
Speaker 1: He is doing well.  He ran down the basement stairs to get us photographs and ran back up.
Speaker 2: He, he is something.  He is really remarkable.  So, of course know him well and, but they worked there to help, we worked to help do some things (I can't remember what they all were) on the campus to contribute to that life because they were having a hard time at that time.  And then we went, I went to American Friends Service Committee in Missouri to work with a group and then--
Speaker 1: Storer College [Harpers Ferry, West Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Storer was a college, yeah and then that was the college where Dick McKinney was the president in Harpers Ferry.
Story_ID: 188567
Speaker 1: And then I went to Europe and we were work, I was working in a student center, which was set up by the American Friends Service Committee in a bombed out building 'cause everything was bombed out then.  It was under the American Occupation [World War II, WWII] at that time.
Speaker 2: And you were in Munich [Germany] at the time?
Speaker 1: Munich.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I worked with the students there and that--that was where we worked with them to, again to try to get them to know each other.  Had displaced persons, Russians, persons from other countries, and German people and even German students, even German people who had been, whose fathers were killed because they were first lieutenants to whatever you called to Hitler's Youth, they were in Hitler's youth groups and they couldn't come.  One I knew particularly well that I hated so badly she could come to America because she was a Hitler Youth, and they went, she married a Russian and they went to Australia.  And then I knew another person who came, she came to see me who became a physician, a German woman, and she came, she visited me here after she, after I came back here and during that period I went to Helsinki [Finland] and I met people in Helsinki who were working with the American Friends and she visited me since I've been back, since I've been back here in America.  So, that it's really was a wonderful experience, an organization, but it's a volunteer thing.  They pay your expenses, but you know, and give you food to live on but I had to go back to work.  I couldn't stay in that always and so I then went to Fisk [University, Tennessee] and that's when I went to Fisk I was there just a year and a half as dean of students and then married in '52 [1952] and went to, with Ben [Benjamin A. Quarles], to Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] in '53 [1953].  We went in '53 [1953] to Morgan State--
Speaker 2: Now, now-
Story_ID: 188568
Speaker 1: Now tell me about--now, now Dr. Benjamin [A.] Quarles has passed, but he was one of the great historians that we've had.  Can, can you tell us when you, when you met him, and you met him early on a long time ago, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I said I met him when he was, when I was a senior at Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] when he came back to Shaw to teach and I met him.  I knew he was a teacher, and I met him then.  And then when I saw him again when he came to Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] after I had gone to Dillard in thirty, in four--when did I say I went to Dillard in '38 [1938] when I went to Dillard he came to Dillard from his studies and so forth in '39 [1939] and at that time he was married and had a little baby who became my stepdaughter later on 'cause her mother [Vera Bullock] died and that's, but I knew him who was--(unclear)--teacher, but I didn't--we--after his wife died he got in touch with me and I, we married in '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then we went, I went from Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] after the end--I went for Christmas to Dillard and then came back to be with his daughter and then we came--I went back to Fisk just for the month of January and at the end of that semester I went to Dillard and then he and I and Roberta came to Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] that summer.  See we had all--'53 [1953] then, by then it was '53 [1953].  The summer of '53 [1953] we went to Morgan, and we stayed to Morgan.  He started working at Morgan immediately, and I didn't start working until '56 [1956], and we came from Morgan to Collington [Continuing Care Retirement Community, Mitchellville, Maryland] Episcopal Life Care Community in '98 [1998], but we had all that time, that thirty-six years in Baltimore [Maryland].
Story_ID: 188569
Speaker 1: Tell us something about what you did at Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] and--
Speaker 2: Well, at Morgan I had and I had, I do have a couple of pictures on that.  At Morgan I think we talked about it a little when I was talking with you privately they set up, I set up a program that included working with every student, beginning with every student on the level where he or she would be able to achieve coordinating those programs.  Because it was a faculty program, and we had students which we called who were placed in curriculum A on the basis of testing and high school records and that curriculum was people who were not likely to do well in college, looked as though they'd have a hard time.  And then we had curriculum B, which looked as though the students who were admitted who could do pretty well, they could make it.  And then curriculum C students who were doing very well who apparently needed just to be encouraged to do better and they were C, record C students and I coordinated the program to keep--to get all of these services that would enable them to do this by having an orientation course and orientation programs, parents' conferences, and then we had a psychologist--we had a psychologist on the staff in the--we had counselors who taught the orientation class, and we had persons from Sheppard Pratt Hospital[later Sheppard and Enoch Pratt Hospital, Towson, Maryland] psychiatrist who came, who worked with us.  So, it was a matter of, and then faculty, we coordinated all these services on students and had the record and we worked with faculty members who advised students from the academic side.  So, we worked with all of the students in order to coordinate all those programs and that was what we called at Morgan, we called it various things at various times, we called it the counseling center, then we called it the counseling academic advising center so that it always was though a job of coordinating, counseling, coordinating these students personal needs and development, coordinating the work of the physician of the college and the nurses, so trying to bring together everything, all that student--in one place so that you could go there now-- they've kept this program up.  I understand they haven't kept it up as well as we had it developed when I left, which was in--I retired in '80 [1980].  But, the students--we had students, honor students, who left there and went to--the big colleges were then taking African American students, you know, and we were getting, we got a large number who did go and I told you [HM] Robert [Mack] Bell went to Morgan State and he's the chief judge of Maryland now, but he is a great lawyer.  He went to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] for law and did well.  And we had several other students who did the same thing.  And many of the students now whom I taught, whom I had in these courses and in this whole setup and advised well have been in the political system, particularly, in, in Maryland now.  We have many of them who are very, very outstanding in the, in the Maryland political system and so that's--
Speaker 1: You said [Kweisi] Mfume was a student.
Speaker 2: Mfume was one who you know has gone a long way, too.  So, that we did a good job of, of really tried--now at Morgan I understand they have so many students.  They've admitted so many more and I'm not sure they have, that it's a good building, and that's something we needed badly when I was there.  We weren't getting the buildings that we should.  See another--everywhere in my mind and everywhere I've been, segregation has always been part of it and even though Morgan State was a state school it was started as a Methodist school and they didn't have a state school until '36 [1936] and then it had its first president then, first African American president at that time.  And then it had Martin [D.] Jenkins who was the president when I was there who brought all, brought really African American intellects from every, for every field.  He just got everybody from wherever they were to come to Morgan and that's when he brought Ben[jamin A. Quarles] in history and he brought other people in the other areas the same way.
Story_ID: 188570
Speaker 1: Now in terms of Dr. Benjamin [A.] Quarles again what, what was he like, I mean, he, he's probably considered one of the outstanding historians we've ever produced along with [HM] John Hope Franklin.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think he is.
Speaker 1: --And Carter G. Woodson.
Speaker 2: Well, he is, I think and he deserves to be.  He, he was a very hard worker, and he really believed in what he was doing.  He really wanted to get it done, and he, he worked at it, worked at it all the time.  Now, when we married because I was working when we first married for three years I guess until after I had the daughter and then I went back to work, he, he was very, always very, he's, he was always a very polite, kind, gentlemanly, thoughtful man.  I mean, he, he always was that toward, toward me and toward anybody else in the family.  But, he did do his work.  He gave his life to his research.  He stayed in the library, Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.].  That was one reason why he was glad to get to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] from New Orleans [Louisiana] because the Library of Congress was there.  He stayed in the libraries and, and he, so he, he definitely believed in what he was doing in terms of his studies.  And he did it all of his research himself.  He never had any help from anybody, student, faculty, graduate students.  Nobody helped him with one bit of what he did.  He did every bit of it himself in the libraries and--
Speaker 1: So no grad students to help?
Speaker 2: He never had a grad student, never had any student of any kind.  He had--because at Morgan he was, many of the years he was there, most of the years really, he was head of the department and he had a student secretary, not even a real secretary, to help with that departmental work.  But, he, he really was a hard worker and he, but he, he was also interested in, in--he, he, unlike you compare him to John Hope Franklin, he wrote for those, for those national organizations and some of his articles were the first to reach the national organization of periodicals and, but--
Speaker 1: What national organizations are we talking about specifically?
Speaker 2: Like the historical organizations.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The American historical organizations and a couple of others, I don't remember them all, I don't think about what they were, but his, he had, he wrote, he wrote for them articles--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he didn't attend--
Speaker 2: --but he didn't attend, but he didn't attend them as regularly.  Now, I have a picture there of where he was, where he got an award from the association of, of--for the Negro life and study [the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History, later The Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH)] in Washington [D.C.] and for fifty years of service there, of service there as advisor or vice present, or whatever, you name it, as a member of that organization.  And he, he has many, many awards and seventeen honorary degrees, which I've prized because I think the colleges and universities know better what you're doing intellectually than some other awards.  But, he has many, many awards and all of his books and all of his awards, all his archives are at Morgan State.  That's where he gave them--and we hope that they, they haven't finished getting them in what they said they were gonna get them in, which is on in some kind of fashion that people can order them.  They will be, give the catalog and they can order them and I'll get copies, you know, and get through the whatever--the present mode of getting things and seeing things they will get done.  Those should be put on what, you put them on, whatever all the libraries have when they get lend material you know that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: --Right, all these (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: So, it's, so that's--and they do have a room at Morgan State, which is named for him.  The Benjamin Quarles African American Studies Room.  So, that's the story on him.  I, I think he, he, he may not have spent as much time in, as we say--well he always was there for meals, sometime, a small time afterwards no matter when, but he may have spent more time in his den sometimes than some people would say he should, but that was his, his life and that's what he did.
Story_ID: 188571
Speaker 1: --He [Benjamin A. Quarles] wrote the first, as you said the first scholarly--
Speaker 2: He wrote the first scholarly book--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) Biography on--
Speaker 2: --on, on Frederick Douglass.  That's his, his, his book published by the Associated Press ['Frederick Douglass'].
Speaker 1: --Then before--
Speaker 2: Under Carter [G.] Woodson.
Speaker 1: Then before the Centennial [of the Civil War] he, he wrote a book on 'The Negro in the Civil War.'
Speaker 2: Yeah he wrote 'The Negro in the Civil War.'
Speaker 1: It was '58 [1958] or '59 [1959].
Speaker 2: No, he wrote '53 [1953].  That was published in '53 [1953], yeah, 'The Negro in the Civil War.'  And after that he has Revolutionary War ['The Negro in the American Revolution'] and the others, and I think he brought out the fact that the Negro or whatever you've called him, a slave or Negro or colored, has made a terrific contribution to this country in every area that you can think of, in--no matter what and significant contributions and people don't, you know, they don't know that unless they read it, but they don't know it.  [HM] John [Hope] Franklin's book is the one that's used mostly as a text book--
Speaker 1: Right--
Speaker 2: --but--
Speaker 1: --from 'Slavery to Freedom[: A History of Negro Americans]'.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but Benjamin Quarles little, just little one 'The Negro in the Making of America,' which is just a brief, brief thing which certainly would be interesting for high school and other kids to read to get at least interested in doing, in reading something about it, but I think now African American history in some ways is considered legitimate.  It wasn't when he started, for a good time he was writing.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When I was in college, they used both books in tandem 'From Slavery to Freedom' and 'The Negro in our History' [by Carter G. Woodson], 'A Documentary History of the Negro' ['The Negro in the Making of America'] by Benjamin Quarles in tandem with John Hope Franklin's book.
Speaker 2: 'From Slavery to Freedom' yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Story_ID: 188572
Speaker 1: Well [HM] John Hope Franklin actually joined organizations.  You see he, he was more of a joiner and went out.  He also worked in places where he had graduate students who could help him do work and who helped him, you know, this, and he is still a very good person.  He is still doing some work I know.  I don't know recently I haven't seen as much about him as I had up until recently.  I don't know whether he is slowing down.  I, I know his wife [Aurelia Franklin] was ill and--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well he's retired--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well he, I know he's retired 'cause I hear from him at least once a year and that's about what I have heard from.
Story_ID: 188573
Speaker 1: I've read in your writings that you provided for us about some of the activities that were going on in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] and you were talking about the black power movement on campus and the response to, to that, that Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] took.  Can, can you comment a bit on that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that Morgan State handled that period very well because we invited all of the speakers, Stokely Carmichael [later, Kwame Ture] and everybody else who was considered a radical or considered black power and they were invited.  They were given the opportunity to answer questions.  The students participated with them and this was planned just as other off campus speakers were planned, and I think the students appreciated that, at least, I know they appreciated that.  And so when the students started destroying in some of the colleges you know, breaking down things, burning things--this happened in many of the colleges that they did a great deal of destruction, nothing at Morgan State.  When they started to--let's see I was thinking about the definite places in Baltimore [Maryland], they went to jail, some went to jail, but then the dean of men and dean of women saw to it that they got food.  They took them food to jail.  They, the people on campus marched downtown.  Those who came back who didn't go to jail came back to the campus, but they never marched on campus and to break down things or to tear up things, and I think that was--it was remarkable because it happened very well.  It was very hard, very hard for the president 'cause he was, you know, helping with the president of the student body.  They were the people who were holding it, leading it, and having the committees work on it and I happen to be a member of the committee, but it was really a remarkable thing that they did.  And I think that it showed that it could be done if you work with them rather than against them.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think there might be a sense one can say that there seem to be on the part of both faculty, students, and staff, all three parts at Morgan State, seem to be in allegiance to the institution, as the institution seem to be serving the needs of everybody on a certain lev--on some level maybe, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  [HM Reverend Jesse L.] Jackson, when Jackson came to speak he was in his garb, you know, and he was considered a dangerous speaker at that time.  He was commencement speaker.
Speaker 1: That's when he had a big afro then?
Speaker 2: Um-hm everything, yeah but Morgan invited him, so that--
Speaker 1: How did you feel about that at that time?  Did you feel that that was the best way to (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, well I was working with them.  I was working with the students and with, with the faculty committee on that, yeah.  Of course I think that that was, that was what we should have done, what we had to do.  And I was really very happy to be a part of it because when I knew what was happening in some other places I was really sort of surprised that education wasn't doing more to help people see what, you know, could be done.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: [Kweisi] Mfume was one of them too.
Story_ID: 188574
Speaker 1: When you look at what's--at the black community today, I mean what are some of your hopes and concerns?
Speaker 2: Well, I still feel that not enough people give of their time and energy to work on a level where they can work together.  I mean you still have--and we are in a county now in Prince George's County [Maryland], which is the most African American county in the country, I guess; I think it is.  It's, it was at one time the most wealthy, and I say that because I'm not sure what's happening in the last few years here.  But, the African Americans now when they build, when they build homes here and a lot of building has gone on right around Collington [Continuing Care Retirement Community, Mitchellville, Maryland].  We were out here all by ourselves.  When we came here, this was plain woods and muddy woods and bad woods and that was in 1988 when, when they, when they completed this and people moved in and we were among the first to move int.  And now, you have all these housing projects around us and they're--and they're mostly African American.  One right there across the street here is just almost completely--they may have one couple of something.  And it seems to be true that they have Alba Lake [ph.] and other places and they quickly become segregated communities.  Now, why can't people live together?  They aren't gonna learn this way.  We've got to learn to go in the same places and somehow live together on it.  Now, you have--certainly have more interracial marriages and more acceptance of interracial marriages, but they--you don't have much of really people, other people who want--and I'm not sure of what kind of things happened to those people who have the interracial marriages too, that they--they either have to sort of stick to the African American community.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, I would like to see us learn how to live together.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: My daughter is married to an Iranian, and they live in Fairfax County, Virginia, and her children are in the school now that was a few years back when all the trouble was going on that was, is named for a southerner, J.E.B. Stuart [High] School [Falls Church, Virginia], J.E.B. Stuart High School for great southerners and it is now the most diverse high school in the country.
Speaker 1: I guess J.E.B. [Stuart] is turning over in his grave.
Speaker 2: I guess he's turning over somewhere, but it is the most diverse--now that's what I call progress, you know, in terms of the way some communities are changing and I think the schools can do it, but--now here in our county where we've had, in Prince George's where they've had people bused they finally said that that was unlawful for them to bus them anymore and then now I think they've removed the restriction now.  But, they still are having a hard time.  I've been to two high schools, and they certainly are definitely African American.  Beautiful new high schools and we need more, but they're still segregated by and they say self-segregation, but until they can get--there's an elementary school that our church is helping to--is working with and that elementary school is in an African American community and it's all African American and so how are these kids gonna meet each other 'cause you have to have the elementary schools were they can get to them, you know, in every community.  So, it's a job.  It's a job, I think, that America, all America faces--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of how you gonna do it.
Story_ID: 188575
Speaker 1: Ma'am can you tell us now, now you, from what I've read that you had a certain method of your own to integrate society and it was through joining organizations.  Can you tell us how this worked?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I thought that society should be always--and earlier on when CORE [Congress on Racial Equality]--you don't even remember CORE.
Speaker 1: Congress of Racial Equality.
Speaker 2: Right.  I was a member of CORE and sat with--I was much younger than anybody in it, and sometimes the only woman there in, in meetings that I managed to attend.
Speaker 1: Was this in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: No I was in, when I was in North Carolina and then when I was a member and then I also, so I worked--and I worked in the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], which--in Raleigh [North Carolina], beginning in Raleigh not when I was a student, but in that area when I came back.  I think even when I was in college we were going to Meredith College [Raleigh, North Carolina], one of the other colleges there, meeting with other students in YWCA and so all along because I think I got it from childhood being in what I told you, a segregated community and the community where we were sort of almost a three-way segregation and people just not really getting to know each other, living right under each other and never getting to know each other and I just got that very early that somehow this has to be changed.  And so I joined everything I could like the YWCA and went to Kings Mountain [South Carolina], which was a segregated conference center, but then later on I would meet with other groups where you could meet in, in groups, you know, where even in New Orleans [Louisiana] where you could meet with groups.  And so I tried hard there in, in that, in those groups.  And then in the profession organization I thought that would be the last place that you should have it and so when I went to Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] and that was in '38 [1938] and the same person whom I told you Hilda Davis, who was present, was dean of women at my college, had been a member of NAWDAC, National Association of Women Deans, [Administrators,] and Counselors--it became--that was National Association of Women Deans first of all, and so I joined and then I found I couldn't go to the meetings because the hotels in which they were meeting would not permit African American, Negroes, whatever you were called, you could not go in the hotel, not even to a meeting.  So, we worked on that and then first there were some of the--we met in a couple of places where you could go in the hotel and the leadership of the conference would come and meet you and take you to the room where they were meeting, that was the only way they were--escort you to the room where you would meet, but you couldn't stay in the hotel.  So, then I worked with the committee and several other people did too to that, that this should be, you know, should not be true and of course they kept saying it should not be true.  But, we really got to it when we got to the Denver [Colorado] conference I guess it was.  I don't remember what, what year, but we, we had a--I invited an African American speaker who was (laughter) the president of a college then, and she came and spoke, and she's a big person in human relationships something or another.  Anyway, she came to the Denver conference and spoke and we got them to invite [HM Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson, and he came to the conference and spoke and we finally got them to meet--not to meet in a hotel where African Americans could not go and that was because I got on the board by working as a head of the college division and as minority--an ethics minority committee we worked on that.  Anyway, we worked on that and got the board finally to vote that we would not meet.  And this thing took several years to get straightened out.  And this is a profession organization, women from all these universities all over the country, well all over the eastern, anyway.  Most of them were from--well they came from pretty much all over and that--it was one organization.
Story_ID: 188576
Speaker 1: Then in Maryland, when we came to Maryland of course, the student personnel organizations--there were a couple of other student personnel organizations not just that one.  One, [the American] Personnel and Guidance Association and then we, the members of that got chapters set up in Maryland where we got African Americans to join because African Americans had been so rebuffed by all this, you know, they just wouldn't even look at it.  I think you could unless you get some encouragement.  So, we got chapters set up in Maryland on the high school level.  It was high school and college counselors and in this whole region and regional, Washington and Maryland groups and then the only way you could do that was to keep working with people and begging people to come and get it worked out so that that on those levels in the professional organizations I did.  In, in Baltimore, I also served on with the League of Women Voters and I also worked in the national association for six years on the board of National Association of University of Women [NAUW], I mean of the U.S., the YWCA of the USA.  And I was a member of the University of Women [unable to verify], and I was trying to think of the other.  I was named the first African American member of the Commission on the Education of Women, which was a council of the--of the [American] Council on Education [ACE] in Washington [D.C.], and I was named there by my major professor and advisor from a higher degree--(unclear)--Jones [ph.].  And so that it's been through the help of people who had the top jobs and who worked, you know, with you and who got you into places where you could work for somebody else to get in too.  And so that's one of the things I truly believe in.  I believe that that's really my mission, to help to see that people learn how to live together and I mean on all levels.  I don't mean just the top administrators or the people who are wealthy, I mean everybody, so, I truly believe in that and so I tried to work for that.
Story_ID: 188577
Speaker 1: Do you have a critique of, or assessment of, of student activity programs and counseling programs nowadays, you know, have you-- have you seen or do you have an idea of what changes have been good and what changes have not been so good?
Speaker 2: I do not know.  I, I--since we came here in '88 [1988], I have not been involved in most things.  Most of the things I've been involved in have been things at Collington [Continuing Care Retirement Community, Mitchellville, Maryland] and we have had, we do have quite a program and quite a lot of things going on here all the time and I'm closely involved with those, but I, I'm really not, I've not tried to keep up because Ben[jamin A. Quarles] was ill.  He got ill the first year we came here, before we were here a year and he was--had hospitalization for quite a long time then, and then had to go to a health center when he came back.  But, then after that he had, every year he had some reason to go to the hospital and he, so he wasn't well and he could not keep up with--I wanted him to really get known here and to speak here.  He never really was able to do the kind of speaking and the kind of work that he could have help educate this community in and I was sorry about that.  But, he did speak a couple of times to some small groups who wanted to just talk with him privately, but not with the bigger groups which whom I wanted to hear him.  But, and I, and he, he really needed me too, so I didn't, I paid no attention to keeping up with anything else outside and so when he, he died in '96 [1996], and when he died, since he died I just had been, you know, that long out of it and so I just didn't bother.
Speaker 1: He was basically sick for eight years, right off and on pretty much from '88' [1988]--
Speaker 2: Yeah well, yeah well, well he didn't get sick in '88 [1988], he got sick in '89 [1989]--
Speaker 1: --because we came here in '88 [1988].  It was the middle of '89 [1989] when he got sick and he was never really well after that, but he was the last two years he was actually in the health center because he had to have the professional nursing care that he had to have everyday rather than the care that they could give him in this cottage.  So, we lived in a cottage.  This place is divided into cottages and apartments and the cottages out in the community, we say where you have to go outside with covered walks, but we lived there as long as he lived and then when he was in the health center I still lived there and a couple of years, two or three years after he died and then I moved here because I wanted to be in a smaller place and my own health I worried about because I have spasms of the eyelids.  My eyes, I think have been staying open pretty well tonight, but I just had the injections.  I get injections in my eyelids every three months for blepharospasm.  I go to [Johns] Hopkins [Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland] for that and so that and the fact that I am having trouble with arthritis.  I have left trying to keep up with what's happening out there in the outside world in the field that I-- I'd really worry about it if I find out what's going on, so I think I--
Speaker 2: So maybe it's useful not to know.
Speaker 1: Not, not, to know.
Story_ID: 188578
Speaker 1: But, I know there are some very good programs though, I do know that.  There's some very good programs.
Speaker 2: Ma'am--
Speaker 1: They're very different and they should be different, you know, times change and you can't do--who can say now because of the way the culture permits the kind of thing that didn't happen back then is any worse than, you know, with the men and women living together, living together years before you marry.  What's happened to our morals and values we'd say.  Children, single mothers trying to rear children, I mean, it's accepted and I hope it isn't promoted because I feel that those children are sometimes neglected and they need to have a chance too.
Story_ID: 188579
Speaker 1: Ma'am at this juncture what would you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy? (Laughs). I don't feel that I have any special legacy to tell you the truth.  I feel that, that as a mother, because I was a career person before married and then career after that, and that as a mother I have been quite successful in working with my stepdaughter and my daughter and of course with my husband [Benjamin A. Quarles] always, but I feel that I have to them been able to help them in such a way as they were growing up and Roberta for instance, my stepdaughter, went to the Peace Corps in Ethiopia for two years and I know I was directly responsible for that and 'cause I was getting students from Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] at the same time to go with Peace Corps.  And I know that Pamela's interest in people.  She's a--she's a psychiatrist, with her interest in people and her interest, real concern for people and the way in which she is rearing her own children means that I have been a good, what they say good mother, but I have been able to really help them I think and will have meaning to them always.  As far as my career is concerned, I think that whether it lasts or not, that I have been effective in the places where I have worked in getting into at least a small way a real difference in the philosophy of working with students because I think it had been too much of leaving students--I mean all students, I don't mean just a few students 'cause I guess always some students were able to make it without the help--to help every student try to get to know what his real abilities were, try to get to have some faith in himself and then working and moving ahead and I think that that has been felt and I think that some of my students, some of these students with whom I have worked remember that.  I get that from some of them, and I think that they mean it and I think that they have felt it and so if--how long that lasts? But I think it has had some meaning.
Story_ID: 188580
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would do differently in life if you had it to do over again?
Speaker 2: Well, you know that's a very hard question because you know you always say if you have to do--if you do it differently, which would mean you had to be born in a different place and in a different climate and you'd have to have a different experience, so it's very hard to say what I would do differently.  I think one thing that I might feel that sometimes because of my desire to have people do well and to have, for instance at twenty-four years at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] when you're in one place that long and working with a staff that you might push your staff too much, that you, that I might not--push too hard to make, to really try to make everybody do, keep up, I mean everybody on the staff that I might have pushed them too hard at times in that sense to really try to get a perfect staff and to try to get a perfect system going, you know.  That, because I work hard and because I could start early and go late and do it, I think that I might have, I might do that a little differently.  I think if I, if I had known that, that was what I should do perhaps I could do it that way.  I think that might be a little bit.
Story_ID: 188581
Speaker 1: The last question is how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: By whom?
Speaker 1: I guess by all of us.
Speaker 2: Well, I would like to be remembered by those who know me or who knew me, who were with me and in whatever way as a person who was really concerned about people, about human beings, about human beings living and learning together and working together and being sincere about it, honestly about it, openly and honest about it.  And I think that that really is about what it is 'cause I don't feel that I have been a great person or, or saint, a good person by any means, but I do think that I have tried and that I really believed in it that the only way for America to be a better place, for our community to be a better place, for our families to be a better place is to learn how to live together in the family, in the church, in the school, wherever we are, in the community, in politics.  Think of how much the country, how much better off the country would be if we had people in [U.S.] Congress who really were concerned, sincerely concerned about people rather than so concerned about what their community or their state needed and they would have pushed for that no matter what else happens to the rest of the country, or people who are going to push for the wealthy people because the wealthy people are the people who, whom they can depend on and therefore they going to turn things their way.  How much better off would we be if we think about--these other people are people too, the homeless, the color line, and I do feel that there is a lot of color racial distinction made now in our society, even though it's by law that segregation is gone and I'm glad for that, but I still feel that it can't be done by law it has to be done by people who respect and really love other people and believe in them and give them a chance.  That's the only thing I can say.
Speaker 1: All right, well thank you ma'am.
Story_ID: 188582
Speaker 1: This is a photo of my father, Arthur Henderson Brett, and this photo was made, I guess, about 1970, no 1970, it was made not too long, about 1965.
Speaker 2: That's my father's mother, Martha, what did I say on that, Martha Reed Brett and that's my father's mother.
Speaker 1: Yeah my mother Julia Rosetta Pierce Brett, my mother.
Speaker 2: Now when was that shot do you think?
Speaker 1: That was done in I can tell from the chair she's in, that was done in about 1981.
Speaker 2: --mother, Rosetta Jones Pierce and that was taken about 18--
Speaker 1: About 1890s you think?
Speaker 2: No, before that.  Eighteen--my mother was born, my mother was born in 1893 and she lived--that was taken--well it could have been taken about 1890, so I'll say that anyway.  My mother's mother.
Speaker 1: And that's my mother's father, and that's John Thomas.  I'm sure that was about the same time about 1890.
Speaker 2: That, that is the earliest picture that I have of my family.  We didn't have many pictures and then when our house burned those we did have were burned, and so this picture was taken in 1942 and it was taken of the entire family, my mother and father and the seven children. And we've shot the caption on this, so you don't have to go into the names.
Speaker 1: Yes and that was shot in 1942 also, Carolyn is the youngest child.
Speaker 2: That is a picture of me in 1935 when I was graduating from college and my high school principal, Dr. C.S. [Calvin Scott] Brown and on the left of me is Wendell Sonnorell [ph.] who was the pastor of my church and the two people who were responsible for getting me into college at Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: That is graduation at Shaw with Charles Frazier [ph.], one of my classmates and me in 1935.
Speaker 2: That one is my stepdaughter, Roberta and her husband Conrad when they were married in St. Croix in 1962, I guess, 1963. About that time, I don't know.  And that's--that's a picture of oh gosh.  That's Roberta and her husband Conrad.  That's me on Roberta's right and I can't see who that is.  His best man was, oh gosh.  I knew I would forget that.  On the end, the best man is.  The best man is on the very end on this side beside the priest.  On the other side of the priest, do you know who he is?  He's a famous comedian, Willie [ph.]--dog gosh.  I knew I'd forget that and I asked her last night.  I know who it is.
Speaker 1: My daughter Pamela and her husband, Rustam Puzar [ph.] and that's her reception, her wedding reception and that was me in the green and then Ben in the back and Roberta, her sister in the front.
Speaker 2: Year?
Speaker 1: Year 1979.
Speaker 2: I want the other one first. This picture was taken in 1968 after, a month after my, no when my father died 1968 and my brother Woodrow is in it and the others, other members of the family, which I won't bother to name.  But, he--because he died the next year I had that picture showing along with that.
Speaker 1: Is Woodrow the one with the tie?
Speaker 2: Woodrow is the one with the tie in the back, my brother.
Speaker 1: My father and my brother and that was taken about 1965, 1960, yeah, about 1965.  And my brother is the big fella on the left.
Speaker 2: Top is a dedication of a picture that was made of my father that was made to the church because of his work in the church and it hangs in the church community room or some place.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: That was--that was done about 1979.  My father was dead at that time.
Speaker 1: The bottom one is a picture of my old sister.  I'm on the left, that side, Ruth and then Glynnis [ph.] my oldest sister on the other side and that's a picture of us at our fiftieth high school anniversary.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 188583
Speaker 1: That's a picture of the entire group at our family reunion in August '03 [2003].
Speaker 2: Okay now from left to right--
Speaker 1: No, I'm not gonna tell you anybody.  That's the whole group, that's the whole group.
Speaker 2: That was at the family union in '03 [2003].  We all had our sweaters on except one person, and from left to right--let me see if I can see them.  Esther, Glennis, Ruth, Bernice, and Carolyn.
Speaker 1: Now here is when I was at Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] and this was about nineteen fifty--when did I go '56 [1956], '57 [1957]--that's about 1957 and that's [HM] Robert [Mack] Bell who was a student, an excellent student, and who is now the chief judge of Maryland.  He went to Yale [University] Law School [New Haven, Connecticut] and was very outstanding there also.
Speaker 2: And the other one is in the corner is Ruth Quarles at retirement in my office in 1980.
Speaker 1: And that's, and that's the same reunion, the '03 [2003] reunion, and that's the family reunion, and that's the grandchildren who were there with the sisters in the center and the grandchildren.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That is at the family reunion with my mother [Julia Rosetta Pierce Brett] in 1984.
Speaker 2: That one over there is family reunion, first family reunion with the family tree in 1981.  The first reunion we held.  My mother is there seated.
Speaker 1: That is my mother with the daughters, most of the daughters in 1981 family reunion.
Speaker 2: That's about 1942.
Speaker 1: And that was in 1944 'cause that's on Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] campus, so I know that.  Wait a minute, not 1944, nineteen-forty.  When did I leave Dillard in '42 [1942], '42 [1942]; that's 1942 at Dillard.
Speaker 2: And that's about 1930--no that's 1938 at Dillard.
Speaker 1: That's in '42 [1942] in Chicago [Illinois] at a conference except that-
Speaker 2: That's, that's, well I'm just gonna say in Chicago when I was attending a conference at someone's home, something.
Speaker 1: 1948.
Speaker 2: 1940.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's nineteen--that's 1978, 1978.
Speaker 1: That's my sister, Martha, who died in March '03 [2003] and she's only five or six, six sisters and one brother.  My brother had died earlier in '70 [1970] and no more deaths, and she died.
Speaker 2: My sister Martha's daughter and her children at the death of her, of their, of Sylvia's, sister in the center is, is the daughter in the center and her children in '03 [2003].
Speaker 1: That's Benjamin [A. Quarles] and [HM] Ruth [Brett] Quarles in 1988 when we came to Collington [Continuing Care Retirement Community, Mitchellville, Maryland].
Speaker 2: And that's my daughter Pamela in 1902, I mean 2002.
Speaker 1: 1999 Pamela, my daughter Pamela in 1999.
Speaker 2: That was done in 1988 too, I think. That was done here I think at Coll--
Speaker 1: That is the cemetery and my husband's body went to Maryland, oh gosh, anyway to medical school and we'll just say that to the medical school in Maryland and the cemetery.
Speaker 2: That's Roberta. We have another one of her and her marriage.
Speaker 1: Benjamin Quarles and I'm giving him an award, which was sent to him by the National Association for the Study of Negro Life and History [the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History, later The Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH)] for fifty years work on that board.
Speaker 2: What year?
Speaker 1: In the year 19, 1995.
Speaker 2: That's Benjamin Quarles with his grandchildren and with me standing with two grandchildren, two of his grandchildren, Jonathan and Christopher.
Speaker 1: And that's a picture of Conrad and Roberta and their youngest children, their only child in 1982.
Speaker 2: And this one on the left is a picture of me and Payne.  Her name is Marian Payne [ph.] who was the president of the National Association of Women Deans [later National Association of Women Deans, Administrators, and Counselors (NAWDAC)] and this was made in 1982 when I was awarded, when they set up a conference in my honor.  The conference was held here in Maryland, and I'm standing at that same conference delivering a thank you or something.
Story_ID: 188584
Speaker 1: That is a retirement picture made with my staff in 1980, and that's enough to say about that staff.  That's enough to say about.
Speaker 2: One in the corner was taken on my tenth when I had been at Collington [Continuing Care Retirement Community, Mitchellville, Maryland] ten years, had taken at Collington and that was in 1998.
Speaker 1: Now I have the fifteen-year one.  That one was taken in '03 [2003] at the Halloween party.
Speaker 2: That was taken in '03 [2003] at Collington and was dressed alike, five of, six of us had the same dress.
