Story_ID: 439707
Speaker 1: So this is a photo of--I'm going left to right.  The little one to the left is me, is I, and I guess it looks like I might have been around five years old so I suspect maybe 1949 maybe.  So I'm far left (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Your name please.
Speaker 1: Oh, and I'm [HistoryMaker] Judy Richardson, and I'm the littlest one and then my mother--I'm standing in front of my mother, Mae Louise Tucker Richardson [Mae Tucker Richardson], and then her father who we call Pop but his real name was Edmund Tucker [Edmund Tucker, Sr.], and then my sister who is about eight and a half years older than I was, and she is Carita Richardson.  And she probably--if I was five then she would have been probably maybe thirteen.
Speaker 2: Okay so going from left to right, this is another family photo at what was called the club, and it was kind of private club for black folks in the Westchester County [New York] area in Westchester, New York, and that was my sister Carita, Carita Richardson and then my father and he's holding me.  My father was William King Richardson [William Richardson].  And then there is I, who is being held by him, and it was on the beach.
Speaker 1: Okay this is another family photo, and it starts with the person in the foreground is my cousin--I'll come back to her.  Okay, to the left is Pop, and again it's Edmund Tucker my grandfather, and then behind her is her sister, and that's Sherry [Sherry Tucker Brown], in front in the foreground looking very angelic is Sherry, and then behind her is her sister Lynette [Lynette Tucker] and then next to Sherry, in the foreground with her eyes crossed is me, yeah.  And then behind me is Lynette, who was my aunt. She's married to my mother's brother and then next to her is the father of the others, and that's--oh golly I'll remember his name in a second.  And to his left, going left to right of course, is Clarissa [Clarissa Bailey Tucker] his wife and then behind Clarissa is another of her daughters.  Clarissa and Eddie [Edmund Tucker, Jr.] had five daughters, and so most of these are the daughters here.  So behind Clarissa is Paula [Paula Tucker Hogan], I think, and then somebody else who I don't recognize.  I can't tell, it looks like I might be around seven, eight years old here.
Speaker 2: Family photo take two.  Okay so going from in the foreground, this is actually mostly one family, and they are my cousins and my aunt and uncle. So foreground first one looking angelic is Sherry, Sherry Tucker.  And then next to her is me with my eyes crossed which is what I often did during a photo.  And then behind, going left to right, is Pop, who is Edmund Tucker, my grandfather.  And then next to him is Lynette, who is the sister of Sherry, and that's Lynette Tucker, and then next to her was my aunt, another aunt--I'll remember her name in a second.  And then behind me is the father of the other two, Sherry and Lynnette, and that's Ed, my Uncle Ed, and then next to him is his wife Clarissa.  And then behind her is one of her--another of their five daughters, and that's--I just had it, okay.  And behind her is another of my cousins and her name is Laurel.  Laurel, that's Laurel.
Speaker 1: Last name is?
Speaker 2: Laurel Tucker [Laurel Tucker Duplessis], although they all have married names now, but it's too hard.
Speaker 1: That's it?
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: Okay this is a photo mainly of my father because I don't know who the other gentlemen are.  But that's my father in the foreground looking very dapper and with his straw hat.
Speaker 2: And that's a family photo.  It's my father William King Richardson holding me at what looks like the age of maybe four or five in front of our house in Tarrytown, New York.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Another family photo, and this is my sister and I, and it's my sister Carita Richardson and I, yeah.  I think it was at her camp. She went to a YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] camp called Quantico [ph.] in New York, and that's what this is.
Speaker 1: This is--I'm the little one on the left, and then that's Judy Richardson, and then it's my mother in middle and then my sister Carita looking very glamorous on the right.
Speaker 2: The photo on the left is my sister and I.  I'm on the left, and then my sister Carita is on the right, and it's a cruise that I treated her to after I left Blackside [Blackside, Inc.] and 'Eyes on the Prize,' and we were going from San Francisco [California] where she was living, through to Baja California [Mexico]. We had this wonderful room with a terrace and we had a great time.
Speaker 1: The one on the right is my sister Carita in front of the office where she worked.  And that's my wonderful Aunt Helen--Helen Tucker Aldridge that was my mother's sister, and after my mother passed she was like a second mother to me and just the most wonderful person in the world.  Can I tell just a real quick story about her?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay the story about Aunt Helen is that first of all she was never ever judgmental to anybody.  And my mother used to book numbers.  And when my mother won one time, she called my Aunt Helen and said, "Come on, I'm going to come pick you up and we're going to buy you a fur coat," and my Aunt Helen always remembered that moment.  She said, "Mae came down and she had just won this money and we went into Saks Fifth [Saks Fifth Avenue] and we bought a fur coat," and she never forgot it.
Speaker 2: So this is my mother and father.  My father to the left, William King Richardson, and my mother Mae Tucker Richardson, and they look just so cute here.
Speaker 1: And this is a family photo left to right--well first foreground my wonderful, wonderful beloved mother Mae Louise Tucker--excuse me, Mae Louise Tucker Richardson, and then I'm in the background with--Judy Richardson with my hand on my sister's shoulder, and that's Carita.  At that point she was Carita Richardson Berson [ph.].
Story_ID: 439708
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Neculai Burghelea.  Ma'am could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Judy, J-U-D-Y, Frances, F-R-A-N-C-E-S, Richardson, R-I-C-H-A-R-D-S-O-N [HistoryMaker Judy Richardson].
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Three, ten, forty-four [March 10, 1944], and place is Tarrytown, New York.
Speaker 1: What is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Documentary film producer, and lecturer, and professional development workshop leader for teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness.  April 10?  Ninth?  Something like that.
Speaker 1: Ninth.
Speaker 2: Ninth.  April 9, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are presently in my apartment in Cambridge, Mary- Cambridge, Massachusetts, and that's 239 Allston Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139.
Story_ID: 439709
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask by management (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: --that only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Oh, good.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh, there are so many and also I'm very hungry right now so everything is crowding in.  I love cheese grits, I love a good fish that's sauteed, a good blueberry pie, oh I'm so hungry, gosh (laughter).  I like a lot of food, I do not cook, so I really appreciate good cooking, yes I do.  I'm trying to think what else.  Those are the things that pop into my mind.
Speaker 1: Blueberry pie and fish.
Speaker 2: And not a fried fish but a nice sauteed fish with maybe a little beurre blanc, just nicely seasoned, yeah, garlic green beans, oh sweet potatoes, mashed sweet potatoes, candied sweets.  And a pecan pie that wouldn't be bad either.  If I could have them all right now it would be fine with me.
Speaker 1: Fred [ph.] is going to love this answer.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, purple, everybody knows I'm purple.  Now I went through various colors through and it usually was through decades, but the one I've been in for the last maybe twenty years has been purple.  So I write with purple ink, half my wardrobe is purple.  But I also like rust.  I like maroons, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring, late spring when everything is budding and the sun's out and it stays out and it's not dark anymore, it's not cold anymore and people are cheerier, and yes that's my favorite.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Caribbean, I love St. John [U.S. Virgin Islands].  But there are some other islands I probably like to.  I'm trying to think what others, but I really like St. John, yeah and I actually like going up to the Cape [Cape Cod, Massachusetts]--actually the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts], to Oak Bluffs [Massachusetts], which is nice.  And yeah, I like both of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Okey dokey.
Story_ID: 439710
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [William Richardson] side.  But we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes Mae, M-A-E, Louise, L-O-U-I-S-E, Tucker, T-U-C-K-E-R, and then after she married, Richardson [Mae Tucker Richardson] at the end of that.
Speaker 1: What is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Queens, New York, and then let's see, May 7, 1902, no 1901 'cause her sister was 1901, so 1902.
Speaker 1: What do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, but first of all what do you know about them?
Speaker 2: I know very little about either side.  My mother I know came from Jamaica, and I did a little family history with her, but I don't remember most of it because she really never talked about it.  She talked about her mother [Frances Tucker], who died before I was born.
Speaker 1: Was she born in Jamaica?
Speaker 2: No she was born in Queens (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Born in Queens, but her mother came from Jamaica?
Speaker 2: That's right.  And worked for the Dewars family, as in Dewar's scotch, and came here and then married my grandfather [Edmund Tucker, Sr.].  So most of what my mother knew--my mother had never been in Jamaica so the ties there were very few.  My mother's--well, my mother's Aunt Josie [ph.] was from Jamaica and I remember her only vaguely.
Speaker 1: Any stories that they passed down about the Dewars or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No actually my cousin Sherry [Sherry Tucker Brown] is trying to get money from them.  She's trying to figure out how to show the direct link.  However, no, she never really did.
Speaker 1: Dewar's scotch is the one with the Scottish--they've got the kilts on the cover and he's got a long kind of a staff in his hand, a fuzzy hat on (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think so.  Is that what it is?  Maybe so, oh okay.
Speaker 1: So there are no stories about working for them, or about what kind of people they were, or how hard they had to work?
Speaker 2: None.
Speaker 1: Did they work in the house for them?
Speaker 2: You see that's the thing, I assume she was a house servant, I have no idea.  My mother talked about that stuff, it's amazing to me.
Speaker 1: But is there a story about how a family planned or by what circumstances they found themselves in America.  How did they--they had to plan to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Don't know that either.  I know more about my grandfather, her father, than I do about her mother.
Speaker 1: What about her father?
Speaker 2: Well I know her father was a chef--cook, on one of the little liners that went up and down the Hudson [Hudson River], and so my mother used to talk about how he would come home and he would cook a week's worth of food for the family.  And there were six kids, my mother and her siblings.  Then he would leave all these dirty pots and pans in the kitchen.  I always remember her talking about this.  At one point I said, "Mommy he had cooked for the week for you guys, at least you could have cleaned the pots and pans."  But he would go away and then he'd come back.  So the result of which is unfortunately that my mother really never learned how to cook, which I then continued in that tradition, so there was that.  I remember Pop a lot because he was alive while I was growing up and he was just so--I don't know, erect, he was always erect and when he would come down, I lived in a house at 133 Franklin Street in Tarrytown, New York.  It was called the under the hill section, and so when he would walk down the street he would always tip his hat when he passed a woman.  He just always seemed so--I don't know, very dignified.  I never remember him without a suit on, so yeah, I knew more about him than I did about my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay now did you know much about his ancestors?
Speaker 2: No what I understood--what my mother said was that he had been adopted.  That he had been orphaned, he was originally from South Carolina, and that he somehow made it to Pennsylvania and was adopted by Quakers.  But I never knew them either.
Speaker 1: So this could have been right after the--well, during Reconstruction?
Speaker 2: Could have been, yeah, given how old Pop was, yeah that's very true.
Speaker 1: South Carolina, all right.  Was he adopted in South Carolina or after he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I thought afterward.  That was my sense in terms of the way she told the story.  That he somehow made it to Pennsylvania and then was adopted.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Connections, maybe, you know, the Quakers working in freedom schools after (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's what I was thinking, that the underground--exactly.
Speaker 1: --during Reconstruction, and encountering him in that situation--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --okay, could be.
Story_ID: 439711
Speaker 1: So you--your mother [Mae Tucker Richardson] grew up in Queens [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Whole family, her whole family grew up in Queens.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.
Speaker 2: Oh I'm sorry, not Queens, Bronx [New York], in the Bronx, yeah sorry about that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Bronx.  Okay, Bronx, New York.
Speaker 2: In the Bronx.
Speaker 1: Bronx, okay.  New York [New York] people appreciate the difference.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's it exactly.
Speaker 1: Any stories about the Bronx in the early days and what it was like for them?
Speaker 2: You know, not really.  It is so--when people talk about to me about how much they know about their families and stuff, it is amazing to me.  It's like a blank, you know, she didn't talk about it.  Now my fath- we can go to my father [William Richardson] at some point, but no with my mother I just knew that they all grew up together.  That there were six of them.  Her brother Fred [ph.] was one of the first black CPAs [certified public accountant]--African American CPAs in New York City, and so he had his own firm.  And then--so it was she and her sister Helen [Helen Tucker Aldridge] and my Uncle Eddie [Edmund Tucker, Jr.] and Ira [ph.]--no, Wabun [Wabun Tucker], I'm sorry, Wabun, and then Ira yeah, Ira was there too but he kind of passed away before I was grown so I didn't really know him too well.  Is it five altogether?  I'm not missing anybody, no that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was--did your mother--I take it education was important in her family--her side of the family?
Speaker 2: It was very important, but what was interesting was my mother only made it to the eighth grade, and then she left.  Her sister Helen graduated from high school and went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], but my mother got tired of school.  But was amazing in terms of her reading.  My mother had stacks of papers similar to what I have now, just stacks of papers that she would go through.  And listened to 'Meet the Press' every Sunday.  My father, when we get to him I'll talk about his union organizing, but she was very aware of current affairs and talked often about them and read a lot, and read the New York Post a lot when it was still a real paper.  So she used to be a seamstress, and so she would work for this southern white woman.  That was one of the few times my mother talked about race, and this white woman really must have been bad because my mother never talked about it.  She, the southern white woman who she worked for doing draperies, and my mother could do upholstery and of course she could do clothing, she was just amazingly skilled, and something that this woman did or said absolutely ticked my mother off and she no longer worked for her.  Mrs. Brennan [ph.]--her name was Mrs. Brennan.  And then my mother also played piano--my mother could play a mean jazz piano.
Speaker 1: Really, okay.  She played jazz (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just wonderful.  She played jazz.
Speaker 1: So what kind of jazz--
Speaker 2: Loved Art Tatum, yeah, and Count Basie but really loved Art Tatum.
Speaker 1: Did she ever play professionally or--
Speaker 2: Well she was in this little band that was in Westchester County [New York], it was a black band.  And I'm trying to remember--it may come to me the name of the band, and they used to travel.  So she would play these dances and stuff, but then I got the feeling that my father got a little concerned about her being around in these dances and playing the piano and stuff.  So he made her stop, and also it was at a time when men didn't want their women--their wives to work 'cause it looked--reflected badly on them and stuff.
Speaker 1: Was she younger then or--
Speaker 2: Well she had me when she was forty-two.  She had a number of miscarriages between my sister--the birth of my sister and me.  So this was before my sister Carita [Carita Richardson], whom I call Kita--before Kita was born I think she was doing all this other stuff.
Speaker 1: Playing the piano?
Speaker 2: Playing piano, and way before that as a seamstress, but all of that was while she was married to my father.
Story_ID: 439712
Speaker 1: How old was she when she married your father [William Richardson]?
Speaker 2: Gosh.  I don't really know.
Speaker 1: I just wondered if that was a factor for her not finishing school, her getting married.  She finished (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no, my mother [Mae Tucker Richardson] just didn't like school.  She told me that she left in eighth grade because she wanted to do a trade, and she wanted to sew, and she just left.  Now at the same time my mother besides from being extremely well read and very well spoken and would always correct my English, I mean she was a stickler about speaking the King's or the Queen's English.  I remember she had a thing about the--if you said, "Well, she went with Henry and I," she said, "Me, me."  Because of course it was a subjective pronoun, I mean she knew all of that stuff having only gone through eighth grade.  So the other thing she did is she booked numbers, as did my father, and so my father was in the plant, UAW [United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America; United Automobile Workers] plant, and so she could add whole columns of numbers, and in fact, the mayor's mother from up the hill used to play with my mother, as did many people in the neighborhood.  I couldn't figure out why I couldn't do it assuming that of course everybody can just add like a calculator.  So she just had all these skills, but no she never went any further.  Now my Aunt Helen [Helen Tucker Aldridge], on the other hand, went through high school, loved school and then went to--was a secretary at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and always remembered Carter G. Woodson and how so sweet he was, and how wonderful he was.  And would have stayed there 'cause she loved the South but then she met her husband.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mother, when she dropped out, did she stay in the Bronx [New York]?
Speaker 2: Oh no, well she--I'm sure she stayed in the Bronx.  I'm trying to think, I don't know when she married (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was about thirteen, I guess?
Speaker 2: I guess, yeah but I mean she was that--the photo of her with my father, I mean they were grown.  I got the feeling she was maybe nineteen, twenty years old when she married my father.  So I'm not sure what she did between the eighth grade and--
Speaker 1: Now, did she meet him in the Bronx?
Speaker 2: Yeah she met him while she was still at home.  I mean she went right from her family's house to my father's, to being with my father 'cause that was at a time when he didn't have apartments and stuff of course.  So what she said was that--because her sister Helen was going out with her future husband, Buster [ph.], and so Buster's cousin was my father.  And so she said they did a double date, and my mother said the first time she met him she didn't like him at all, and then I guess he grew on her (laughter), so they got married, yeah.  But they were--she was, you know, late, at least late teens at that point.
Story_ID: 439713
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side now.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, King, K-I-N-G, Richardson [William Richardson].
Speaker 1: Now is there any story behind the King?
Speaker 2: There may be but they sure never told me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh, I have no idea, I know it was Tarrytown, New York but I don't know what his birthday was.
Speaker 1: Was he much older than your mother [Mae Tucker Richardson]?
Speaker 2: No I got a feeling they were around the same age.
Speaker 1: So about 1901, '2 [1902], something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) O' one [1901], '02 [1902], something like that.  Oh I know how I could tell because he was fifty-five when he had a heart attack on the assembly line, and that was when I was seven, so '51 [1951].
Speaker 1: Nineteen o' one [1901], I guess [sic.].
Speaker 2: Well yeah, that's right, so about the same time you're right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, and so he was born in Tarrytown?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now do you know much about his ancestors?  Were they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not a whit, except Aunt Carrie [Carrie Richardson].  Aunt Carrie was what I was told originally that Aunt Carrie--one of these little secrets that goes through your family.  I was told originally that Aunt Carrie, who had an orphanage in Tarrytown, and in fact lived in the house that we grew up in that my father and mother then moved into.  But Aunt Carrie had this orphanage, and she--let's see, how do I say--I was told that this was his grandmother.  That Aunt Carrie was his grandmother, and Uncle Jack [John Richardson], I was told, was his brother.  Now I find out later, I mean I'm talking I'm in my thirties, and I'm sitting talking to my mother who at that point was in a nursing home.  So we're talking mid-'70s [1970s], and I said something about Jack, and we went to his--Jack and Louise's [Louise Richardson] house in Yonkers [New York] every Thanksgiving.  That was Uncle Jack, that was my father's brother, right.  Well it turns out it was my father's father (laughter).  They never told me because in fact, what really happened was that at the orphanage, Jack met this little girl, and they had a baby which was my father, but my Aunt Carrie was my father's real grandmother, and his father Jack, who I thought was his brother.  What they did was, Aunt Carrie sent the little girl away to Canada, my understanding was, and then she came back with a baby and Aunt Carrie said that it was her baby.  So, in fact, Uncle Jack was really Grandpa Jack.
Speaker 1: So Uncle Jack and Aunt Carrie, how were they related?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was his mother.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, so Aunt Carrie would have been the grandmother of your father, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes, would be the grandmother of my father, that's right.  But I grew up thinking, she was his mother, that's what it was because my assumption was that Jack was the brother and that both of them were birthed by Aunt Carrie.  Whereas in fact, daddy was birthed by my Uncle Jack, grandpa.  When I told my Aunt Helen [Helen Tucker Aldridge]--mentioned this to my Aunt Helen, I said, "Helen do you realize all this time they've been telling me this thing and it's not true.  And really, da da da da da."  She said, "Oh my goodness, Mae actually told you," (laughter) so yes, it was one of those family secrets, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you never met your actual grandmother?
Speaker 2: No she was dead by the time I got here (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 439714
Speaker 1: Did your father [William Richardson] go--have a chance to go to school in Tarrytown [New York]?
Speaker 2: You know, I guess so.  Again, see my problem was that he died when I was seven.  So I assume he did because I have a picture of him in elementary school and so--yeah, it was Tarrytown.
Speaker 1: Were the schools segregated in Tarrytown?
Speaker 2: No they weren't actually.  You know, they probably were at one point but certainly by the time my father gets there they were not.
Speaker 1: Tarrytown is a place where there are not that many black people.
Speaker 2: No, 'cause when I was growing up it was maybe--we were maybe 10 percent of the population.
Speaker 1: Okay, well that was about the national (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah well that's true.  Well, the main thing was we had a Chevrolet plant--Fisher Body plant [Fisher Body Corporation] there, so there were--everybody's father that I knew worked in the plant, including all the black folks.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did he go to high school?
Speaker 2: I assume so, I actually don't know.  The picture--I'm trying to think the picture that I have of him--the photo wherever I have it, I'm trying to think of how old he looks like he might be.  He looks like he's junior high age but I don't know how much farther he went.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your father have some good stories about growing up in Tarrytown?
Speaker 2: Oh no.  If he did I never heard them because I was seven and so they didn't get passed down to me.  So I don't know my sister [Carita Richardson] might remember them--have remembered them but no.
Speaker 1: What were his, I guess talents or (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh he could make anything.  In our house he made the closets, he was like a handyman, he just could build anything, he could fix anything.  In the same way that my mother [Mae Tucker Richardson] was talented with upholstery and making cloth kinds of things, he could build anything.  He could do plumbing, he taught my sister how to do the plumbing, he could do electrical work, he did everything in the house.
Speaker 1: Did he start working at the Fisher Body plant at a certain point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I remember my mother saying that she was very happy, because my sister Carita was on the way.  My sister was born in 1935 and my mother was a little concerned because it looked like the Depression [Great Depression] was just coming over, and actually they were in the middle of the Depression at that point, and so she was worried about the fact--she said they didn't have the next payment for the house.  So she was concerned about that and he was doing trucking, and she said they used to have a ball because he would come pick her up and he would be transporting stuff across the river.  I'm trying to think how they would have gotten across 'cause there was no Tappan Zee Bridge at that point.  But somehow she said that they would go across to Jersey [New Jersey] and deliver the stuff and she would be in the truck with him and then they'd come back.  And it just seemed like a really good time.
Story_ID: 439715
Speaker 1: Going back and forth across to Jersey [New Jersey], and then he [Richardson's father, William Richardson] gets, yes the job (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Are we rolling?  Okay, we're rolling now, well--
Speaker 1: So he gets the job on the line, on the assembly line at the UAW [United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America; United Automobile Workers] plant--well, it's the UAW--at the Fisher Body plant [Fisher Body Corporation], which was Chevrolet.
Speaker 2: They had been married about fifteen years up to that point, right?  Nineteen thirty-five [1935]?
Speaker 1: I wonder (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They got married around maybe '20 [1920] or so, 1935 would be about fifteen years.
Speaker 1: Yeah it could be if it was that, yeah that's true.
Speaker 2: They got married about 1920, I think that's right?
Speaker 1: Maybe, I never knew, I'd hate to speculate, I'm not sure.  So he's working and he gets this job in the Fisher Body plant which was making parts for Chevrolet, and so that was at that point of course considered a really good job because you could stay in there forever.  But at some point he also decides--starts working with people to form a union, the UAW local there, and I did not know any of this.
Speaker 2: Now this is pioneering stuff because we always--I grew up in a GM [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] household and we always assumed the union was always there but I know it wasn't.  But it's a strong presence (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, that's right.  Absolutely.  But see I didn't know about it until Blackside [Blackside, Inc.], which did 'Eyes on the Prize' and did all these other series for PBS [Public Broadcasting Service], they did a series on the Depression [Great Depression].  And my sister [Carita Richardson] saw that and the first hour of that seven-hour series is on the Ford [Ford Motor Company] plant and the assembly line--
Story_ID: 439716
Speaker 1: There was a--the series that Blackside [Blackside, Inc.] did and it aired, and my sister [Carita Richardson] called and said how wonderful it was to see because it reminded her of how daddy had helped form the UAW [United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America; United Automobile Workers] local.  And I said, "What?"  Because I had no knowledge of this, and so it's one of the powers of film I guess, but anyway.  So she said, "Oh yeah," what she remembered was this white guy who came down from the national from the UAW national office and would sit in the kitchen talking to my father and that my mother [Mae Tucker Richardson] would come in and pull the curtains.  It was only two floors and the kitchen was right there with a little porch.  She said my sister would pull the curtains and then they would talk, and my mother was very upset because she thought daddy was going to lose his job from trying to start this union.  But it worked, they got the local, they got the union, and my father was treasurer of the local and in fact when he dies on the assembly line when I'm seven, my mother was very--always used to talk about how he got five notices of meetings the day that he died.  They came and told her about it.  They brought me out of school, but everybody knew Billy [William Richardson].  I mean that was the thing he was born and raised in Tarrytown [New York], white, black, everybody knew Billy, which has its repercussions when I come back from the movement and try and integrate the housing there, but that's a whole other story.  He was very much--he was very well liked.
Speaker 2: I guess he formed a union just in time I guess too for the benefit of your family because you wouldn't have had benefits (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's probably true 'cause you're right I don't know what it would have been otherwise, yeah.
Speaker 2: In those days, if you passed away they would send you some flowers.
Speaker 1: That is true, that is true.
Speaker 2: Just one more thing about your--as far as you know your father's ancestors were from Tarrytown (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) As far as they go.  I suspect that they came--obviously there was something before that but I don't know what it is.
Speaker 2: There's no tradition of being from further south?
Speaker 1: No, not that I know of, yeah--
Speaker 2: There are a lot of black folks in New York, you know--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, we come from everywhere in the South, yeah.
Speaker 2: But not necessarily having come from the South.  New York at one time, I think the state had more slaves than any other state in the union at one point, yeah.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah it did, yeah.  Well any other--only because I've now done three slavery documentaries (laughter)--besides South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 439717
Speaker 1: So in your household growing up, there would be your mother [Mae Tucker Richardson] and your father [William Richardson], your sister [Carita Richardson] and yourself.  And your sister is how many years older than you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About eight and a half years older.
Speaker 1: Eight and a half years older, okay.  So did any of the grandparents live with you or anything like that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I mean Pop [Edmund Tucker, Sr.], who was the grandparent I knew, lived with my mother's brother, Uncle Eddie [Edmund Tucker, Jr.] and Clarissa [Clarissa Bailey Tucker].
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I had a cyst on my eye, and I think I must have been around six maybe, and I remember it was really sunny and my mother was taking me to the hospital, and so we got to the hospital and then evidently the doctor or the nurse told her that she shouldn't stay with me.  That it was going to be harder for them to deal with me if she stayed.  And so she left and I remember just crying and crying and crying and then, you know, I woke up and there was my mommy.  You know, I don't--it's amazing that people would do that but that's my earliest memory.
Story_ID: 439718
Speaker 1: What was your neighborhood like?  Was your neighborhood like an all-black neighborhood or was it an integrated neighborhood (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  It was interesting I mean my neighborhood, on my block, we were the only black family but we lived under the hill.  So everybody in that block was poor, but there was--next door were the Baldaccinis, and so they were Italian--I mean half of Tarrytown [New York] was Italian.  And then Elaine Kohler [ph.], she was Polish, that was my best friend.  And then up the block was Sandy Pollack [ph.], and she was Polish.  And then the stationery store on the main drag on Main Street was Slavin's [ph.], so they were Jewish.  Then the Petranos [ph.] were just up the hill. and they were Italian.  So it was very multi-ethnic.  However, all of my mother's [Mae Tucker Richardson] friends were black and so they would be from Mechanics Avenue, which was a little ways up from where we were.  And then there were projects that got built somewhere in there but I can't remember how old I was at that point, and that was mainly black.
Speaker 1: Were there any Dutch people left in Tarrytown?
Speaker 2: Oh that's funny, you would think wouldn't you?  No.  Now I'll tell you what's funny about that, we used to have to go to Philipsburg Manor [Sleepy Hollow, New York] every year during my elementary school.  We'd go to Philipsburg Manor and all of the Dutch people would come out and they'd show you what Philipsburg Manor was like.  Now fast forward, I am now doing teacher training and stuff and I think I was working at that point still at Blackside [Blackside, Inc.], and I look at this front page of The New York Times--the metro section of The New York Times.  They talk about how it was the slaves, slave people, who ran Philipsburg Manor for the absentee landlord.  Because the landlords at that point were down in I guess Brooklyn [New York], which was way far away 'cause that was seen as in town, and so they had this--they were absentee.  They talk about the fifteen enslaved people who ran the farm.
Speaker 1: So Philipsburg Manor was a famous Dutch farm?
Speaker 2: Yes it was, and I think it was called a plantation at that point 'cause they were all called plantations.
Speaker 1: What did they grow in particular, did they grow anything for export (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know I don't even remember, I don't even remember.  I do know--the only thing I remember is these little people dressed up in these little Dutch dresses.  Now they have now I understand changed the interpretation of that site so that you do have that the absentee landlords were there.  I mean it was being run by these enslaved people, but that's part of the reinterpretation in the same way that they're reinterpreting the African Burial Ground and all that stuff in Wall Street [New York, New York] but yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And let me just say, had I'd known that, I would have related to it totally differently, you know, as would my white classmates.  So it really kind of pissed me off that we didn't know about this stuff, you know, but that's a whole other thing, yeah.
Story_ID: 439719
Speaker 1: Describe your neighborhood, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I just remember being always happy and it being sunny.  It was just always sunny.  We had a little house, and there were garages on the--if you were facing the house, a little two-story house, we had a garage.  Then there was a junkyard kind of next door and then there was a machine shop that Tripp [ph.], no not Tripp, god I can't remember his name--that he ran.  He was a white guy, and then there was our house and then there was a row of garages that people would park their cars in and then next to that was Elaine Kohler's [ph.] house.  We were best friends through sixth grade although her father never allowed me in the house.  I mean it was real clear I was not to come in her house 'cause he was really racist.  But anyway the mother was fine except that--so and then next door was Gregory Baldaccini, and his grandfather had a wonderful grape vineyard not a vineyard but grapevines--an arbor that's it, and you could smell it sometimes.  Across the street from my house was a big vacant lot that I guess after I went south--so after I was late teens, that's where the police station was built.  Then before that happened you could go through this vacant lot where we used to play every night, and you could go to the train station because there was a train depot there in Tarrytown [New York], which was very lucky 'cause anytime I used to take violin lessons when I was going through high school [Sleepy Hollow High School, Sleepy Hollow, New York].  And my sister [Carita Richardson] was paying for it, and I would have to go in the city and I'm always late, I mean I've always been late.  So I would hear the train and rush to get to the depot with my little violin case in order to get to the train.  I grew up hearing always train whistles, and so for me it's also a very comforting sound.
Speaker 1: Where would the train take you for your lessons?
Speaker 2: New York [New York], New York City (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) New York City.  So they had a regular train going to New York?
Speaker 2: Oh all of the time.  I mean I don't know if it's as frequent as it is now because Tarrytown at that point was not at much a commuter town.  I mean it was always that but it was primarily working class.  It was primarily the folks who worked at the plant and stuff.  So it's only started becoming that when I was really I guess graduating, around the time I was in high school, yeah.  So the train schedule was not that great but it was enough that you could, you know, go back and forth to the city.
Story_ID: 439720
Speaker 1: Was music a big part of growing up?  Your mother [Mae Tucker Richardson] played music (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah because of my mother.  My mother played, and she just always played, I mean she would always play, you know, various--she loved Nat King Cole.  So she would play a lot, and then my sister [Carita Richardson] played the French horn, and my sister sung alto as did my mother.  My mother could harmonize, she didn't need sheet music, my mother could hear a song and she could play it with beautiful chord progressions, I mean it was just amazing.  In fact, when I came back from the movement, she says to me, "Come here," and she sits me down on the stool and she plays this beautiful blues rendition of 'We Shall Overcome.'  It just brought tears to my eyes, she just did it, and it was amazing.  So there was always music.  And she whistled a lot, which is why I whistle, so she was always whistling.
Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Not at all, not at all.  My mother--now what was interesting was my mother was very religious, but for whatever reason, and she never talked about why this happened, she was down on organized religion except that she read the Bible every Sunday and so had read it two, three, four times through.  That on Sunday I had to read some portion of the Bible in order to be able to go with my little quarter to the movie theater, the music hall, up Main Street.  She would listen to the Ethical Culture [New York Society for Ethical Culture] radio station out of New York [New York] every Sunday, but she did not require that I go to church, had no problems with it but didn't require it, and I never saw her in a church.  My father [William Richardson] on the other hand was Catholic, and he used to go--there was a Catholic church named St. Teresa's [St. Teresa of Avila Church] in North Tarrytown, which is now called Sleepy Hollow [New York].
Speaker 1: Oh, it wasn't called that originally?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh no, it used to be North Tarrytown.  That's where the plant was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So North Tarrytown is now called Sleepy Hollow?
Speaker 2: Yes Sleepy Hollow, and it was a whole thing between the old residents who liked it being called North Tarrytown, and the new people who are higher income and they wanted it to be called Sleepy Hollow, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah I saw it on a map not too long ago and I thought, you know, I didn't know there really was a Sleepy Hollow but there it is on a map.  But that's North Tarrytown.
Speaker 2: That's North Tarrytown.
Speaker 1: So because of commercial reasons I would assume it's named Sleepy Hollow now to capitalize on Washington Irving's legacy (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and because they wanted to not be what North Tarrytown was, yes, there was a whole other image for North Tarrytown, which was lower income, it was the plant, it was all the people who worked in the plant.
Speaker 1: Now as far as you know, was that site at North Tarrytown what Washington Irving--was that the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it's the whole area; it's really the whole area.  So I went to Washington Irving Junior High School [Washington Irving Intermediate School, Tarrytown, New York], which had been the high school when my sister was there 'cause it used to be just one high school.  One high school was for Tarrytown [New York] and one high school was for North Tarrytown.  So but then when I go into ninth grade, they combined North Tarrytown and Tarrytown into one consolidated high school and it is called Sleepy Hollow High School [Sleepy Hollow, New York], and our football team was the Headless Horsemen, yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now at Sleepy Hollow High (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh god yes.  Oh yeah, we had the whole thing, they did it all.  So Washington Irving was the junior high then.
Story_ID: 439721
Speaker 1: Describe school, did you like school?
Speaker 2: I liked school.  I did well in school.  Partly, I mean, my mother [Mae Tucker Richardson] and stuff.
Speaker 1: You started at what school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I started at F.R. Pierson elementary school [Frank R. Pierson School, Tarrytown, New York].  My first day going to school I was late, which continues all the way through the twelve years.  As a matter of fact I hid in the cloakroom because Mrs. Jones [ph.], my kindergarten school teacher, had already started, and so I hid in the cloakroom because I was afraid to come out because I knew I was late, and that happened a lot (laughter).
Speaker 1: You would hide in the cloakroom?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah because I was trying to figure out how to kind of sneak out from the cloakroom before they saw how late I was.
Speaker 1: At age five (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Six.
Speaker 1: Six.  Well, it was your fault that you were late?
Speaker 2: Probably I mean because when I had nothing to do--well let me say, my mother was always late, but I'm trying to think, that's interesting, how did I get to school?  My mother must have walked me at a certain point when I was little but I have no memory of that.  But at a certain point I'm walking, I mean certainly by third grade I am walking and I'm coming home every day and walking back home probably a fifteen-minute walk maybe.  There would be lunch for me and I'd go back up because see by that time my father [William Richardson] has died and mother is now working full time.  So I was what is now called latchkey, but yeah I would come home, have my peanut butter and jelly sandwich, go back to the elementary school.  But yeah, I was late on my own.  But that's interesting, now I know that's true that first day--no you're right they wouldn't have let me go by myself that first day.  So yeah, it was probably my mother, yeah.
Speaker 1: Parents have something to do with that when kids are that young.
Speaker 2: Yeah that's true.
Speaker 1: That's why I asked you.  So F.R. Pierson (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) P-I-E-R-S-O-N, I think.
Speaker 1: P-I-E-R.  Did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: English.  Yeah I liked English, I always liked English.  I liked diagramming sentences that was a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Not--actually I don't have a favorite teacher until I get to high school [Sleepy Hollow High School, Sleepy Hollow, New York] really.  One teacher when I was in elementary school, and that was the only time my mother ever verbalized that she was mad at a teacher 'cause I had all white teachers going through school, and this teacher slapped me.  The fact that I remember this, my mother came up to school, and I remember her being so mad when I told her, but it never happened again, never happened again.
Speaker 1: What did she slap you for?
Speaker 2: I don't even remember, I just remember her slapping me.  And I remember the reaction of my mother made me feel I had to do with the fact that I was black but I don't know.  See again my mother never talked about race, but she was mad, yeah, and then we also had a little boy who had polio when I was in elementary school too, and he would come in and out and I remember him.  At some point I knew he that he was in an iron lung but I don't know whether we visited him at some point as a class or not, I'm not sure.
Story_ID: 439722
Speaker 1: Now did you have favorite radio shows, TV shows?
Speaker 2: Yeah Milton Berle, Uncle Miltie, yes, yes, and as a matter of fact my sister [Carita Richardson] remembers this as a struggle of wills between my mother [Mae Tucker Richardson] and me.  But at some point it was a Saturday--no it must have been Sunday 'cause I think Uncle Miltie came on a Sunday and I had refused to eat my cereal--it was cold cereal, and my mother's thing was you're not going outside to play, unless you eat your cereal, and I said I'm not eating it.  I had this stool as a matter of fact the stool that's in my little kitchen area right now.  I would sit there, and I sat there, and my sister said, you know, people would come to the porch and say, "Can you come out to play?"  "No, I have to eat my cereal."  But I just refused to eat my cereal, however and I think it must have been eight o'clock at night Uncle Miltie came on, and my mother said, stood in the doorway between the kitchen and the living room and all of this is all small, and she wasn't going to put the volume down because everybody else wanted to hear it, but she stood in the doorway so I couldn't see it and I ate my cereal so I could go see Uncle Miltie.
Speaker 1: You really liked 'The Milton Berle Show.'
Speaker 2: I really did.
Speaker 1: He was Mr. Television.
Speaker 2: Yes he was, that's right, but I was also a very stubborn child as you can see (laughter).
Speaker 1: TV came along I guess by the time you were about seven, six or seven?
Speaker 2: Well yeah and at the point we had it, yeah by the time we had it I probably was around seven, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, the days when 'Howdy Doody' ['The Howdy Doody Show'] was on.
Speaker 2: Absolutely loved 'Howdy Doody' too, yes that's right.
Speaker 1: It seems strange that Milton Berle would be your favorite show.
Speaker 2: What else was there?
Speaker 1: Well the kids' shows.  Because you know like 'Howdy Doody,' I don't know what else.  I'm trying to think of what else was on--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's only later when I'm growing up in Tarrytown [New York] that they had like 'Million Dollar Movie' and that's how I remember--I know all the 1940s, John Garfield.  I just remember all of them because 'Million Dollar Movie' which was on WOR [WWOR-TV, Secaucus, New Jersey] used to play the movie, they used to strip them so you would get the movie.  For the full week they would play it three or four times a day, and just that movie all week long, it was wonderful.  I remember 'One Touch of Venus,' I remember all these old movies but that's later.  That's when I'm getting into high school age.
Speaker 1: Now did you like--was radio a big deal when you were a kid, or had it kind of faded?
Speaker 2: It had faded by the time I was--of me having any memory of it at least.
Speaker 1: When you were growing up since you're a documentary filmmaker now, did you take much notice of documentaries?
Speaker 2: I don't remember ever seeing a documentary when I was growing up.  I don't know if they had them.  I shouldn't say that, I'm sure they had them.
Speaker 1: I remember The Disney [The Walt Disney Company] documentaries.  He used to do the 'True-Life' ['True-Life Adventures'] nature things.
Speaker 2: Not when I was growing up, no that was a little later (laughter).  So the only thing then was 'Nanook of the North,' you know that kind of documentary and you would see those in high school--I mean you would see those in--
Speaker 1: In the movies?
Speaker 2: Yeah but it was 'Nanook of the North.'  It was white people doing exotic places and staging them in the way that he did that, so that's all I remember.
Speaker 1: You must have had educational films in, I guess in school?
Speaker 2: Yes, well that was considered Nanook even though he had staged it because nobody admitted that he had staged it.
Speaker 1: Okay, those were the days when the news was only fifteen minutes.
Speaker 2: You got it. 'Huntley-Brinkley' ['The Huntley-Brinkley Report'], which my mother always looked at.  So she looked at 'Huntley-Brinkley,' and she always looked at 'Meet the Press' 'cause that was on too and those are the main programs that I remember.  And then you also got the dramas.  You got the 'U.S. Steel Hour' ['The United States Steel Hour'], you got, I'm trying to think--there were things like 'U.S. Steel Hour' that were similar to that.
Speaker 1: The 'Armstrong Circle Theatre'?
Speaker 2: Might be that's right, yeah.  And I bet--it's interesting, you know, when you talk about radio I vaguely remember like the 'Lux Radio Hour' [sic. 'Lux Radio Theatre'] but that's a very dim memory.
Story_ID: 439723
Speaker 1: So we were just talking about media that you saw when you were growing up.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite movies, I mean, at the show?  Any of the current movies that were around were?
Speaker 2: At that point I think I loved 'One Touch of Venus.'  I loved it.  "Speak low."  You know, it was Ava Gardner, and I just thought that was so wonderful.  She's a mannequin in a department store who comes to life, and it just--it was a lovely story, I thought that was so cute.  And I'm trying to think if there were any others that really stick in my mind.  No--oh I think I used to like 'Sayonara' too with William Holden [sic.].  That was an interesting film, but I was in high school that time.  But no not a whole lot, you know.
Speaker 1: Well tell us about high school.  You went to Washington Irving?
Speaker 2: No, Sleepy Hollow High School [Sleepy Hollow, New York].
Speaker 1: Oh, it has changed names by then?
Speaker 2: Yeah 'cause I went to Washington Irving Junior High [Washington Irving Junior High School; Washington Irving Intermediate School, Tarrytown, New York], my sister [Carita Richardson] went to Washington Irving High School [Tarrytown, New York] before it gets consolidated and I come in ninth grade (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you went to junior high, Irving Junior High.
Speaker 2: And I come in to--we were the first class to consolidate North Tarrytown [Sleepy Hollow, New York] and Tarrytown [New York].  So I was in lots of clubs and after school stuff.  I played violin, I started the violin when I was in third grade, and then by the time I get to high school at some point maybe sophomore year, I'm first chair, and then I go to Westchester Youth orchestra [Westchester Youth Symphony].  And I was taking summer courses and stuff like that.  I wasn't very athletic, which is unfortunate, although I was very healthy because I was always walking.  I mean, I never--we didn't have a bus that went from my house or that I could get from my house to high school and it was a twenty-minute walk given that as usual I was very late usually, I was running a lot so in the morning to get to school on time because homeroom started at like 8:30.  I didn't have--I had friends but they were mainly friends in high school whom I actually studied with.  So it was Jackie Juliano [ph.], who ends up going to Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] and--Schoen [ph.], I'll think of her first name in a minute and we would study 'cause we had a horrible Latin teacher, Mrs. Gates [ph.].  So like tenth through twelfth grade we would go to Jackie's house and study Latin over our lunch, and then come back for that first class.  And then most of the after school stuff was music, it was the orchestra, I was in band and I played the xylophone, not the xylophone, the, yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know what you mean.  It's the--there's a name for that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, what do you call it?  Glockenspiel.
Speaker 1: Glockenspiel, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's right, I played the glockenspiel, and I had a solo on 'Bells of St. Mary' ['The Bells of St. Mary's']--
Story_ID: 439724
Speaker 1: We were talking about high school [Sleepy Hollow High School, Sleepy Hollow, New York], and you playing the glockenspiel in the band, and violin in orchestra (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you were a member of the Westchester Youth orchestra [Westchester Youth Symphony].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And at--so as a member of the Westchester Youth orchestra, how many times, I mean how far did you have to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh let's see, I did summers.  I would practice during the summer and I remember doing--actually I did remember going to the all-state concert, it was the first time I had ever flown, and that was in, actually that was in seventh grade.  That was the first time I had ever flown.  Is that possible?  I guess so.  I mean certainly that was the first time, but I was trying to remember was it in seventh grade and I think so.
Speaker 1: Was that in Albany [New York]?
Speaker 2: It was in Albany, that's right, yeah.  I almost missed the plane because my mother [Mae Tucker Richardson] was late to the plane.  We made it just in time, yes, from the Westchester Airport [Westchester County Airport, White Plains, New York], that's right.  That was an actually wonderful experience 'cause it was actually the one and only time that I was really serious about practicing.  And I got so much out of it.  It was just a lovely experience.  As a matter of fact we were doing the German drinking song as part of the Brahms [Johannes Brahms] something or other, one of the Brahms symphonies, and there was a point where I absolutely felt (hums) and when I got to a certain point there was something about the energy of that particular part that just made me feel like I was lifting off the ground.  I mean I just--it was almost physical, just felt like I was lifting.  So I got to the point where I loved to practice because I loved the feeling, and also because I would look forward to it.  It was like, oh we're coming to that part again you know, we would play and stuff.  So it was nice, that was a nice piece.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you have any aspirations at that time about music?  About being a professional musician?
Speaker 2: Not really because I didn't like to practice, and I knew what it took.  My sister [Carita Richardson] at that point was working I think for Columbia for the A&R, artists and repertoire section of Columbia Records, and I had a sense always of how much people had to practice to be good, and I knew I just wasn't going to do that.  So my sister continued playing the French horn and stuff, and then she married Larry Berson [ph.], who was first chair in the New York Philharmonic.  So I had a sense that you really did have to practice to do this kind of stuff, and no I'm not going to do that, so, yeah.  No, I assumed that I was going to be a social worker.
Story_ID: 439725
Speaker 1: Now you said you did have a favorite teacher in high school [Sleepy Hollow High School, Sleepy Hollow, New York].  Who was it and what were they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and I can't remember his name, but he was absolutely nontraditional.  He was the only nontraditional teacher I ever had, and I remember him talking about his wife and--he was in English but it was English comp [composition], and it was tenth grade and he gave these wonderful exercises and I remember doing one where I read poetry to music, didn't do it very well, but he really made you want to get to some of the inside of you, and he exposed himself in a way teachers never did.  He really did.  He talked about his personal life such that I never experienced that with a teacher before, but I can't remember his name.  It's funny.  I remember Mrs. Jones [ph.], who was my kindergarten teacher, but I can't remember his name.
Speaker 1: Was he a young man, old man?
Speaker 2: He was an older man I mean, but again everybody over thirty seemed old to me, so.  I would suspect 'cause I see him now, I see how he looked, he seemed like he might have been early forties, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did you have favorite books when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh I always read 'Nancy Drew' [Carolyn Keene] when I was going through junior high and stuff.  And then I loved the 'Anne of Green Gables' [Lucy Maud Montgomery] stuff and then when I got into high school I remember reading Hemingway [Ernest Hemingway].  There was a word in there that was sexual, I can't remember which one it was, and I asked my mother [Mae Tucker Richardson] what the word meant, she said, "What?"  My mother never talked about that, I mean let me just say I was somebody--my mother told me when I was growing up when I asked her how people got born, and she said well the man plants a seed in the woman.  That's as far as she ever got with me okay.  We never talked--and the thing is I thought I had this wonderful knowledge so I went to Elaine [Elaine Kohler (ph.)] my girlfriend from next door and I told her this 'cause we would have these heart to heart talks in front of the garages between our houses and we would be there 'til like seven in the evening.  It would be dusk and our parents would call--mothers would call us.  So I remember telling her, "Oh I know how people get born," and so I told her this and then--and it was just that, it was nothing more.  Her mother called my mother and said, "You are not to talk about sex," and I don't know how she said it, but you were not to talk about this anymore, and that's all she told me.  Now I grew up I would suspect until I was in maybe fourth grade where I thought that Mrs. Brundage [ph.] and her--she had a roomer, and they lived up the hill and they had all these Irish Setters, and I must have been maybe fifth or sixth grade before I figured out that they hadn't had the setters themselves.  So what I knew about any of this was miniscule.  So anyway, how did I get into this--there was a reason why I went off on this (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We were talking about your teacher and favorite books.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, favorite books, right so the thing about Hemingway, so there was a thing about Ernest Hemingway, and I'm asking her the meaning to this word and whatever it was.  She--coitus, I think it was coitus, yeah, that was the word and she lambasted my sister [Carita Richardson] 'cause my sister had suggested--I think it was 'A Farewell to Arms' [Ernest Hemingway] that's what it was, yeah, and, "How could you give this to Judy [HistoryMaker Judy Richardson] to read?"  But I was reading--I'm trying to think any favorite, I kind of liked Hemingway actually growing up, I mean in high school.  But I don't remember any others.
Story_ID: 439726
Speaker 1: Now did you get any black history at all in high school [Sleepy Hollow High School, Sleepy Hollow, New York] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no, oh gosh no.
Speaker 1: Or from anywhere?
Speaker 2: No, the only--no, not from anywhere.  I mean, we subscribed to Ebony and Jet so I read the Jet every week but I don't remember it too well.  Ebony I just always remember it just having famous people in there, and that was about it.  See I don't remember any of the [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett stuff when I was growing up.  I don't know whether he just wasn't publishing that or not, but I certainly don't remember it in there.  The only time--I remember being in the tenth grade Advanced Placement course and I was the only black student and we got to a section--a chapter on black Reconstruction, and they had one and only one illustration in there and that was of a what I found out later from one of the scholars--one of the many scholars who advised us on 'Eyes on the Prize' and I mentioned this book and he said, "Oh yeah that was the prescribed textbook at the time."  In fact, he said that illustration was from 'Birth of a Nation.'  It was a graphic from 'Birth of a Nation' ['The Birth of a Nation'] and what it was, it showed black folks--supposedly a black state legislator with his hair all disheveled and you know, his bare feet up on the desk of the state legislature.
Speaker 1: They showed that print?  I know exactly what you're talking about.
Speaker 2: Yeah that's the one, and that was in the textbook illustrating what black Reconstruction was like.  So I didn't get anything about South Carolina and getting the first educational reforms for not just the black ex-slaves but poor white people, who had been denied it, didn't get any of that.  So what I remember is my white classmates turning around kind of looking at me like, oh that's what happens when you people take power, and feeling very ashamed, feeling really ashamed.  So that I remember, but that was the black history I got growing up.  There was only one black merchant at that time, he had a shoe repair store.  Many of my mother's [Mae Tucker Richardson] friends worked as maids.  I'm trying to think.  There was a black doctor, but he had died by the time that I was really aware of any of that, and then when I got to it must have been junior high, two things happened.  One has to do with the church.  But Dr. Lane [Mary Lane Cobb] and her husband [James Cobb], and they're still there, a black couple, young black couple who moved on Broadway.  And that was amazing that there was somebody black who had moved to Broadway because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On Broadway in Tarrytown [New York]?
Speaker 2: In Tarrytown because they weren't--you were not allowed to buy and everybody knew that.  You couldn't buy in Sleepy Hollow [New York], you couldn't buy in Philipsburg Manor [Sleepy Hollow, New York], you couldn't buy--most of the places really did have I guess you would call it a covenant, you couldn't get it.  So that they bought right on Broadway catty-corner to Washington Irving Junior High School [Washington Irving Intermediate School, Tarrytown, New York] and still lives there.  And it was this grand house, and Dr. Lane was in Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America], and I went to her and that was amazing to me that you had a female doctor and stuff.  That was a wonderful thing.  Now the other thing I remember is I did once go to--there was a point where I was going to church, and I think it must have been--I was either in junior high or lower high school and I started going to church.  And it was the First Baptist [First Baptist Church of Tarrytown, Tarrytown, New York], it was a white church, and it was also on Broadway.  Then they had a summer school--a summer camp, not camp but they took trips.  And I remember coming in one day 'cause some other black kids had started coming as a result going to the camp--mainly going to the outings.  I remember going into the sanctuary at one point and overhearing--because they didn't know I was there--and overhearing a woman who I thought had been so nice talking to another woman and saying, you know we have to be worried about the fact that we're getting, I don't think she said too many, that we're getting more black kids.  And that was clearly worrisome for them and that they were trying to figure out how to stop this flow of kids coming in and stuff.  Now let me just say, you know, we're not talking humongous hordes here, you know, probably three or four, you know.  So but that sticks out in my mind as one of those church--and I never went back, I never went back to the church.
Story_ID: 439727
Speaker 1: --Did your mother [Mae Tucker Richardson] discuss the Civil Rights Movement when the Montgomery Bus Boycott hit in sixty--'56 [1956] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't remember her doing that.
Speaker 1: You would have been ten, well no, twelve I guess then?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, twelve, that's right.  I don't remember Montgomery [Alabama], I do remember Little Rock [Arkansas], and I took a totally opposite position.  I mean, I looked at them and I said they should be trying to get--learn something instead of doing all of this protesting.  So I say that too when I go on campuses to speak because I want people to know you don't necessarily come out where you start.  That I could be where I am now in terms of my politics and could have started there and saying, oh, they shouldn't be trying to get into this all white school.  They should stay where they are and just try and get the best education they can.  I wrote a letter to that effect, to the Tarrytown Daily News.  So what's amazing to me is that I had no politics--well no, that is politics.  So I came a long way, yes.  At the same time that my mother was very pro-labor obviously so she thought Walter Reuther was just the most wonderful thing in the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're in high school [Sleepy Hollow High School, Sleepy Hollow, New York] from what, 1958 to '62 [1962], is that it?
Speaker 2: I guess, I graduated in '62 [1962] yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 439728
Speaker 1: During that period of time, like the profile of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] keeps going up, you know (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I have no memory of him until I go to the March on Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to the March on Washington in '63 [1963].  Okay now, that's after graduation [from Sleepy Hollow High School, Sleepy Hollow, New York], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because, now--yes but that's because at that point my senior year I was going to--I somehow got involved with the women's international--Women Strike for Peace, that and the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom.  There was a woman, older white woman who had a big old house in--I guess she was Philipsburg Manor [Sleepy Hollow, New York], one of the wealthier parts of town and I remember going with a couple of friends of mine, and yeah.
Speaker 1: Women's International League for Peace and Freedom (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: WILPF (laughter).  It was one of those--both of those were groups that were overwhelmingly white and older people, and usually related to the peace movement.
Speaker 1: Okay, now there was a strong peace movement then in terms of--
Speaker 2: Yeah 'cause part of that was around not--around the bomb 'cause you know, we at that point were going through duck and cover and the atomic bomb and everybody's getting the bomb, and so the whole nuclear thing.
Speaker 1: So there wasn't a focus on Vietnam at that point?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh no, no, I'm not even we'd started at that point, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the U.S. had advisors and by '63 [1963] they were really, by then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They had advis- by then, yes you're right, but at least we weren't aware of it, see that's the thing, yeah.
Speaker 1: But not, okay, yeah.
Story_ID: 439729
Speaker 1: Now when you graduated in '62 [1962] what were your--I mean you ended up going to Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But how did that happen, I mean how did you, did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well first of all when I was in seventh grade, at that point now, my sister [Carita Richardson] is in Bennington, Bennington College [Bennington, Vermont], and the teacher tried to put me into the trade track and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the counselors always do that, it seems like.  They seem to do that a lot.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I was an A student so it also had to do with race (laughter).  My sister said, "In Bennington they were going to put me on the trade track."  But anyway, so my mother [Mae Tucker Richardson] got very upset and she shifted it.  But what was wonderful about it was that I learned how to type ninety words a minute and I took great shorthand.  So that when I get to the movement and there are still people who say when they go into the Atlanta [Georgia]--The King Center [Martin Luther King, Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia] archives, as horribly as they are kept, as a matter of fact, when Joanne [Joanne Grant] granted them the Ms. Baker [Ella Baker] book, that first Ms. Baker book ['Ella Baker: Freedom Bound,' Joanne Grant], she asked me to transcribe my notes from the executive committee from SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] because it was all in shorthand.  And I did, and I still have it.  The reason that Forman [HistoryMaker James Forman]--Jim Forman, then executive secretary of SNCC, wants me to be his secretary is because I can type ninety words a minute, I do shorthand, and he assumes since I've been at Swarthmore that I can write a literate sentence and stuff, which does not necessarily follow, but it's okay he thought so.  So seventh grade I get--I do probably a year of all this stuff that--let me just say my white friends who have lower grades than I do they never attempted to track in that way.  So I do that through I guess seventh grade, and then eighth grade I'm back on the academic track.  So that happens.  When I graduate I'm number three, and actually Jackie [Jackie Juliano (ph.)] was ahead of me, the one I had studied with, Lorraine Schoen [ph.], that was her name.  Loretta Schoen, that was the other person that we studied with.  The way I get to the--in terms of the colleges I'm going to apply to, I'm sure my sister had a lot to do with that.  Now my counselor advised that I go to Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina].  I don't think he even got to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]--I know he wouldn't have gotten to Spelman, he didn't know about it.  But he assumed that I was going to a small black college.  So my sister is telling me about Swarthmore and Bennington, so I applied to two of them.  I applied to Sarah Lawrence [Sarah Lawrence College, Bronxville, New York] and Antioch [Antioch College, Yellow Springs, Ohio], and actually got into all of them, but Bennington 'cause my sister wasn't doing that well, and so I probably wouldn't have done that well either.  Bennington said, well I was accepted but they knew Swarthmore was giving me a full scholarship, which said to me you need to go to Swarthmore.  So that's where I ended up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Just go back a little bit, I probably should have asked you a question about the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Peace and freedom?
Speaker 1: What kinds of things did you actually do?
Speaker 2: I remember them talking about--truthfully I think it was only one or two people.  I remember this one woman and I think she was it, and so for a while there we were going over to her house and talking about peace issues.  And I think I got a sense of other movements going around peace internationally, but I have very little remembrance of that.  I do know that the reason I got to the March on Washington was because they were doing--they and probably women's strike for peace (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay so that's later--
Speaker 2: But both of them were there, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's about a year after you graduate that you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well it's the year that I graduate see 'cause it's '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Oh, you graduated from high school [Sleepy Hollow High School, Sleepy Hollow, New York] in '63 [1963] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh wait a minute no, wrong, that is wrong, I was class of '62 [1962].  Well, isn't that interesting.  Well see I'm not at Swarthmore--well must be at Swarthmore's campus then by that time.
Speaker 1: That's the summer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes of course, I would have to be that's exactly it, but I went on some peace--no so I'm back home that's what it is because it's August.  So I'm home from college but I do go on one of their buses, but you're right I've already been to Cambridge, Maryland, I'd been part of the movement, and you're right because I see people there whom I knew from SNCC.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  So you got a full scholarship from Swarthmore so tell us about--now was there anything else about graduation we need to know, or do you think that's--
Speaker 2: I have no memory of it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were number three in the class.  Did you get any special recognition from the school?
Speaker 2: I don't remember getting any.  I remember being once in the Tarrytown Daily News because--with my little violin.  And so I'm sitting there on whatever page with my little violin and stuff, but no I don't remember any special recognition, might have gotten it, don't remember.
Story_ID: 439730
Speaker 1: So were you excited about going to Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I was scared.  You know, I mean, it was my first time away from home.  I did not meet people easily, I was, you know, very nervous around strangers and whether they would like me and whether I would get along with them, and the fact I was going to be rooming with somebody, and what does that mean?  It was just all kinds of questions and I'd never been anywhere, and I didn't know what kind of folks I was going to meet there and stuff.  So my sister [Carita Richardson] was great, I mean she--the three of us my mother [Mae Tucker Richardson], my sister--I had one big suitcase and we packed it up and we drove from Tarrytown, New York to Swarthmore, Pennsylvania.  And my mother let me drive and I remember I drove really, really fast and was crossing lines in the Holland Tunnel.  But we got there, and it was my sister because she was very outgoing, and so she made friends and kind of introduced me to the kids, the other kids and stuff.  She started talking to my roommate who I can't remember now, so that by the time she left she had for me some connections with some of the students.  And I had a big sister, there was a big sister there who--there was a big sister for every incoming freshman and she was in the same dorm that I was in.  I actually did make friends there, but what amazed me was how much they knew, how much these kids already knew that I had never heard of.  I felt that I had had a pretty good education and stuff, you know, but these were kids who had travelled to France, southern France for vacation and been to Switzerland.  Many of them came out of private schools, and I mean, my folks were poor.  There weren't many poor kids going to Swarthmore.  At that point I think it had, still does, had the highest tuition of any college in the country.  Even the black kids had money.  There was somebody from I want to say the Dominican Republic, but her father was an ambassador and that came out when we started doing the demonstrations because her father stopped her from going on the demonstrations.  Sara Lawrence-Lightfoot was Sara Lawrence then, and she was in my incoming class.  There were four boys and four girls and I always assumed it was because they didn't want us to date outside the little group we had.  I had work study, so I worked in the cafeteria, and in fact, when--well at some point we'll get to the demonstrations and what happens on campus as a result but yeah.  At one point there were these open pipes in the cafeteria, and one of them had H2O on it.  And the wait staff--the real wait staff, they were all black women and they had been trying to get the college to put covers on these pipes 'cause they were hot as hell.  It was only when as a student worker I back into one of these pipes as a lot of them had for many years.  I back into one of these pipes and it sears it, and for a few years I had H2O backwards on the back of my leg.  The college gets so upset. First I'm sure they think I'm going to sue them, but the other thing is, they--it's a student that this has happened to, it's not just a worker and it was around the time there was a SDS [Students for a Democratic Society] chapter on campus, and they had been working with some of the wait staff in organizing them.  It was actually going fairly well and when this happens I go to the administration and I say, you're going to have to do some things, and I was talking to the SDS people about what should I demand and you know, all that stuff.  So that was part of that but I was at that point doing, you know--working in the--I wasn't working in the kitchen, I was working--waitressing, you know, in the cafeteria.
Story_ID: 439731
Speaker 1: So you're at Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] and, now, the year is, well--
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962], '63 [1963], yes.
Speaker 1: So you were going to major in--you're working in the cafeteria and you're going to major--what was your major?
Speaker 2: Sociology, I was going to be a social worker.
Speaker 1: Did you know any social workers back in Tarrytown [New York]?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Did you have a role model social worker?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I don't even know where I got that idea.  It might have been people in my family.  Oh that's not true because my Uncle Fred's [ph.] wife was a social worker.
Speaker 1: That's the accountant?
Speaker 2: Yes that's right, that's right, she went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and she was a social worker that's true.  So yeah I guess so.
Speaker 1: Well, how did it go at first, did you take to Swarthmore?
Speaker 2: It was okay.  I actually felt very alien, it was around--I had some, there were certain friends of mine from my dorm, but I felt a little like a fish out of water that I really had to work so very hard for grades that used to come so easily for me in high school [Sleepy Hollow High School, Sleepy Hollow, New York].  Then again I just--it seemed like they were--most of the kids were already five, ten steps ahead of me.  They had experiences that I had never been exposed to.  They knew things I didn't know.  So I remember just feeling almost panicked.  A sense that I really--how do I even compensate for all of this?  But it was also a time for me that I'm trying new things and so that's how I get to this SDS meeting, and the Students for a Democratic Society had a chapter on campus, and I go on a lark just to see what's going on.  Then find out that they're doing these demonstrations a couple of hours away--I think it's a couple of hours away on the Eastern Shore of Cambridge, Maryland, and so I go on the bus.
Speaker 1: Now what were they demonstrating about?
Speaker 2: Oh, to desegregate facilities in Cambridge.  Black folks in Cambridge had always had the right to vote and in fact the main leader there, Gloria Richardson, who is still alive and well and living in New York [New York], she was the local leader there.  And one of her relatives, I think her uncle [sic. grandfather, Herbert M. St. Clair], had been on the city council [Cambridge City Council].  But black people basically had no power and everything was segregated including the roller rink, and that was a major thing.  The roller rink was segregated, and the dividing line was Race Street and black folks lived on one side (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The dividing line was Race Street?
Speaker 2: Yes, Race Street, so and in fact the demonstrations were always along Race Street too because that's where the businesses were.
Speaker 1: Cambridge--
Speaker 2: Maryland, right, on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, that's it.  So my first demonstration was at the Choptank Inn [Cambridge, Maryland], which was a bar and grill, and there was this guy who's, you know, barring my way in and I just got really mad.  There were enough things that had happened to me in Tarrytown that I knew that there was a difference between black and white, I knew that there was discrimination, I knew that, but again my mother [Mae Tucker Richardson] never talked about any of that.  So some things I just assumed were personal, you know.  So I'm now seeing this guy and I think, oh I see, this is what this is about, okay and then that was I think was my first arrest.
Speaker 1: Now this is the fall of '62 [1962]?
Speaker 2: Fall or winter, one or the other, yeah.
Speaker 1: So it would be winter of '63 [1963], I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah or what I mean is it could have been November, December around '62 [1962] but I'm just not sure.  And I just remember he was fingerprinting me, and I had a thing about the fact he was spelling my middle name wrong and kept spelling it F-R-A-N-C-I-S, and I kept saying, "It's E-S, it's E-S," with that kind of arrogance that just I'm sure drove him crazy.  And not knowing any better.  Had I'd been born and raised there I would have known, look, don't play with this police.  But so what he did of course was he bent my finger back so it really, really hurt while he was fingerprinting.  And then it got to the point where I was taking a lot of trips back and forth on the bus because SDS and other--Grinnell [Grinnell College, Grinnell, Iowa], there were other, Skidmore [Skidmore College, Saratoga Springs, New York], there were other colleges that were going down as part of this campaign.
Story_ID: 439732
Speaker 1: And then I find out that it's a SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] project, and that Reggie Robinson who was a seasoned SNCC worker--SNCC field secretary.  He had gone into Amite County [Mississippi] initially with Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] and others and Curtis Hayes in '61 [1961].  He was from Baltimore, Maryland, and so when Gloria [Gloria Richardson] and the local activists asked for SNCC assistance, then SNCC sent Reggie.  And so he was there when I got there too.  And I had not known of SNCC before that.
Speaker 2: Did Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] have a position about SDS [Students for a Democratic Society] at all?
Speaker 1: Oh no, not about SDS.  I mean it was fine for them to meet on campus and whatever.  It got to be really difficult when I, first of all a lot of us were getting jailed and coming back and I was starting to miss classes as well.  There was a SNCC worker who, Penny Patch, who had taken off part of her sophomore year and came back that second semester of my freshman year, and hears that I had been going on the demonstrations and suggests that I might want to apply to take a year off.  No at that point it was going to be six months off, and go on SNCC staff.  But she was very clear.  She said, "You've got to apply and you've got to go by Ruby Doris [Ruby Doris Smith-Robinson].  You've got to get accepted by Ruby Doris Robinson," and that was Ruby Doris Smith at that point, and she was the administrator in the office.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the office was in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: In Atlanta, the so-called national office was in Atlanta, yeah.  So I get to that at some point, but what demonstrations did is that they really split the campus, this supposedly Quaker and liberal campus.  I had--I will never forget, I was in a class on Russian history and there was a kid that there who had been everywhere.  I mean, he used to talk.  And he wasn't arrogant about it.  He just would talk about what he had done and stuff.  I remember he could pronounce the Russian names correctly and stuff and I just thought, oh my goodness he knows all this stuff, and I overheard him saying that these demonstrations were going too fast and what the Negro student should do is stay in class and not do all of this demonstrating, and that they could best help their people by just getting a good education.  And then other Swarthmore students were talking about how it is a businessman's right--'cause that was the line then, a merchant's total right to refuse service to anybody, it was their business.  And then I was even getting the states' right thing because that was assumed also in this country at that time.  So a state has the right to decide what the rules are going to be and if those rules are segregation than that's what has to happen.  This was on a Quaker campus.  So it really split to the point that my big sister [Carita Richardson] stopped talking to me, some friends on my whole thought that it was not right and we would have these arguments about it.  I was missing some gym classes and this Texan woman, a white Texas athletic director who had been so helpful in terms of helping me overcome my fear of going into the water--of jumping into the deep water because I love water, but jumping into the deep because I didn't swim that well, and you had to pass the swimming test.  So she taught me, she said, "Just see if you can keep your eyes open," and it was fine then, it was like it wasn't scary and she was just so sweet except when the demonstrations started.  And just got so--I mean, you could tell she was just a changed person to me.  When I went to her to see if I could take a class over because I had missed some of the gym classes--some of the swimming classes and she said no.  And she was just--no.  You know, and she was so--it was so different, she was such a different person before.  You know, I just couldn't believe that it was the same person.
Story_ID: 439733
Speaker 1: And then we decided that the May Day queen--which had always been done by the fraternities.  You know, they would nominate the favorite girls from whatever frat it was and stuff.  Well the SDS [Students for a Democratic Society] chapter which was called the Swarthmore Political Action Committee, SPAC, we decided that we would nominate our slate and it included me which was of course the first black person to be included in this May Day celebration as the May Day court and we won 'cause we block voted and the campus was--oh they were ever so pissed that we won.  So Mimi Feingold [Mimi Feingold Real] becomes the May Day queen, I become part of the court and it was wonderful.  Now they boycotted--some of the students boycotted the May Day ceremony but we had it anyway and my mother [Mae Tucker Richardson] was so proud so she came down from Tarrytown [New York] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So what were you elected to?  Part of the May Day court, okay.
Speaker 1: May Day court, I was part of the court so it was the court and the May Day queen would come through and you had this little crown of flowers and stuff and you were dressed a certain way that I can't remember now.  You had the May Day procession and then, you know, Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] had all these trees and lawns and stuff and so we did this thing around the May Day--the tree and stuff.
Speaker 2: And the maypole.
Speaker 1: And the maypole that's right although I think we did it as a tree but it might have been a pole, might well have been a pole.  But my mother came down and I don't even remember if I told her all of this but she was just so proud to see me in this May Day court and she just thought it was so pretty.  So my little mother took the train down and she saw me and she went back home, you know, so that was cute, um-hm.
Story_ID: 439734
Speaker 1: Now here you are contemplating leaving school [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] for six months (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, and scared to death to tell my mother [Mae Tucker Richardson].  I mean the thing is--I mean again I'm the first--my sister [Carita Richardson] is before me but I'm the first generation going to college, okay.  My cousins had gone but this was a very proud moment for my mother, and I was very close to my mother.  So--
Speaker 1: Now when were you thinking about this decision right after (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually after Penny [Penny Patch] comes.  When Penny comes back that second semester of my freshman year, she comes back from Albany [Georgia]--
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's second semester--
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm not thinking about any of this the first semester--
Speaker 1: So it's spring of '63 [1963] I guess.
Speaker 2: That's right, and she had been one of the first white field secretaries in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].  She had gone to Albany, Georgia, in southwest Georgia, and she was from Jersey [New Jersey].  SNCC at that point--that was one of the projects that would accept white people because it was so dangerous to have white females with the black male staffers.  It put everybody in danger, but Sherrod, Reverend Charles Sherrod, otherwise known as Sherrod, he would allow for that, and so a lot of white folks went to this Southwest Georgia Project [Southwest Georgia Project for Community Education, Inc.], so that's where Penny was.  So she comes back that second semester of my freshman year.  At that point it is also I think the second semester of her sophomore year, and she says, "Well I understand that you've been going to these meetings in SNCC," then says, "you should think about taking off."  What was then going to be just the next semester, which would be the first semester of my sophomore year--and working for SNCC in the South.  So I said okay, and at that point I'm thing it's just going to be Cambridge, Maryland.  So but before I do it I call my mother but I dread it, you know, I delay it, I delay it, and this was before we had cell phones so it's also--I finally get to the hall phone and I get my mother and I tell her.  I stress that it's just going to be six months, I'm going to go right back to school and she's really calm.  So I go back to my dorm room thinking I'm over, everything is fine.  And not fifteen minutes later my sister calls and she's screaming, "What are you talking about, taking time off, are you crazy you're on full scholarship?"  She's saying everything that my mother figured she didn't have to say 'cause my sister is going to say it.  But somehow I made them realize how important it was and that I really, really am going to go back, of course it ends up being three years but that's okay.  So they let me do it and my mother, who--so anyway I do it, but I also had already gotten a summer job and it was at a foster care facility in Hastings.  So I had to stay with them and do that job because I committed to it but even with that I left early, and they were not happy about that.  And it's during that time that I then go August 28th in '63 [1963] to the March on Washington and go down with either Women Strike for Peace or WILPF [Women's International League for Peace and Freedom] or, you know, one of the peace groups, the women's peace groups.
Story_ID: 439735
Speaker 1: This summer of '63 [1963] is really something from what I've read and from what I remember reading in the paper growing up in those days, that something was going on every month.  CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] was demonstrating in every major city in the United States--
Speaker 2: But see I had no awareness of that, so I'm focused on the southern struggle so I don't even know all the stuff that's going on in the North.  I don't even think I knew that Medgar Evers had been shot and killed and that was June of that year.  I don't think I knew that.
Speaker 1: Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] famous address was I think that night, that same night I believe.
Speaker 2: Was it, oh that's interesting.
Speaker 1: Yeah
Speaker 2: Okay I don't remember that either.
Speaker 1: Said, "Those who resist the civil rights gains of the country are against the tide of history," or something.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, he did.
Speaker 1: Yeah
Speaker 2: You are absolutely right but I had forgotten that it was that time.
Speaker 1: That was his strongest statement I think, about civil rights (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes I'm sure (laughter).  So yeah he talked a good game actually, but anyway, so I ended up going to the March on Washington.  Don't remember King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speech that well because I was sitting up on one of the kind of mounds, one of the little hills there with some of the Cambridge [Maryland] people.  And didn't know other SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] people at that point anyway.  I remember hearing the speeches over a really rickety sound system so I could barely hear the speech.
Speaker 1: You knew that [HistoryMaker] John Lewis was speaking?
Speaker 2: I think I was aware of that but I didn't really know John see 'cause at that point I only know Reggie [Reggie Robinson] from SNCC.  Other SNCC people I had never met.  At some point I go--so I leave the foster care facility and in October of '63 [1963] my mother [Mae Tucker Richardson] puts me on a Trailways bus, and I go to Cambridge supposedly to work for six months.  While I'm there, Reggie says, oh come on go with me to Ohio--Cincinnati [Ohio] I think it was Cincinnati because Bill Hansen one of his real friends from SNCC--Hansen was a white field secretary from--I don't know where he was from originally but he was working Pine Bluff, Arkansas.  And Bill had also been other places in the South as a SNCC field worker--field secretary.  So Reggie says, Bill Hansen is marrying Ruthie [Ruth Buffington Hansen], who is a black woman from southwest Georgia actually if I remember correctly, and they were getting married in I think it was Cincinnati.  I get there, we take the train all the way from Maryland off to Ohio, and then I get there and it turns out that Ruthie doesn't have a maid of honor.  Now I had never met Ruthie, I'd never met Bill.  They poured me into this little black dress--tight little black dress--and I become her maid of honor in heels that I could barely walk in, and then that was it.  And then we come back and he says, well let's go by the national office of SNCC, and I'm looking for national office, it's going to be like a real office building and it's going to have carpeting and it's going to--we come down what was then Hunter Street, it's now Martin Luther King Boulevard [sic. Martin Luther King Jr. Drive], and he takes us a little right and it's 8 1/2 Raymond Street.  It was dead ended in--gosh I think it was a wall, and the national office was above a beauty parlor.  I see Reggie go to this--it was a plate glass window on the downstairs, and I hear him recognize somebody at the top of the stairs.  I look up, and it's a big guy who is in overalls and is sweeping the stairs, and Reggie says something about, "Hey doctor, how you doing?"  And the guy at the top of the stairs is overjoyed to see him and they hug and stuff.  I'm thinking oh this is really egalitarian because I'm assuming this is the janitor.  And it turns out this is Jim Forman [HistoryMaker James Forman], and he's the executive secretary of the organization, and Forman would oftentimes sweep the floor 'cause he wanted everybody to know that nobody is too high in the organization to sweep the floor.  And it was constantly dirty anyway.  And I often tell people that he didn't sweep it very well, but it was supposed to be a lesson so it didn't matter.  And so then he finds out, you know, that I can type ninety words a minute, that I can take Gregg shorthand, and again that you know I can write supposedly and stuff, so he says, "Well no, I need her here."
Story_ID: 439736
Speaker 1: So I become his secretary [for HistoryMaker James Forman] and what it does for me is that it--I get a bird's eye view of the entire organization.  You know, I find out about all these friends of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] organizations.  I find out who the staff in each of these projects, in Pine Bluff [Arkansas], in Cordele, Georgia, in Jackson, Mississippi, in Amite County [Mississippi].  I know the staff before I even meet them and then I find out about the pro bono lawyers.  So Rabinowitz and Boudin [Rabinowitz, Boudin and Standard; Rabinowitz, Boudin, Standard, Krinsky and Lieberman, P.C.] in New York [New York] and Mike Standard [Michael Standard] was our main point person.  Bond, Julian's [HistoryMaker Julian Bond] brother-in-law--oh, how could you forget, Judy [HistoryMaker Judy Richardson], Howard Moore [HistoryMaker Howard Moore, Jr.], attorney Howard Moore who always got us out of jail in Atlanta [Georgia] and everywhere else.  So I come in knowing nothing being very--I have to remind SNCC people now that I was very--I mean I was withdrawn, I was just very bashful, I was a very bashful person.  And so it helped that I'm thrown really in the deep end of the pool.  I come out, I am talking to Mike Standard up at Rabinowitz and Boudin about what they are doing and stuff, I'm talking to friends at SNCC offices in New York 'cause one of the outreach things we did at SNCC was to have all of these not satellite offices.  They were a way that we got out news about the beatings and the church burnings and whatever.  There was a main office in New York that was the main fundraising office, and then you had one in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you had one in Chicago [Illinois].  Then you had friends at SNCC offices at most of the campuses.  So we had a student voice that we put out monthly, and we had what was called a WATS line, and it was basically an 800 number, and so people from the field would call in and they would say--they would call for a certain person who was not there, and we'd say well they are not there but if you can leave your number 'cause it was a time when you could do that and if you can leave your number then we would take it and we would call them back on this 800 number.  The WATS line, which was the Wide Area Telephone Service.  Then you would have WATS line reports, and so you would then draw up every day what people have called in from the field in terms of shootings and violations of voting registration on federal property while FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] people--agents were watching and they were doing nothing.  So it was all of that and--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: --so we had all of this going on.  I mean, it was--the sophistication of our organization was amazing particularly given that we did it on almost no money, and we did it--we were 19, 20, 21 years old, you know.  And we're working with all these local people (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 439737
Speaker 1: Let me just ask you, from what you do know about, though--just give us a brief, maybe an (unclear) origin of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay SNCC is--
Speaker 1: 'Cause SNCC was about two years old I guess--
Speaker 2: No, actually three years old at that point.
Speaker 1: Three years old.
Speaker 2: SNCC is the student organization that grows out of the student sit-ins in 1960 that are mushrooming all over the country. So they are coming out of Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], they are coming out of Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], they are coming out of certainly Greensboro, North Carolina, and that's where it originates.  On February 1, 1960 four young black men from A&T College [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University] in Greensboro, North Carolina sit down and refuse to move.  Now there had been a previous student sit-in at a black campus and I can't remember where, and in fact CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] had done one in Chicago [Illinois] to try and integrate a Chicago restaurant.  But--
Speaker 1: Wichita [Kansas]--I can go on and on.  I've heard a lot of, but they were the first one to get national attention (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, there had been a lot of them.  That's it and I think it's just because of the time, you know, people were ready for it.  So there are no photos of that first sit-in because nobody is covering it, but when they go back they keep bringing waves and waves of people.  Now Julian talks about how--[HistoryMaker] Julian Bond who is our communications director at that point.  When I come on he's communications director.  Now he is chair of the NAA [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)] but then he was communications director.  So he says, when the sit-ins jump off Lonnie King [Lonnie C. King, Jr.] who was a fellow Morehouse student with him, comes to him in the cafeteria and says, "We should do that here," and Julian's thing was, "What do you mean we?"  He was not thinking about this at all.  But there was something about the energy of those times and somehow people being able to communicate with each other before cell phones, before the Internet.  And so the student newspapers on the black campuses are hearing about all this going on in the national student movement and Diane Nash and [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry who becomes mayor of Washington, D.C., and [HistoryMaker] John Lewis who is now chair--who becomes our chair later.  But that starts in 1960 as a result of that first Greensboro.  Now Nashville [Tennessee], the Nashville student had also been talking about this and in fact, Reverend Lawson--
Speaker 1: James Lawson.
Speaker 2: James Lawson, right, had been schooling them in philosophical and tactical nonviolence.  Now that's a whole discussion that we hopefully will get into because by the time I get in most of those Nashville people have left and what people are talking about is only a tactical nonviolence.  That if you have the whole power of the state amassed against you and neither the federal nor the state governments are going to help you.  And the state governments want you dead.  Then what are you going to do?  As a tactic, nonviolence is a very effective tool.  Now for some of the Nashville movement and some of the others, it is a philosophical question.  It is, you do not respond violently to someone who is hitting you because there is no way to cap the violence, there is no way to end it, it keeps escalating and escalating.  And they were saying that even in the midst of local people--black people who were carrying guns--had always carried guns, this was the South.  So when I come in even the SNCC people--most of the SNCC people are not talking about any kind of philosophical nonviolence.  They are talking about a tactical one, and so when Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] is coming down some dirt road and he gets on to Hartman Turnbow's farm, and he's a farm owner, he knows he will be protected by a twelve gauge and he is very thankful for that.  So a lot of those people have left by the time I come in, but SNCC starts with that kind of movement and it mushrooms.  Then you get Vanderbilt College [sic. Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee], which was a white university that had thrown Lawson off.  He had been in theology school there but when he starts doing the demonstrations and leading that they throw him off--out of Vanderbilt.  So there were white students from Vanderbilt who were also participating in the sit-ins, and then you also had a lot of sympathy demonstrations all over the country.  Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company], which is where the demonstrations started, and they were a chain and so the New York [New York] folks, you know, CORE, SNCC, a lot of the youth chapters of the NAACP, a lot of folks are then sitting in New York and in Chicago and San Francisco [California] and stuff as sympathy demonstrations.  So that's SNCC, yeah.
Story_ID: 439738
Speaker 1: From what I understand, and correct me if I'm wrong, I think that SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]--well SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] kind of spun off of the SCLC (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not at all.  Oh, you mean off the office.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Ms. Baker [Ella Baker] was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, which they allowed because of Ms. Baker.  Ms. Baker who was known as the godmother of SNCC, Ms. Ella Baker, she was at that point temporary executive secretary with SCLC--the Southern Christian Leadership Conference.  And so she convinces Dr. King--Reverend King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] at that point--to provide about seven hundred dollars to bring all of these sit-in leaders and activists--all these young people together at Troy University [Troy State College; Troy University, Troy, Alabama].  So that happens April 15, 1960, and Julian [HistoryMaker Julian Bond] remembers.  He says, you know, we piled in the car, we got about five people in a VW Bug [Volkswagen Beetle], and we went from Atlanta [Georgia] all the way up to her alma mater.  Her alma mater, oh my goodness--Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina].  No, Shaw [Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina], she was at Shaw (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Shaw University, that's right.
Speaker 2: In North Carolina, that's right.  So all of these sit-in leaders they are already leaders in their own right because they've already, in their own locations, have been doing sit-in campaigns and organizing all of the stuff. So they come in not assuming they are going to form anything on April 15, 1960, and again the sit-ins began on February 1.  So they all come together and they decide that they will do a temporary coordinating committee because Ms. Baker's thing is, you all need to talk to each other, to communicate, to see how you can help one another, information that can travel between the various movement sites and stuff.  Then all of these adult organizations want to swoop the young people up. They want the energy of it.  So SCLC wants them to become a youth group within SCLC.  NAA [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)] wants to bring them into the NAA chapter.  I mean it's everything, and it's Ms. Baker who says, "No, you need to stay by yourself--"
Story_ID: 439739
Speaker 1: Okay, so we were talking a little bit about the origin of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and Ella Baker.  Now was she in the office when you were around?
Speaker 2: She would come in, yes.  She was--a lot of times if I remember correctly she was in New York [New York], so she was travelling a lot back and forth.  But I have minutes of meetings that I took when she was there and castigating, for example, Julian [HistoryMaker Julian Bond], for not coming in early enough because the press needs to be able to get to us at nine o'clock.  She was asking questions about the [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory concert 'cause Dick Gregory was a comedian who was very famous at that time, and had really good politics and was supportive of the movement.  And so he had offered to do benefit concerts that summer I guess, but he needed ten thousand dollars to cover costs and all that kind of stuff.  So Ms. Baker was questioning, what does it mean if you're going to pay him and you're not paying other people who could do benefits for us?  She was really--Ms. Baker, the way Ms. Baker would operate is that she would not interfere unless she thought something was going wrong and then the way she would interfere is really by asking questions.  Well if this happens now, what's going to happen twelve, six months from now?  How is it going to play out?  What are we gonna--you know.  She was asking questions about the high school students who were getting involved in the student movement in Atlanta [Georgia] and she wanted to make sure that their parents were being contacted and that they knew where their kids were.  I have this all in the minutes, it's amazing.  I hadn't even remembered that she was that involved in the staff meeting in Atlanta.  She would do the same thing in executive committee meetings.  We would have them--there was--and I was always there 'cause I was taking notes because I knew shorthand and could type.  And so this would be Frazier's [Frazier's Cafe Society, Atlanta, Georgia], Frazier's restaurant, which was down the street from Paschal's Restaurant [Atlanta, Georgia].  In a way that Paschal's was not clear about his support for us, Frazier's always was, and so we would have our meetings in his basement.  And Ms. Baker was always there, sometimes with a smoke mask on because everybody smoked.
Speaker 1: Did she wear a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah she would wear a real mask because she had--I'm not sure what she had at that point, but--and I don't remember when that started happening 'cause I don't remember her always having that. It's just that at some point she started needing that during the meetings because it was smoke-filled.  I mean, it was--we were always in little cramped quarters, we were meeting until four or five [o'clock] in the morning, you know, and at some point I guess she said, you know, "I can't take this."
Story_ID: 439740
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about Ruby Doris (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Ruby Doris Smith [Ruby Doris Smith-Robinson].
Speaker 1: Now she was--we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Willie McCray, who often ran errands and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm, wonderful McCray.  That's right, yes.
Speaker 1: --did logistical activities, you know.  He made us aware of the tremendous operation of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].  I mean how many--they had several cars in states that would--
Speaker 2: Oh we had the Sojourner Fleet [Sojourner Motor Fleet, Inc.], we called it the Sojourner Fleet because what's interesting is the UAW [United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America; United Automobile Workers] gives us these General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] cars, we had Chryslers, and they were all tan.  So at some point if we ever get to the MFDP [Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party], and how they sell us out at Atlantic City [New Jersey], at the Democratic National Convention in '68 [1968]--I'm sorry in '64 [1964 Democratic National Convention, Atlantic City, New Jersey].  To have that same UAW work against us was very interesting.  But at that point they are giving us a fleet of something like twenty cars, and we just fed them out throughout the projects, and they were wonderful, yeah.  So we had the Sojourner Fleet, we had the Freedom Schools going in Mississippi, we had all these friends at SNCC, I mean it was an incredible operation.
Speaker 1: Seems significant to me that Ruby Doris is running, Ruby Doris Smith (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ruby Doris Smith-Robinson--
Speaker 1: --is running the office for SNCC, Ella Baker is the major mentor for the organization, both black women at a time when the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] is all male preachers.
Speaker 2: Well, honey, you got it, and that was a significant difference.  It wasn't that Dr.--certainly with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], I mean I did not know him. SNCC people like Prathia Hall who was a field secretary and project director in southwest Georgia and later comes up here, she has passed since.  But she came up here to take the Martin Luther King chair at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], and that's when she finds out she is sick.  But she was really strong in the organization and she talks about it.  She and Debbie Amis [Debbie Amis Bell] talk about how they would go over to Dr. and Mrs. King's [Coretta Scott King] house.  At one point they were kind of sitting with Dr. King's mother [Alberta Williams King] because he and Coretta evidently had to go out, and Ivanhoe [Ivanhoe Donaldson] and Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] and a lot of people.  The guys talk about going over and eating dinner and Mrs. King--Coretta King cooking dinner and stuff.  There was an ease that Dr. King had with SNCC people that some other SCLC people did not have.  Why, I couldn't have cared less.  But Dr. King really, there was a deep respect in a lot of ways for who Dr. King was amongst SNCC people.  Now we called him (pronunciation) de laud because that's the way--it was always this sense within SCLC that he was just somewhere up here--
Speaker 1: De Lawd.
Speaker 2: Yeah, De Lawd, and it was also a very different organizing style.  I mean we really did not like hierarchical leadership, and we didn't like charismatic leader because our thing was if you have a charismatic leader like Dr. King and he goes into a site like Albany, Georgia when he goes out that local organization that you've been building is falling apart because they're looking to him for leadership.  Whereas what we're trying to do in SNCC is ground up leadership, which was already there in many of the places where we went in.  So it's a conflict also of organizing style.  But from what everybody told me at SNCC, you know, they liked him, you know they really liked him.  So in any event, that is operating as well, yet as women-even Ms. Baker had a lot of problems working in SCLC, which is the reason she is so happy to see these young people who don't have all these fixated, traditional ideas about who can be a leader and stuff.  And she's one of the ones, of course who infuses SNCC with that whole idea of grassroots leadership and the necessity for there to be grassroots leadership that can survive even your deaths as an organizer in a location.  So that comes from her.
Story_ID: 439741
Speaker 1: Now I've never heard anybody ask this question before, but I'm going to ask it.  And I don't know, what was the--can you describe what was going on the day that John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh I remember being in the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] office.
Speaker 1: In the SNCC office?
Speaker 2: Yeah I was in the SNCC office, we were all going to the workroom--
Speaker 1: Malcolm X got in trouble for saying it's a case of the chickens coming home to roost and all.
Speaker 2: Yeah and in fact what's interesting is while Malcolm is also getting jammed by Elijah Muhammad, but the--for saying, yeah, chickens have come home to roost, that day we were talking in the workroom, and I never--I haven't described, by the way, this office 'cause I stopped it at a certain point but it was this rinky old thing that had humongous water bugs at night that flew, that you could hear the scratching of when you were in one of the other little offices.  Oh God, and it had the mimeograph machine.  So we're sitting there, the water bugs had not come out yet, and I remember Forman [HistoryMaker James Forman] and other people talking about how we're going to respond to this because see Kennedy had been less than forceful in terms of protecting people trying to register to vote.  A federally protected right.  And this is a time when J. Edgar Hoover, avowedly racist, head of the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], Kennedy is having his own problems with Hoover.  So how we felt about John Kennedy was mixed but the point was, and a lot of this is in transcripts of the meetings which is in 'Memories of the Southern Civil Rights Movement' [Danny Lyon].  It's a wonderful picture book--photo book done by Danny Lyon on UNC Press--University of North Carolina Press [Chapel Hill, North Carolina]--and it's wonderful.  It has these wonderful photographs.  But what he also included in this book was primary documents and so you get the original type written documents of the staff meetings.  And you see that there is this argument going about how overt are we going to be in the statement about the fact that Kennedy was not all that he could have been and that we are of mixed opinion about how we feel about his death.  I mean, nobody wants an assassination but there were people who said, "How much are we going to cry tears about this?"  So we did come out with a very sympathetic statement but there was a disagreement within the staff.  For me, I'm new to the organization 'cause you know I'm just only recently gotten to Atlanta [Georgia] at that point 'cause this is November, and you know, I was new.
Speaker 1: Were you surprised by the reaction or did you have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No because I knew that we felt that Kennedy was not doing as much as he could have to protect people.  And people--I'm sitting here taking WATS [Wide Area Telephone Service] line reports and hearing people getting beaten and FBI men standing there and taking notes, and you would protest and protest and send written protest to the White House [Washington, D.C.] and to John Doar at the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice], and to Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] at Justice, and nothing was being done.  Herbert Lee had been killed, Louis Allen had been killed, all these people had been killed, and it was like--by that time of course Medgar Evers has been killed.  When I go into Greenwood [Mississippi] in '64 [1964] everybody tells me Byron De La Beckwith did it, he did it with a shotgun, everybody knew it.  So the fact that the federal government under President Kennedy had done so--really so little in terms of what he could have done and what was on the books as laws.  I was not surprised because I had been hearing all of this, and I had been taking the reports from people with church burnings and, you know, beatings on voter registration.  So you know, it made perfect sense to me.
Story_ID: 439742
Speaker 1: Well, at some point I want to talk about that perception of the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] because I know you had some strong opinions about the movie 'Mississippi Burning' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh God, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And the--I forget the director's [Alan Parker] name from Britain who did it--
Speaker 2: Yes, I've forgotten him.  I was on a panel with him at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts], we'll get on that.
Speaker 1: He's very contrite about it now it seems.
Speaker 2: Oh really?  He wasn't then.
Speaker 1: He came up with a new movie [sic.], 'Ghosts of Mississippi' to try to make amends.  That's what he said on the radio--
Speaker 2: Oh did he?  I see.
Speaker 1: That's what he said, but I don't--and he apologized and said that I didn't know any better.  But I don't know, we'll talk about that later.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I see.
Speaker 1: So the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassination is November of '63 [1963], and '63 [1963] is winding down and that winter, now what happens that winter leading up to the spring?  I guess is that when the decision is made to--
Speaker 2: Have Mississippi Freedom Summer?  They had been talking about it.  There is a freedom vote in Hattiesburg, Mississippi that I slip out and go to Hattiesburg, Mississippi.  That would have been January of '64 [1964], and they were already thinking about building this independent party--Democratic Party--building an independent delegation within the Democratic Party, okay.  I go down in January but Forman [HistoryMaker James Forman]--I kept saying I want to go to the field, I want to go to the field because that was the romanticism of it.  What's romantic about being the Atlanta [Georgia] office?  So I waited until Forman left for one of his fund raising trips, and Dinky, who becomes his second wife, she was head of northern support and she got, Dinky Romilly [Constancia Romilly], she got me a ticket.  So unbeknownst to him I go to Hattiesburg for the freedom vote, and it was the first I had ever been in the field.  And it was like a whole new thing for me.  There was just this energy, and it was amazing, and I get all amazed at the local people who were there and what they are doing.  See I have to break to just say, when I come into SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] I find this amazing bunch of young black people.  I had never seen any people like this before in my life.  I'm growing up in Tarrytown [New York].  Now there were smart black people in Tarrytown, but not like this.  These were young people who first of all they knew--these southern black kids who knew more black history than I had ever heard of.  Now they're getting certain people, they're not getting, you know, Frederick Douglass was talking about you need to poison the slave master, they're not getting that stuff, but they are getting at least Mary McLeod Bethune and Sojourner Truth and Harriet Tubman, I wasn't getting any of that.  They knew histories of--they knew about stuff within their communities and resistance within their communities, long-term stuff that just amazed me.  A lot of them were--a number of them, like the Ladners, like Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Ladner] and [HistoryMaker] Dorie Ladner coming out of Hattiesburg.  June Johnson [June E. Johnson] coming out of Greenwood [Mississippi], June and--I'm about to forget her brother's name.  All of these people coming from strong movement families.  So I come into this vortex of energy, and it is absolutely amazing to me, and most of them look like me.  I had never experienced that in my life.  And so it has to be said that I am in awe of much of what I experience through my time at SNCC.  I don't say anything at staff meetings.  It's like, these people are so brilliant to me that it's like, who is going to talk in the midst of these people.  And it's funny because when I talk to SNCC people they did not see me that way but I definitely was that way.  So when I go to Hattiesburg, I'm just in awe of everything.  You know it's like people are organizing these freedom days, 82,000 black people registered to vote for the freedom vote on that January.  The reason that it was done was because the white segregationists kept saying, "The only reason black people aren't voting is because they don't want to vote, they just don't want to vote."  So one of the things we were showing with the freedom vote was, yeah these people want to vote, and if you didn't kill them when they tried to vote and tried to register, a lot more of them would try and vote.
Speaker 1: So it was a demonstration of--to show that you wanted to vote by just going to a SNCC office and saying, "I want to vote" (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, that's right.
Speaker 1: I see.
Story_ID: 439743
Speaker 1: And we had--it was an alternate voting procedure and it was called the freedom vote, and then out of that comes--we will develop an independent political delegation.  Since the Mississippi Democratic Party was all white, and the delegation was all white, and it was going to the Democratic National Convention in Atlantic City [1964 Democratic National Convention, Atlantic City, New Jersey] that summer, August of '64 [1964] we said we're going to do an alternate and we will follow every rule of the Democratic Party to form an alternate delegation.
Speaker 2: Which the white delegation did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did not do, that's correct, they did not do that.
Speaker 2: Yet they were supposed to represent the black people of Mississippi, who outnumbered the whites.
Speaker 1: That's right, and particularly in the black belt counties, and the thing is you find that out also once we get there, but even in terms of the organizing of it.  We would find out that there was a white caucus meeting going on--a Democratic caucus.  We would go in, somebody would bar the way and say, "There's no meeting going on," and people would say, "We're looking through the door and there is a caucus meeting going on."  Rabinowitz and Boudin [Rabinowitz, Boudin and Standard; Rabinowitz, Boudin, Standard, Krinsky and Lieberman, P.C.], Mike Standard [Michael Standard], all those guys went through the regulations and found out what it took to legitimately, according to the DNC [Democratic National Committee] rules, form an alternate delegation, and we followed that.  We dotted every I, we crossed every T on it.  So people were organizing around this delegation, and it has two white activists in it.  What they said was, we will be open to any white people who want to join us assuming that they join us with our principles.  So there was Reverend Ed King, who was already a white activist, there was somebody else.  I can't remember, I think there were two but Ed is the only one I remember.  And then we keep building.  We keep building this Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party, and it's throughout the state.  Particularly the 2nd CD, the 2nd congressional district, which was the black belt. And then CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] had the 4th CD [4th congressional district] and so that was Dave Dennis and he was organizing that.  All of these people are coming, you know, and even with people getting killed and even with people getting beaten they are registering to vote and this is at a time when--and they're registered, it's a dual process, so they continue building the MFDP--Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party, but at the same time they were also trying to vote as a regular Democrat.  So they're going up to these registration offices, and say like in Hattiesburg [Mississippi], Theron Lynd was this big, I mean big fat white guy--
Speaker 2: He's on that '60 Minutes'--he's standing at the top of the stairs and he's huge.
Speaker 1: Yes he's huge, that's right, and so in Mississippi at that time you had to answer any one--interpret any one of almost three hundred questions related to the state constitution to the satisfaction of the registrar.  All of whom were white, some of whom could not read or write themselves.  So you have these black teachers, you have people who are both learned and unlearned you know in the traditional sense of that, but who shouldn't have to go through this, any of them, to try and register to vote.  And routinely being beaten, their houses being burned.  Mrs. Hamer [Fannie Lou Hamer] goes in Sunflower County, Mississippi, home of Senator Eastland--U.S. Senator Eastland, James Eastland, and she's working on a plantation.  Charlie Cobb [Charles E. Cobb, Jr.] and some other people come, and Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses]--Bob and I think it was Charlie.  Certainly Bob Moses goes to talk to her.  She agrees to try and register to vote.  She goes, she comes back, the overseer on the plantation 'cause she was a timekeeper on the plantation says to her, no, unless you take your name off that, we're going to throw you and your kids and Pap [Perry "Pap" Hamer], who was her husband, off, and she refuses to do it.  He throws her off, Pap I think stays on, and then she goes and stays with a family in Greenwood [Mississippi].  And within about six weeks they pump shots through the whole house where she is staying.  All of that, and that was routine, right.  You would tell the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] that stuff, nothing, nothing.
Speaker 2: They would write it down.
Speaker 1: Yeah they would write it down and you'd always know that they were FBI agents because in boiling heat, in ninety-five-degree weather, they would be besuited.  They'd have these little suits on and these funny little shoes and white socks.  We moved the national office down to--let me just say by the way, I come back from that Hattiesburg trip and Forman [HistoryMaker James Forman] is not happy, you know, because first of all he doesn't want to lose me as a secretary because I really was quite good.  And so he didn't want to lose that.  He didn't want to lose that we were taking the notes and stuff for the meetings.
Story_ID: 439744
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Forman [HistoryMaker James Forman] is not happy, yeah, and the thing is we--somewhere in there we did a sit-in in his office because I got tired of taking the notes and other women got tired of taking the notes, right.  So he has come back from some fund raising trip and what he meets is Bobbey Yancy [Roberta Yancy], who is now number two person at the Schomburg library [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York], Mary King who wrote the book 'Freedom Song' ['Freedom Song: A Personal Story of the 1960s Civil Rights Movement'], Ruby Doris Robinson [Ruby Doris Smith-Robinson] and his wife then, Mildred Forman [Mildred Thompson Page], and I, he meets.  All of us are sitting on the floor, and there is a photo of that which I must get you if you don't have it already, I'll send a jpeg of it.  Anyway he meets us there, and what he says in the revision of 'Black Revolutionaries' ['The Making of Black Revolutionaries,' James Forman], I couldn't believe it.  I was at that point, I'm fast forwarding now--well let me just say the resolution of that was that women were no longer the only ones taking the minutes.
Speaker 2: Well you all were singing too, right?  You sung (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, we were singing that's true.
Speaker 2: You had signs.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we had signs that's right.  No more minutes until justice comes to the Atlanta [Georgia] office, it was wonderful, we shall not be moved.  You see him in the back standing over, looking a little uncomfortable.  So we said we're not going to be the only ones doing it, the guys have to--got to take these minutes too, and they did.  But part of it was because we said we will no longer do it.  Now if you don't want them taken, fine but we're not doing it.  So it wasn't so much that they weren't sexist because it was the '60s [1960s] but you could always push the question in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].  The guys were coming out of movements where women had been leaders.  Who is going to say to Diane Nash or somebody, you can only take the minutes?  Ruby Doris had done thirty days in jail, no bail, in Rock Hill, South Carolina, had been put on a chain gang.  These are women that--it's not just that they are strong, it is that the men had real respect for them.  And so at a certain point you could call the question, as we used to say.  So it was both our adamant nature that we were not doing it, but it was also they were not going to buck us on this because the rationality of it they understood, they actually understood it.
Speaker 2: So to call into the question the real freedom struggle is solving the core of this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's right.  Now I will say they didn't take as good notes, I will say that, but 'cause they didn't like to listen but aside from that we didn't have to do it as much (laughter).  So we had this thing so all of that had happened too.  He comes back, and he's not that happy.  I'm going to do one thing, I'm going to fast forward because what Forman says about the sit-in is that--and he says it in a preface to the revised version of 'Making of a Black Revolutionary' [sic.], right.  To set the scene, I'm coming from Boston [Massachusetts], it's probably '84 [1984], '85 [1985] something like that.  We were in the middle of making the first series of 'Eyes on the Prize' and so I was up here at Blackside [Blackside, Inc.] making the production of that first six-hour series.  Forman comes out with this revised version of 'Making of a Black Revolutionary,', he's having a book party in New York [New York] so I'm taking the train down, and I'm reading the preface of this new revised version, and he says in it that--and it says something about women's movement or the sit-in or something.  And he said the women in the organization had come to him because they were concerned about sexism in SNCC.  And they came to him because we thought that he would understand and so he suggested that we role play a sit-in in his office.  I'm looking at this, and I still have the book, I wrote in blue highlighter, "Say what!"  I couldn't believe he had said this.  And said it on the record?  So I get down to the book party and everybody's there and I'm happy to see everybody, and at the end I'm alone with Forman, and I'm having him autograph my book, and I said, "Forman how on earth could you have said that, you know that didn't happen."  He says, well, and I mean, it's like what do you say (laughter)?  And I've had this--I was on a panel with him at the Ms. Baker [Ella Baker] conference in 1990 I guess, and he says--I'm on the same panel with him he starts to do this rendition again and says, "And I know Judy [HistoryMaker Judy Richardson] disagrees with this," and I said, "Because it didn't happen, but you got the mic, now you go ahead (laughter)."  Because for him that's his image of what happened, you know.
Story_ID: 439745
Speaker 1: --We move the whole national office [of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)] to Greenwood, Mississippi the summer of '64 [1964].  I start off the orientation in Ohio because that's where we had--
Speaker 2: It was up in Oxford (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oxford, Ohio.
Speaker 2: Miami University [Oxford, Ohio], or Western College for Women [Oxford, Ohio] I think--
Speaker 1: Oh was it?  Oh I didn't know it was for women.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a college for women, Western College for Women.
Speaker 1: And I was in that first orientation because I was going down to help prepare the national office and stuff along with other people, Dottie Zellner [Dorothy Miller Zellner] was there, and that's when we heard that those three particular civil rights workers were missing, Chaney [James Chaney], Goodman [Andrew Goodman] and Schwerner [Michael Schwerner], and what I remember is Bob [Robert Parris Moses] coming into that first morning session.
Speaker 2: This was Bob Moses?
Speaker 1: Bob Moses, who was the co-chair along with Dave Dennis of what was called COFO [Council of Federated Organizations].  It was an umbrella organization (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just to--how did--do you remember the discussions about how the Mississippi summer project was conceived and--
Speaker 1: That was done by the staff, the Mississippi staff, and I wasn't part of that at that time.  I do know that there was a lot of disagreement and that's on the record.  I mean there were a number of members of the black staff, and it was primarily blacks in Mississippi who thought that if you brought an influx of white students and white people, it would take the onus off the black people who were organizing that.  That it would do the same thing it always does which is white people will come in, they will fix it, they had the power which was what we were absolutely organizing against.  We were saying, "You have the power.  You don't need anybody but yourselves to organize this stuff."  So there were people who felt that that was a mistake, however local people wanted it, I think Bob wanted it, and so it was done.  But I was not part of that so I'm taking this from what people have told me who were on staff at that time in Mississippi.
Story_ID: 439746
Speaker 1: Western College [Western College for Women] in Oxford [Ohio] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, so when we find out I'm in the first orientation that first week, and the plan is that I'll go to Greenwood [Mississippi] and then the second week of orientation will continue.  I mean, not that it's focused on me just that that's--for me that's what I would be doing.  The first time I realized that the three are missing is when Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] comes into the area and he says that James Chaney, Michael Schwerner, Mickey Schwerner, and Andrew Goodman, Andy Goodman, are missing and he says, "And we assume that they are dead."  And for me it was the first time I thought the people that I am close to really could die.  Now I had been taking WATS [Wide Area Telephone Service] line reports, I had been taking all these reports and I knew people that had died, I knew they got beaten but it just brought it home to me and by this time I'm really close to a lot of these people, and it took me out.  I mean I just--in the sense that it made me absolutely then aware, this is a real possibility.  And as a young person of course, you think nothing is going to happen to you, death, what are you talking about?  For me it wasn't that anything would happen to me it was that the people I was close to something might happen.  I remember thinking about Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] and Ivanhoe [Ivanhoe Donaldson] and all of those guys, Reggie [Reggie Robinson]--all those people, something could happen to them.  So every day after that Bob came up and without saying a word he would just write their names on a blackboard or something not their names but he would say they're still missing, they're still missing.  Then my friend Jeanne Breaker [E. Jeanne Breaker Johnson] said--she was in the Jackson [Mississippi] office at that time, and she knew they were gone because we had a really good system where all the cars--all the Chryslers had two way radios in them and you were supposed to call in.  We knew that they had gone to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  We knew that they had been jailed and we knew that nobody had seen them come back out and they had not called.  People had gone to the jail, no they weren't there or no they hadn't seen them or rather they had let them go, that was the story.  So at the point that I'm coming into the state 'cause we used to call Mississippi the state, which other projects used to get unhappy about because how come Arkansas and Georgia aren't the state but anyway: Mississippi--
Story_ID: 439747
Speaker 1: I'm going into the state at the point that I know these three [James Chaney, Michael Schwerner, and Andrew Goodman] are missing now, and I go into the Greenwood [Mississippi] office, and, you know, we continue taking these reports of the church burnings and the community center burnings and at some point that summer--two things, one, June Johnson [June E. Johnson], who again was from this really strong movement family, I mean they fed and housed Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] and a lot of the guys--a lot of the people, men and women, from that 2nd congressional district office.  So she comes in, now she had been beaten bloody in Winona [Mississippi] in '62 [1962] because she and Mrs. Hamer [Fannie Lou Hamer]--she was at that point fourteen when she gets beaten in Winona by local police, and it was she and Mrs. Hamer, Annelle Ponder and--I'll think about it--Euvester Simpson, all of them local black female southerners.  So this is the woman who is now coming to me and saying, "We've got to go to the hospital," 'cause I had the keys to the Chrysler and I was manning--womaning the WATS [Wide Area Telephone Service] line at that point.  She said, "You've got to go," because Silas McGhee, who was from another strong movement family in Greenwood--they had sat in and the movement had said no sit-ins because it diverts the energy and the resources away from the building of this party and the building of this Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party.  If we're trying to get you out of jail and it's a diversionary action.  We don't want that this summer.  But their young, they were younger than we were, they were high school kids, and so they did this sit-in.  So what happens is one of them I think the brother--one brother gets shot so he goes to the hospital.  The second brother, Silas, he goes to take, I think to take his brother to the hospital and he gets glass on his eye because somebody throws a rock through the window and it goes to his eyes.  So June is now coming in saying we've got to go to the hospital and made sure everything is okay.  So I get the keys, I get in the car, we drive, and at some point we hear what kind of--sounds.  And June says, "Judy [HistoryMaker Judy Richardson] hurry up, they are shooting at us."  "Oh no June, they are not shooting at us, it's just the backfire."  Now I'm from Tarrytown [New York], do I know?  She's from Greenwood, but okay.  So I'm going along, we get to the hospital and we get there and there is this small mob, not big but a small mob of white guys and they start coming toward us when they realize that we are coming to see about Silas and his brother.  We run in through the front, and it has a big--the waiting room is in the front and it has a big plate glass window and there are six FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] men and they're milling around because of course this thing has just happened and there's been a shooting.  At some point--so I immediately go to the hall phone which is what I would do--not to the hall but to the phone which is in the waiting room and I start calling John Doar from the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice].  John Doar was the only person in the justice department who gave us his home number.  So poor John Doar would get awakened at any hour of the day and night.  But anyway so I'm calling him, and he says there is nothing he can do, he's going to see what he can do and that I should keep calling back.  It's not that he says that he can't do anything, he's just going to see what he can do, and I should keep calling, so I keep calling.  As I think about it I'm not sure whether I'm also calling--I might not have gotten him the first time so I think I'm calling also to try and reach him 'cause that's what June reminded me of.  She said, "Don't you remember that you kept calling?  You kept calling on the phone to try and reach him."  I said oh yeah right so I guess that's what it was.  At some point somebody--one of the mob throws something through the window and we all, including FBI men, run behind this wall to get away from this picture window.  And I say, I had never seen FBI men move that quickly.  They never moved that quickly when demonstrators were getting beaten or voter registration people trying, you know, never moved quickly.  They moved so fast it was amazing, behind this wall and when I got there they were seated on the floor in this hallway.  And I thought, just like the monkeys, you know, see no evil, hear no evil.  It's like I almost wanted them to just do this (gesture) 'cause they were just sitting there.  And I started screaming at them, you know, "Why aren't you doing anything?"  I'm screaming and yelling like a crazy lady.  They were doing exactly--I knew that's what they did, I knew that they never did anything, but in the moment and I'm sitting there and I'm seeing them doing nothing and I just got irate, I got so angry.  And then when I thought it was safe I went back to the phone in the reception area and started calling again, and finally the sheriff came and got us--June saw, made sure that Silas was okay and then they came and he escorted us through the mob and back to the car and we went back to the Greenwood office.
Story_ID: 439748
Speaker 1: So there was that and then there was and I've got to say the Belafonte [HistoryMaker Harry Belafonte] 'cause--and then we can probably end with this one.  Harry Belafonte was a really strong supporter of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], and of the movement generally.  In fact, later on he supports a number of folks after the summer project of '64 [1964] to go to Africa and that's Mrs. Hamer [Fannie Lou Hamer] and a number of people.  At that point my sister Carita [Carita Richardson] was in the SNCC New York office, and Harry Belafonte had agreed to do five fundraising parties on Long Island [New York].
Speaker 2: Now how did your sister--did your sister get involved (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh I didn't say all that, no, I didn't get--my mother [Mae Tucker Richardson] gets so--my mother is sending me care packages, she's writing letters in the Tarrytown Daily News in support of the movement because my mother could write beautiful letters in beautiful handwriting.  And there was a woman, Mrs. Kenney [ph.].  Mrs. Kenney was a right wing racist (laughter), and Mrs. Kenney kept talking about, "SNCC is a Communist organization it's in the Congressional Record," and she would quote McCarthy--Joe McCarthy [Joseph McCarthy].  So my mother would always respond to her letters and stuff, and my sister leaves Columbia Records and is convinced to join for that summer to coordinate the fundraising parties for Harry Belafonte.  So my family now is deep in it, it's amazing.  So my sister--I'm now in Greenwood [Mississippi], right, summer of '64 [1964] the three [James Chaney, Michael Schwerner, and Andrew Goodman] are missing, we all know what's happened--we don't know what's happened we just know they are dead.  My sister calls to say--Harry Belafonte and Sidney Poitier were to come to Greenwood that next day.  They were going to do a concert that next night, I think.  And so they were booked on this reservation.  Harry was booked on this reservation--Harry, like I know him well.  Belafonte was booked on this, okay.  So my sister calls and she's with Belafonte, and she says, "Judy [HistoryMaker Judy Richardson] he's going to miss the flight can you see if they can hold it for him," and he was going out of what they called then Idlewild [Idlewild Airport; John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York, New York], which is now LaGuardia [sic.] but it was Idlewild.  So I said, "Let me see what I can do."  So I actually call Idlewild Airport, and I called first the ticket counter, and this was a totally different time.  First of all the three are missing and that's all the news, the summer project, everything is in the news.  So I say what this is, "Harry Belafonte is about to try and get this plane, can you hold it," and she says, "Let me see what I can do."  She patches me in to the flight tower, and I get somebody in the flight tower who says, "Let me see what I can do," and he is really sympathetic.  He says, "I don't know whether we can do--let me see what I can do," because I'm at that point asking if they could hold it maybe half an hour.  So he then gets back on the line and he says, "I'm so sorry but we just can't hold the flight," and I say, "If you can't give us the vote at least give us Harry Belafonte," and he says, "I'm sorry, I'm sorry."  So then I hang up with him, and I call Kita back, my sister, and I said, "Kita they just can't hold it."  She said, "All right," and I said, "I have some alternate flights and stuff," and she said, "Okay, well let me put Harry on."  He gets on and I hear his voice and I cannot open my mouth.  Now this is at a point where I am used to really being strong at a FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] agent and saying, you will listen to me, I mean doing that whole number with them because they didn't want to hear it right.  And they didn't even have a FBI office in Mississippi with all of that stuff until the white volunteers come in.  Before that northern Mississippi you were going to be in Memphis [Tennessee] FBI office, southern Mississippi you would be in the New Orleans [Louisiana] office.  So we finally have a FBI office in Mississippi and they're not listening.  So I'm used to dealing with them, Harry Belafonte gets on the line and I am absolutely speechless.  It's like in the movies when you open your mouth and no words come out.  I'm trying and I hear him say to my sister, "Carita, nobody is on the line."  So she gets back on the line and she's mad and then she said, "Judy," and I said, "I couldn't say anything," (laughter).  So she said, "All right, all right, well just give me the information," and I hung up and I was amazed at myself, I really was.  I was just amazed that I lost it, you know, I just totally lost it, yeah.  So yeah, okay.  So those are the two main stories from there, I mean, that I would want to make sure we got.
Story_ID: 439749
Speaker 1: It must have been an emotional rollercoaster, so many things (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh it was 'cause I was so fearful, and really you never think it's going to happen to you, so I'm so worried about all of these amazing people whom I've now met and that's something going to happen to them.  I mean like Dottie Zellner [Dorothy Miller Zellner], Dottie Zellner whom I'm close to particularly now because we are on this SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] women's anthology, 'Hands on the Freedom Plow' ['Hands on the Freedom Plow: Personal Accounts by Women in SNCC'].  We are on the editorial committee together, she hasn't heard in her story--in her manuscript about the fact that we were shot at, I have no memory of this.  We were both in Greenwood [Mississippi] together, and I'm sure she's right, but it never--I was so worried that something was going to happen to the people I cared about.  And then there is this whole other thing about once we get to Atlantic City [New Jersey] and how just pissed I get at everybody. I mean, the whole Democratic Party.  If nothing else, what we learned, and we'll go through this at some point but what we learned from trying to get the Democratic Party to acknowledge this alternate delegation, which said, we will--and we did sophisticated lobbying thing with Ms. Baker [Ella Baker] and the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] office.  We knew everybody who was on the credentials committee.  They had said that they were going to vote with us to get the issue onto the floor of the delegation, we were lobbying, lobbying, we were doing all the stuff you were supposed to do.  And we get there and of course, they go with the all-white Democratic Party.  Even though the all-white Democratic delegation--not party delegation, but also party from Mississippi says that it will not declare allegiance to the slate.  Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] was going to be the president, Hubert Humphrey is trying to be the Democratic, the vice president they won't even say we're going to support them.  We said we would support them, we said we would support whatever slate you put up at this convention [1964 Democratic National Convention, Atlantic City, New Jersey] and they still turned their backs on us.  Well, that's I realized politics ain't about morality, it's about power.  Which is what happens when we go into black power and Lowndes County [Lowndes County Freedom Organization; Black Panther Party], and all that stuff 'cause that's what we've learned, it's about power.
