Story_ID: 85524
Speaker 1: Okay.  My name is Larry Crowe.
Speaker 2: How do you do?
Speaker 1: I'm the interviewer today for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is [HM] Amy [Tate] Billingsley.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Adine Ray.  A-D-I-N-E, R-A-Y.
Speaker 1: All right.  What was your maiden name?
Speaker 2: DeLuc.  D-E capital L-U-C.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Victoria (laughs).  The children used to tease me about that, because they decided I was very Victorian in my manner.
Speaker 1: And did you have any nicknames?
Speaker 2: Deanie.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: Now, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July 4th, 1908, Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm retired now as a former teacher.  When I reached young adulthood, everybody, all my friends were teachers.  That's what one did or perhaps you became a social worker or librarian.  But that was the extent of our work world.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: I'm not understanding you.
Speaker 1: Oh.  What is today's date?
Speaker 2: My base?
Speaker 1: No.  Today's date.  The date today.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: What is the date today?
Speaker 2: Oh, golly.  I think it's 11th or 12th?
Speaker 1: The 12th.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The year?
Speaker 2: Oh (laughs), 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we today?
Speaker 2: You mean the city, state, so on, so on?
Speaker 1: Where are we?
Speaker 2: All right.  Well, this building is 9737 Mount Pisgah Road, Silver Spring, Maryland.
Speaker 1: All right.  Thank you.  And--
Story_ID: 85525
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five "People" Magazine-ish type questions that we always ask, and the first one is:  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, golly.  I don't think I have any.  I'm afraid I don't have any.  Oh, I know.  I like cheese.  Something that's really not good for you, if you eat too much.  But then I have, I understand, a perfect rate of cholesterol, just as it should be.  So I've asked the doctors about that, and they said you can eat whatever cheese you want (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like spring, and then I like fall.  I like those two.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I like Lausanne, Switzerland, because I lived there, but it's too strenuous to try to travel there now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: It could be worse.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's it.
Story_ID: 85526
Speaker 1: Alright. Now, can you tell me about your family history?  How far back can you trace your family?
Speaker 2: Oh, dear, dear, dear; not too far.  I've heard tales from my parents [Alma Toups DeLuc and Andrew Charles DeLuc], of course.  I know my father had a relative who was a very clever artisan, and he bought his freedom.  And that was somewhere in the period of the Civil War.  He bought his freedom and that of the members of his family, who were on the plantation.  And he bought the freedom of an Indian [Native American] girl, who had been enslaved.  That was the first time I knew that Indians had been enslaved.  I didn't know that.  And they married and set off for New York.  They ended in Poughkeepsie [New York], and their daughter, it is said, was the first non-white child to attend Vassar College [Poughkeepsie, New York].  And I thought that rather interesting.
Speaker 1: What was her name?  Do you know?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It might have been--I don't know the exact relationship between my father and grandfather and so on.  My father was very, very interested in the Indian cause, because, you know, the Indians, during the Veil of Tears [sic. Trail of Tears], the expulsion from the east area, they made their way through the southern part of the United States dying of disease and starvation.  In some cases, they were aided by the slaves, and they, in turn, aided the slaves to escape.  So there was a close relation between them, and I think that's where my father had not only an interest, but Indian blood.  So much for my father.  But he was always very incensed.  He liked history and he was always incensed about the treatment of the Indians.  So I guess it was closer to him than I realized.  I don't know.
Story_ID: 85527
Speaker 1: And for my mother [Alma Toups DeLuc], as I said, my mother's father was French.  And I think I told you he was a very impatient Frenchman and it led to his death, because when the floods came, he refused to wait for a the drainage engineer and chose to clear the drains on his farm himself, and he caught pneumonia and then tuberculosis and died and left my grandmother with five children and one on the way.  And--but she was a very stalwart woman.  She sold the farm and moved to New Orleans [Louisiana], and she made it.  She saw to it that her girls did not go into service.  And so on and so on, 'cause that was a precarious way of living.  And--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: By service you mean--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Work in people's kitchens.  Yes.  No, she held her family together.  And one of the boys working at a--doing summer work in the yard, went to the assistance of a caretaker in a neighboring state, because the barn was on fire.  And when he picked up the hose, the short that possibly was in the--just made an arc and he was just burned until he was blue.  Yes.  That was hard on my grandmother.  She never really overcame his death.  Yes.  Yeah.  And that was that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, did you know your grandmother?
Speaker 1: No.  She died before--no.  She died before I was born.  My father's mother I knew.  Of course I don't remember her because I was a baby.  But I know from hearing my parents talk that she was alive when I was born.  I was the third child.
Story_ID: 85528
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--well, tell us about your father.  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Andrew [Charles] DeLuc.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: A-N--well, Andrew.
Speaker 1: DeLuc the same way?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: And Andrew is, A-N-D-R-E-W?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, can you talk about--when was he born?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: Oh, dear.  Let's see.  Must have been born in '73' [1873], 1873.  And he lived to be eighty-five.  I think I have some of his--what do I want to say--well, I'm more like him than I am my mother [Alma Toups DeLuc], both in appearance, and I guess in stamina
Speaker 1: So he lived how long again?  From 18--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: He lived to be 85.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: All right.  And so, what was he like and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: Oh, he ran on the road like so many men of his period.  And had been different, I think he could have had a different experience, because he was a great reader; he was very interested in history.  But opportunities weren't there, and he had a family to feed.  And so he did what he did.
Speaker 1: Now, he was--was he born in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: In Saint Charles borough?
Speaker 2: No.  Not in Saint Charles.  No.  My mother was born on a farm in Saint Charles.  He was just born in New Orleans [Louisiana]--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: In New Orleans.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And his father died at fourteen.  And so he had to start--leave school and go to work to help support his sister, because they wanted her to have an education.  And she became a teacher.  And his mother, I think, must--I don't remember her, of course, except that I heard she was a very interesting character--she, in the Catholic schools--well, as you know, they teach all of the girls to do handwork, and she had become an expert seamstress.  And somehow or other she managed to get a job at the French Opera.  And that gave her not only a--added to her way of living, but it gave her a feeling of importance, and she felt she was just about as important as the opera divas.  And it was a family that was very, very interested in music.  As a matter of fact, when I was around seven or eight years old, I'd sit beside my father on the piano bench while he played excerpts from opera.  He had two big opera albums called "Opera Gems," and he'd go from page to page playing them and singing them.  And I tried to sing along with him.  It was a pleasant experience.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--all right.  So your father played the piano?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  And you didn't hear jazz in the house.  It was very interesting.  My parents looked down on jazz which great disdain.  And I can understand it.  They were coming out of a period where they themselves were living with disdain, and they didn't welcome anything that would emphasize that aspect of life.  Yes.  The--oh, let's see--the [Johann] Strauss [II] waltzes, that sort of thing and excerpts from the opera.
Story_ID: 85529
Speaker 1: So he's--his family had--did his family have a lot of means or--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  No.  I think there was more cultural emphasis.  No, but I mean, we had a comfortable home and more than enough to eat and clothing and all that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So how far did your father go in school?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know except that he left when he was fourteen.  I know that.
Speaker 1: So he left and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Went to work.  And I don't know what he did, but he had to help support his family, because they wanted--he and his mother wanted to see that his sister had an education so that--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he lived in New Orleans.  He was in New Orleans--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --but he came home to work.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Oh, he didn't leave New Orleans until he was a grown man.
Speaker 1: Now, what did he do for a living when he was grown?
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: What did he do for a living once he grew up?  I mean what--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, I guess, like so many black men, he got a job on the railroad; a railroad waiter or porter or--I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he worked on the railroad?
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  What was he like otherwise when--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, he liked music.  And (laughs), I remember my brother and I--well, my sister and I--and I think my brother, too--all studied the piano.  That was very important.  And then my brother and I studied the violin.  And I can remember when we were practicing and he happened to be at home, he would listen very carefully, and he'd always come to the piano and show us how this was supposed to be played, much to our annoyance (laughs).  But, yes, he was interested in our musical education and our books, our reading.
Speaker 1: Now, you say he read a lot.
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Was he a part of any literary groups or reading--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, no.  I don't think any of them existed then as far as I know.
Speaker 1: What kinds of books would he read?
Speaker 2: History for most part, because he was able to tell us all about Haiti and Henri Christophe, and [Jean-Jacques] Dessalines, and people of that sort.  Yes.
Speaker 1: So was he concerned with Black History primarily?
Speaker 2: Yes, I guess so.  I guess so.  Yes.
Speaker 1: That's something.  He's a lot--you know, that's a rich history, the history of Haiti.  So he was really interested in that.
Speaker 2: Will you talk a little louder, please?
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anything else?  Was there anything else--(unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: No.  I was trying to think of his interest in other books.  But, no, that stands out in my mind, his interest in Haiti.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sure he was interested in something else.  But I remember that because he told us all about the (unclear) Toussaint L'Ouverture and so many stories of all of them.
Story_ID: 85530
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us about your mother.  Can you give us her full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Alma Toups DeLuc.  Alma, A-L--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Toups.
Speaker 2: -M-A; Toups, that was her maiden name, Toups.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: T-O-U-P-S.
Speaker 1: T-O-U-P-S.
Speaker 2: French name.
Speaker 1: And Duke for the last name?
Speaker 2: DeLuc.  DeLuc.
Speaker 1: DeLuc.  Oh.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  And where was she--when was she born?
Speaker 2: Well, she was born in '79' [1879], and she was born in Saint Charles [Louisiana].  As I said, her father had a big farm close to the Mississippi River, and he had his own landing and all went well until he developed pneumonia and tuberculosis, and that changed the family fortunes.
Speaker 1: So did she have a tough time growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  She had a very nice time, and her mother was a leader in her community, and--no, they lived very nicely.  And then when the fortunes changed, the--well, I didn't know my grandmother, but I gather from what my mother said, she was a very no-nonsense, very capable woman.  And she just took matters in her own hand and went ahead.
Speaker 1: What was your mother like and what did she do?
Speaker 2: Oh, she's great (laughs).  She loved her family, and she loved her home.  And she wanted things to be just so creme de la creme.  She wanted everything to be just right.  And sometimes it was a bit hard on us, but we profited it from it, I'm sure.  Yes.  She liked to talk.  And she would lecture, well, twenty-four hours a day almost if we did something that didn't please her.  And we were glad to change our ways just to avoid the constant lecturing (laughs).  But it was all right.  It was all right.
Story_ID: 85531
Speaker 1: How did your parents [Alma Toups DeLuc and Andrew Charles DeLuc] meet?  Did they have a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: Well, they both found themselves in Chicago [Illinois].  I think he left because a friend of his and the friend's family moved to Chicago, and they may have corresponded with each other; I don't know.  Anyway, I guess my father decided to come to Chicago.  And then my mother came.  She was sent as a matter of fact.  She had a cousin who was being released from the hospital.  She had had a nervous breakdown, and there was no one in Chicago to take care of her.  And my mother, who was very, as I said, very, very mature, self-reliant.  She was sent to take care of her cousin.  And she liked it up here in Chicago, and she never returned.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they met in Chicago.
Speaker 2: They had known each other.  My father used to date a friend of hers in New Orleans.  Yes.
Speaker 1: So they were acquainted, but they--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: They were acquainted, but just casually.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Some of the--is there a story about they actually got together in Chicago?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.
Speaker 1: You don't know?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  No (laughs).  But you know, there--of course, maybe it was the growing in this Louisiana club, where, what with the Illinois Central Railroad, you know, going directly into Chicago, many people from Louisiana found their way to Chicago.  And the Louisiana community grew rapidly.  So I guess, maybe at one of their social affairs or--I don't have no idea.  But anyway, they came together.  And, you know, I would like to know if they still exist.  It was a very large group of people.  And I can remember when my mother died, it seemed as though she wasn't a member, 'cause she was much too busy.  I think my father was a member.  I don't remember.  But it seems as though half the Louisiana club had come to her funeral.  As I looked at the entrance to the cemetery, the cars seemed endless.  They were a very clannish group of people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when were your parents married?
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: Mmhm.
Speaker 2: Oh, dear.  Must have been--let's see.  I was born in '08' [1908], my sister was born in '06' [1906], my brother was born--I imagine that they must have married in 1901 or '02' [1902].  I don't remember exactly.  But--
Story_ID: 85532
Speaker 1: Alright. Well, can you reflect back on your childhood, and give us a sense of some of the sights and the sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I was the youngest in the family, and I was, as my mother [Alma Toups DeLuc] said, her "baby."  It used to annoy me so.  When I was a teenager later, when a young man would come to call, she would always say, "Well, you know, Adine is my baby."  In other words, "You be careful how you treat my baby."  (laughs.)  Well, anyway, I was not a very feminine little girl.  I didn't like to do handwork or anything that my sister did.  I liked to climb trees and climb fences, and it was rather hard on my clothing.  And so I got into trouble a lot of times for that.  I wanted to do what my brother did.  I remember during the race riots, when he was confined to the family garden, I was very pleased because it meant that he would play with me instead of going off to play with the boys.  That's not a very nice thing to say, I guess, about the race riots, but I did.  I feel that I had him for a while.
Speaker 1: Now, well, I want to ask you about the race riots in detail in a minute, but, like, tell me about when you were a little kid, you know, the kinds of things that you remember.
Speaker 2: Oh, dear, dear, dear.  Well, I remember--I must have been four years old.  See, two things happened to me.  I must have been driving my mother crazy, because the other two children were in school, and I was jealous.  And they'd come back from school and flaunt their importance, you know, and I was very jealous.  But I remember she picked me up and spanked me.  And she had never spanked me before.  I was sure she didn't spank me hard, but it was such an insult to my--or an assault on my dignity that I just couldn't get over it.  And I've always remembered that.  And I know I was very young.  The other thing is that, and as I say, I was rather a nuisance.  There were some little kittens out in our backyard and I wanted to see them.  And she said, "Wait.  I'll get your jacket so that you can out."  But I was impatient, and I decided to get it myself, and I fell right through from our first floor down into the basement, because there was a trapdoor that formed the floor of the closet, and it was up and I didn't know that.  I wasn't badly hurt, just my feelings were hurt.  But I can remember that.  I was about five years old then.
Speaker 1: That must have been scary to--
Speaker 2: I didn't hurt myself, but (unclear).  I can remember it though.
Story_ID: 85533
Speaker 1: I also remembered when she [Alma Toups DeLuc] decided I was civilized enough to go to Sunday school.  My sister and brother could go to a Sunday school-a church, that--where they wouldn't have to cross a street.  It was just at the end of the block.  And she decided that maybe the time come for me to accompany them.  But, my sister and brother were very fair skinned and they sort of faded into the background.  But, when they took little brown me, the children wouldn't sit by me.  And they kept moving away.  And when my mother heard of it, she just exploded.  And so that was the end of the Sunday school going.
Speaker 2: What church was this?
Speaker 1: Oh, I don't know.  I have no idea at all.  I know it wasn't a Catholic Church, 'cause the Catholic Church was, oh, a couple of blocks away, and there was a Catholic school.  The priest came to call on my mother because--of course, she was Catholic--and apparently records are sent all over the country, you know.  When you move, they--say if you move from New Orleans [Louisiana] to Chicago [Illinois], your church records apparently go with you.  And the priest came to call on my mother.  He wanted the two older children to start school, but he didn't want them to go to school that was basically Irish-Catholic.  He wanted--and about two blocks away.  He wanted to send them--now we were at 65th Street, and this Catholic Church was at 38th Street.  You can imagine.  He wanted to send them to a Catholic school of color.  And he says, "Oh, I'm willing to pay their transportation."  And my mother, being my mother, made him understand that she didn't come to Chicago to seek further segregation, and so on and so on, and in no uncertain words.  And that was that.  Now, let me see.  What else do I remember from that period.
Speaker 2: Now, where did you live--you lived around 65th, you said, I think.
Speaker 1: That was at 65th and Langley Avenue.
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: And then I started school.  She put me--my mother put me in school about a year before I should have gone.  I wasn't six, I was five.  But as I say, I think I was driving her crazy, because the other children were there.  And then I had learned quite a bit from them.  I had learned to read a bit, and so on.  But, my physical, manual progress was slow.  And I remember--I can remember very, very clearly not being able to cut out a postman.  And I'd pick up the scissors and they just go wrong.  And so what did I do?  I broke into tears.  And I did an awful lot of crying, because I was frustrated.  But I managed to be passed out of first grade and I'm so afraid of the children across the hall in the second grade, 'cause they look so big and strong.  But, anyway, I became a second-grader, and I adjusted, and so on and so on.  But I was always one of the younger children in the class, because I had had this head start.
Story_ID: 85515
Speaker 1: Ma'am, could you explain what a postman is for those who don't know?
Speaker 2: A man who delivers the mail.
Speaker 1: And you had a cutout of him you were supposed to cut out for something?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  And I just couldn't do it.  I know--it was--she--I think that--it's hard to remember.
Speaker 1: You drew a picture or something?
Speaker 2: I don't remember now.  All I remember is that I couldn't do what the other children were doing.  And it frustrated me and I just cried.
Speaker 1: So you're a year--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Year early.
Speaker 1: --early.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It makes a big difference.
Speaker 1: So when was--so you really enjoyed going to school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  And sometimes I would pretend I was sick.  Well, I just--I wasn't.  See, I was really too young, emotionally too young.  And I didn't get away with it though.  My mother [Alma Toups DeLuc] sent me anyway.  And then after a while, I adjusted, and I stopped being afraid of the children, the big second-graders (laughs).  And my second grade teacher, I must say, was very nice.  I can remember her.  She was a little red haired woman, very short.  And her husband came to school on one occasion, and he was very tall with dark hair, and the contrast was so (unclear).  But she was very nice.  And I remember every year in June there would be a production, a musical production that the school would put on.  Each class would make a contribution.  And she included me in a dance, in a group of six.  And it helped me with my self-esteem that I was selected.  And it made accepting school a little easier.
Story_ID: 85516
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what your neighborhood was like when you--well, what it looked like when you were a little girl?  'Cause the neighborhood--
Speaker 2: Well, it was lower middle class.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, we're talking about though, a year that few people nowadays can imagine, and that's, so you were like five years old in 1913.  Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, I mean, life in--I mean, the--what did the streets look like in 1913?  What did they--you know, what was it like?
Speaker 2: Well, I assure you there was no snow removal.  Sometimes the snow was just impossible.  You couldn't go from one side of the street to the other.  And then I also remember, and my mother [Alma Toups DeLuc] feared them so, when there was a fire, the horses on the fire trucks, you know, would go--and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: So most of the vehicles were still drawn by horses?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  And the horses seemed so wild, and they were being driven very rapidly, of course.  And it was all very dramatic, but very disturbing to my mother.
Speaker 1: How did they, how did they clean up behind horses in those days (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: I was wondering how they cleaned up behind horses in those days.
Speaker 2: Oh, they were--yes.  Men, they would employ men to come along and shovel off the waste.  Oh, yes.  Yeah, because I mean there were horses everywhere.  All the delivery trucks were pulled by horses.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was it like to shop for food? I mean, what kind of a (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, I can remember how excited the neighborhood was when an A&P [The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company] opened in the next block.  Of course, there was always the little store on the corner, you know, and the bakery shop.  Oh, my.  My sister and brother always insisted that I go and get the bakery--the buns.  I liked going, except that I was afraid that I meet a dog, and I was afraid of dogs.  So, I mean, I was a little girl, six, seven years old.
Speaker 1: In those days, dogs kind of roamed around where they wanted to then.
Speaker 2: Yes.  But there weren't that many dogs, but just one dog was one too many.  And--but outside of that, yes, they would--I don't know how they got away with it, because my mother didn't seem to make them go--maybe she knew that I liked to go.  I don't know.  Anyway, I would go and get the rolls for breakfast.  And the bakery was manned by a German couple.  They were nice and fleshy, and they had a nice, fleshy daughter; but they were very (unclear), well, they were very pleasant.  The daughter was rather pretty.  And they were pleasant people.  And there was the shoe shop, and there was a dry goods store on the corner.  We didn't like the owner of the store.  I think perhaps he was not well, but he was always so negative.  But, my sister and I, we wouldn't go in there alone.  We'd go in because--well, I guess, we were sort of afraid of him.  That I don't know.  But as I say, I think he was ill, and we were always buying, you know, oh, embroidery thread or stuff like that, she was, and I would go there with her.  And what else was there?  Oh, then this A&P came, and we thought it was just the grandest thing.  And so we stopped, but we started shopping at the A&P.  And the little store across the street where everyone had shopped formerly went out of business.  Yes.  Well, you know that happens.
Story_ID: 85517
Speaker 1: The large companies eat up the little companies.  And that's still going on.  For example, we have no hardware store around here now.  First, there was a nice one just across--about fifteen minutes of walk away.  He went out of business because a big--Hardware City opened up, oh, several blocks away.  And he took--they took all his business.  Then they went out of business, because--what is the big giant, Home Depot, had ate it up.  I mean, that's the way it goes, and there's no Home Depot, no anything around here now (laughs).
Speaker 2: You got to go to Home Depot to get something now.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yes.  To be sure, and that's rather a distance away.
Speaker 2: But in those days, there were lots of shops.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, little specialty shops.  And it was nice.  You could take care of your needs very easily.  And you came to know the owners, and they knew you and it was a nice relationship.
Speaker 2: Now, were most of the businesses--well, were there many black businesses in the neighborhood?
Speaker 1: No, there weren't any.  Now, let's see.  The dry goods shop was Jewish.  The shoe repair shop was Jewish.  The bakery was German.  And the grocery store across the street was German.  There were a lot of Germans in the neighborhood.  Everyone just melted together.
Story_ID: 85518
Speaker 1: Now, were there many black families in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  Mostly--it was mainly Irish.  And sometime they were sort of difficult, because I guess they were having problems at home; and anger and hatred, it was just part of their experiences, you know.  I don't know.  We sort of stayed clear of them.  But, let me see.  Maybe in--sometimes, I was the only non-white child.  Sometimes there were two or three of us, that sort of thing.  Then, of course, as the war [World War I]--after the war--during the war, there was this influx from the South; and then more up here.  And so, instead of two, there might be six or seven in a class.
Speaker 1: Now, were there restrictions on where black people could live?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  There was always a neighborhood segregation.  As a matter of fact, there was no outstanding restriction, but it--see, I was trying to think.  Most of the neighborhood was white; most of the neighborhood.  Just a handful of black families.  And it remained that way for years.  I should've gotten out my graduation pictures so--from elementary school graduation picture.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of the elementary school you went to?
Speaker 2: McCosh [Elementary School].
Speaker 1: Oh, McCosh?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  And in the graduating class, there were about four of us.  Roma [ph.]?  Roma was in the graduating class.  And, yes, it was just about four of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell me now, now, you lived in an integrated neighborhood, and most of the black people were--they lived in something called the black belt from what I understand.  Right?  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was down to the--down in the thirties and the twenty-ninth; yes.  No.  We lived at--in the 60s, we lived at 65th Street.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So that an integrated there--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but I'm saying most of the black people lived in the black belt.  Right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I guess so.  Yes.
Story_ID: 85519
Speaker 1: You were--I guess you were eleven years old when the riot hit (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I guess so.  What--in what year did the riots start?
Speaker 1: Nineteen, nineteen [1919].
Speaker 2: Right.  Right after the war [World War I].  Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you remember much about the riot?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember--as I said my father [Andrew Charles DeLuc] worked on the road, and he had to come home from the station, you know, and we were always very, very, uneasy until he arrived home.  But he never had a negative experience.  But those were difficult times.  And we'd hear tales of actual fighting between--you know, there was a very tough Irish group who lived around in the lower sixties, and they were--they were just mad at the world.  There is--I wish I could remember his name--there is an author who wrote of that group.  He wrote several books.  Studs Lonigan [a trilogy of novels by James T. Farrell].  Do you know the title of that--you know that book?
Speaker 1: I heard of Studs Lonigan.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Studs Lonigan was one of these tough Irish kids and it tells about his life.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah, he's different from Studs Terkel, who had--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  Oh, that has nothing to do with this.  I know Stud Terkel.  Yeah.  No.  Studs Lonigan was the name of this character.  And he was a tough young man.  But I remember this:  My brother had had a very serious operation.  He had had pneumonia, and because his coughing was weakening so, that the doctor very unwisely stopped his coughing, and the matter that should have been expelled gathered in his body just under his heart.  Well, he was just simply dying, and the nurse, who was far more intelligent than the doctor, urged my parents to get further--seek further attention.  And a doctor in our neighborhood, an Irish doctor, Doctor Gunn [ph], had him--entered him at Saint Bernard's Hospital.  Do you know Saint Bernard's Hospital?
Speaker 1: Saint Bernard's.  Yes.
Speaker 2: And--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: In Englewood [Chicago, Illinois].  Right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He was so weak and so sick they couldn't give him an anesthetic.  They had to--that is, they had to give him a local anesthetic.  And he drained--they opened this lump, and he drained for six months to get that fluid out of his body.  And he was a delicate person.  And I remember, of course, he was still very much boy, and he wanted to do what the other boys did, and that was always a problem in our house.  My parents [Alma Toups DeLuc and Andrew Charles DeLuc] saying, "You can't do this, and you can't do that."  Well, he found himself with his friends in Washington Park, and they were attacked by a group of these kids from Stud [sic, Studs] Lonigan's area, and he chased them, and, of course, my brother couldn't keep up.  And he--they beat him terribly, yeah.  And my parents had no way of determining who was guilty.  But they were awfully upset, yeah.  Just out of nothing, you know.
Speaker 1: That sounds awful.
Speaker 2: Yeah Yeah.  I mean--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Through the Washington Park?  That's where he was when he was--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  Minding their business.  But I guess the psychiatrists say that if a child meets brutality in his home, he will take it outside of his home and be brutal to other people.  And I think that that was the case, because there was a lot of alcoholism in that community and the children suffering as a result.  Yes.  That, we used to call that the Irish Channel, all that area over there; 61st Street, west of South Park [now King Drive].
Speaker 1: Would they congregate around Saint Anselm's? Did they go to that Saint Anselm's [Catholic] Church there?
Speaker 2: They may have.  I don't know.  I remember that church.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Catholic Church.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: There was a Greek Orthodox across the street, I guess--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: --in those days.  It's now Saint Edmund's Episcopal, now.  But--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Is that so?
Speaker 1: Saint--(unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Oh, Saint Edmund's is there.
Speaker 1: Anselm's a huge church.  It's still there.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: Saint Anselm's.
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm not much of a churchgoer.
Speaker 1: It seems like that's the biggest Catholic Church in that area.  I just wondered if the--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Is that so?
Speaker 1: --Irish community was congregated around that.
Speaker 2: They what?
Speaker 1: I was wondering if the Irish community, in those days, was congregated around Saint (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I would have no way of knowing.  No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they were a no-nonsense group of people.  I remember Irish were always very athletic, and I would be on the baseball and whatnot at the--when I was in seventh and eighth grade.  And there were contests between the schools.  And I remember those Irish kids, when they came over, these little girls, they were no-nonsense.  And my mother would not allow me to go to their school to play, because she didn't know what might happen.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 85520
Speaker 1: There were other black children in the school when you were there, but not many.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There weren't many.  No.  As I say, there was an influx after the war [World War I].  And I would say in my graduating class, maybe there were about six kids.  See, so booming was very slow.
Speaker 1: Did you have any black teachers at McCosh [Elementary School]?
Speaker 2: No.  Except one who they offered--as a matter of fact, our family doctor was married to one of the teachers, but she was indistinguishable.  And we knew because she was our doctor's wife (laughs).  But I don't think the rest of the people knew.  No one knew.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, were there any teachers that were particularly outstanding at McCosh that you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  One.  A Miss Johnson.  She was the sixth-grade teacher, and everybody loved her.  And I think she loved every single child.  It was a pleasant experience to be in her room.  Yeah.  But I think she was about the only one.  And, you know, they varied.  Some were very negative and some were just indifferent.  And, as I say, Miss Johnson was just a wonderful person.
Speaker 1: Now, did you grow to like school more after you were around a while or did you (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Yes.  It was all right.  I accepted it, and I took an active part in whatever was going on.  I remember in seventh grade we had departmental work in seventh grade, and I remember, I've always liked dramatics, and there you did a novel out of memorizing.  For example, when we were studying Julius Caesar [by William Shakespeare], we were all expected to memorize one of the speeches.  And I remember mine was Anthony.  "Friends, Romans, countrymen," etcetera, etcetera.  I liked that.  And also, we had to do the Lincoln Address.
Speaker 1: The Gettysburg Address?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  How does it start?  I've forgotten.  Well, anyway--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: "Four score."
Speaker 2: "Four score," yes.  And we were checked on our expression and it was very pleasant.  And apparently the children enjoyed it, too.  And then--now, I had another English teacher.  Maybe she was the eighth-grade teacher, I don't remember, who was very interested in poetry.  And we had to learn excerpts from the "Vision of Sir Launfal" [by James Russell Lowell].  I don't know if you know that one.  "The drawbridge dropped with a surly clang, and out a little charger sprang," [sic, "The drawbridge dropped with a surly clang, and through the dark arch a charger sprang"] and that was very dramatic.  I loved that (laughs).  And but I don't think kids do that anymore.  They don't learn poetry, do they?
Speaker 1: I don't think so.  Not very much.
Speaker 2: That's what I say.  This is all supposed to be progress, but to me in so many ways, it's just the opposite.
Story_ID: 85521
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, so in grade school, well, you graduated from grade school [McCosh Elementary School in Chicago, Illinois] in--well, it was about 19--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Twenty-one [1921].
Speaker 2: Twenty-one, yeah [1921].
Speaker 1: Yes.  And I was, what, 12 or 13.  I was 12.  And then I had a--by the time school opened in September, I was 13.  Yes.
Speaker 2: You went to high school at Englewood [Englewood High School] first.
Speaker 1: At Englewood for two years.  Yes.
Speaker 2: All right.  Now, what was Englewood--now, the Englewood I know in the early part of the century was one of the most popular high schools in Chicago, and they're on the South Side, and they're in a big rivalry with Hyde Park [High School, now Hyde Park Academy High School].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I liked Hyde Park.  It had--it had class (laughs).  Yes.
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: It was very nice.
Speaker 2: That was the difference between the schools then--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think so.  Well, I tell you.  I think the work at Hyde Park was more demanding.  Yes.  I studied much harder while I was at Hyde Park than I did at Englewood.
Speaker 2: So, well, you started at Englewood.  Right?
Speaker 1: Yes, I did, 'cause I was in the Englewood District.  But I found that there were ways of getting yourself transferred to Hyde Park, and I took advantage of them, and so I graduated from Hyde Park.  Yes.
Speaker 2: So how long were you at Englewood before you figured how to--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: How?
Speaker 2: How long were you at Englewood before you figured out how to get out?
Speaker 1: Two years.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Two years, I think, or a year and a half.  I don't remember.  But either one or the other.
Speaker 2: Tell us about Englewood.  Were there many black students at Englewood when you were there?
Speaker 1: Well, no.  Not many.  But it's hard to say.  Well, there weren't.  Let's see.  I'd say about 25 or 30.  There weren't many.
Speaker 2: And--let's see.  Were there any particular teachers or people at Englewood?  Any personalities that stand out?
Speaker 1: Well, the only one I remember is the Spanish teacher.  Everyone told me, "Oh, don't get Mrs. McGuire," or somebody, "for Spanish because she's terrible."  Well, you know, they seat you alphabetically, and they--it just happened that DeLuc put me right in the front seat of the second row.  Well, I don't know.  I found what she had to say very, very interesting, and I responded and I found that she wasn't such a terrible person after all.  And we got along very well, and I learned well under her.  Yes.  But everyone was sympathizing with me, because I was being assigned to Miss McIntyre [ph].
Story_ID: 85522
Speaker 1: Okay, so. Well, how did you--now, so you managed to get transferred to Hyde Park [High School in Chicago, Illinois]--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, I had a friend, the mother of my father's [Andrew Charles DeLuc] friend who had persuaded him to come north, his mother lived in a district that fed Hyde Park.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I just went to live with my grandmother (laughs).  That is, I didn't, of course.  But I gave her--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: On paper.
Speaker 2: Yes on paper, and it worked very nicely.  You know, sometimes one does those things (laughs).  Yeah.  No one questioned it.
Speaker 1: Did you have a lot of friends at Hyde Park already?
Speaker 2: No.  No. But, I managed.
Speaker 1: You just thought it was better.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, yes.  It wasn't--there were even fewer non-white people there.  Yeah.  Some, a couple of Mexican.  I remember one Mexican family.  Yeah.  There weren't many.  But the standards were higher.
Speaker 1: So did you really like it a lot better than Englewood [High School]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Yes.  It was more challenging.  Yes.
Story_ID: 85523
Speaker 1: What are some of the highlights of your high school life at Hyde Park [High School]?
Speaker 2: Well, I belonged to the drama club.  And I--we were preparing for a play called "Dolsie [ph]."  And I prepared for the leading role.  I have my nerve, but I did.  And then, despite the fact that some person in the world of drama who was a friend of our teacher, came out to listen to us and judge us, he chose me as Dolsie.  But I didn't get Dolsie.  I was given the position of a maid.  And I said, "Nuts."  (laughs)  And so I didn't take part in the presentation at all.  Yes.  Because I had qualified for that part.  But I was silly.  I thought that if you qualified, you'd get a thing.  But I had a lot to learn.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, it's probably better that you tried, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think in some ways.  Well, what other activities were you involved in in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, dear, dear.  In high school, well, I was in the dramatic club.  And the rest of my effort was given over to studying.  I didn't do anything.  I don't remember now.  That's the only thing that comes forward.
Speaker 1: Were you in any clubs or anything?
Speaker 2: Not then.  When I was a little older, I joined the bridge club, but I didn't like it.  There was a great deal of unpleasantness or rivalry between the women.  And I would come home and tell my mother [Alma Toups DeLuc] about what happened.  She'd say, "Well, why on earth do you attend the meetings?  Why bother?"  And I was asking myself, well, why do I.  And so I withdrew.  Yes.  A lot of--you know, I don't know if you would know this woman. I don't seem to be able to remember the names of authors, but she's a Canadian writer, and she has written a book--I've read several of her books--on the ugliness that can exist between adolescent girls or older girls, and how it can wreck the life of a person.  And that's very real.  I don't know.  Do boys have that experience?  Are they antagonistic toward each other?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in kind of a different way, I think.
Speaker 2: I see.  I see.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, there's a great--and you find it in a bridge club.  Amy, did you find that in the bridge club or did you belong to a bridge club?
Speaker 1: AMY TATE BILLINGSLEY:  I didn't.
Speaker 2: A bridge club.
Speaker 1: AMY TATE BILLINGSLEY:  I didn't.
Speaker 2: I didn't.  Yes.  Well, I didn't remain long in it because it was unpleasant.  And that was that.
Speaker 1: Now, what were your favorite subjects in school?
Speaker 2: I liked English.  I think that was my favorite subject.  And I liked Spanish.  I was taking Spanish, and I liked the two of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you have any teachers at Hyde Park that took a particular interest in you or that you admired?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  My Spanish teacher, she was a Chilean, and she was a nice person.  I liked her and I think she liked me.  But I can't remember any others.  No, it was just work, work, homework.  "Present your papers and do your work," you know.  That sort of thing.
Speaker 1: You just enjoyed the challenge of doing--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, I--the--there was a different level of student there, too, and you had to work hard to keep up with.  There were many Jewish people in the school.  And, of course, the standards are high.  And you worked to hold your own.  Yes.  I would say there were higher standards at Hyde Park.
Story_ID: 85054
Speaker 1: I mean, what period do you want me to tell?
Speaker 2: Well, we're still in high school [Hyde Park High School].
Speaker 1: Oh, in high school.
Speaker 2: We're still in high school--(unclear)
Speaker 1: You know, high school to me was just work.  I don't remember anything.  I liked my drama club.  But outside of that, it was just work.  I was pleased that I was allowed to take four--the advanced English class.  You could only take it if your English score was satisfactory, and I was able to take four-A English classes.  I remember that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, as I say, it was just work.
Speaker 2: I have two questions that you know, but from the photos I saw earlier, you seemed to have quite a bit of fun as a teenager (laughs).  You seemed to have quite a bit of fun as a teenager, and--but, did--was your social life outside of Hyde Park and then--and not in the school or did you have--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: It was outside of Hyde Park.  Yes.  And, of course, we knew many, many people.  And--yes.  We didn't lack the social life.
Speaker 2: So you didn't do--most people go to proms and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Well, I didn't go to the prom.  We had a lovely graduation and I was very pleased.  The president [sic, principal] came up to me as we stood in a line and told me how nice I looked.  And we dressed in white dresses and the school had furnished a group of roses--a bunch of roses, red roses; and we didn't wear gowns, we had dresses.  I can remember my dress very well.  And he came up to me and told me how nice I looked, and I liked that.
Speaker 2: Oh, so you were able to participate in prom and--(unclear)
Speaker 1: It wasn't a prom.  We were just--this was graduation.
Speaker 2: (Unclear.)
Speaker 1: I guess it was a prom.  But I mean, I wasn't interested.  I wasn't interested.  No, it wasn't like it is now.  The proms were not big time--I think they must--they were small.  I don't know.  I don't know.  I don't remember anybody going to a prom.
Speaker 2: They didn't even have them?
Speaker 1: Oh, I think they had them, but it might be known if the white kids went.  I don't--I really don't remember.  But I don't remember anybody going to a prom.  I mean, we had our own social life, and it was very nice, you know.  There were house parties, and then there were little clubs and they would give larger parties.  And we didn't lack for social life at all.  They were very nice.
Speaker 2: Were you a member of well--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --some social club?
Speaker 1: No.  They were--I later joined a sorority, but--when I was in college.  But, no.  No.  It's very hard for me to remember now, the social clubs.  Maybe they appeared later.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, tell me this.  I neglected to ask earlier, but how did you get to and from school?
Speaker 1: Oh, gosh.  Well, sometimes I walked, and sometimes I rode, depending on the weather and depending on--I would go to school, when I was in Englewood [High School], a very close friend of mine and I would walk to school.  I walked because I think she had to walk.  And--but if the weather was cold and she was not present, I would ride.  But I liked to walk, particularly when I went to Hyde Park, because you could walk along 63rd Street, and there were all sorts of little specialty shops, you know.  And I remember at the very end of my home--walk home, I'd stop at one of these Greek food shops--you know how they would always have the fruits and vegetables--and I would buy a group of oranges, and I three oranges for a dime (laughs).  And--yeah.  I would walk if I had--and I'm very glad I walked because it was wonderful exercise for me, and it all contributed to my health.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, if you rode, would you ride in a streetcar, a taxi or--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  Yes.  Yes.  And they were very direct.  Yes.  And the carfare was seven cents (laughs).  Yep.
Speaker 2: That's inexpensive, well, by these standards, today's standards.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, were you a pretty good student at Hyde Park now?
Speaker 1: I was fair.  I managed.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Were you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: My score was in the eighties; about 85, 86.
Story_ID: 85055
Speaker 1: So when you were ready to graduate, what were your aspirations?  Did you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, I knew I was going to go to the [Chicago] Normal School, [later named the Chicago Teacher's College and now Chicago State University in Chicago, Illinois].  I couldn't go directly to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], 'cause my parents didn't have that kind of money.  But I went--and every--I mean, practically everybody--went to the Chicago Teachers' College, which, of course, was two years and it was free.  And then, at the end of your--when you graduated--you could apply for admission to the University of Chicago, and you took and examination, and if you were successful, you entered.  And that was it.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about Chicago Teacher's College?  Did you go there?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know that there was anything spectacular about it.  No.  Just more work.
Speaker 1: Well, doesn't have to be spectacular.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm just--well, it was--there, again, there were just a couple of us in a class.  And--gosh.  I haven't even thought about it for years.  Some of the work was really interesting, some of it was very boring, and that was that.  It--I don't think it was as interesting as high school.  I mean, didn't have the variety or--there was something about it.
Speaker 1: Where was it--(unclear)?
Speaker 2: It was--do you know Marquette Road?  Yes.  Well, to the west, which would follow Marquette Road.  It was over in Englewood in--up in that district.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there was a high school there, and all.  Somewhere around there,
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'd say but to walk from my home to there.  It was a very pleasant walk.
Story_ID: 85056
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you finished at Chicago Teacher's College [Chicago Normal School, later named the Chicago Teacher's College and now Chicago State University in Chicago, Illinois], you were where?
Speaker 2: Enrolled in, yes, my--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: So you went to--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --my godfather and godmother came to the rescue with the tuition, and I was very grateful for that.
Speaker 1: And you attended the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what was that like?  How did you like that?
Speaker 2: It was work and it was interesting.  Yes.  Of course I was taking an education course, and what else was I taking, I don't remember.  I really don't remember, but we had a syllabus and you took whatever the university wanted you to take.  Let me see.  Anthropology.  Anthropology?  Yes.  That was very interesting.  And sociology courses were interesting.  And the drama course was interesting, the poetry course was interesting.  Yeah.  All the work was interesting.
Speaker 1: Did you have any professors that you remember now?
Speaker 2: Yes. I liked my--Mr. Trevino (ph).  Senor Trevino.  Later on he was my Spanish teacher.  He was very nice.  And I took a course, a couple of courses from him.  Then there was a young Jewish--Mr. Davidson, a young Jewish man in the dramatics--the drama class when we were studying drama.  And he made it very, very interesting.  I enjoyed that.  I had to take economics.  As a matter of fact, I took two courses.  I don't think it made much impression on me, because I found it very hard to understand.  But I had to take it.  It was in my syllabus, and I took it.  The philosophy courses, I had a couple of them and they were interesting and confusing (laughs).  And I remember, of course, my mother [Alma Toups DeLuc] didn't make a very much--make a fuss about religion.  She was more interested in ethics and that sort of thing; morals.  But, I remember I said to her, "You know, I was hearing about the question whether God was omniscient, omnipotent and all that."  And my head was spinning around.  And I came to her and I said, "Mama, what should I believe," 'cause, you know, I thought I was Christian, and I found out that I--that there were a lot of other ideas.  And then she said, "You are going to have to work that out for yourself.  I can't help you."  And so I did (laughs).  And we got farther and farther away from religion (laughs).
Story_ID: 85057
Speaker 1: That's interesting from those days, because you often hear these stories about church life and so forth.  But your parents [Alma Toups DeLuc and Andrew Charles DeLuc] were basically freethinkers or they were basically--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, almost, yes.  They were both more interested in ethics and morals.  Now, my father liked the sociability of, I think, of the church.  As a matter of fact, he was--as I said, he was interested in music.  And I remember that every--at every Easter program, he sang the "Intermezzo" from Cavalleria Rusticana [opera by Pietro Mascagni].  He had a very nice voice, and he sang the "Intermezzo" from Cavalleria Rusticana.  I remember that.  Yeah.  But--and the church was--well, the minister was from Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts], and that gave the church a certain tone as a Congregational Church.  What was I going to say about him?  Oh, during the fall and winter season, there was a forum, and we would have speakers come.  And we were--my parents went and, of course, took us along.  And most of it was very interesting.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the speakers that spoke?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember there was a man from Angola.  He had devoted his adult life to helping the Angola people, and it was revealing.  I didn't know anything about what was taking place in Africa.  Africa was just a continent as far as I was concerned.  And he made some of the problems come alive.  Yes.  And then--oh, I remember that was the period when speaking, being a good speaker was an asset.  I remember someone with a very fancy name, and I don't know really what he did.  He might have been a politician, I don't know, but it was somebody called, Somebody [Roscoe] Conkling Simmons.  And I remember he was a really grand speaker.  But I don't remember what he said (laughs).
Speaker 1: His style was--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  He was very dramatic.  Yes.  I think my parents sort of laughed at him (laughs).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That was a time for real dramatic oratory.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  And well, right along with the music and violin, I had the elocution; that is, it was a woman in the neighborhood who considered herself an elocutionist, and I would go to her and learn certain poems or certain passages from--well, like the Lincoln Address [sic, Gettysburg Address] and things like that, you know.  It was very important.  And your diction was important.
Speaker 1: But did you ever hear the elocutionist-- a black woman named Halle Q. [Quinn] Brown?  Did you ever hear her speak?
Speaker 2: No.  Did she come along at my time or later?
Speaker 1: In your time, she would have been older, but she was still
Speaker 2: Oh, I see.
Speaker 1: They named a library at Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio] after her.  She's a famous elocutionist.
Speaker 2: Is that a fact?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: No.  No.  I sort of missed that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  You know, did any famous people come to speak?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a woman who was an elocutionist and she was--she lived in our neighborhood.  And she would read Paul Laurence Dunbar's poems.  She was very, very good.  I remember once, my church--the church was conservative, very proper and upward mobility; you know, everything was very --she read one called "Step Back, Somebody; Step Back."  And this church criticized her 'cause they felt it was just a little too informal for the church.
Speaker 1: "Jump Back, Baby, Jump Back."  I remember--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --"Jump Back, Baby, Jump Back."
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's not (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And the--so she was criticized, but other than that, she was welcomed because she was very good.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, did your parents join any organizations?
Speaker 2: No.  They would attend special things, but they did not join the--or the church.  They would go when it was convenient, but, as I say, we were not very religious people in that sense.  We were not serious churchgoers.  My mother wanted us to go to Sunday school.  She wanted us to know the Bible as a cultural experience, you know.  And so that's why we went.
Story_ID: 85058
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.  At the University of Chicago [in Chicago, Illinois], did you have any courses from Robert Park, by any chance?
Speaker 2: Robert?
Speaker 1: Park.  You remember him?
Speaker 2: Robert Parks?
Speaker 1: Park.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, who was he?
Speaker 1: A sociologist, I think.  He supposedly--  The University of Chicago had something to do with the founding of the study of sociology, and he was an early sociologist.
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't have him.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was very interesting, but I--I think I had only one sociology course.  And it was conducted by a man from South Carolina.  No.  North Carolina.  And I've never had a southern teacher for, and my nose went up in the air, and "I wonder what he's going to be like."  But he was the most interesting man.  He had lived in Africa for seven years, and he told us so much that we might not have ever learned; for example, he said, "There's no place in Africa where an act"--now, how shall I say this.  "An act in one society may be quite acceptable, whereas the same act in another society would be worthy of severe punishment, like death."  And I thought that very interesting.  And he told--he gave us examples and so on and so on.  Yeah.  And he was--he made his work very interesting.  Yeah.  Dr. Edwards from University of North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what--now, you were majoring in education.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) with the intent on becoming a teacher.
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: Right.  Was there anyone in the educational department that you remember that--.
Speaker 2: Not particularly.  They were just hum-ho.
Speaker 1: So how did you--you know, what was your impression of the University of Chicago?  Was it--did you feel that just it was--you just had to get out and get the work done or--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, I liked it.  I worked as hard as I could.  I mean, you had competition there.  I mean, everybody was--I liked my--you know, you could take an examination and bypass first year English.  But--and I had a friend who did that.  But I didn't want to do that, and I was very glad I didn't because I had an excellent young teacher.  And we had to write a play (laughs), and I did that.  And I managed to get an A out of the course, and I was very pleased with myself.  It was a nice experience.
Story_ID: 85059
Speaker 1: All right.  And you--when did you graduate from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: In '35' [1935].  You see, I--let's see, how did I go.  I had to go--see, I was assigned to teach in 1930, and I would have to go in the summer or go to the classes that were held Downtown.  You know, it was piecemeal.
Speaker 1: You started teaching before your graduation unclear (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: You said you had an associate's degree from the other school [Chicago Normal School, later named the Chicago Teacher's College and now Chicago State University in Chicago, Illinois] or you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes.  The Teacher's, I had the two years, yes.  I was eligible to teach.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it took a time to get the degree, because, as I say, I couldn't--I had to work and--so most of us--many of us who were working, did our studying in that way; we were there in the summer on the campus, and then in the fall and the winter we went Downtown after school to study.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was alright. Same teachers.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your teaching career.  Now, what school did you start teaching?
Speaker 2: At Gillespie [Elementary School].  Do you know Gillespie School?  Yes.  Oh, I didn't--when did I--did I start there?  I'm trying to think.  No.  No, no.  I started in [Stephen A.] Douglas School.  Do you know Douglas School?
Speaker 1: I'm not certain (unclear).
Speaker 2: It was a nice school then.  It was in a poor neighborhood, but the parents were so cooperative and so respectful of the teachers. I remember they'd say, "Now, if Johnny doesn't obey you, you just pick him up and spank him."  Well, of course, I wasn't interested in doing that sort of thing.  But they were very sincere about their children getting a good education.  And have you ever heard the name "Bousfield?"  Maudelle [Brown] Bousfield?  No.  Well, Dr. [Midian O.] Bousfield's wife, Maudelle Bousfield, was a very--she was from the Washington area [sic, St. Louis, Missouri].  Very intelligent.  Very intelligent woman, and she--I was fortunate.  She was my first school principal, and she demanded very, very high standards.  And when she--you did something that she--which she approved, she'd make a little note in the book that you signed every morning to--that's something.  "I drop into--Mrs. Ray's room," I guess I was Mrs. Ray then--and see the work that's been done.  You had--she would give you credit for your efforts, and, of course, the teachers loved her.  Then a time was going on, and I had to stop for mercy.  What is the expression?  I've forgotten.  Well, anyway, if I was going to have a family, I'd had to stop and have a family.  I stopped I guess--can't remember when I stop.  But, anyway, I taught for a while and time was running out, and I had to get started on my family.  So, of course, I left the system.  And I stayed away for twelve years, because, well, the war [World War II] came and my husband [Marcus Ray] just insisted--he said, "Now you wanted children.  Stay home and take care of them.  And I did and I was very glad for that.  And then after twelve years, I returned to--my daughter's ready to go to high school, and I--so I could return to a little neighborhood school, Gillespie [Elementary] School, walking distance.  And I stayed there until 1966.  And I resigned in 1966, because my husband was ill.  He first had a serious eye operation.  And then he had a very, very serious spinal operation.  And he was in the hospital for three months.  And so I needed to be with him.  So I resigned.  And then next year, we moved to Switzerland.  So that's the way that went.
Story_ID: 85060
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before you get far with that, how did you met your husband, and--
Speaker 2: How did I meet my husband? Yes.
Speaker 1: At a party, at--you know, they always these little house parties.  And if someone had a visitor, the visitor would be given a little party to meet other people.  And so there was a friend visiting me from Washington, and we were invited to Dr. Carl Roberts' home to a house party.  And there was this young man.  I had heard about him.  And so we met and started talking to each other and dance, not once, but twice (laughs).
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Yes.  And then it just went on from there.  And that was that (laughs).  But I mean, that's where it started.  And I came home and told my mother [Alma Toups DeLuc] I had met Marcus Ray.  And, of course, she knew the family from New Orleans [Louisiana].  And that helped matters, too.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, was he in the armed forces when you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: No, no.  He wasn't.  No.  He was in school.  He was getting his master's in--not anthropology--oh, dear, dear, dear.  It begins with an A.  Isn't that stupid?  What would I be talking about?  Working with medicines and things.
Speaker 2: When I think of pharmacy.
Speaker 1: It wasn't--it wasn't.
Speaker 2: Pharmacy  (unclear).
Speaker 1: No.  He had a degree in Pharmacy from the University of Illinois.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well, it'll come to me.  I'm getting old.  I--you have to forgive me.
Speaker 2: Anesthesiology?
Speaker 1: Mm?
Speaker 2: Anesthesiology?
Speaker 1: No, no.  No, no.  It will come.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's crazy, but I can't remember.  Anyway, and I was in the undergraduate school [University of Chicago in Chicago, Illinois] getting my degree.  And that was that.
Story_ID: 85061
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, when the war [World War II] began in 1941--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, he was interested in the ROTC and the--and something at the armory.  Do you know the Eighth Regiment Armory?
Speaker 1: Reserves?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Was it Reserves, Army Reserves?
Speaker 2: Possibly.  Anyway, and, of course, I was not clearly fond of military things, but he would rationalize and say that it gave us--that the kids who lived in the inner city needed a sense of--someway of developing a sense of discipline.  And he felt that the [U.S.] Army would be helpful to them.  That was, as I say, I think he was rationalizing.  He just liked the Army.  But anyway, that's the way it started.  And then the war broke out, and went from one level to another.  And that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Then--so, during the war, was he stationed overseas during the war?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  In Italy for two years--about two--almost two years.
Speaker 1: But that's without the family.  Right?  The family didn't--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: The family stayed at home (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, indeed.  Yes.
Speaker 1: And you had children at that time.  Right?
Speaker 2: Yes, but I wasn't working.  Our son was born with asthma, and he required a great deal of attention.  And I couldn't send my daughter to nursery school, 'cause I was afraid she might bring home a cold germ or something that would just about finish him.  So I had to be careful about him.
Speaker 1: All right.  So what was the war years like?  Your husband is away at war, you got two children--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Unclear.)
Speaker 1: Was it tough?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I mean I was just another Army wife.  We measured up.  We did whatever was necessary.  We managed.  Yes.  We learned to do a lot of things that--for example, we had--before we had oil put into our furnace, we had something that was--that fed coal to a big device.  And I--if there was a clinker in it, then it would stop the operation.  I learned to turn off the heat, I'd turn off the electricity and go into it, remove the clinkers.  I mean, you learn a lot of things that you never expect to learn.  And you grow as a result.  You know, one challenge after another.
Story_ID: 85062
Speaker 1: We returned from [U.S.] Army duty in Germany, we came back in 1950, I think, and people were all excited about television.  So we went to my brother-in-law's home, and I saw for the first time television.  And I said, "Nope.  My children are not going to be exposed to that sort of thing," 'cause I decided it was just trash (laughs).  And so I refused to have a television.  And we didn't have a television until they went away to college, because I wanted them to be able to get into very good schools, and I knew they'd have to concentrate on their studies.  And I didn't want anything that would interfere with their studying.  They had other outside activities.  And, of course, no, I don't think my daughter paid much attention to it because she was pretty busy.  But my son had friends whose parents had television, and he wanted one.  And then after a time, he became proud of the fact that his parents would not have television in the house.  Yes.
Speaker 2: About what time was that when he went to school?
Speaker 1: Oh, golly.
Speaker 2: What did your kids--when did you get the first one?  Did--(unclear)
Speaker 1: Well, let's see; I guess around 1957.  About 1957.  I think Adine graduated--she's the older child--graduated from high school in '57' [1957].  So we didn't have a television.  And then Marc [Marcus Ray, Jr.] graduated in '58' [1958], I guess.  And we still didn't have a television.
Story_ID: 85063
Speaker 1: Going back to a question I wanted to ask at first which is, how did you spend your time when your husband [Marcus Ray] was away in a war?
Speaker 2: Are you kidding?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: (Laughs.)  I was busy every minute being not only mother, but father, too.  Yes, indeed (laughs).  Oh, goodness.  Yeah.  I was a very busy person.  And I didn't have much time.  I belonged to a mother's club along with Amy's  mother [Inez Duke Tate].  As a matter of fact, I think it was she who brought me into the mother's club.  I was expecting Adine.  Didn't even have a baby.  But anyway, I was going to have one, and so I became a member of the mother's club before I was a mother (laughs).  And, as I say, that I would attend their meetings every month and attend their activities.  I remember we were having a committee meeting at my home on the seventh of December [December 7, 1941], and--it was a Sunday--and after we finished planning for the children's Christmas party, we sat around talking about the political conditions.  And I made the statement--my husband and I were interested in politics, and so we knew what was going on--I said, "I think America is crazy if it thinks that the Japanese are going to agree to the demands that America has laid down."  And do you know, when the meeting broke up, somebody went home, turned on the radio, there was the news that Pearl Harbor [Hawaii] had been bombed.  Yes.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: So what you said was prophetic.
Story_ID: 85064
Speaker 1: Yes.  And I remember also when [President John F.] Kennedy was assassinated my husband [Marcus Ray] and I were sitting in the living room reading and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: This is 1963.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And we started talking about political problems.  We were always talking about political problems.  And again, I said, "I think that"--I probably said crazy, I don't remember, but I said, "He was very unwise to go to Dallas [Texas], because it was so much hostility already floating around Dallas."  I don't know if you knew that, but there was.  And I said, I think he's very unwise to go into that area."  And the next thing you know, he was, next day or so, he was assassinated.  Yes.  It was if he were asking for it.  But that wasn't a wholesome environment for him.
Speaker 2: Now, what was wrong with Dallas?  And what was going on?
Speaker 1: You know, I don't remember now.  But I know there was a lot of turmoil, and there was a lot of antagonism toward him.  You know, I have asked my son--my son does a lot of reading and he knows everything; well, he thinks he does anyway; but I mean, he keeps up with things like that, and I'll have to ask him why, but it was very obvious that those were bad times for John Kennedy.
Story_ID: 85065
Speaker 1: Going back to World War II though, when that--so your husband [Marcus Ray] was away for how many years?
Speaker 2: About a year and a half, I would say.  Yes.
Speaker 1: And did--after the war, he continued in the service?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He came back, he was very sick.  He had pneumonia, walking pneumonia.  Have you ever heard of ambulatory pneumonia?
Speaker 1: Yes, I have.
Speaker 2: He came back, and we went to a party and my family doctor said, "He doesn't look good."  But I didn't pay much attention to him.  I was so glad to have my husband home.  And he had to leave us in Chicago [Illinois], 'cause he had been assigned to the Pentagon [Arlington County, Virginia], to the War Department [United States Department of War] and off he went.  And there he couldn't live in a normal hotel like he could now.  There was this one building set aside for black governmental employees; government employees.  So he lived there, and there was no telephone in the room and he had to go downstairs to call the doctor.  But before he could do that, he passed out, and hit--fell to the floor, on the floor, on the tile floor and knocked out all the front of his teeth.  That was his entrance to America.  And then he was sick for a long time, and he came home to recover, of course.  And then what did he do?  You know what I think then--it's hard to remember all these things--but, then they did not assign a high-ranking black officer to troops because he would have had to be assigned to a troop where there were whites, and they couldn't have a black man supervising white soldiers.  So they sent him to--what was that school in Ohio?  Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio].  Do you know Central State?  Oh, he's--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Yeah, I do.
Speaker 2: You know?
Speaker 1: Mmhm.
Speaker 2: Well, so he was the (unclear), Military Plans and Training Officer, there for a time.  And I know him.  I don't have the orders straight up.  But then he was sent to Korea after the war.  He became a--what do they call those people--an advisor.  And he was out there for about eighteen months.  And then what?  He came back, and he was at the--at Camp--what was it, the one in Chicago [Illinois] out on the lake?  Oh, I know.  Grant--no.  It wasn't Grant.
Speaker 1: Sheridan.  Fort Sheridan.
Speaker 2: No.  Fort Sheridan was up the lake.  This was in Chicago itself.
Speaker 1: Oh.  Navy Pier.  No, that's only--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: No.  It was in the Jackson Park area.
Speaker 1: Oh.  The Armory?  The--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: What was that?  Was it Grant?  No.   Well what--you know?  I have no business being so forgetful, but I haven't thought about those things in years.  Well, anyway, he was assigned there, and it was from there that he retired.  And then we sold our home and we went to Europe.  And we stayed in Europe for seven years.  And when we became grandparents, we came back to the United States.
Story_ID: 85066
Speaker 1: Now, what did he do in Europe for a living (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Nothing.  He was retired.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: So he retired with a salary and everything?
Speaker 2: Oh, mais oui, I should say (laughs).
Speaker 1: This is--okay.  So this is--about what year is this?
Speaker 2: Well, we left in '67' [1967].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: All right.  I couldn't even get a sense of the passage of that much time at the beginning.  But, yeah, so he was in the military about 20-something--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes, 27 years.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: So when he retired he went to Europe.
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You see, we had been stationed in Germany, and we came to know various places in Europe, and we fell in love with Switzerland.  Have you ever been to Switzerland?  Oh, you must go.  It's beautiful. And we liked it.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your favorite town, Lausanne [Switzerland].
Speaker 2: Lausanne?
Speaker 1: Mmhm.
Speaker 2: You know, there's one called Lucerne [Switzerland] too, but Lausanne is in the French speaking.  Lucerne is in the German speaking part.  It was really funny.  First, we knew that we had to go to the Embassy, the American Embassy in Bern [Switzerland].  So we up to Bern and--oh, I'm trying to think.  I guess we rented a car.  I don't remember how we got around.  But we went up to Bern, and we were told that, yes--we thought of living in Geneva [Switzerland], 'cause we knew Geneva; we didn't know Lausanne at all.  And we were told that Geneva was rather crowded, but down the lake [Lake Geneva] or up the lake there was this very charming place called Lausanne where housing was more available and we might investigate it.  He gave us the name of a lawyer, and we drove up to Lausanne.  On the way, we stopped for directions to the office where the [juraunts?], the real estate people.  And while I was waiting for my husband [Marcus Ray] in the car, I happened to look over to the left and I saw a beautiful new apartment building.  And when he returned to the car, I said, "Now, if you can find me and apartment in that building, I'd be very happy."  So we went on to the real estate office, and it just so happened that they were handling that building.  And so right then and there, we made arrangements to--for them to hold an apartment for us, and they did, the apartment on the twelfth floor, I think.  And we returned to Chicago [Illinois], and then in October, we moved.  And the apartment was hardly finished.  They hadn't put the doors on the cabinets (laughs), but we moved in and we stayed there for say--it was a three-bedroom apartment, really very nice, overlooking the lake, and overlooking the mountains.  And it was so beautiful, that it hard to attend to your--to the matter of settling in, because we'd just stand and gaze out of the window.  It was so beautiful.  We could see Mont Blanc on a clear day.  And, oh, it was nice.  It was a very warm experience, and we met some lovely people.  I joined the American Women's Club there, which finally became more of foreigners than it was American.  But that was all right.  And it was nice meeting the foreign women.  And I had one friend.  We visit back and released--when I was travelling; I'm not traveling any more.  We'd visit and forth.  She was here last year and spent a few days with me.  And it's been-it was pleasant.
Story_ID: 85067
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you have pictures of you and children in different parts of Europe and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: You have some photos of you and your children in different parts of Europe, I know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  They're there.
Speaker 2: So the children had a chance to travel, too?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Well, in 1960, we made a--see they were small when we were stationed in Germany, but they were college children when we went to--in 1960, Marc [Marcus Ray, Jr.] was a junior.  He came of age driving around the cliffs of Spain. We bought a new car and we said, "Well, if we fall down the cliffs, we'll all fall together (laughs).  But it worked out.  Have you ever driven in Spain?  No?  It's an experience.  And the thing of it is they have these people in these old broken-down trucks sailing down the road, taking more space than they should.  But anyway, we survived.  It was nice.  And, well, we drove all through Europe and we enjoyed it.
Speaker 2: Was the atmosphere different in Europe than it is in the United States in terms of race relations?
Speaker 1: Oh, I should say so (laughs).  Ha, America.  They see you as a person, not as a color.  And that was an interesting experience.  Yeah.  They're interested in your class.
Story_ID: 85068
Speaker 1: Yeah, they judge you not by your color so much.  I don't know if they do now because things change.  But I mean when I was there, the Europeans were interested in your character, in your achievement, in your personality.  But color wasn't there.  At least I never felt it.  I didn't--if it was there, I wasn't aware of it.
Speaker 2: Now, what about in Lausanne [Switzerland].  What did they--I mean, were there any other black people in Lausanne when you were there?
Speaker 1: There was one man.  He was a performer.  He was over there for just a brief period of time.  He did some work at the University of Lausanne.  Pharmacology.  He was in Pharmacology.  And he brought his family over, and I came to know them.  The wife was--they were much younger.  And let me see.  Then there was a doctor from some place--not Angola; somewhere along the west coast of Africa.  And he was there doing some work, and I met his--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Unclear)?
Speaker 1: Mm?
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Oh, this was while I was over there, yes.  And I met him and his family.  I remember they had a little asthmatic child, and I was really very sympathetic, because I had been through that with my son.  And down in Geneva [Switzerland] there were one or two families.  One or two, yes.  Very few people.  But, I mean, it didn't matter.  You just found yourself with people who spoke your language.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You lived in Lausanne for quite a while.  Right?
Speaker 1: Seven years.
Speaker 2: Seven years.
Speaker 1: Mmhm.
Speaker 2: Until 1974?
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967] to seventy-four [1974].
Story_ID: 85069
Speaker 1: Now, why did you return to the United States?
Speaker 2: Well, we thought we'd--well, we would fly in every year to see our family.  We'd go to Chicago [Illinois], and then we'd go to New York [New York City, New York] where our kids were.  But you see, we became grandparents during that time, and we felt that we wanted to be closer to our little grandchildren.  We had twin grandsons, and we wanted to be closer to them.  And so we--but we didn't want to go back to Chicago.  Not that we disliked Chicago, but we had just enough of Chicago.  And so my son had gone to college in Massachusetts, so we decided to explore that part of the country.  And we found ourselves in a little town twenty miles from--to the west of Boston [Massachusetts].  Can't think of it now.  Oooo, I.  This is awful.  I lose these things.  I forget them.  And we stayed there for a while, but it was just too much of a small community.  Their idea of cultural activities was the high school chorus (laughs).  You know, it was empty.  We'd go down to--we'd drive the 25--20 miles to Boston to attend the symphony concert and the ballet and that sort of thing.  But so far as--I can't think of the name.  Oh, dear.  It was Framingham [Massachusetts].  Have you ever heard of Framingham?  Yes.  That's where they conducted the heart search on men--not women, despite the fact that women-that heart trouble kill--heart attacks kill more women than cancer.  But they didn't do their experiments on the women.  They did them on men, which I didn't approve of very much.  Well, anyway, we lived--it was a very limited place.  And so we came down here just on an idle visit, and we found that--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: You didn't leave.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we found that there were many changes; for example, I saw a black woman on the television and I was shocked.  And we could stay at any hotel we wanted to.  I was shocked again.  Yes.  Things had changed to some extent.  And we said we might find Washington [D.C.] interesting.  So we came down and did a bit of search.  We looking around Connecticut Avenue, but I noticed none of those apartment buildings had balconies.  And could not image living without a balconies.  And so we started looking further.  As we were driving along the beltway, my husband [Marcus Ray] saw these two buildings overlooking the beltway, and he said, "Let's go in there and try."  And so here we are.  We've been here since '76' [1976].  But I don't think I have lived without a balcony.  I guess people do and they're perfectly happy.  But I--as soon as the weather is fit to enjoy, I get out on the balcony, and I stay.
Story_ID: 85070
Speaker 1: Now, tell me, what are some of your concerns about the black community today; some of your hopes and concerns--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I think the black community, like all communities, is on the downgrade.  I do.  And of course, I think that because the black community has less to build on, it's decline may be faster.  Now, I'm not talking about the middleclass and such upper classes we may have.  I'm not talking about them.  They're doing the right thing, you know.  Well, they call it living the American Dream.   I don't like that expression, but anyway.  They're interest in their children's education and their college education, and so on and so on; the family's stability.  But I don't know.  I think that there's so many things that demean the human being.  Now.  That the things that come from the radio and the movies and such things, that people who don't have a great deal to fall back on or to build on, they are affected even more adversely.  Do you understand what I mean?  Yes.  How do you feel about it?
Speaker 1: Well, this is your interview. So--
Speaker 2: (Laughs.)
Speaker 1: I don't want to go on about that, but I think it's a concern of many people, that--so you were saying before we started everything that you were concerned about the lack of--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Civility.
Speaker 1: Civility.   Right.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Now, I don't think I could be in a school now in case I--I was brought up the old-fashioned way, where politeness and your harmonious relations with people, that was number one.  And it's not like that at all now.
Speaker 1: No. Yes. Well, what are some of the differences you say that you see now?
Speaker 2: I was just mentioned the schools; of course, I don't experience.  I protected from it.  However, I noticed someone who had little children coming in from after-school.  When the bus leaves them, they come rushing into the foyer.  And sometimes the parents are standing around and they say nothing.  But old school teacher me, I have to speak to the children to remind them that they're in a building, and not out in the playground.  And they must be quiet.  And nobody has threatened me, no parent has threatened me, but that's what I do, because someone has to tell them.
Speaker 1: So the general lack of civility and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then too--you know, in Europe, they would call America the "dollar democracy."  Have you ever heard that expression?  You haven't?  Well, it's very common in Europe.  Everything is geared to making money here.  And if you do something that is disastrous to a society, so what?  I don't know what it's like now in Europe, 'cause I've been away almost thirty years.  I hope that they still cling to some of their basic attitudes.  I don't know.  But here, if it brings in profits, we accept it.  And I think that's very harmful.
Story_ID: 85071
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what were your best moments?
Speaker 2: Oh, dear.  I think I enjoyed parenthood.  I like my little children.  And I was sorry they grew up.  They were so much more interesting as little fellows (laughs).  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I don't think I have any.  I mean, as I told you before, I didn't set the world on fire.  I did just with the nine-tenths of people do.  You go to school, you get an education, you work, you marry, you have children; and that's it.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, you're involved in some activities here in [Washington] D.C.  And what are--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No.  Not in D.C.  I do belong to a little group.  It's called WIRF.  The--what do you call it--Women's International Religious--I don't know what the F is for.  I've forgotten.  Anyway, we meet once a month, and whatever money-raising activities we indulge in, we turn over to various groups that work with children.  And I understand there's a hospital here [Silver Spring, Maryland] for ill--children who are ill, and I think we give something to that.  At one time, it was a very large organization, and they're bazaar was held down at the Hilton.  That was my first contact with them.  But like all organizations, you know, they reach a certain level, and then they decline.  And this one is much smaller, although we last, just--was it Monday?  Yes.  We had a end of the season luncheon.  And it was attended by about thirty people, which was very good.  And everybody brought a foreign food or that is--because there's so many foreign women in--and it was interesting.  But outside of that, I belong to a reading club, an interracial reading club, believe it or not.  They're just eight of us, four whites, four blacks.  And read mainly the literature of black female authors.  Sometimes we vary; for example, The poet--oh, what is his name?  It'll come to me.
Story_ID: 85072
Speaker 1: Let me ask you now--say this on tape, now.  You're a member of a book club?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us something about the club.
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's interracial. And we read the books of black female authors.  Of course, sometimes we vary.  We stayed with Langston Hughes for about two months, because he was so interesting.  Do you know his prose as well as his poetry?  Yes.  He's good--well, excellent.  We had a hard time leaving him.  But, normally we stay with women.  It's very amusing.  Our white members say sometimes, "Really, are we that bad?"  (Laughs.)  And we have good laugh.  But I mean, there it is in front of you, you know.  And it's funny.  But they're charming people.  And we, incidentally--you know, they would always, since I'm the oldest person around, they always insist celebrating my birthday with their last meeting.  And so after five years of this, I've had enough.  I said, "Now, this time I'm--you're going to be my guests, and I'm going to celebrate my birthday by having you as my guests.  I'm going to be the hostess."  And they have accepted it.  And so next week we will do that.  They're celebrating my birthday before I really have it, which it--well, it's just a matter of a week or two.
Story_ID: 85073
Speaker 1: Now, to what do you attribute living so long?
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you drive your own car.
Speaker 2: Oh, surely.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I was going to get a new car.  [HM] Amy [Tate Billingsley] took me to a place, and we looked at it and then I decided, I said, now, maybe.  Amy, that was the hardest decision.  I'd stay awake thinking about it and trying to make an intelligent decision, and it's not easy.  Then Marc [Marcus Ray, Jr.] came up for a--a couple of weeks ago--and we talked about it.  And I decided, now, maybe-
Story_ID: 85074
Speaker 1: Yes.  And I have no problem with my driving.  I've never had a serious accident.  I've never had--well, once I skidded on a leaf, wet leaves, and that's the extent of my accidents.  And I don't have any trouble.  I'm alert.  I'm alert.  And you know, I think this:  that the more challenge--of course, there's a limit.  You know when you reach it.  But the more challenge you accept, the stronger you become.  And I think that's why people decline so quickly in these retirement homes and such places, you see.  I have to do everything for myself.  Oh, I finally found a woman who'd come in--who'd come in once a month and do a little cleaning for me.  But other than that, I do everything for myself.  And I think I'm better off for it.  So anyway, we talked about the car, and I said, "Well, I give myself maybe about two or three more years to drive, maybe not that long."  Although, unless suddenly happens, I should be all right.  And I can spend a few several thousand dollars and have a new motor put in my--I have a Volvo, six-cylinder Volvo.  And it needs attention.  And so I'm going to do that, spend the money, because I have to spend so much more money to buy a new car, and then the minute you take it off the floor, it loses its value.
Speaker 2: Now you're saying then that by doing more it helps you stay active-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Oh, I should say so.
Speaker 2: --keeps you healthy?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And are--is there any other thing that you attribute long life to?
Speaker 1: Well, my father [Andrew Charles DeLuc] lived to be 85.  My mother [Alma Toups DeLuc] died early, died at 60.  She had her first attack of asthma at 50, and by the time she was 60, her heart just gave out.  Yeah.  It runs on her side of the family.  But, I have my father's genes.  I'm tall, and I was once slender as he was, and we have the same interests in music and literature and that sort of thing.  Yeah, I think.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Do you exercise?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  Every morning for 10, 15 minutes, yes.  I have gotten into difficulty 'cause I've done things that have--I pulled a hamstring.  And I had to go to the physical therapy people and get some exercises.  It takes a long time for it to--I do.  I take care of it every morning; that is, I do my exercises or that even before I get up.  But it goes on and on.  But I don't have any internal problem.
Speaker 2: Do you ride a bicycle?
Speaker 1: No.  No.  No.  I have to be careful about doing--I used to walk, but my leg bothers me now.  And I do my walking around here.
Speaker 2: What kind of foods do you eat?
Speaker 1: What kind of what?
Speaker 2: What kind of foods do you eat?
Speaker 1: Oh, I eat my vegetables and fruit and drink a lot of water.  I don't eat red meat.  I like chicken, not very much.  I like fish.  I like salmon and other fish.
Story_ID: 85075
Speaker 1: Now, what advice would you give young people today?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.
Speaker 1: A lot of it, huh?
Speaker 2: I should say so.
Speaker 1: (Laughs.)
Speaker 2: Well, decide very early in life what you want out of life, and then work toward that end, because throughout your life, you are bombarded with negative attitudes.  And you have to steel yourself against those--your so-called friends with those attitudes--in order to preserve yourself.  You don't do that, you're in trouble, because boys, not girls, but boys can influence boys to a negative result in the same way that girls influence girls to a--to negative, yes.  You can adopt their attitudes, and before you know it you're in trouble.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 85076
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  I don't even know that I want to be remembered (laughs).  "She tried."  (Laughs.)  That's about all.
Speaker 1: Well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Oh, you're more than welcome.
Story_ID: 85077
Speaker 1: ...(unclear) you've got a hat on.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Go ahead and tell us about the top one, now.
Speaker 1: The top?  I can't even see it.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  You can't see it?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Let me try to angle it towards you a little bit.  I don't want to mess Matthew up.
Speaker 1: In Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois] and I am about eleven years old.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  (Unclear.)
Speaker 1: Now, there would be a race with the girls and a race with the boys.
Speaker 2: That's about 1919.  Right?  When you were (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yes.  Now this is, oh, a little bit later, maybe I was about fourteen years old.  That's crazy, that picture.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  (Laughs.)  Okay.
Speaker 1: She was not bosomy like modern girls, you know.  She was very flat chested.  Yeah.  But that was a nice dress.  She had gorgeous hair.  They were, as I say, they were biracial.  And, of course, the girls took after the father.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  You know, I think I'm getting a glare.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are you ready?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Yeah.  (Unclear.)
Speaker 1: Oh, you got it.  Okay.  All right.  You got the caption without all of the glare.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Glare on that, yes.
Speaker 1: My sister was 16 and my brother was 18, and we were going to a party.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  And you were 14, you say?
Speaker 1: Mmhm.
Speaker 2: Now, do we know your sister's and brother's names?  Did we have that?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Just name them for the caption.
Speaker 1: Leona and Andrew.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: So.  All right.
Speaker 2: You're a mess, Amy (laughs).  It's all right.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Tell us about this photo, please.
Speaker 2: Well, now the regiment was an infantry regiment in Chicago [Illinois], the Eighth Regiment.  You know the--is that still there, the Eighth Regiment Armory?
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  The fort's closed down.  The last they had there with (Mikey?) Missiles.
Speaker 2: Oh, is that so.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  They closed that.
Speaker 2: Well, he and another officer were sent to Fort Benning, Georgia for training.  And they were the only two black officers.  And do you know, about thirty-five white officers--sorry--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  (Laughs.)
Speaker 2: (Laughs.)
Speaker 1: --sent--well, I'm just telling you; I mean, you know what it's like--went to the commandant and told him that they refused to serve with him.  And do you know that was General George Marshall.  You heard of him?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The Marshall Plan.
Speaker 1: He said, "Well, I'm sorry.  If you can't adjust yourself, you'll have to go."  And he wrote out dismissal orders for all thirty-five of them.  So my husband thought, "Wow."  (Laughs.)  And he was devoted to George Marshall from that time on.  Yes.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  That's sad.  That's Marcus?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Marcus Ray.
Speaker 2: Marcus Ray.  And what rank was he when he returned?
Speaker 1: He was a colonel.
Speaker 2: Colonel.
Speaker 1: Full colonel.  Third colonel.
Speaker 2: I want to get this one captioned so everybody knows--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --when they see the picture who it is.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) from Germany.
Speaker 1: Can they yodel?
Speaker 2: (Laughs.)  They--I guess they tried.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  And their names?
Speaker 2: Larry and Steven [ph.].  Larry is the small one, Steven is the larger one.
Speaker 1: Those are your grandson's kids?  Okay.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  They're thirty-five now.
Speaker 1: Who are they?
Speaker 2: Mm?
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Same two?
Speaker 2: Are they the same two?
Speaker 1: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 2: Who are these?
Speaker 1: It's the same people.
Speaker 2: Well, we don't know until you tell us.  You have to (unclear).
Speaker 1: Oh (laughs).
Speaker 2: We see you're giving your voice--your voice is being recorded.
Speaker 1: Oh, you know, you didn't tell me.
Speaker 2: That's why I'm--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: You're supposed to tell us--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: All right, now.  You want me to tell you.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well then, then are my grandchildren.  I think they were about four or five in one picture.  And about--well, they're in their teens somewhere in the other picture.  One, the smaller one, is Larry; the larger one is Steven.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  My--the daughters a Ray.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  (Unclear.)  Okay.  Who is that lovely woman?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Can you tell us for the recording?
Speaker 1: Who is this?
Speaker 2: This is my husband's mother.  Unfortunately, she died very young at fifty-four.  She had diabetes, and she suffered a lot.  But before she died, she knew that we were engaged, we were going to marry, and she had an opportunity to admire my engagement ring.  Okay.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Start at the top.
Speaker 2: All right.  This is Adine's graduation picture.  She was--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: This is your daughter.  Right?
Speaker 2: Right.  Adine is my daughter.  She was 17 going on 18.  She was born on July 7th.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: And there is Marc [Marcus Ray, Jr.].  Marc was 17.  He had just made 17, and he was 17 in April.  Very, very good student.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: (Pause)
Speaker 1: Which could be awkward.
Speaker 2: They are, are they?
Speaker 1: And they're my darlings.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's them when they were younger?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  I just wish they would have stayed that way.  But they didn't.
Speaker 2: Now what year is this?
Speaker 1: Let me see.  Dee Dee [Adine] was three, and Marc was a year and a half.  So, let's see.  She was born in--when was she born?  In--oh, gosh.
Speaker 2: It was just after the war--at the beginning of the war [World War II].  Right, '41' [1941]?  Is that it?  Or '42' [1942]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, '41' [1941].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The anniversary.  Let's see.  When did we marry?  In what year?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  So, these are your 25th Anniversary photos?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So this is Adine Ray, and this is Marcus Ray.
Speaker 1: Thirty-four.  We married in '34' [1934].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  What was this occasion?
Speaker 2: My daughter was getting her doctorate from Columbia University [New York City, New York].  Now, don't ask me when that was.  I'm trying to think.  I see.  My husband had already passed; otherwise he would have been there.  Oh, dear, dear, dear.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Oh, that's okay.
Speaker 2: Goodness.  Goodness.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  What's this?
Speaker 2: We were dating then.  I don't think we were married.  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: So that's in the thirties [1930s].  Right?--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Was this a typical day for you, out at the beach?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Oh, yes.  We would go out to, you know, to the lake at South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] there.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  So this is at Lake Michigan in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: My uncle's dog (laughs).
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  And is--that's in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I didn't leave Chicago until I was '67' [1967].  That's when we left.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  (Laughs.)  That's not so bad.
Speaker 2: Now, the cute part is the good part (laughs).
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Nineteen twenty-three.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) pictures (laughs).
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: And this was out in our garden.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear.)  Who is this?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Can you see that?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: They're doing the Charleston it looks like.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  The Charleston was at its height in those days.  What is that?  We were very affected by the movies, you know.  The movies back then were fit to see.  And parents didn't have to worry about their children going to the movies.
Speaker 2: There were no ratings back then.
Speaker 1: Yes.  No.  And I don't ever remember seeing something that should have been X-rated when I was a child.  They just didn't exist.
Speaker 2: Now they're big time.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Who was taking these pictures?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.
Speaker 1: The glare (unclear).
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Here we go.  Okay.  What was the occasion here?  (Unclear) feathers (unclear).
Speaker 1: Oh, it was accustomed for us to go to the photographer, have these pictures made and give them to our friends.  That was the in thing.
Speaker 2: Like the pigeons.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  (Laughs.)  They're filthy creatures.  Venice, Italy.  When were you there?
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Mmhm.
Speaker 2: Oh, let's see.  You know I was there twice.  I have to--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Unclear) little.
Speaker 2: Mm?
Speaker 1: (Unclear) little.
Speaker 2: I was very little?  Then that was while we stationed in Germany, because we--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --yes--because we returned in 1960.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) kind of little.  In fact, I think it's in the forties [1940s] 'cause they're like little kids.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Okay.  What are we seeing here?
Speaker 1: Now, that's [HM] Eileen [Cline], very dynamic woman; and [HM] Amy [Tate Billingsley].
Speaker 2: Okay.  So the tall one is Eileen --(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Mmhm.
Speaker 2: --and Amy's on this side, and you're in the middle.  Right?
Speaker 1: And they insisted that they're impressed by that mink coat.  You know, there is no point in having a mink coat and this region.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Mmhm.
Speaker 1: I enjoyed it in Chicago because it's so very cold.  But here, it stays in the closet year after year.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  And who are these people?
Speaker 1: The tall one is my daughter.
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: And the shorter one is my daughter-in-law.  Oh, yes.  That's my daughter.  And I think that's overlooking Lake Geneva, Lake Lamond there in Switzerland; in Lozan, Switzerland; or that is along the lake somewhere.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: Ilene.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  (Unclear)
Speaker 1: That's her.  That's Ms. Ray and Eileen.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Oh.
Speaker 1: Mmhm.
Speaker 2: Eileen who?  (Unclear.)  What's Eileen 's last name?
Speaker 1: Cline.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: C-L-I-N-E.  Bridge club.  I don't mean bridge.  I mean my book club.  Yeah.  This tall woman on the end is the wife of a doctor, and she has had a great deal of muscular trouble.  Blouse [ph.] is a lawyer and an absolutely charming woman.  But she's fighting breast cancer, and you'd never know it from her manner.  She's just as alive and it's surprising.  Now, this is my birthday last year.  You see what I mean?  They insist on celebrating my birthday (laughs).
Speaker 2: My daughter is right here in the red.  And a close friend of mine, she's a retired lawyer.  She was with NASA.  NASA.  And I'm around somewhere.  There I am down at the bottom.
Speaker 1: Now that's--oh, what is it?  You tell me again.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Matterhorn.
Speaker 1: Matterhorn.  Yes.  The Matterhorn.  It's a colorful little country.  I love it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Matterhorn.  I remember that because Walt Disney had a--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: ...it was '41' [1941].  The dollar bought four francs.  When we left, it bought about two.  Yeah.  My husband said, "I love Switzerland, but I don't intend to buy it."  (Laughs.)
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  And who's in this photo?
Speaker 1: That's my daughter-in-law and Amy and my son.  Chuck.  And that's mother and daughter.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  And this is your ninetieth (90th)?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  This is the ninetieth (90th).
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  And that's your son Marc?
Speaker 1: And my son Marcus, yes, looking.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: I bet you know [HM] Frances Matlock.  I bet you know her.
