Story_ID: 662601
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Full name is Andrea Theresa Roane Skehan, so it's first name A-N-D-R-E-A, middle name Theresa, T-H-E-R-E-S-A, last name R-O-A-N-E, professional.  Married name Skehan, S as in Sam, K-E-H-A-N as in Nancy, but I go by [HistoryMaker] Andrea Roane on television.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 5th, 1949.  I was born in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And your occupation and title.
Speaker 2: My occupation now is television news anchor--morning news anchor at WUSA 9 [WUSA-TV, Washington, D.C.], the Gannett [Gannett Company, Inc.] owned affiliate CBS.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 27th of January, it is a Monday--
Speaker 1: And where are we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) two thousand fourteen [2014], and we are broadcasting--we are being interviewed right here at our Channel 9 studios Broadcast House in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 662602
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five warm up questions--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that we ask and they only require short answers.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I do have a favorite food. It's soft shell crabs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Fried soft shell crabs.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Egg yolk yellow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: There are several; I love Tuscany [Italy] and I love France.  We have family there, so it's always nice to go where family is in France.  They are in the--near the town of Monts pays [ph.], which is about forty-five minutes to an hour's train ride outside of Paris [France]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I like going home to New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Try it, you might like it.
Story_ID: 662603
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history; your mother's side of the family and your father's [Frederic Roane, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name Ethel, E-T-H-E-L, maiden name Simon, S-I-M-O-N, last name R-O-A-N-E [Ethel Simon Roane].
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March the 10th, 1925, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: What can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and do they have a history of being some other place other than New Orleans?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know a whole lot about the family because a lot of the records that I had gathered were lost in Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], but I have gone back as far as on my mother's father's side, all the way back to a great-great-grandmother, and their names--Joseph Bartholomew [ph.], and no one could remember the grandmother's name--my grandfather's grandmother's name, and we had to find some--they had to settle a claim for oil--little bit of oil found on the land, so we went back to the court records in St. John Parish [sic. St. James Parish] in Vacherie, Louisiana, and we found out her name was Caroline Malboroux [Caroline Malboroux Bartholomew (ph.)], even though on the census forms taken they don't list her as Caroline; they list a whole bunch of different names, but on the written form for who owned the land, it was Caroline Malboroux and Bartholomew, Joseph, and they gave birth to (pronunciation) Marie Josef [Marie Bartholomew Simon (ph.)], that's how they said it in Vacherie, Louisiana, Creole accent, and she gave birth to my grandfather Celestin Simon, who was my mother's father, and my grandmother, maternal grandmother, don't know as much about them because her mother and father--her mother died shortly after childbirth, and her father died shortly thereafter; I don't know whether it was the flu epidemic that happened or childbirth, but she ended up being adopted by her grandparents, so even though her mother and father had a different last name, she has always gone by Nellie Taylor [Nellie Taylor Simon] as her maiden name and Simon as her married name; she married Celestin who was my mother's father, and she was raised by her father, Grandpop John [John Taylor] and his wife Cecile Miller [Cecile Miller Taylor (ph.)], and I do know that great-grandfather's [sic.] father's name was Henry [Henry Taylor (ph.)], but I don't know much about them at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How do you spell Maligrew?
Speaker 2: Malboroux?  I don't even remember; I've put it down, Malboroux, I believe it's M-A-L-B-O-R-U-X, Malboroux--R-O-U-X, like Malboroux--but Caroline, and that was on the, the forms in the courthouse as I said, St. John Parish in Vacherie, Louisiana.
Story_ID: 662604
Speaker 1: For those who are watching this in the future and for those who--some--who are watching it now, tell us a little bit about Creole culture 'cause your mother's family is Creole (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, I mean--you--they spoke the Creole language, there are--there is always someone else in the family tree besides just those people of African ancestry, and with, with these people--again, I don't know a whole lot about who was, who was who--most of the people that I've told you about we do know are black, but we don't know about the other side of the family and what they were, but my mother's father spoke English; after age twelve, he spoke Creole, his mother [Marie Bartholomew Simon (ph.)] spoke some English but was comfortable in the Creole language which is more of a patois where Cajun is more 18th century French.  Creole is kind of a mishmash of, of English, French--they understand each other--Cajuns and Creoles understand the language, but it's, it's not pure French.  And--in fact, my mother [Ethel Simon Roane] made her First Holy Communion in Vacherie, Louisiana in French because her grandmother wanted to know--her paternal grandmother wanted to be able to understand and, and carry on that tradition of the family having roots in Vacherie, Louisiana so she made her First Holy Communion twice, once in English in the city, and then in Vacherie for the grandmother.  And that--I mean I don't know--as I said, I don't know that much about 'em because before 'Roots,' quite frankly, I didn't even ask a whole lot of questions, and you forget that that is important.  I think young people know that it's important now to find out about their history as far back as they can go, but I never even thought about it.  And then at that time, the grandparents I wanted to ask, and could have answered some of my questions, had died.  My grandfather died and his sister, who survived, didn't remember; I mean she could not remember what her grandmother's first name was.  It was, "We just called her Maw Maw," (laughter), so when I found out her first name was Caroline [Caroline Malboroux Bartholomew (ph.)], she said, "Oh, yeah," you know, 'cause it wasn't that important.  You knew who they were but you never thought that this may be something that should be passed down or that it wouldn't be passed down.  I don't think they even realized that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or even that it might have a legal implications.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And we didn't know all of this until we had a legal issue--who owned this piece of property so therefore we could get the little bit of money--it was just a little bit--from, I think it was Texaco [Texaco, Inc.], I can't remember, but it was something and it was a windfall no one expected.  So that's what I know about that; my grandfather, the paternal--maternal grandfather's family know very little about--my grandfather was Celestin Simon; his father was Anatole, and it seems as if they go back and forth with the name--Anatole may have had a Celestin as his father, but I couldn't find anything on (pronunciation) Anatole Simon, as it was pronounced back then because no one was around to say where he actually was born.  He was not born in Vacherie.  Some say LaPlace, Louisiana, but I couldn't find anything on that side of the family except my grandfather's mother's side.  And on the maternal grandmother [Nellie Taylor Simon], again, not a lot of records for her and, in fact, when she went to Europe for the first time, it was a hard time getting a passport because she had nothing; born in the home of a relative in the City of New Orleans [Louisiana], we knew that, but there wasn't a surviving birth certificate.  I think there had been a fire or something, so she had nothing.  We had to go to other contemporary--contemporaries of hers to verify that she was alive at this stage in her life, and the, the state department--INS [U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service], immigration, you know, whatever--who issues visas, they took that.  But now it wouldn't be so easy to get a first time passport if we had just that flimsy material to go on.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I don't know a whole lot about them; what I've pieced together is just pieces; they're, they're not evenly cut from the puzzle, they kind of forced them together, but I wish I knew more.
Story_ID: 662605
Speaker 1: Did your mother's father [Celestin Simon] have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: He did, but only, I think, until elementary school.  His wife, my grandmother [Nellie Taylor Simon]--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: --my grandmother, finished an equivalent of high school, but they believed strongly in education.  They weren't wealthy people but my mother [Ethel Simon Roane] and her sister [Earline Simon Wilkerson] they went to what were the best public schools in their areas and they both attended Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and my grandfather told them, "Your job is education," so they never even had part-time jobs when they were growing up, and this is growing up in the '40s [1940s]; they were in college in the '40s [1940s], but they believed in the power of education to get you to the next level--to the level that was beyond where they came from, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did your mother's parents do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father--my grandfather was--I can't remember what I put down on the sheet 'cause I had to ask my mother.  He was a labor organizer for the--I don't remember the actual name of the, the labor, but they were like carpenters and, and those kinds of people, so they built some of the buildings during the era when Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] was having things built, and my grandmother was a homemaker; she did some practical nursing, and for some people she was an expert seamstress and some people would have her do fine sewing for them, but basically she was a homemaker raising her two daughters.
Speaker 1: Are there any memorable stories your mother told you about growing up in New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: No memorable stories really about growing up except that my mother was very ill when she was younger; had some gastrointestinal issues.  Not cancer or anything like that, but was enough to make her seriously, almost deathly, ill.  And again, the, the power of education--she was determined she was going to finish with her class at Xavier.  She would take eighteen to twenty some hours of course work and the nuns weren't so sure that she could handle this because she had been so seriously ill, but she was determined to do that; she did finish with her class, she--I don't know; as I said, they didn't talk a whole lot about those types of things, they just lived their daily lives and impressed upon my brother [Frederic Roane, Jr.] and me the importance of education and that nothing should hold us back.
Story_ID: 662606
Speaker 1: Is it significant like where she grew up in New Orleans [Louisiana]?  I mean the neighborhood or--
Speaker 2: They, they grew up Uptown, and before they owned their own homes they did live in (air quotes) a housing project, but people didn't see housing projects the way they see them now, as ghettos or something like that; these were the housing projects where they had rose garden competitions and who had the best roses growing in their front yard.  And with my grandmother [Nellie Taylor Simon] being such an expert seamstress, she had beautiful curtains in the windows and she made my, my mother [Ethel Simon Roane] and her sister [Earline Simon Wilkerson] their clothes so they looked as fashionable as anyone could with what they had.  My grandmother was so good that for my aunt, my mother's sister's wedding--she wanted a certain kind of wedding gown and my grandmother went down to the store, saw something, kind of sketched out a rough pattern, and made that wedding gown for her daughter and--but it, it was a totally different thing; it was--this place where you lived didn't define who you were, and with those kinds of activities, people never thought of themselves as coming out of this horrible place where there was no escape.  It was seen as the next step up, and the next up was to buy their family home, and then to buy another home, rent that out so you had income coming in, and just--and then educating their children so that they could do better than they did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's a good point--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --projects were a lot different (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, very different; when she would talk about these rose garden competitions, you know, it's kind of like, wow.  You pass by projects now, or at least before Hurricane Katrina in the area where they used to live, and you would think, wow, no one's ever planted a rose bush or anything like that.  In the '80s [1980s], '90s [1990s], Katrina came; they have rebuilt in some of the areas where they used to live and there these lovely little cottages and--with greenery in front and picket fence, the white picket fence around.  And you look at that and you realize, wow, now all these years after Katrina, all these years after they've been built, they still look good.  The grass is still green, there's no trash.  People take on the environment in which they find themselves and if you live in something that looks like a home, you treat it like your home, not something that if it's not right, I can just walk away from.  And that's what it was, I think, when they were growing up.  This may not have been the home they owned but it was the home they lived in, so they kept it like the home they lived in, like a home for a family.  It was a family of four and, and--I think even with the, the tough times.  My grandfather [Celestin Simon] had to pay a poll tax in order to vote, but they didn't let this chip rest on their shoulders.  Rolled right off, go forward; don't let anything stop you, and education is the way to push that wheel down the path.
Story_ID: 662607
Speaker 1: Let me ask about your father's side of the family now.  Can you give us your father's full name?
Speaker 2: My father's full name Frederic, F-R-E-D-E-R-I-C, middle name Barber, B-A-R-B-E-R, last name R-O-A-N-E [Frederic Roane, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 20th, 1922.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was he born in New Orleans?
Speaker 2: Born in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now what can you tell us about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: Again, it's, it's kind of complicated; don't know a whole lot 'cause nobody really talked a lot about any of that kind of stuff.  His father was James Garfield Roane [James Roane], and I did find some World War--I think it was World War I [WWI]--military records on him and he was born outside of New Orleans, Louisiana--White, White something, Louisiana; it's, it's down on the sheet, I don't remember.  He was a Pullman porter and worked on the Illinois Central Railroad, and I remember as a young child, we had a--my father also worked for the railroad.  When I was young, he was a mail handler, literally taking those big, big mail sacks off the, the trucks and--off the train cars and putting them where they needed to go to get to everyone else.  And because he worked for Illinois Central, we had train passes; my mother [Ethel Simon Roane] still has her train pass and it'll be hers until the day she dies.  And my brother [Frederic Roane, Jr.] and I could go free on the train until we were twelve, and then after that, for a certain amount of time, half price, and once you became seventeen or eighteen, pay your own way kid.  And I just remember going on train trips to Chicago [Illinois], and my grandfather being the Pullman porter on that train.  And he had this wonderful, deep voice and he had the, you know, what you see the, the Pullman porters in the old pictures, the starched white jacket, that hat that they wear and, you know, people--again talk about people who had those roles in terms that are sometimes pejoratives, but he was well respected and looked up to by the white conductors, and no one ever put him down, and when they knew we were on the train--James Garfield Roane's grandchildren and his son and family were on the train, we were treated like royalty; I mean it was really--that's some of the memories I remember about him, being a Pullman porter.  His wife, Mary Porter Roane, was from Plaquemine, Louisiana and Mary, from what I knew about her, she was again a homemaker and took care of the two sons she had--my father Frederic and his brother John [John Roane].  And I don't know much about her family, I did meet more of her family, I never met anyone except my grandfather's sister; her name was Mary [ph.] as well, who lived with them for a time, until she died.  That was the only relative I met on her [sic.] side, but on my grandmother Mary Roane's side, I met her--her sisters and some brothers and nieces; she was called--what was she called?  Her sister was Anna [ph.] bebe, but that wasn't her real name.  I forgot what my grandmother was called, but they had a name for her because she was like the, the, the baby of the family and treated specially.  Their father was Richard Porter.  I know--I remember what he looked like because she had a picture of him on one of the dressers in a bedroom at their home; he was a minister at one point, I think a United Methodist minister or a minister of the Methodist church, I'm not sure if it was United, and he was Richard Porter from Plaquemine, Louisiana and I don't remember the grandmother's name but I did know Richard Porter.  I think her mother's name may have been Mary [Mary Porter], too; it was easy--a lot of Marys and Maries (laughter), but not a lot about their family, unfortunately.  And again, everybody's so scattered now; when my dad died, he was the connection to everyone else and so that was lost, and then Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].  Katrina is like something that blew away a lot of memories, and a lot of people scattered to the wind, so--that's kind of sad.
Speaker 1: Yeah, really--you know, yeah.  It just changed the entire--
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) course of the history of the city.
Speaker 2: It, it really did, really did.
Story_ID: 662608
Speaker 1: Now your father was able to finish high school and go to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] too, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, my father finished high school, he was in the [U.S.] Navy.  He was a cook in the Navy but he served the admiral, so he was fine cooking and he continued the fine cooking; he was like the best cook in the world, and so he did that; didn't have many pictures of him even though they had a year book from one of the ships that he served on because he cut his picture out.  My father loved the Navy but didn't like where he was positioned in the Navy; he was much more than a cook and didn't appreciate that, and didn't want that memory, I guess, because I never saw him in pictures.  One picture we had of him in the official photography that the Navy takes of all of its new enlistees--great picture, but when his mother [Mary Porter Roane] died, his brother [John Roane] took that picture along with everything else; his brother died and then--so I don't have that picture of my dad, but that was--he, he was, he was proud of the job that he did but not, not happy that that's what the Navy did with a lot of blacks.
Speaker 1: He served in the segregated Navy during World War II [WWII], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yes he did; served in the--wanted to be in the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] or [U.S.] Army but his mother wouldn't--he wanted to sign up like at sixteen or something, and his mother wasn't going to have her sixteen year old go off to war and he had to have her permission, so as soon as he was old enough, it was easier I guess, he joined the Navy and, you know, that's what happened.
Speaker 1: Do you know where he actually served?
Speaker 2: He was in the Pacific.  I think he may have gone to Europe once, but it was basically the Pacific, yeah.
Speaker 1: South Pacific?  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I've heard from the Navy vets from that era who say that Navy was probably the worst in terms of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, it was, I mean--and, and he was--along with other blacks and Filipinos; I mean that's what their job was.  But, again, that wasn't gonna define Fred Roane [Frederic Roane, Sr.] at all, and so he came out, went to Xavier, and then went to a school in New York for dental tech, and eventually wanted to be a dentist I think.  A position came open somewhere in the [U.S.] military, and from our last name and even the spelling of his first name, no obvious, this is a black man, and he--there was a, a telegram that was in his records before Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] of course, that talked about him getting this position and then rescinding the position when they found out that he was a black man.  So, again, even the military wasn't gonna be Navy working--it was some other branch, and he still didn't get that.  But, again, didn't let it stop him; when he came back home--he had been in New York for dental school, my mother [Ethel Simon Roane] was there, they were pregnant, she was not going to have me born in some strange city away from her family, so came back here.  My dad even thought about coming to Washington, D.C., tried out for the police force [Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia] and my mother didn't wanna live here either, so went back home and his father [James Roane] said, "Come and work for the railroad."  So he also went to work for then Illinois Central [Illinois Central Railroad] as the mail handler, and then through affirmative action, when they needed to hire minorities in management positions, he was the one with the education, he got tapped and he was assistant station manager at Union Station [New Orleans Union Station, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Story_ID: 662609
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met (unclear)?
Speaker 2: They met at Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and I, I don't know a whole lot about the story but I do know my mother [Ethel Simon Roane] said her father warned her about those military veterans coming back and, you know, 'cause they were older, experienced men, and he was not having that and neither was his daughter.  But my dad [Frederic Roane, Sr.] was a, a different kind of person; he was serious kind of guy, he was a respectful kind of guy, his parents had taught him well.  Even when he was in the [U.S.] Navy I do remember him telling us about how excited he was to have met Mary McLeod Bethune because he said when a lot of the other guys went off and they were going to bars and looking for women and stuff like that, he would go to historical sites or see what was in the town, and I don't remember exactly where he met her, but he did meet Mary McLeod Bethune and they had a conversation and that just made his day.  So that was the kind of person he was, and that was the kind of person he presented himself to my, my mother and then to her parents, so my grandfather Celestin [Celestin Simon], who he called Chief, gave his seal of approval to this young man.  My father was Methodist so that was an issue for the Catholic church, and he had to go through all of the training to promise that any issue from the, the marriage would be raised Catholic and they, they were agreed upon (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So the Catholic church makes you do that; I mean they require you to do that if they--
Speaker 2: It did then, and--
Speaker 1: --go forward in the marriage--
Speaker 2: Exactly.  It did then and it probably still does, maybe in some--maybe not as dictatorial as it was back in the '40s [1940s]; they were married in '48 [1948], but yes--and so he signed the papers and they were married at Holy Ghost Catholic Church [Holy Ghost Church, New Orleans, Louisiana] where I was baptized, where my brother [Frederic Roane, Jr.] was baptized, where I made my First Holy Communion, and it was the parish in which we lived, and it was so funny because most people did not know my father was not Catholic.  He was very involved in our education and our upbringing in the Catholic schools and in the church, and he would be volunteered or would volunteer to take some of the nuns to their dental appointments and things like that.  My mother taught at the Catholic school where I attended, Holy Ghost elementary school [Holy Ghost Catholic School; Opelousas Catholic School, New Orleans, Louisiana], and so she taught there for about nine years--at least through my seventh grade she was there, and he was a very active parent.  My brother went to a different school 'cause we had moved, he went to St. Paul the Apostle School [New Orleans, Louisiana], and again, daddy was called on to be an usher if the regular usher wasn't there, and my dad's last words to us before he fell ill and had a very short illness--he went with my mother on Saturdays to church almost every Saturday, and it was at a Maria Goretti [St. Maria Goretti Church] in New Orleans East [Eastern New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana], and my mother said he sang louder than anybody there and he knew almost everybody in the parish; went up and talked to the priest, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, and then came home and laid out his suit to go to his church, Peoples United Methodist Church [New Orleans, Louisiana], the very next day, but took ill that Saturday night and about six days later, daddy was gone.  But (crying)--I'm sorry.
Story_ID: 662610
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --their sense of humor, how they walked, how they talk, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I am my father's daughter in temperament, personality--that type of thing; I am my mother's daughter in my nose, and they were--they are Ethel [Ethel Mertz] and Fred [Fred Mertz], right?  Ethel [Ethel Simon Roane] and Frederic [Frederic Roane, Sr.].
Speaker 1: That's right, the famous Fred (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fred and Ethel; they were nothing like the Mertzes, these were more like Tweedle Dee, Tweedle Dum; they loved doing things together, they worked together to, to just give us the best existence they possibly could.  I, I admire them.  I did a newspaper interview a couple of years ago--when I first came to Washington [D.C.] it was a Catholic standard, and they're always asking about who are your role models, and since I never thought about going into television, I don't have TV role models, and my role models are my family because of what they accomplished in spite of.  New Orleans [Louisiana]--not like Bogalusa [Louisiana] maybe but still a segregated town, but I never felt the, the overt pain of segregation and they made sure that whatever we could--they could afford, my brother and I, he's Frederic, Jr. [Frederic Roane, Jr.], could have, and the fact that we were able to travel so freely on board Amtrak [National Railroad Passenger Corporation], Illinois Central [Illinois Central Railroad], that took us out.  I, I never went to--Pontchartrain Beach [New Orleans, Louisiana] was the big beach, "By the beach, by the beach, by the beautiful beach."  I couldn't have fun at Pontchartrain Beach because it was just a little too tan, so what do we do?  We get on the train and we go to New York [New York], we visit family there and you go to Coney Island [New York, New York] or you go to someplace like that.  Maybe you couldn't go into the zoo, or you went into the zoo at a particular time, so what do you do?  You get on the train, you go to the Bronx Zoo [New York, New York], you go to City Park, Cent- you can't go to City Park [New Orleans, Louisiana] and have the kind of fun you want, you go to Central Park [New Orleans, Louisiana].  So, you know, they--again, and they followed with that belief that education was going to be the ticket, and for me it was the same as my mother's father [Celestin Simon] had told her, "Your job is education.  You go to school, do the best you can, we'll worry about giving you the money for the things that you need."  And my father was the one who was my biggest fan always, and (laughter) even when they travelled to Europe, I would give him--they didn't need anything for Christmas, so for Christmas I would give him a logo shirt with something that said, Channel 9 [WDVM-TV; WUSA-TV, Washington, D.C.], and he wore it one time in Paris [France] and someone stopped him who was from the states--from the Washington, D.C. area.  "Oh, are you from Washington, D.C.?"  "No, but my daughter's on TV.  Do you know [HistoryMaker] Andrea Roane?"  (Laughter) That's--they were just beaming with pride, not just 'cause I was on television, but they had the same kind of pride when I was in the classroom, when I graduated college, high school, grade school, music school, which I wasn't the greatest in music school, but they were supportive, they were funny, they might have argued, but after the argument, you'd hear them talking and going over the day's events, and, thank goodness, not a lot of arguing, so we didn't have any of that kind of strife in the home.  You know, I had a good, good childhood; I had a very good childhood and I wasn't anxious about anything, I had two sets of grandparents who cared a lot and were close to, and I just feel very fortunate in, in what I had, and they loved to--my father always encouraged travel and I think that was the other good, good thing he found in the [U.S.] Navy was the traveling and seeing what the world was like; he always talked about Cuba and how, you know, he wished I could have seen Cuba before Castro [Fidel Castro] 'cause it was, it was a wonderful place and he loved being, being in Cuba and he always encouraged travel and that was one of the things that I, I did and, and traveled as much as I could.  And he said, "Do it before you get married and before you have children because then that will slow you down," and it did.  But, you know, they were just supportive and encouraging, and encouraging and supportive of each other.  They did feel the, the, the stings of, of segregation but they didn't let it slow them down.  They just knew, keep your eye on the prize, stay focused.  And that was the message that I heard and took in and, I think, followed.
Story_ID: 662611
Speaker 1: You just have the one brother [Frederic Roane, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Just the one brother.
Speaker 1: Is he--he's younger than you, right?
Speaker 2: He is seven years younger than I am so he was born in 1957, August the 12th.  He's a Leo and stubborn like Leos.  And he was a high school graduate with some, some- let's just say a high school graduate, and he also now works for the railroad; he is an assistant manager on the MARC side [MARC Train Service] here in Washington, D.C.  He moved to the Washington, D.C. metro area in the 1990s and has been here all of that time, so my closest family--I come from a very small family, the only brother, and my mother [Ethel Simon Roane] are now here in Washington, D.C.  My dad [Frederic Roane, Sr.] died in 2003 and mother moved here after Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now do you have--so for seven years, you were an only child?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).  Wasn't that nice (laughter)?  That was fun, that was fun.  It was nice being, you know, the girl, the one who had all the attention, but I, I didn't mind my brother coming along.  He was cute and he was seven years younger, so there were those times when you're the teenager and, "Get outta my room, leave me alone, get out of my room, close that door, I'm doing this, that and the other."  So we had that kind of thing but not a, not a bad relationship, you know; not, not--typical, I think, typical.
Story_ID: 662612
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I think some of those early childhood memories--I think the earliest childhood memory I remember being at Sarah Allen nursery school [Sarah Allen Child Development School, New Orleans, Louisiana], and that was a nursery school on the grounds of a United Methodist church, not the one my dad [Frederic Roane, Sr.] belonged to but another one.  And I just kind of remember being there so I would have been two or three or something like that.  I remember my, my elementary school a lot better so that was starting at five o'clock--five years old, because my cousin was my kindergarten teacher.  Carol Simon [ph.] was my kindergarten teacher, and I have a little picture of me and some students just sitting around; we were out of uniform on that day so that must have been a very special occasion for us to have been out of uniform, and--but the earliest, I think, would be Sarah Allen about two or three--two or three, and just being, you know, sleepy time and waking up from sleepy time.  And again, it was, it was good; I enjoyed being there, I loved my eight years at Holy Ghost elementary [Holy Ghost Catholic School; Opelousas Catholic School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and, and high school [Xavier University Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and college [Louisiana State University in New Orleans; University of New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana], it was good, it was good (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, now--
Story_ID: 662613
Speaker 1: What neighborhood did you grow up in, or was it several, I mean (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You talking about Uptown, Downtown, Backatown, out Frontatown, that kind of thing--I grew up in the Uptown neighborhood.  It was--we--I was on Peniston Street [New Orleans, Louisiana], so my grandparents now own their first home; it was a duplex, so it was 2737.  Peniston Street was my grandparents Celestin [Celestine Simon] and Nellie Simon [Nellie Taylor Simon], and next door, my mother [Ethel Simon Roane], me and then my brother [Frederic Roane, Jr.] and my father [Frederic Roane, Sr.], 2739 Peniston, so we were Uptown.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's how the neighborhoods are (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Um-hm.  My paternal grandparents [Mary Porter Roane and James Roane], they were Backatown, and that was close to Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]--their, their neighborhood.  They were on South Genois Street--1225 South Genois Street; beautiful free standing home with a lovely porch, a long, long driveway, and off to the side of the driveway was just beautiful, lush green St. Aug [St. Augustine grass] grass was the, the brand of the variety of the grass, and my grandfather had one of those little push mowers--this was the Pullman porter--and his grass was way high, and he always had snapdragons and daisies out front, and I always remember how beautiful his yard looked, and then he had a little free standing two story apartment in the back where his sister stayed for a time, until her death--that was Gram, she wasn't mine, but she was my dad's great-great-aunt.  And then some other people; somebody--you know, sometimes people from the railroad [Illinois Central Railroad]--he would let them, them stay in one of the apartments if they were in between long hauls.  But, you know, they lived Backatown--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Gert Town, Backatown, one of those things.
Story_ID: 662614
Speaker 1: Well describe your house and the neighborhood and the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: When I was growing up on Peniston Street, 2739, you still had a milk man who could come and deliver milk to your home, so you'd put out the bottles.  We had the Hamiltons [ph.], who lived on one side of us; they were a family with seven children; most of them went to Holy Ghost [Holy Ghost Catholic School; Opelousas Catholic School, New Orleans, Louisiana] so my mother [Ethel Simon Roane] taught almost all of them, and right next door to them on the very corner of Peniston Street was Miss Hattie's Grocery Store [ph.], so there was a little convenience grocery store right there.  And on the other side of us was another home--I can't remember that guy's name who lived next door to us, but my mother was very keen on knowing where her children were so there was a Page fence on one side and basically a wooden fence on the other side, and I would play with my friends through the fence; I never went into their yard or, or anything like that.  She was mindful, even then, of where are your children?  You know where your children are, keep them safe, keep them home.  And it was a neighborhood of homeowners.  Everybody--I think almost everyone owned their own home in the 2700 block of Peniston Street, and (laughter) for Halloween--she was not big into asking anybody for anything, including candy, so I didn't trick or treat.  I, I would put on the little sheet and be a ghost or something or put on the cowgirl outfit that I might have worn at Mardi Gras, and I'd be there and I'd be on my front porch, but I'd give somebody else candy as they came along; she, she was not into that.  You had the candy sales at school, we'd buy our own candy; we're not asking anybody for candy.  That's the kind of people they were.  And so that, that was the neighborhood.  Again, lovely front stoops, porches, if somebody got an awning and you didn't have an awning, they would have an awning after you got the awning; if they painted the front porch this color, people over there they'd do the same.  It was like a, you know, one upping--somebody was going to one up, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Keeping up with the Roanes?
Speaker 2: Keeping up with the Roanes, how about that?--with the Simons, really, at that point; it was my grandparents [Nellie Taylor Simon and Celestin Simon]--keeping up with the Simons.  But again, that showed you what the neighborhood was like, you know.  You'd walk down that street, you'd drive down that street, lovely homes, some with really long stairways leading up into houses that sat up a little higher, but people had pride in their neighborhood; that was the big thing--they had pride in their neighborhood, so you weren't gonna let anybody look any better than you did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the major street that run--ran through your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The biggest street that once you left Peniston, if--I don't know the north and south but it was near Louisiana Avenue, and our church [Holy Ghost Church, New Orleans, Louisiana] was also on Louisiana Avenue, and the school was not too far off Louisiana Avenue.  When we had things at elementary school and we would have holy days of obligation and they fell during the week day or things like that, we would march from Holy Ghost elementary, which I believe was on Danneel Street, and we'd march around the corner until we got to Louisiana Avenue and march into the church and do our thing and then march back to school, so it was--my neighborhood was not only where I lived but it was where my education took place and it was my faith home as well.  Everything was in that neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 662615
Speaker 1: Now, I imagine that when you grow up in New Orleans [Louisiana] in that environment, you take a lot of things for granted necessarily, that people in other parts of the country don't see, you know, but I--you know, New Orleans is famous for the music and the food, the--you know, the ambience of Mardi Gras (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --so what were some of those--
Speaker 2: The food was always the most important thing; and for holidays and whatever.  My job for holidays was cleaning the silver, and my grandmother had this huge silver service--a tea service, had to clean that.  We had twelve goblets--twelve silver goblets and I used to like seeing them on the table, so a friend of hers, Betty Bonner [ph.], who was African and Native American--full blooded Cherokee or whatever, and then her African father, and Betty Bonner was a dear friend and she would come over and help my Grandmother Nellie [Roane's maternal grandmother, Nellie Taylor Simon] get ready for the holidays.  So I would volunteer to do that and I would help with the silver and, you know, take the toothbrush and do the silver through all the grape leaf design, and then I would set the table.  And I used to have an Emily Post book, even as a little kid, I had my Emily Post book and I knew where to put my glasses and my goblets; we had twelve silver plates as well, and sometimes we would eat off the silver plates, but more than often, we would use the silver plates as chargers so we'd put the china on top of that.  But used to really dress up the table and have the table glistening for the holidays, and my grandmother would be in the kitchen doing her gumbo and I would help maybe chop, but for the longest, I never knew how it went from chopped veggies, onions and all that kind of stuff and became liquid.  And I really didn't know how to make gumbo until I moved to Washington, D.C. and my new husband [Michael Skehan] said, "You need to learn how to make gumbo or else you have to go back home."  So I literally called Grandmother Nellie on the phone and said, "Okay, what do I do?"  And I still do my gumbo based on how high it comes up in the big pot, and I have a huge, huge pot, and the color of it based on what she told me over the phone, so I, I, I make my gumbo.  I would also help out with pralines.  You say (pronunciation) pralines, we say pralines (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --and so it would be taking the butter--first, cleaning off the table, then taking the butter and we would slather the butter all over the table, and she would do the praline mixture--the brown sugar, the milk, the eggs, the pecans, the whole routine, and then pour that on the table, and I'd put warm pecans on, and then we'd wait a couple of minutes until they were ready to slide off, and those were the treats that you had for the big holidays, they were the treats that you gave as gifts, I made some with my children when I had my own family here and, and it's all about food, you know (laughter), it really is all about food.  My dad [Frederic Roane, Sr.], working for the railroad [Illinois Central Railroad], he--sometimes when he was still a mail handler, would be on a later shift.  Again, church has a lot to do with everything, and on Fridays--you couldn't eat meat on Fridays but he would get off and maybe come home by twelve o'clock.  Hot sausage sandwich, a hot sausage po boy from Dooky Chase [Dooky Chase's Restaurant, New Orleans, Louisiana]; he would go to Dooky Chase before he came home, and we would sit there and we would wait for the clock to strike twelve, so it was now twelve midnight, but it was Saturday morning, and enjoying our hot sausage po boy or oyster po boy dressed with margarine, mayo, dill pickles, tabasco, lettuce--oh, my god, it was delicious, absolutely delicious.  And those were the best thing--my paternal grandparents [Mary Porter Roane and James Roane] were not great cooks (laughter), but my, my father's mother made the best cup of coffee and because my grandfather was a Pullman porter on the early shift--left early in the morning, he had to get up early so when we spent the night by her house, literally like the commercial, her drip--little white pot--drip Maxwell coffee [Maxwell House] would wake you up; it was that pungent, that greatest smelling cup of coffee, and she would fix a full breakfast with the coffee for him before he went off to the train station, and those were the, the smells and the foods that I remember 'cause I don't remember anything she cooked that was really great 'cause she was not a good cook.  But that cup of coffee in the morning--full bodied, almost as, as thick as you might find in a Cuba or something like that--(makes sound) to die for.
Speaker 1: Is that the percolator?  Is that what you call it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the percolator, this little (makes sound)--little white thing that was on her--yeah, just the best, the best.
Story_ID: 662616
Speaker 1: So it was a lot about food, and so when people ask, "Okay, where do I go to eat?"  I have places to tell them where to go to eat; there are a lot of new places that have sprouted up since I left there in 1979, but there are still some traditional ones that we go back to; I go back to Camellia Grill [New Orleans, Louisiana] for my chili cheese omelet, pecan pie warmed up with little ice cream on top.  But I didn't really have to go to a restaurant when my dad [Frederic Roane, Sr.] was alive because he was an excellent cook and he believed in pretty presentation, so he would take--let's say Monday is his traditionally red beans and rice day and, yeah, we would have red beans and rice, but my dad would take a little jelly jar and they had these little markings around the jelly jar, pack the rice in the jelly jar and then put it on the plate so you had this little trapezoid, and then the beans were around it.  Red beans and rice, but it looked nice.  It absolutely looked nice.  For (laughter), for Good Friday, friend of mine came over and she said, "I've never known anyone to celebrate Good Friday with a feast."  My dad could make a seafood platter that you would pay twenty to thirty some dollars in a restaurant, especially in the Washington, D.C. area, but he would make that--that's what he would serve us on Good Friday, so it would be--I didn't like going out and getting seafood platters 'cause they always had too much fish and I wasn't a fish lover, so he knew not to put any fish on my platter.  But we'd have the soft shell crab, we'd have a stuffed crab that he would put on the little metal crab shaped thing, and--or, in the real crab shell he would put the stuffing inside.  We'd have a couple of shrimp, we'd have the lettuce and tomato sliced on the side, and then a ice cream scooper of potato salad--Good Friday, good food, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: And I didn't gain weight then (laughter).
Story_ID: 662617
Speaker 1: What about sounds?  What about the music in New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: You know, the--the sounds were the sounds of jazz.  I had friends who had relatives in Preservation Hall [New Orleans, Louisiana], and my grandmother, she was the Baptist--Grandmother Nellie [Roane's maternal grandmother, Nellie Taylor Simon].  And she even sang with a group, from what I understand, back in the '30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s], and they were a gospel trio and sometimes they'd go around the country and sing, but not like a professional, but when they would have these Baptist events, they were noted for singing, and she was an excellent singer until illness kind of took away the voice.  So we had that kind of singing, and then those people she was friends with.  She didn't really know who he was because she knew him by another name, but it was Allen Toussaint--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --and he, he had this other professional name, and she goes, "Oh, is that who you're talking about?"  She knew him as somebody else; she was totally oblivious because she was the Baptist raised not to do the dancing or the--that kind of Baptist where, you know, my grandfather--they were Catholic (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Allen Toussaint is just--or Toussaint--
Speaker 2: Or Toussaint, yeah--
Speaker 1: You have the correct pronunciation--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --as far as I'm concerned, and whatever you say is the right one--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, no, no--
Speaker 1: --but if it's Toussaint down there, that's what it is--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and he's been rediscovered in a way.
Speaker 2: I know, yes.
Speaker 1: I saw him at the Detroit Jazz Festival in--
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: --and he's responsible for writing so many popular songs that we don't know--that most people don't attribute to him--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --but he's a--from Coca-Cola commercials to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know, I know.
Speaker 1: --everything.
Speaker 2: I know, I know.  And of course now the Jazz and Heritage Festival [New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival] is, is so big, so huge, it's even overtaking the crowds that come to Mardi Gras because it's more about the music and what this city is about.  I remember some of those first jazz and heritage festivals and it was, oh, my god; in what is now Louis Armstrong arena [Louis Armstrong Park, New Orleans, Louisiana], or whatever it was, and I'm listening to Sarah Vaughan, I'm seeing Count Basie on the piano, I'm seeing Gerry Mulligan on sax and, and Sonny--Sonny Carter [ph.] and--wow, this is happening in my home town.  And then my friend Mabel [ph.], her uncle played in the Preservation Hall Jazz Band, and it was just all around you, and as you said, it was just--that's the guy who lives down the street or that's the person who we knew from whatever.  It didn't, it didn't resonate with us just how special this was to the rest of the country.  We knew what it meant to us, but it's all we knew.
Speaker 1: So I guess when you were a little kid, like Fats Domino (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fats Domino--well his daughters went to my high school, and so it--Fats was a parent just like my parents [Ethel Simon Roane and Frederic Roane, Sr.] were parents; he was a little bit more famous--everybody knew where the pink house was in the Lower Ninth Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana], and you'd drive around, people come into town, you'd drive 'em around, "And this is where Fats Domino lives," but--you know, and you were always proud of him, seeing him on 'American Bandstand' and stuff like that, "Oh, that's Fats Domino."  But his, his kids went to my high school, Xavier Prep [Xavier University Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana]--yeah, yeah; and they were normal kids, you know.  They weren't so special that they couldn't be down to earth--Dooky Chase; everybody knows Dooky Chase Restaurant [Dooky Chase's Restaurant, New Orleans, Louisiana].  His daughter went to my high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was older than I was, but they were just there, you know?  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  We interviewed Leah Chase [HistoryMaker Leah "Dookie" Chase] back in 2002.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, she's amazing, absolutely amazing.
Story_ID: 662618
Speaker 1: Now what about, did--did you have any memories of Mardi Gras?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).  I remember being that little cowgirl with my little hat and my--I had Dale Evans six gun shooter, and we would go down--we didn't go down to Canal Street [New Orleans, Louisiana] so much because they came in your neighborhood; we were uptowners, and all of the big floats would come through--Rex, Zulu [Zulu Social Aid and Pleasure Club], and the truck floats were the best because that's--they were just throwing away stuff.  But we would go get dressed and maybe we'd go to Claiborne Avenue at Canal because they would end there on Canal Street.  But it was easier to go into the neighborhood because we were there--most people thought they had to go to Canal Street, but neighborhood people--so we would go down to St. Charles Avenue, not too far from where we lived, and you'd get your spot there and, you know, you're a little kid and they loved to give to little kids, so it was fun getting stuff as a, as a child and, and dressing up.  After a while, my mother [Ethel Simon Roane] was like, been there, done that.  But she would still go with us when we were teenagers, and she would stand way in the back and we were in the front trying to get our little goodies, and every now and then, somebody had a really great arm and something would fall at her feet, and my mother is barely five feet, she's shrunk even more since she's gotten older, so she was not about to be jumping up 'cause she couldn't see anything.  But she would be in the back and she'd come up with some really--"Where did you get that?"  And she said, "Oh, yeah, just fell here, so I picked it up."  But it was also open house; it was the kind of thing where you'd go out early in the morning--well, start it back.  In the neighborhood--my grandparents [Nellie Taylor Simon and Celestin Simon] had now bought a house on, on (Unclear) Street which is near Claiborne Avenue, and the, the truck barn for Rex was down Claiborne Avenue, so we could even see them coming out of the truck barn getting ready to go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Rex is one of the krewes that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Rex is the krewe--the krewe; that is, that is Mardi Gras day--that's the king, Rex, king of Mardi Gras.
Speaker 1: And so they keep the float in --
Speaker 2: They kept the floats; they kept the floats in the barn and the barn was right there on South Claiborne Avenue; no longer there--again, Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], everything else.  But on Mardi Gras day, the black Indians [Native American] would come out and they would be marching through your neighborhoods if you were--I mean it was like catch 'em, catch can.  They'd be coming out of their homes in the project area, and they'd start marching through the neighborhoods; it would be nine o'clock in the morning and they were drunk as skunks--so to say, as they said back in the days, and they were just having a ball, and they would keep going, keep going.  Then you'd get ready because you had to see Zulu.  Zulu would start like at nine o'clock, and--in the neighborhood; so you'd catch Zulu and now Zulu is very organized and, and really big.  But they were a little ragtag in, in my younger days, but they would be out at nine o'clock, and then through the neighborhoods, around ten, would be Rex, and so you'd see Rex, the same Rex float, the boeuf, the Mardi Gras, and some of the traditional ones going through--flambeau carrier still back in those days with real fire, and then after Rex would be all of the truck floats, and the truck floats were people who just all banded together and paid to get on a float, and they had the same costumes for one truck float to the next, neighborhood people--all white, and they just threw stuff at you.  You always wanted to find them.  But it was a long day, so you'd see Rex and you knew you'd catch a truck float somewhere along the line, so we'd go back to my grandmother's house and literally she had gumbo for people, she had sandwiches, my father [Frederic Roane, Sr.] used to do little sandwiches; he'd make diamond shapes and all kinds of--everything about my father was pretty--presentation was everything.  And so all of that would be at the house, and people would--could come through, eat, then go back out to the parades; eat, go back out to the parades.  I didn't do the night parades because safety, and as a young person, my parents weren't out there and as a teenager, I wasn't going out there, so we would watch--the big parades at night were Comus, and then there was a tableau.  Rex had already been out early in the morning, but to end Mardi Gras, the two major courts would come together on television, and so you'd see Comus and Rex meeting, and the kings meet, their queens meet, and there's this tableau, then that was it, you go to bed and that was it; there was no more Mardi Gras.  At midnight that was the end of that television production; they might continue with their parties behind closed doors with their breakfasts, but literally the police would come through, get people off the streets, and the cleanup would start almost immediately at midnight.  It was amazing, amazing.
Story_ID: 662619
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were just talking about the Zulus [Zulu Social Aid and Pleasure Club] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Zulus.  In the early days, they were not respected, even among blacks.  They, they didn't like the black face makeup, didn't like the clothing and thought it was--I guess thought it was playing to the negative stereotypes that whites already had about you.  And even with the Louis Armstrong as your, your celebrity king, it, it wasn't good enough.  You started to see the change though in the 1970s.  I'm not even sure what brought about the change, but all of a sudden, this organization--maybe it was the members and how they presented themselves and started to re-focus what this organization was going to be about, and all of a sudden Zulu became a source of pride, they were organized, they started on time, they, they had a designated route--because in the beginning, they didn't even have a real good route that you knew, if I were here at nine o'clock, I'd see them.  They would be late, whatever.  Things changed, and to the point where there were whites who were embracing the organization and even wanted to join the Zulu organization, and now it is one of the the hottest tickets for their Zulu ball, to get into--really hard, really hard (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) [HistoryMaker] Desiree Rogers --
Speaker 2: --Desiree Rogers.
Speaker 1: --who was Desiree Glapion--her dad [Roy E. Glapion, Jr.] was the attorney for the Zulus when they were charged with throwing coconuts and hitting people in the head with them.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean they were real coconuts (laughter), and they used to lob, and again, some people on the floats were lobbing a little harder 'cause they might have had just a little bit much before they started.  But now, you don't want the lobbing because you want that coconut, it's beautifully decorated now, and it is a prized souvenir year after year, after year; such a big turnaround.
Speaker 1: I was amazed to find out there was a Negro League baseball team called the Zulu Cannibal Giants--
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: --and I saw pictures of 'em (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wow.
Speaker 1: --you know, in their uniform with baseball glove with a grass skirt.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There's also the Indians, the Wild Tchoupitoulas.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I went home and did a feature on my home town, and we went down to the Lower Ninth Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana] around St. Claude Avenue on this--I think it was on this side of the Industrial Canal, so not quite the Lower Ninth Ward, and this guy, Wild Tchoupitoulas, had these costumes literally hanging from the ceiling around his home--the most beautiful things you have ever seen; they work on them all year long, and their holiday--their feast day was St. Joseph's Day--was March 19th--is March 19th, and they still--you can find them parading around town; gorgeous, gorgeous, gorgeous; they had an exhibit of their, their carnival garbs, their headdresses and whatever, at the Cabildo, the Louisiana historical museum right there off of Jackson Square [New Orleans, Louisiana]--just absolutely gorgeous.  And I thought about those guys when Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] hit; were they hit so bad or were they able to take these things with them because they cost thousands and thousands of dollars, and what I saw around the room at this guy's house, they were worth more than the house; they were that exquisite and that time consuming, and they are a sight to behold.  My husband [Michael Skehan] has taken some still pictures of them--just beautiful, bold colors and, and the fine detail and bead work.  It's amazing; all done by these guys, not their wives or any other woman, these guys are doing it.  They're just so talented.
Story_ID: 662620
Speaker 1: It sounds like you had--really had a rich, cultural experience growing up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think so, I think so.
Speaker 1: --in New Orleans [Louisiana] and on the train going to New York [New York] and other places--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: --taking advantage of the railroad free pass.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was very fortunate.  One trip I took with my grandmother [Roane's paternal grandmother, Mary Porter Roane]--again, the Baptist, to a Baptist conference and I was always--don't make an issue of being Catholic or anything like that, and we started in New Orleans, went to Chicago [Illinois], and then transferred to another train and went across the top (gesture).  So you're going through the Dakotas, you're going through Green River, Wyoming, and then we were going to Portland, Oregon for this Baptist conference and while we were there, she had some time, we took another train, went to Seattle [Washington], went to British Vancouver [Canada], came back through Portland, took another train, went to California, visited her daughter and family--my aunt, and then came back home--Union Pacific [Union Pacific Railroad], the bottom way.  It was the most fantastic train trip anyone could have ever taken. It was just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How old were you at that time?
Speaker 2: I was ten?  Twelve.  It was great (laughter).  It was fantastic, yeah.
Story_ID: 662621
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And Holy Ghost (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Holy Ghost elementary school [Holy Ghost Catholic School; Opelousas Catholic School, New Orleans, Louisiana], Catholic parochial school.  The nuns were the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament and they had mostly nuns.  First grade, fourth grade, six, seven, eighth were nuns, and the other grades--kindergarten, second, third and fifth were lay teachers, all Catholic lay teachers.  My mother, not only my mother, but my teacher and my spiritual teacher.  She taught second grade, so that meant she was responsible for us going through the sacrament of the Eucharist--receiving the holy communion and the initial sacrament of penance, the confession before we were able to accept communion, so she was there teaching from my kindergarten years through seventh grade, and then she left there and started teaching in the public schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that was, that was that experience.  Wonderful--again, wonderful experience.  The, the biggest problem for me in grade school, especially in second grade, was what do I call this person standing at the front of the room who is my mother?  And I'm a seven year old, so wow--this dilemma; and I think I never really said anything; I would raise my hand, and she would call on me and I would answer the question, but I would never say, Mrs. Roane [Ethel Simon Roane].  I certainly would not call her mother, but I would never say, Mrs. Roane, or maybe once I did or something like that.  And I do remember that if any bigwigs came through and that meant bigwigs in the, in the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament or any priest or bishops that came over, when they came into our classroom, certain of us were called to stand up, and one was my friend Connie Floyd [ph.], and her mother and father were both professors at Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  And then I would be asked to stand up.  "This is Mrs. Roane's daughter.  Mrs. Roane is our second grade teacher," and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  So those types of things.  It, it was--it was, it was good.  I, I liked Holy Ghost elementary and went on to Xavier Prep [Xavier University Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana]; again, this was the--1963, it was the beginning of integration of the parochial schools, and I was accepted or I had the option of going to Dominican High School [St. Mary's Dominican High School, New Orleans, Louisiana], which was an all-white girls school run by the Dominican nuns.  And my father [Frederic Roane, Sr.] and mother decided that they didn't want me to be under the pressure of being one of two in this school during this time, so they opted for me to go to Xavier Prep (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay--
Speaker 2: --instead of to Dominican.
Story_ID: 662622
Speaker 1: Before we get you there, I just wanted to ask you, what were you interested in in elementary school [Holy Ghost Catholic School; Opelousas Catholic School, New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: I was an avid reader, loved to read, and my love of mystery books started at that point.  I've read even old 'Perry Mason' books, but I was Agatha Christie like any typical girl.  I was a 'Nancy Drew' reader and read all of the 'Nancy Drew' books, and I was involved in reading--or just if they had reading groups or something like that, that's what I did a lot of.  When I got into seventh and eighth grade, I think we were getting involved in seeing other groups so there was a National Conference of Christians and Jews [sic. National Conference for Christians and Jews; National Conference for Community and Justice] and I was involved in that, and it just meant an exchange dialogue, meeting young kids who were Jews, we were Catholic and that kind of thing.  And--yeah, that's about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You had mentioned music at some point.  Did you play an instrument (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) I was enrolled in the Xavier University school of music and they--the building doesn't exist anymore.  It's part of now a big new, brand new science building on the campus at Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], and it was like a metal building so when it rained on top of that metal roof, you heard all of that noise.  And I took piano for several years, first at the Methodist Church--the, the person who was the choir director at my dad's church, Peoples United Methodist Church [New Orleans, Louisiana], taught me music, and then I had a more formal music thing at Xavier University school of music.  I hated it (laughter).  I did not like taking piano and I was never very good at it, and when I was fourteen, I believe, my parents [Ethel Simon Roane and Frederic Roane, Sr.] said, "Okay, enough; you don't have to worry about it, we're not gonna waste our money; we have the piano at home and everything, but we're not gonna waste our money."  And when they said I didn't have to go, I played all night long on the piano, and I just was never great at it so, you know, I mean I don't have a musical bone in my body (laughter).  I tried the flute when I was in high school (imitates playing the flute).  Still can't do it (laughter), still can't, so that was it, so I got out of band and ended up in the physics class, so that was fine.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're a good mathematician I guess.
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't (laughter).  I, I did well--algebra, I hated algebra so I ended up going into another class and it was trigonometry, and it was something about trigonometry and the sines and cosines that just seemed to make sense and I loved that, and I enjoyed that, I enjoyed geometry, but algebra I just was not a big fan of, of that ever.  Isn't that weird?
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (Simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What I did love in school, even in grade school, was language, and wanted to learn French because I knew my mother had to learn French when she was young to make her First Holy Communion for her [paternal] grandmother [Marie Bartholomew Simon (ph.)], and so I started picking up some words and, and doing some reading and, and getting little books and--you know, elementary kind of books, and read French, and I would watch TV and sometimes on the public station they would have just the elementary words about the colors in Spanish, so I knew things like that, and I thought maybe I would like to do something with language, and I thought about that for a long time and what do I do with language?  Maybe the UN [United Nations] or something--be a translator or whatever.  I, I was just fascinated with language and I still would like to stay at a place long enough to improve my language skills.  But I took French in, in high school [Xavier University Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and did very well in French, and then even was advanced place in college when I took my entrance exams for college.
Speaker 1: Were you called upon to speak in elementary school before--
Speaker 2: Called upon to speak? No, not really, no.  Just to stand up when, as I said, someone came through and they said, "Oh, this is Mrs. Roane's daughter Andrea [HistoryMaker Andrea Roane]," and that kind of thing.  But no, I didn't do any real speaking; we didn't have anything like that, it was--later in high school, I worked with others in--volunteer with the debate group and stuff like that, but I never did--I was really very shy, very shy student, and would never have put myself on a stage--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --never (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now--Yeah, well something happened (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And here I am in TV.
Story_ID: 662623
Speaker 1: Something happened when you were in eighth grade; that's the year that President Kennedy was assassinated, and it's important for a lot of reasons (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I was in ninth grade.
Speaker 1: You were in ni- ninth grade?
Speaker 2: I was in ninth grade.  It was, it was '63 [1963], and--'cause it was, you know, June of '63 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) November, that's right, that's right --
Speaker 2: --so it was November '63 [1963] so the new school term had started, and in fact I was in an algebra class with--the teacher in the algebra class was the principal of my elementary school, she was Mother Ignatius [ph.] when she was the principal and now she was Sister Ignatius, and we got to the--we were in algebra class and it was close to twelve o'clock and we got the word that something had happened and to start praying and, you know, even when we got the word and, and we were asked to pray and I'm sure every school--every Catholic school in the, in the Archdiocese of New Orleans [Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New Orleans] was asked to, the president was already dead.  But, you know, that, that was important to me but I didn't have any speaking thing or anything like that, no--nothing like that.  I do remember the prayer card that we were given; I still had the prayer--I still have the prayer card that we were given with a prayer--a quote from the president on the back, and then, "Pray for the repose of the soul of [President] John Fitzgerald Kennedy," and his birth date and the death date is on that.  And I remember in--it was in grade school; this was in grade school when he came through New Orleans [Louisiana], and we all left our Holy Ghost elementary [Holy Ghost Catholic School; Opelousas Catholic School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and we walked down Louisiana Avenue and we had our position right there at the corner of Louisiana and St. Charles Avenue, and those were black and white TV days so it was amazing to see this open car come through and this guy with strawberry blonde hair, and I was short so I was in the front, and I just remember seeing President Kennedy for the first time, and amazed by the color of the hair, and it didn't translate on television, you know?  It, it was something, it was something.  And then, just a few months later, he was gone.
Speaker 1: Now this was a major television event--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and some say it transformed how the news--
Speaker 2: I do believe.
Speaker 1: --the first time that a story like--was covered over several days--
Speaker 2: It consumed us, and it was the first time we had ever seen anything like this.  I, I don't think anyone believed that you could kill a president in that day and age; this was the 20th century, this wasn't the time of Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] where you had a civil war going on and you had that kind of strife.  Yes, we had the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK], we knew about that, but you would never think that the president could be assassinated, that it would be allowed to happen because he had all of this protection.  Granted, when he was coming down St. Charles Avenue, he was as exposed as anyone; the guys were walking alongside of him but it's not the kind of protection that you see now.  And it was just shocking, absolutely shocking, and for somebody who was a teenager, a young teenager who had seen him, it, it, it was like unbelievable, and we could not tear ourselves away, and we only had the choices then of ABC, CBS, NBC, and we were glued to CBS because they literally covered it from every angle and because it was Walter Cronkite who had given us the bad news, that's who we stuck with.  And the TV stayed on all day, all night because you didn't wanna miss anything.  And we were sitting in front of the television when Jack Ruby shot Lee Harvey Oswald, and I was like, "Oh, mother [Ethel Simon Roane], I can't believe that they just shot--." It was amazing, it was amazing.  It was unbelievable; and I was just a viewer then.  Who knew that I would be part of the business and in, in years later, be part of types of wall to wall coverage like that.
Story_ID: 662624
Speaker 1: I don't even think they did that kind of wall-to-wall coverage when Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] was assassinated, and they didn't do that even when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.  I think they were worried too much about showing anything to inflame even more the passions on either side with Dr. King's death.  That was an amazing day as well.
Speaker 2: So '63 [1963] was also a big pivotal year--civil rights, a lot of civil--Birmingham.  The bombing of the church [16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Things that we watched on television--those young girls; and it was kind of like how do you do this?  How do you do this to innocent children?  That's all you could think of.  And for us in Louisiana, New Orleans was a little bit more passive than some other places; you had the boycotts at the lunch counter and things like that, but we didn't have the kind of ugliness that you would hear about in Bogalusa [Louisiana], but Israel Augustine [Israel M. Augustine, Jr.] was there dragged off to prison in New Orleans--and some other prominent names.  My grandparents [Roane's maternal grandparents, Nellie Taylor Simon and Celestin Simon] helped with voter registration but they weren't in the line of fire to be spat upon or anything like that, but they did try and help people get registered to vote; as I said, my grandfather, in the early days, he had to pay a poll tax, so they understood the importance of getting people registered to vote--yeah, unbelievable (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 662625
Speaker 1: I just wanted to set the tone for that.  Now had you--at that point, had it ever crossed your mind that you might wanna--'cause I don't think--and you correct me if I'm wrong, but I don't think there were any women news anchors, or reporters, on any of the major networks.
Speaker 2: No, people ask, who were your role models in television?  One, I never thought about going into television.  I thought it would be just what I turned out to be after I left college [Louisiana State University in New Orleans; University of New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana], an educator.  Even when I played with dolls as a child, they weren't my children, they were my students.  And my role models were my parents [Ethel Simon Roane and Frederic Roane, Sr.] because once I got into TV and people started asking me about TV, I realized--do you know the only woman who was on television when I was a child?  This is way back--Pauline Frederick, do you remember Pauline Frederick?  That's who was the only woman that I saw doing a news show on a regular basis, and she was a guest on 'Meet The Press' way back when, in the days when women still wore the little hats on their heads.  I only remember one other journalist of color, and again, it's way back when, in the black and white days; I don't remember her name because she wasn't national TV but she was big time New York [New York] broadcaster--was on 'What's My Line?'  There was a black journalist female who came on 'What's My Line?' as a panelist.  Wow.
Speaker 1: I'm trying to think of who--
Speaker 2: And the only reason why I remember that is because when I get up in the morning, I used to turn on the TV--I still turn on the TV that I had in the bedroom, and they used to have the old game shows on, and 'What's My Line?' was one, and this woman came on; she looked a little different, they had the name, and I googled her, and she was a New York journalist and was, I think, the only black panelist who was not from the entertainment industry that was on 'What's My Line?'  But at the time, you know, that still wasn't my industry and I was still a young child, but Pauline Frederick was the woman you saw on a more regular basis and I didn't see anybody.  I think the first person I saw who looked different, Connie Chung, and I was already in my twenties at that point, and still not thinking about a job in television.  And then we had Royal Kennedy [Royal Kennedy Rodgers] eventually come on, and Royal was on the WDSU [WDSU-TV], the NBC affiliate in New Orleans [Louisiana], and then you started seeing men, but you didn't see the women, you didn't see black women, you didn't see Hispanic women, you didn't see Asian women except for Connie Chung--
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: --so if you were looking for a role model, women were hard to come by, and then women of color were almost nonexistent when I was growing up.
Story_ID: 662626
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about Xavier Prep.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, Xavier University Prep high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's--the formal name is Xavier University Preparatory School [New Orleans, Louisiana], it is no longer Xavier Prep.  The nuns sold--got out of it, and it is now St. Katharine Drexel Preparatory academy [St. Katharine Drexel Preparatory School].  Katharine Drexel was the foundress of the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament.  She was a convert to Catholicism and her mission was to educate blacks and Indian [Native American] children.  Now, they educate all children, but still their primary mission is black and Indian children and their mother house in Bensalem, Pennsylvania.  My first grade teacher is still there, Sister Ann Regina [ph.], and--but Xavier Prep was where I, I ended up going and I wanted to go to Xavier Prep 'cause I remember in eighth grade [at Holy Ghost Catholic School; Opelousas Catholic School, New Orleans, Louisiana] when we had a, a field trip there, I thought the girls looked great--was blue skirts, white blouses, and they had a little scarf around their neck and it had XP on it, and they also had a beanie with a little yellow pom-pom.  I was ready for that uniform, and of course our freshman year was the year that the Catholic schools went to plaid--ugh!  Just terrible.  And so I'm part of the plaid generation--started a plaid generation.  But, again, I really had a great upbringing.  I think the only problem I ever had was--always got good grades, and we got a report card and--good grades, but then there was a checkmark on disturbing others in class.  Well my mother [Ethel Simon Roane] was furious at me.  "I don't know what they're talking about."  So she goes to parent-teacher conference and it was basically I was asking a student in front of me to tell me what was on the chalk board 'cause I think we were in alphabetical order and so I was further to the back, and I couldn't see what was on the board.  And so I was asking this, this student.  I had no idea whether the student said something to the teacher or the teacher noticed me, but that's why I got the checkmark.  And my mother was furious because she didn't believe--once she heard the reason why, the teacher said, "Well I think she might need glasses."  Well my mother said, "Why didn't you say that, instead of putting down disturbing others?"  But that, that was freshman year.  And at that point, I got glasses.  And I look back at those pictures and I don't know--why didn't I take those glasses off when they were taking pictures?  I hate those pictures.  But--which is why I don't wear my glasses all the time.  I still hate me in glasses.  But it was a good year.  We had the best teachers.  Again, the idea was no matter what you look like, a good education, a good foundation, you could write your ticket anywhere; that was the belief.  We were given challenging course work, we were given opportunities for enrichment in whatever the course work was and, and we still had a great time.
Story_ID: 662627
Speaker 1: We had boys at the school [Xavier University Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana] throughout my four years there, but in the sophomore year, they decided that it was going to be an all-girls school.  So at that point, a lot of the guys started to leave, and--but until then, we had a, a good football team, a good basketball team, and some of the best pep rallies in town, and our biggest rival was St. Augustine [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana], the Purple Knights, the mighty 100 [St. Augustine High School Marching 100], and everybody still sees the Rose Parade--they were there, Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade, and we had this ferocious rivalry with them.  I remember one year we had a coffin at the end of the hallway on the first floor and it was the Purple Knight, and we would march that coffin around Magazine Street, up and down, and then bring it to the auditorium and we would have this funeral for the Purple Knight, and it was tremendous.  The drum, the, the, the cheerleaders on stage--it was the whole rest of the afternoon, like we'd have class until twelve o'clock, after twelve o'clock, it was now pep rally time.  And if we won the game, we could get a day off, and if we lost the game, well, it was a great pep rally, and it was--those were some really, really, really fun times.  And one of our guys who was on the basketball team, Greg Blache, ended up becoming an assistant with the Green Bay Packers first, and then came here to Washington, D.C. and was an assistant with the Washington Redskins.  So I was only in contact with him through our sports anchor, who was down there; we never got a chance to see each other after all these years in person, but it, it was, it was a good time.  I enjoyed it; again, I felt I was very prepared for whatever was going to come next, and--but I remember we were counseled by the nun. I was thinking clinical psychology when I left, and there was another student--art student, and we were thinking about going to Louisiana State University in New Orleans, a public school, and the sciences and the arts, and the nun who was the counsellor wanted us to consider a Catholic school so that we would have a faith based in the sciences, a faith based in art so we wouldn't go off and be crazy people.  But we ended up both going to LSUNO, which is now the University of New Orleans [New Orleans, Louisiana].  And, you know, looking at Facebook and seeing where a lot of my fellow students are, they've done very well, they've done very well.  Whether they stayed there and taught at the public schools and made a name for themselves there, or went on to university pursuits--medicine--it was a good class, it was a very good class.  We were with our class the entire four years; only through foreign language and maybe somebody was in the band.  My homeroom class, 104, we moved as a group.  The sophomore class, the same class.  We were tracked--A, B, C, D.  We were in the same homeroom with each other for the entire four years, except for foreign language if you went to Spanish or French, or if you did band, and those kids they really all have done very well, those who are still with us--still in the area that I know about.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So you graduated in 1967 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen sixty-seven [1967], and then went to Louisiana State University.  It was at the time, not the most welcoming place; it had a reputation for getting people out of there in the freshman year, it was not that far removed from being integrated, so it was a tough school; it was a tough school, and I survived freshman year.  I also changed my major from clinical psychology to a secondary education.  Statistics did me in, there comes that math again.  Statistics did me in, and then I, I really hadn't researched what was going to be required for someone in clinical psychology so that was it, and started with secondary education.
Story_ID: 662628
Speaker 1: University of New Orleans--LSU, New Orleans [Louisiana State University in New Orleans; University of New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana] in those days, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: So this is--is this your first experience in school with mostly white pe- students?
Speaker 2: Yes, really, absolutely.  It was majority white, and we were, we were not the first group of whites there--of, of blacks integrating the school, but it still had that kind of reputation of, well, if we can get you outta here in that freshman year, let's go, but if you could make it there--it's like the song, you could make it anywhere.  And I survived my freshman year.
Speaker 1: Did you live at home?
Speaker 2: I lived at home; it was--at the time, there were only--there were, there was no housing at all for undergraduate, and we didn't have housing for graduate students right away, but now much more accommodating for graduate students.  I still think it's mostly a commuter university.
Speaker 1: I'm curious as to how this decision was made.  I mean you could have stayed at Xavier (unclear), you could have--I mean you're a good student--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --got good scores and, you know, you didn't have a desire to go someplace else to school?
Speaker 2: As far as Xavier was concerned, my parents [Ethel Simon Roane and Frederic Roane, Sr.] said, "You know all of those people already.  We want you to experience something different, we want you to be in an environment where there are white people because that's what the world is going to be like, so we want you to be prepared to deal with them."  So that was one reason why not Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] for me.  Out of town--they were not keen on that, and they said, "If you wanna go out of town for graduate school, that's fine, but right now, stay in town."  And that's what I did--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you know?
Story_ID: 662629
Speaker 1: Were there any particular teachers or role models or mentors or, you know, guides that--
Speaker 2: A teacher--I don't remember his name, but I remember when things just really started to turn around and university became fun.  Freshman year, sophomore year, I always tell young people, get the basics out of the way, then you can do anything you want--change your majors or whatever, 'cause you have the sciences, the maths out of the way--the histories.  And they, you know, they were okay.  I don't remember any, any of the teachers at that point, but when I decided that I was going to go into secondary education, I, I started to feel a, a, a difference when I got into my junior and senior year.  I'd also started to do more in the theater department and--not performing, but just being part of the crew, makeup, set design and whatever.  On the academic side, there was one professor who talked about American history as if it were living, breathing that very moment.  And it was the year when that American history assignment coincided with European theater history, and it coincided with another period in American theater history.  It all made sense, it just worked perfectly, and it was like the best year of college because it made sense.  It made--his history class fit in with what was happening in Europe, what was happening in American theater at the time, and wow, it was like this great revelation.  The teachers that I remember in the theater program, Dr. August Staub, no longer alive, he was the head of our department--chrome dome like Yul Brynner, very majestic in his speech and, and, and he just loved the theater and loved the history of the theater and taught it like this history professor, as if these performers were still alive.  I first learned about Ira Aldridge and Howard [ph.], and it was just marvelous.  Then I had another professor, Dr. Shaw [William Harlan Shaw], and Dr. Shaw was in, in my grad school, and he, he was interesting because he knew Fess Parker, and he knew (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's Davy Crockett, right?
Speaker 2: Davy Crockett--he knew Fess Parker, he knew Davy Crockett, and he knew--ooh, what's her name?  Another actress, she was married to a--well anyhow, he knew this other actress, and he would tell us these stories about Fess Parker and how one role he played because he used to sleep all the time and, and all he had to do was sleep in this, in this role, and so that's how Fess Parker got into the theater program.  But LSU [Louisiana State University in New Orleans; University of New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana], as I said, those first two years were tough, you know, college was, was rough, but once I got past that, it just all made sense.  And undergrad was great, finished in '71 [1971], then immediately started in '72 [1972] graduate school--
Story_ID: 662630
Speaker 1: Was there a black student organization on campus?
Speaker 2: There may have been one, but I didn't join the black student union.  I didn't join any sororities because when I first started, there weren't any that were really organized, and then after a while it, it--you know, I just wanted to kind of focus on the academics and I thought, well, you know, I can always do the sororities in graduate school, and I never really got back to that.  I'll slow it down a little bit.  So four years went very well, I am now really into the theater program, so my master's degree says, master of degree at communications and theater.  We really had no communications whatsoever.  It was a theater program, and my concentration was really theater history.  And I started working, though, immediately upon graduation, in the New Orleans Public School System, so I graduated undergraduate in 1971, but I had a job already lined up in the New Orleans Public School System.  I was a, a practicing student under a woman named Harriet Shaw [ph.] at John F. Kennedy senior high school [John F. Kennedy High School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  She had planned to go on sabbatical, and she recommended me to her principal who then took that recommendation to the Orleans Parish school system, and she said for me to fill in for her job, so even before I graduated college [Louisiana State University in New Orleans; University of New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana], I had a job in the New Orleans Public School System.  And I was there teaching seniors and juniors in high school, and I got stopped routinely by some of my colleagues who didn't know me, for going the wrong way down the hallway.  "Young lady, don't you know you're supposed to be going this way?"  You know, it was like up the downstairs case.  "But it's me, I'm going to my class, the teacher," kind of thing (laughter).  And so I worked there, and I taught--I was the speech teacher, so I taught speech, and my, my kids--one kid--I was twenty, had I made twenty-one?  I may have just made twenty-one.  Larry [ph.] was nineteen, so that's how close in age I was; I, I may be about three years difference between me as the teacher, and my students, and I was responsible for the school play in the spring, and the school play in the fall, and I had just some of the best students in the world; they liked each other, they, they--we did 'You Can't Take It with You' [George S. Kaufman and Moss Hart], and we did some other play, and then the kids loved it so much being with each other, they put on their own show called 'Fudgeripple Follies' ['Fudgeripple Follies, or Nobody Likes a Smart Ass'] and it was to show these black and white kids, Jewish, Christian, whatever--all together, and we put on something that was sort of like--it was the era of the hot pants, so 'Fudgeripple Follies' they were in hot pants and they did dancing and singing, and they created it all themselves.  And, two of the girls were doing community theater, so they got me involved in community theater.  Again, still this shy person, even though I'm in the theater program going for a master's degree in drama and communications, I was not the performer.  On the graduate level, I would do scene design, I would do makeup, I directed some plays, but I didn't do a whole lot of acting but I, you know--I did.  And did some fanciful plays.  We did 'The Tempest' [William Shakespeare] and I was Ariel, one of the sprites.  But to make Ariel seem like it was all over the place, this one sprite was me in one area, and another Ariel in another area, so the spotlight would turn this way (gesture) and I'd say something and then it would turn that way (gesture) and my counterpart would be in the other place.  Didn't matter that she was blond and blue eyed (laughter), that was me, but that kind of fancifulness which was a lot of fun to do.  And I was doing graduate school the entire time I was a full-time teacher, and I first taught at John F. Kennedy senior high school where I did my practice teaching, and then I went from there--still in grad school, to Edward Livingston Middle School--first year the school opened, and this was in the New Orleans East section [Eastern New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana], and it was seventh and--seventh and eighth graders.
Story_ID: 662631
Speaker 1: Was that an integrated neighborhood?
Speaker 2: It was a predominantly white neighborhood in, where the school was located--integrated schools and all the problems that went along with that; we had attempted stabbings, we had fights breaking out that first year; it was unbelievable.  We could not--you could not imagine that this would be happening at this school.  Things sort of settled down, but that was the beginnings of the school.  Then they brought in sixth graders who were really little kids, it's--the difference in the height was amazing with the sixth graders, seventh and eighth graders.  And it was the beginning of the whole middle school concept that these kids were not young but they were not high schoolers.  They needed their own path.  And it's funny, thirty--forty some years later, still seeing the middle school philosophy worked out, and it seems to still have problems.  But it started back in the 1970s, early 1970s; and so we had issues at that school with, with some violence in the beginning, got it under control, and my job there was called coordinator of cultural services.  It was a very large school and so we, you know, we had smaller groups and then--smaller classrooms, and then if the teachers wanted to do something special in their language arts programs, they could send their kids to me.  I had a room--a huge room with carrels around it, little portals, and I had a stage so we would put on plays and, and stuff like that, and I guess that was part of the theater bug.  I know I'm jumping around 'cause I'm, I'm missing out on something here.
Story_ID: 662632
Speaker 1: Let's go back to the college (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: So this is grad school and I'm at LSUNO and still shy, but when opportunity knocks, you don't always say no.  So the opportunity came to do a commercial and it was for Popeyes Fried Chicken [Popeyes Louisiana Kitchen, Inc.], which was started in New Orleans [Louisiana], and they needed three girls and they picked three girls from my university, I was one of them.  We had our little outfits on, we were behind the counter and we mimicked the song that singers in Los Angeles [California] actually sang--was (singing), "Love that chicken from Popeyes, you'll love the way it's fri- i- ied," (laughter).  That was my first taste of doing something commercial, and it was a thirty second commercial that took about six hours to shoot--still in grad school for that, still teaching as well.  And then I did--I did this program at Livingston [Edward Livingston Middle School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and a bulletin came on the board talking about a job in administration, and it was basically my job times however many schools in the public school system [New Orleans Public School System].  And I applied for that job under Shirley Trusty Corey, who was director of cultural services for the entire school system, and I got the job.  And it would be to bring artists and residents around to various schools so that they could work the arts in with history or language arts programs and whatever.  So I did that, and part of the job was now as administrator of this new high school for the performing arts [New Orleans Center for Creative Arts, New Orleans, Louisiana] that Shirley had envisioned for years, and finally got the federal funding to start, and the school board funding.  My position was a federally funded position and the school opened on the campus of Louisiana State University in New Orleans [University of New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana], and because I had a relationship with that university, we had classrooms in the drama department.  She said, "Would you be the administrator of this?"  So in essence, I was the first principal of this school and, again, I'm still a grad student, I hadn't finished.  It was a two year program.  I hadn't finished just yet, but went on television--maybe I had finished by that time.  Went on television to promote this new high school, and convincing teachers and parents to let their good art students, drama students, vocal students, music students, dance students to come to this performing arts high school and do their arts with us in the afternoon at the campus of Louisiana State in New Orleans, and do their academics at their home high school, and went on television to promote that, and a couple of weeks later, I get a call asking me to apply for a job as an education reporter.  And even though now, with a master's degree--I had got the master's degree in '73 [1973], even though I had this, this job, I didn't really know anything about television, it required two years' experience.  I knew nothing about TV except turning the dial.  And I went in for the interview and I got the job.
Story_ID: 662633
Speaker 1: Now this is WYES [WYES-TV] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) WYES, public television in New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah--yes--
Speaker 1: Just say yes (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, just say yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right.
Speaker 2: That's how I got into television.  I did not quit my job with the school system [New Orleans Public School System].  My parents [Ethel Simon Roane and Frederic Roane, Sr.] said, "Try it, you might like it," which is why I say, "Try it, you might like it, but don't quit your job."  I took a two year leave of absence from the public school system and they guaranteed that if it didn't work out, I'd be able to come back to the high school where I was now teaching, and that was Abramson High School [Marion Abramson High School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  I have jumped over all, and gotten off your, your line of, of thing here.  I went from Kennedy [John F. Kennedy High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] to Edward Livingston [Edward Livingston Middle School, New Orleans, Louisiana], to Abramson, and in the meantime finishing my graduate degree during those high school times, and then--now starting this job on television, something I knew nothing about, absolutely nothing.  Didn't know how to write for television, certainly didn't know how to go out with the cameramen and shoot, and it was film in those days so once you edited, it was it.  If you made a mistake, too bad, and it was scary--scary to do that.  And I had people, though, who were willing to take a chance with me.  The woman who suggested that they call me happened to be a parent.  I taught her daughter at high school at Abramson and also at the creative arts high school [New Orleans Center for Creative Arts, New Orleans, Louisiana], Margie Larson.  She was the associate producer on this public television program--federally funded program.  Bill Hess [William Hess] was the producer, his family had a long background in broadcasting, his uncle was the owner of the NBC affiliate at New Orleans, WDSU [WDSU-TV], and so Bill was our project director, and it was a federally funded program, to help people in Orleans Parish [Louisiana], and the bedroom community, Jefferson Parish [Louisiana], understand what was happening in the public schools and why they might want to vote for increase in taxes, to improve the public schools.  The bedroom community had a better public school system--mostly white.  The urban Orleans Parish public school system, the test scores were not as good.  It was mostly now a minority public school system of course, after integration.  So convincing the residents of Orleans Parish to put more money into this school was what we were about.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the program was called Schools (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Schools in Sight' [ph.].  My co-anchor was a guy named Phil Evans from New York [New York], who had trained to be a journalist; we're still friends to this day, and then me, this novice who knew nothing about the business.  Our cameraman was a guy named Roy Blum, B-L-U-M, and Roy was a veteran cameraman.  He had worked for the networks, had covered some of the, the civil rights, you know, activity for the networks, and so he was the guy who was going to help Phil, and hopefully teach me, and his one thing was, "You need to pre-visualize.  You need to pre-visualize.  What's this story supposed to be about?  And think about that--kind of write up a rough idea of the script--where you wanna go, and then go there and see if the facts mesh with what you pre-visualized."  It took me forever to understand pre-visualization.  I'm still working on it.  I am a work in progress to this day.
Story_ID: 662634
Speaker 1: Were there any other African Americans in New Orleans [Louisiana] television at that juncture?
Speaker 2: No, not really (laughter).  I think Royal Kennedy [Royal Kennedy Rodgers] had finally made it on to television in the '70s [1970s] or '80s [1980s], and--what was his name?  Pharon Chapman [ph.] was on--male, but other than that, no.  No, no, no, no--not even on public television.  I was it on public TV, yeah--and Phil [Phil Evans], and Phil, we were both black, and once we started that program, it did very well, but the guy who was the producer of the program left the station, and they needed a new project director and the project director was responsible for filling out all the government forms, we were funded under the Elementary Secondary School Aid Act, ESSAA [sic. Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965], and they asked me to be the project director, so now this person who knew nothing about television is now the producer and project director of the program, making sure we get funded again, making sure that we all get money so we could be paid.  And I did that, and I ended up doing not just 'Schools in Sight' [ph.], but a program called 'Opportunity' [ph.], a program for women.  And I did another program called 'New Orleans Weekly Fair' [ph.].  My name was in little light bulbs on the kiosk that rotated outside of the New Orleans Superdome [sic. Louisiana Superdome; Mercedes-Benz Superdome, New Orleans, Louisiana].  I mean that was a big deal.  That was the opening shot of our show 'New Orleans Weekly Fair.'  And it was a, a--entertainment show, we interviewed authors, directors, movie stars, entertainers.  I met Bobby Short and Earl "Fatha" Hines, and just wonderful people like that.  Interviewed the--Anne Rice when she came to town, and Bob Newhart did an interview with the guy who wrote 'Patent Leather Shoes Reflect Up' [sic. 'Do Black Patent Leather Shoes Really Reflect Up?,' John R. Powers], and it was a great interview because everybody who had had a Catholic experience, whether it was in the city, outside the city, black, white, whatever their ethnicity was, that was the common thread.  We had all heard these crazy things from our nuns and priests about what not to do so you won't end up like that person or that person, it was hysterical; and it was a great training ground for what I've, I've done since I came to Washington [D.C.].  But those shows were going along swimmingly, and then I got the call from this CBS affiliate [WWL-TV, New Orleans, Louisiana] to come and interview with Mickey Wellman, woman, who was head of the documentary unit, and wanted me to do something in education there.  I wasn't sure I wanted to leave WETA was--WYES [WYES-TV, New Orleans, Louisiana], rather--was very comfortable there, had had great opportunities, where right to work, stayed in Louisiana, so I was able to touch things.  Coming from a background of no formal training in broadcast journalism, I was able to operate studio camera, I did makeup on other people's shows.  I ended up directing, actually pushing my own buttons and calling the shots on our marathon pledge drives, which taught me a lot about television.  And then also the guy I would marry, my husband [Michael Skehan], was a news cameraman--learned a lot from him about sound bites.  I had twenty second sound bites.  "Let's cut it down, cut it down, cut it down."  Nine seconds--but it's not saying anything.  "That's where you come in."  Learned a lot from him as well.  But being able to do all of those things really was like a graduate education in broadcast journalism--running camera and directing and whatever.
Story_ID: 662635
Speaker 1: So I wasn't sure I wanted to leave a place like that, but what did my father [Frederick Roane, Sr.] say?  "Try it, you might like it."  So I met with Mickey [Mickey Wellman], took me out to a fabulous lunch at Galatoire's in the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana], one of the finest restaurants we have there, and offered me a job in the documentary unit, and I said, "Yes."  And I, I wasn't really happy there.  They were all very nice and my husband worked in the same--at the same studio, this is WWL-TV, the CBS affiliate.  It was owned by Loyola University [Loyola University New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana] at the time, and--but I never got to see him 'cause he was in the news department and I was in doc, and--you know, it, it, it was okay.  Everyone was nice, but I didn't really feel great about that assignment and when the opportunity came to go back to YES [WYES-TV, New Orleans, Louisiana], I jumped at it, and when I went back, I was given the opportunity of working on some MacNeil Lehrer shows which is now the news hour that you see with Judy Woodruff and [HistoryMaker] Gwen Ifill.  It was the Robert MacNeil, Jim Lehrer 'NewsHour' ['The MacNeil/Lehrer News Hour'; 'PBS NewsHour'], and I co-anchored from New Orleans [Louisiana], with Robert MacNeil, a show on the emerging black Republican Party in the South, had never done a network anything, and this was network when you think about the PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] network.  And their people (background noise) (pause)--I was asked to do a 'MacNeil/Lehrer News Hour,' and it was on the black Republican Party--the emerging black Republican Party in the South--had never done anything with any kind of network operation; this was network for PBS, and I was waiting to communicate with Robert MacNeil and the producers came in early in the morning and, "Oh, we're great--how do you say your name?  Is it (pronunciation) Andrea, Andrea?"  I said, "It's Andrea [HistoryMaker Andrea Roane]," and, "Oh, this is great.  Where can we have lunch?  Where do you recommend for lunch?"  So went out to lunch with the producers and the director still had not talked with my co-anchor, Robert MacNeil, and when we got back, it's like maybe 3:30, 4:00, the phone call from--, "How do you say your name?"  "Andrea."  "Call me Robin, (pronunciation) Andrea, Andrea, Andrea, looking forward to talking with you on the air."  That was it.  And then we did the show, and it was a pretty good show, if I must say so myself, it was a really good show, and then they were gone.  And didn't think any more about it, but then the phone started to ring and people had inquiries about me but I wasn't interested in leaving New Orleans [Louisiana] at all.  And then had the opportunity to do another 'MacNeil/Lehrer,' this time Jim was the co-anchor and the subject was the wetlands in Louisiana.  And who knew how important a subject matter that would be in the 1970s when we go forward to Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] and not having the wetlands and what that did as far as destruction.  And we talked about that and after that, the phones really started ringing.  So this is like '77 [1977], '78 [1978].  And opportunities came to go to Chicago [Illinois] with the NBC affiliate [WMAQ-TV].  Cleveland [Ohio] called and, and at this point, I was engaged to be married to my husband to be, Michael Skehan, and I wasn't interested in leaving my home town and besides, he was a news cameraman so I wasn't going to go anywhere where he couldn't go, and little did I know that there were friends at the station who knew people, and the woman who is my associate producer, she had been the secretary at one time for the guy who was the talent scout for NBC Chicago, and another friend, Dinney Bott [ph.], her cousin was vice president of radio for NBC, so all of these people were getting together and we ended up having an interview--my husband and I both had an interview.  I said, "I'm not interested in leaving, plus I'm getting ready to be married; my husband's a cameraman, so--gotta find something for the two of us."  "Where would you like to go?"  I, you know, I said, "Washington, D.C.," that was his home town, "and New York [New York]."  This is the number one market 'cause I knew it would never happen (laughter).
Story_ID: 662636
Speaker 1: And we got the call to come here, and we interviewed with the news director at WRC [WRC-TV, Washington, D.C.], Dave Newell, who would go on to do something with 'Entertainment Tonight,' and we interviewed as a married couple.  And I was offered a job but I said, "You know, gotta find something for my husband."  And then they ended up finding a job for him as a news cameraman so he worked for NBC WRC and moved here in '78 [1978]--early '79 [1979], rather; and I moved here in May of '79 [1979].  Called up NBC, "Hi, I'm here.  Any opportunities?"  "Aren't you married to Mike Skehan [Michael Skehan]?"  I said, "Yeah."  "We have a nepotism clause here."  I said, "Well, we interviewed as a married couple, didn't they tell you?"  And so for the first time in my life, I did not have a job--of any kind, not volunteer, not anything.  And we had moved here, we were living in my husband's family home where he grew up--where he and his six brothers and sisters grew up.  It was vacant so we, we were able to move into the house, and I didn't know what to do, so for three months, I cleaned my house, I visited museums, I cleaned my house and visited museums and learned how to fix gumbo and, and bake a turkey.  And now I know to remove the giblets from the inside before you put it in the oven, I didn't know that.  And a friend called after I'd been like with nothing for three months, and said, "Would you like to go back home?  I've gotta cover a hurricane [Hurricane David]."  And he worked for the BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation].  And I said, "Oh, yeah, sure."  Crazy!  I lived there all my life, you went outside of the hurricane zone, you got to higher ground, you didn't go into a hurricane zone.  But I said, "Oh, sure."  So the guy Bob Krevenburg [ph.] said, "Be my sound person."  And so I went with him to cover the hurricane that was gonna hit Mobile, Alabama.  He and his cameraman--his reporter from the independent tele- from BBC, rather.  And so we covered this hurricane in Mobile, Alabama, and literally when we got out of the airport in New Orleans [Louisiana], blinding storm.  We were driving to Mobile from New Orleans, you could barely see anything in front of you, and all I could think of--the reporter was white knuckled on the dashboard.  I was in the back seat and I was sliding down to the side 'cause all I could think of was, if we run into a tractor trailer and it severs the top off, I'll be safe because when I was younger, Jayne Mansfield, her car, driving in Louisiana, was behind a mosquito fogging truck.  They ran into the back of it, sliced off the top of the car.  Her two children, Mariska Hargitay the actress, in the back seat with her brother--lying down, they survived.  That's what I did all the way to Mobile.
Story_ID: 662637
Speaker 1: So you're covering the hurricane in Mobile [Alabama] this is 1979 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm covering the hurricane in Mobile--it was Hurricane David or something, not 1979, maybe, maybe '80 [1980], the beginning of '80 [sic.]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --somewhere in that, that timeframe, and literally we're driving in this horrible rain storm.  We could not see where the hotel was because all of the lights had gone out, and we drove down the street and saw flashlights; we passed it, we realized that's where the hotel was so we were driving back and it was so funny 'cause as we were driving back, a tree had come down just where we had passed, it was, it was amazing.  But we, we survived, and we were in the hotel, driving rain, no power, and that was the, the night we spent, and it was one of those nights where literally I was on the floor with the--a mattress kind of pulled over just in case there had been any debris, 'cause it was that dangerous, I mean there was that much flying around.  And we survived the night, the cameraman was by candle light trying to type out his story, and when we woke up the next morning and saw all of the debris that had fallen around us and then trying to drive into the city, Mobile at the bank--the destruction--the, the hotel where a lot of the network media had stayed, all of the glass had, had shattered; it was amazing.  But it was still exhilarating.  It was good to be back working, and I was learning something new.  I'd never run audio before, and this was the big audio deck around your neck, so--again, my graduate school education in journalism that I never really had in broadcast journalism was now paying off, so that would be great, and came back home and then did some work in the office for the BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation] here in Washington, D.C., they were down at 2030 M Street, and just, just helping out really; it wasn't a job, nothing formal, but it was nice to be doing something rather than just staying home, cleaning up and going to the museums.
Story_ID: 662638
Speaker 1: In the meantime, when I first came here, not only did I apply for a job at the NBC affiliate [WRC-TV, Washington, D.C.], but I applied for a job at public television here at WETA [WETA-TV, Washington, D.C.].  At the time, they didn't have anything for me, they had just hired someone to do their weekly magazine news journal show called 'Metro Week in Review,' and so--okay, no job.  I am now doing my little freelance work for the BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation], I read The Washington Post, the newspaper column, and it talks about the woman who was just hired at WY--WETA to do this 'Metro Week in Review' had just gotten a job in Chicago [Illinois] with NBC [WMAQ-TV], a job that at one time I had been offered as well.  So I called up WETA immediately and said, "May I apply for this job?"  And they said, "Oh, sure, come on in and do an on camera audition."  Well I didn't realize the on camera audition was actually a show, a real show, and so it's a roundtable, Washington Post metro journalist, Washington Star journalist covering the metro area, local newspaper people and some radio--had this conversation and like you see, [HistoryMaker] Gwen Ifill, and now doing 'Washington Week' ['Washington Week in Review'], that's what we did for 'Metro Week.'  It was an audition, on camera; I did it three times, but what was amazing, coming from a right to work state and working for public television, everything you did was volunteer, you never got extra pay for doing anything, not the makeup, not the directing or whatever, it was a learning experience, it was public television.  I got paid for those.  That was amazing, it was unbelievable.  After doing three shows, I got the call from the producer Ricky Green, and she said, "We'd like to hire you."  So I started at WETA as the host correspondent for 'Metro Week in Review.'  It was a wonderful civics lesson about this city, our nation's capital, and the surrounding jurisdictions--again, getting my civics lesson on a daily basis as a correspondent--as a host correspondent.  And I did that show for two years, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So this is your--I'm sorry--you're supposed to start in 1980, right?
Speaker 1: I started there in--it was two years, two years, so late '79 [1979]; I'd say '79 [1979].
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: I take that back--it was '79 [1979] there, and--but later in the year, closer to 1980.
Speaker 2: Well that means the hurricane [Hurricane Davis] was in '79 [1979] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the hurricane had to have been in '79 [1979], yes.  Hurricane in '79 [1979].  I'm not great with dates.  And--so I started there, and it was good.  I did an art show, and did all kinds of things; had great experiences there, still begged for dollars on the pledge drives.  In fact, I got the phone number wrong one time.  I was having you call the Sunbeam Bread line, which was the phone number that we used at the New Orleans public station [WYES-TV, New Orleans, Louisiana], and they said, "Oh, you did a great job except you gave the wrong phone number," and I said, "What?"  She said, "Yes, you gave 504--whatever, whatever, whatever," and I said, "Ah," (gesture). I'd been doing it so many years, but had a wonderful time there.
Story_ID: 662639
Speaker 1: And then a new story broke in The Washington Post and it was a Pulitzer Prize winning story, but it turned out to be a false story, and that was the journalist who had been given the Pulitzer Prize based on this young boy's account of living in the project and what he saw and whatever.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the Janet Cooke story ['Jimmy's World'] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Janet Cooke story.  All, all--what we later found out was not true.  But, we were supposed to have the metro editor on our show ['Metro Week in Review'], and that was going to be Bob Woodward, who was the metro editor of The Post at the time and--yeah, and--but he ended up not coming on because so many people, "We want you on our show," so it didn't come on.  But I think there had been some talk about me, I later found out among some of the people here at Channel 9, Gordon Peterson, who was the main anchor, Ron Townsend who was in management here, and I got a call from Betty Endicott [Betty Wolden Endicott] to come to talk with her about joining the staff at WUSA [WUSA-TV, Washington, D.C.] which was then WDVM [WDVM-TV], and at this point in 1980, '81 [1981]--must have been '80 [1980], I was very pregnant, and I waddled, literally waddled over to the restaurant where we met, somewhere on Wisconsin Avenue, and they talked about doing a morning show--starting a morning show, and they were interested in me doing it, but they didn't really have anything firm, and so I enjoyed my lunch, enjoyed the conversation, because I believe you learn something from every job interview that you can use the next time, and that was it.  And so I went away and--when did I say that interview was?
Speaker 2: This is 1981.
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-one [1981].  Later, I had my first child, our daughter, Alicia [Alicia Skehan], was born May 8th of 1981, and I never heard anything back from Channel 9.  I was out for about six to eight weeks and was getting ready to go back to work at public television [WETA-TV, Washington, D.C.] when I got a phone call, and it was Betty Endicott.  "Well, what are you up to?"  And I said, "Well I'm getting ready to go back to work."  "Oh, no, no, no, no, no.  You've gotta come here."  And I came to Channel 9, we were on Brandywine [Street] at Albemarle Street at the time, across from Wilson High School--Woodrow Wilson High School [Washington, D.C.], and I did my interview and the next thing I knew, I was hired.  And that was in August of 1981.  And I have been here ever since.  I started the morning show which was at that time, just a cut in--6:25, 7:25 cut-in.  And then in October of that year, I was partnered with Bob Dalton who had signed the station on, I understand--I think like the year I was born or the year after I was born, and he was Ranger Hal here on the station, well known personality, and was our business editor, and we were partnered in October to do this new half hour morning show on Channel 9.  And I think just a few weeks into doing the show, Bob suffered a minor heart attack, and his doctor told him this was not good for his health, so he was gone from doing the morning show and I was anchoring it by myself.  It was just a half hour at that point, and it branched out to an hour and I was doing it with a meteorologist, Bill Kamal, and Stacey Benn [ph.] was now our traffic reporter.  Jerry Edwards had started with us but he left and Stacey Benn was our traffic reporter, and that was the morning show.  And then over time my, my duties expanded to doing the noon show with Bob Dalton at more reasonable hours for Bob, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was the name of the morning show?
Speaker 1: Just the morning show--
Speaker 2: Just the morning show, okay--
Speaker 1: --the morning news, no real name to it, just the morning news on WDVM [WDVM-TV; WUSA-TV, Washington, D.C.], and did that.
Speaker 2: Now I read--I have a note here that--
Speaker 1: --We were the one and only 9.  That was our, our slogan at the time, but that--it wasn't the, the name of our newscast.
Story_ID: 662640
Speaker 1: The history of the station includes Sam Donaldson--
Speaker 2: Oh my god, isn't it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Warner Wolf, Max Robinson.
Speaker 2: --yes, yes.  I did an interview one day--it was a phenomenal day, we had a nine o'clock news--this is jumping ahead--and my six degrees of separation from George Clooney--Nick Clooney was at Channel 9 [WDVM-TV; WUSA-TV, Washington, D.C.].  I said, "You mean we're colleagues?  We're former colleagues?"  He says, "Yes, we were."  I mean they had everybody--Roger Mudd--all the giants of CBS, and those of ABC, as you said--Sam Donaldson.  I heard stories about the station not being on the air one time and Sam, ever the journalist, went into the tower and did his broadcast from the tower so he could make his story.  And that's the kind of person he was, but you're right. Jimmy Dean had some sort of start here, Arthur Godfrey did his show here; it's amazing what came out of what is Channel 9, amazing group of alumni I'm just so proud to be a part of.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  That's--I didn't realize this--Arthur Godfrey (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Arthur Godfrey, yeah--and Jimmy Dean, you know?  I watched Jimmy Dean on TV, I watched Arthur Godfrey on TV.  Who knew?  Who knew I'd be at the station where they were, at any time?
Story_ID: 662641
Speaker 1: You went to the noon time show (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Went to the noon time show with Bob Dalton.
Speaker 1: This is in '83 [1983] then, right? Not sure?
Speaker 2: Eighty-two [1982], '83 [1983]?  And got pregnant again during the ratings book (laughter), and this time our son Andrew [Andrew Skehan] was born on the first day of the book, May 1st, 1983, and I was out for the entire ratings period.  My news director said, "Never do that again."  I said, "I promise I won't do it ever again."  And came back doing the noon show, doing reporting, covering the arts, what to do on the weekend kind of things, those segments--substituting on the five P.M. show which we had now expanded the five from a half hour to an hour, substituting for J.C. Hayward on that show at six o'clock, substituting at times for [HistoryMaker] Maureen Bunyan and then the, the news wanted to do a four P.M. newscast, and--wow, how about that?  I mean we had, we had done some things, I think I had proved myself, and I remember when the Challenger [Space Shuttle Challenger] exploded, I was getting ready to do the noon show, and my news director, Dave Pearce, came out and said, on camera, "Do this."  And it was literally a sheet of paper (unclear), the Challenger has exploded, and I think it was--what was it, seventy-three or eighty-three seconds after takeoff.  And to the camera--we were on even before CBS came on with their breaking news about this story.  And--keep going, keep going, still didn't have a whole lot of wire copy, but luckily I had interviewed Christa McAuliffe and her backup Elizabeth Morgan [sic. Barbara Morgan], as the teachers in space--before, so I was able to, you know, just kind of stretch and stretch.  So I, I thought I could do this job and I went into the news director's office and I said, "I'd like to be considered for the position of an anchor on that four o'clock newscast."  And he said, "Thank you for letting me know."
Speaker 1: I'm interested in the time management aspect of this, 'cause these times mean that you're sleep- I mean the morning show for instance, what was your routine (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The morning show wasn't as hard as it is now (laughter).  That morning show--literally when we first started in, in '81 [1981], it was a cut in, so it was 6:25, 7:25.  I was here like five o'clock in the morning, and then--I've never really been a nine to fiver.  I may have always been a little bit earlier or just a little bit later, but then it became a little bit more of a normal hour when our second child was born, so from '83 [1983] to about I guess, until about 1995, it was pretty much a, a normal, middle of the day kind of thing, which worked well with the family.  When my children were young, I was home early.  When they were older, I was either working a shift where I could do mommy stuff for one school, my husband [Michael Skehan] would pick up the other school.  He was home doing homework when I, you know--it kind of worked out.  But the schedule has been all over the place, but mainly I've been a morning person and in 2000, when I went back to mornings, it just started to get earlier and earlier, and earlier.  But let's not jump around too much.
Story_ID: 662642
Speaker 1: We do the four o'clock--this is my normal day side, I'm now partnered with Mike Buchanan [at WUSA-TV, Washington, D.C.], and if anybody in the Washington, D.C. area is old enough to remember Mike Buchanan--crazy, wild guy, and when they told me he was going to be anchoring with me, I said, "You've got to be kidding," because he was the one who'd be on the road finding crazy, crazy people and doing crazy stunts, but he was an excellent, excellent anchor, excellent journalist, a great partner.  I learned so much from him.  It's not just, "Police say blah, blah, blah," but he would always put in--he'd find some quote.  Let's say it's a fire, and the woman said, "I lost everything and I don't know what I'm going to do."  He might lead with a reader with kind of poignant sound for you to get their attention.  "It happened this way," and then you'd go from that.  So I learned so much from him.  He was an excellent, excellent source of information during the sniper incident.  I mean the police [Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia] would call him, and he was just a wonderful person to be partnered with and work with, and when we did the four o'clock--I think we started the four o'clock in '89 [1989], and--don't get, don't, don't hold me that--we started in the late '80s [1980s], how about that?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We started the four o'clock in the late '80s [1980s] and it was just, let's fill the time.  We were sitting on stools down in the studio.  We did not have a formal set at all and we, we just did the show.  The best part about starting that show when we did and this will put it into a timeframe, it was during the first Gulf War.  So we were on when the defense department [U.S. Department of Defense], the Pentagon, would be doing their briefings.  They would have briefings at four o'clock that you, on other stations, would hear about during their regular five o'clock newscast, but now we could bring you those stories live; it was just, just incredible, and it worked out very well for us.  We, we had a guest booker, a writer who could track down anybody, Janet Terry, she's still on staff with us, amazing at finding people.  When we wanted to get reaction to world events, she could track you down to your McDonald's in Romania or something like that, and we would be talking--I remember one time we were on the phone with the ambassador to the United States from Iraq, and he did not really wanna talk to anybody who wasn't network, but we--, "Is this network?"  "Oh, Mr. Ambassador, we're so glad that you--." We just kept saying anything, and we kept him on the air.  "I hear some commercials, it doesn't sound like network."  "Mr. Ambassador, we're ready to go."  And were able to ask him questions and, and we, we did that.  It was a perfect time to have this new show on the air that some people said would never fly from the other networks that--and then they started doing it themselves.  But it was, it was great training just being next to Mike Buchanan and learning again how to do this job, how to put the passion into the reporting, and how to keep the passion in a measured way, but still convey that this is important, or this is joyous, or this is serious, or this is lighthearted in talking with a guest or talking with a, a family member who had lost someone, or whatever (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now this, this is--
Story_ID: 662643
Speaker 1: I remember that is--actually came to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] in '88 [1988] for a week, a conference, and that was the time of the--D.C. was being referred to as the murder capital--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of the country.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I know [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry spoke before the press club [National Press Club] and he said it's not the murder capital, these are just shootings--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --but it was a crack [crack cocaine] related (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Rayful Edmond's gang was the big gang; that was the big story.  Bruce Johnson was covering that, Mike Buchanan, Gary Reals--they were all over that because it seemed as if this organized crime family but not in the sense of, of what you saw on the, on the federal level, but just as powerful, just as, as pervasive in the D.C. area, was making its presence known, and it seemed as if there was nothing that could stop it 'cause there were also questions about the honesty of members of the police force [Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia], and everything.  It, it was a, a rough time and, you know, again, people were worried about what was the--happen to the nation's capital, what was gonna become of the nation's capital, and look at it today, look at today--a place where people are coming back to this city, whites are moving back into the city, the tax break is improving, the worse--the downside of this, though, is the gap between the haves and have nots is continuing to widen, but it is a, a city that is going up for many, going up for many, and not fast enough for the others.
Speaker 1: Now I remember that period--of watching the news every night, and there was an escalation of the response to the shootings.  There was a training--the police had been issued guns with bigger bullet magazines--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --the National Guard was being called, and this was all in the same week; this was right after the Super Bowl [Super Bowl XXII], about '88 [1988] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a tough time, it was a tough time.  And with this being the nation's capital, a spotlight was shining on it like no other city--like few other cities; I mean obviously my home town, we've had the, the spotlight shining on us--the federal government taking over law enforcement in New Orleans [Louisiana], I mean that was very difficult, and it's still not out from under that cloud in New Orleans, but D.C. has, has come out from that.  Now, we have some other things that we're reporting where the police chief saying, "This is not the force, this is individuals; they were doing these things off their hours--job hours," but there's the talk again about the culture and what's going on.
Speaker 1: What were the concerns in those days, or did you all actually have discussions about how to present this kind of news?  I mean, I know there were discussions in Chicago [Illinois] about whether certain violence should be reported in the news on a daily basis or not, because it was so depressing that a lot of times, people would say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wasn't part of those discussions one way or the other so I couldn't answer that one accurately.  I'm sure there was some input from reporters like Bruce Johnson, Bob Strickland, who was on our staff at the time [at WUSA-TV, Washington, D.C.], Gordon Peterson and Mike Buchanan, Gary Reals; but I wasn't part of that discussion so I couldn't answer that.
Story_ID: 662644
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about that, in--in terms of whether--because something is going on, should it be reported, and at the same time, if you don't report it, aren't you not reporting what's going on?
Speaker 2: Aren't you not reporting the facts--I think there's a point at which you can report the bad stuff, but you don't have to keep piling on--how many murders do you have to talk about in one newscast.  "Violence has erupted in a Southeast neighborhood [Washington, D.C.], blah, blah, blah has happened," and you can put it under an umbrella, but you don't have to detai- , "And on 12th Street Southeast, this happened, and then north--," you don't have to do that.  And I think it's incumbent upon a station to show that this isn't the only thing that's happening in that community.  This is a level of lawlessness maybe, a level of violence, but this is not the only thing that's happening in that community.  And I know we were doing stories like that, maybe not enough, but I think you have to balance it because if that's the only thing we're telling the outsider, it's the only thing we're telling the insider as well.  And, as I said about my own youth, I was encouraged every step of the way to attain the best I could do, and be the best I could be, and that I knew people had my back and were pushing me, but I also saw these people who may not have had the greatest education, may not have had the, the most money in the world, attain a level of respect, of prosperity and, and want more for me.  But if, if the only thing I would have heard as a child is how bad it is and how tough it is, and nobody can get out of this neighborhood and everybody who's in this neighborhood is destined to be that person, I wouldn't have made it; I wouldn't have made it into high school, college, the classroom, public TV here in Washington, D.C., I wouldn't have made it.  And I think it's incumbent upon us to show that there, there are never two sides to a story.  There are usually three or four--the nuances that make certain things happen.  And I think it is our job as well to report the facts, but all of the facts, and the fact is that even the worse street filled with crime, there's one person on that street, probably, who has a story to tell that's uplifting, that is succeeding in spite of what's going on around them.
Story_ID: 662645
Speaker 1: Four o'clock news begins--
Speaker 2: Did the four o'clock and then in 1995, we had a change again, and I was tapped to do the six and eleven o'clock news.  [HistoryMaker] Maureen Bunyan had left the station and I was tapped to be her replacement and I co-anchored with Gordon Peterson from 1995 until 2000, and I think that was the--it was a good time, and one of the, the roughest times in my career; I've been a very, very lucky person.  I've said that all along.  My educational upbringing was good, my home environment was excellent, I had the opportunity to travel the world with my parents [Ethel Simon Roane and Frederick Roane, Sr.] and grandparents.  My grandmother [Mary Porter Roane] took me to a Baptist World Alliance.  Do you know there's a Baptist church in outer something in Russia?  You know like Albania?  There's a Baptist church, and so I went all over the world with her and, and so things were going well.  I never really had to look for a job; that first teaching job, I was recommended by my mentor teacher for John F. Kennedy [John F. Kennedy High School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  The next jobs I applied, I got because I had something they wanted.  I came here, even though I had a little stumble, the BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation] was a nice bridge to public TV to now Channel 9 [WUSA-TV, Washington, D.C.], and here I am doing the six and eleven with Gordon.  And in 2000, I'm going to the set to do my newscast, and I hear from someone that they've hired this person from Atlanta [Georgia] to do the six and eleven o'clock with Gordon.  Well, six and eleven o'clock with Gordon--they've hired someone, duh, what happens to me?  Before I even sat down on the, the set, I went back to my desk and called my general manager at the time and I said, "Is there something I need to know?"  And they said, "Well, when you finish the show, you know, come on up and see us."  And I did the show, head held high, energy--whatever, and then I couldn't get off the set fast enough.  And they said that, "Yes, we're going to replace you with Gordon at six and eleven," and I was stunned because I had no indication that anything was amiss.
Story_ID: 662646
Speaker 1: All right, so what was the nature of this--what were they thinking?
Speaker 2: You know, I think they--the ratings didn't pop as quickly as they thought, and since I was the new quotient in that, we're gonna go in another direction, but I didn't know what direction I was going to go in, and for a couple of months, no one could tell me what direction I would be going in.  And Dave Roberts came in as our new news director [at WUSA-TV, Washington, D.C.], and we sat and we had a long conversation and he said, "We value you, we appreciate you, we are so sorry it's taken," I think it was almost three months, "to figure out what it is, but we know what it is, and we wanna pair you again with Mike Buchanan."  And they paired us at early morning newscast, so it was five to seven A.M. back on the news in the morning, and then a nine o'clock news hour.  And after not knowing what I was going to do but come in to work every day, in the back of my mind my parents [Ethel Simon Roane and Frederic Roane, Sr.] saying, "Come in, head held high, be a professional no matter what," and that's what I did--came in, now I knew what my role was going to be.  And it was back in the mornings and back with Mike, and it was good; we had a, a great time doing the news together, we loved doing the, doing the nine o'clock because it was entertainment, infotainment, and I felt good about how Dave had--and, and the company had handled me coming back after not knowing.  I mean I had never, ever been without a certainty in, in where I was going in my career and--except for that one little time when I, I first moved here and I just didn't know what I, I'd be doing.  But, you know, that was a different thing.  Now, I had family and children and bills, and so what was going to be my future?  And he came and, and helped me see what my future was going to be.
Story_ID: 662647
Speaker 1: (Background noise) And I was working with Buck the morning of 9/11 [September 11, 2001], and we were just standing down in the studio [WUSA-TV, Washington, D.C.] and happened to have--I had 'The Today Show' ['Today'] on, on my desk at the, the job, but I was standing at the doorway waiting to go on, watching CBS and Bryant Gumbel said something about a small plane going into a building [World Trade Center, New York, New York].  Well, I figured, you know, 'Today' was really riding high, maybe they had more.  (Makes sound) Ran over there, and MAQ [ph.] was saying the same thing but had no pictures because, little did we know at that time, that their tower had been attacked.  Went back out and saw this plane go behind--the second plane go behind the tower and not come out, and I yelled up to Buck and I said, "Buck, let's move, something's wrong."  And literally, we were on the air--about 9:30 until almost two o'clock that afternoon--straight--initially talking about 9/11 in New York [New York], and then we get the call.  Dave Statter says, "There's something at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.]," and we had a crew heading towards the Pentagon and we did a squeeze back, took New York back and focused on the Pentagon, and I heard from people who said the CBS affiliate bureau thought we had lost our minds, that we were now covering something else, and then everyone realized, oh, my god, a plane had gone into the Pentagon.  And so we--you know, it was a, a very active situation.  Not all of the information was correct.  We had information that things were happening down on the Mall [National Mall, Washington, D.C.] and whatever, but we had reporters everywhere; people who were in the sports department were now back to being news reporters--just straight out news reporters.  It was an incredible time.  It was incredible for me because not only were we a part of this in- this breaking news story in New York, and here, right in our own back yard; like where's my husband [Michael Skehan]?  Where's my son [Andrew Skehan]?  What are we gonna do?  What's the evacuation?  All those things are going in your mind while you have to focus on telling this story.  And then the other realization was that our daughter's [Alicia Skehan] dorm, where she was in college, was near that.  My husband said--called me up, "Oh, no, she's near Union Square [New York, New York]."  She was three and a half block from where you could look down and see the bull for--you know--for the stock exchange [New York Stock Exchange, New York, New York].  And--couldn't get in touch with her for the longest, but still doing the news, and in fact, I remember we did a line where people were just trying to get through to New York and I said, "Don't worry, if you can't get through, I'm having the same problem; you can imagine the traffic and the telephone traffic trying to get through."  And I didn't hear from her until almost one o'clock.  She had called--made sure she called everybody she could, and then the assignment editor came in and Chris Houston, the late Chris Houston, he said, "Your daughter's on the phone, do you wanna talk to her?"  And I said, "Yes, yes" (laughter).  So I jumped off the set--Mike Buchanan handled it, and she said, "I'm okay."  She said, "I thought I was dizzy--having a dizzy spell," 'cause she was in the shower getting ready for her class; she was a student at the Parsons School of Design [New York, New York].  And she said she was in the shower and literally their building shook, and when she got out and got dressed, she saw kids coming back, who had early classes, coming back with soot all over their faces and, and whatever.  It was just an amazing news day, an emotional day as a journalist, an emotional day as a parent, and now we can look back a, a little bit more calmly, but wow, what a day, but what a news cast we put on that day.  I was proud--very proud of the job we did as journalists.  It, it was amazing, and it was wall to wall--like the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassination, you know?  We did a good job.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what a day.  I know when I first heard, I thought it was similar to--I thought they were--what they were describing was similar to the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Pearl Harbor?
Speaker 2: No, the little plane that hit the White House in '94 [1994]--
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: --when Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was president; it was a little Cessna [Cessna 150], or something like that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right--
Speaker 2: --deranged guy [Frank Eugene Corder]--
Speaker 1: Exactly.  Well, it was in the Tom Clancy novel ['Debt of Honor'], too, remember--with one of his--coming straight down Constitution Avenue going for the Capitol [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.] during the State of the Union address.  And that's the first time we know Jack Ryan gets up, and I'm thinking, whoa!  This is truly life imitating art.  Yeah, but proud of the job that we did.
Story_ID: 662648
Speaker 1: Did you stay, you know, on the--in the morning slot [at WUSA-TV, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: I have been in the morning slot since 2000, it's gotten earlier.  We are no longer five to seven and nine to ten.  We dropped the, the nine to ten hour, and so now I'm on 4:30 to 7:00, and that means I'm here at three A.M.  If we have snow days or any kind of emergency, we're usually here before then--2:30, 2:00--to go on new with expanded coverage.  I'm working with my third co-anchor named Mike--in the morning; my first, of course, was Mike Buchanan.  And then after 9/11 [September 11, 2001], I started working with Mike Walter who--great guy who's now at Chinese television [Chinese Central Television].  And about three years ago, I was paired with another guy.  I said--we worked together very well right from the beginning and I went into the news director and I said, "Let's hire that guy; his name is Mike.  I won't make a mistake when I have to lead to him because his name is Mike.  I won't call him by his last name just in case I get it wrong."  But we have turned into fast friends.  We finish each other's sentences which is kind of creepy and scary but good, and I like the mornings.  We are a unit almost unto ourselves, we, we get, we get the hand off at night but we have to, to make it better in the morning or continue it on the upswing in the morning, and we're really a good group of people.  I admire these young people who are producing and reporting out there and, and looking like they're fresh eyed and bushytailed, and they're as tired as anybody could be, but the energy is still there and it's paying off, it's paying off.  We're seeing it in our ratings and, and the energy and, and the camaraderie is, is wonderful so I, I, I don't mind being in the mornings, I just wish it would come just a little later (laughter)--mentally it would come later (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --or that we'd have a four day week.
Speaker 1: So, it's really a team effort.
Speaker 2: It is, definitely a team effort--definitely a team effort.  You know, in the daytime you have a little bit more people who are deciding what's happening; in the morning, it's your core group--your anchors, your producers, your executive producer and your desk, and the reporter who is, is covering it and those cameramen, and we really--we really work well together and we--
Story_ID: 662649
Speaker 1: I still report.  My concentration here is breast cancer awareness, and we celebrated our twentieth anniversary of a program called Buddy Check 9 in October 2013, and it's a program that's so simple, just women or men reminding their buddies what to do to prevent breast cancer or to at least find it at its earliest stages, and the most rewarding part of this assignment, of this job, is to have someone say, "You saved my life," because we helped them do the breast self exam or get the mammogram, finding the cancer at the earliest stages, and you couldn't ask for more out of any career.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, you pioneered this in this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In this area, yes.  It started first in Jacksonville, Florida and--with the Gannett [Gannett Company, Inc.] station there, and because of the numbers that we have in the Washington, D.C. area--highest mortality rate among black women, a high mortality rate among Latinas--because they tend to find the cancers at a later stage, and for some reason the cancers, especially in black women, tend to be more aggressive, leading to more mortality numbers.  But then, also, the incidents among white women is high in the district, their outcomes are much better, but the incidents of breast cancer--so all of those factors combined said to our management, said to our company that we need to address this, and they asked me to do that, and I started that work with health producer Maria Checchia [Maria Checchia-Ciazza] twenty years ago--yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and I've worked with several other producers since then, but we're still continuing with Buddy Check.
Story_ID: 662650
Speaker 1: You've won some Emmy Awards too, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm and Gracies [Gracie Award] and community service awards for my work--breast cancer--some feature pieces that I've done with some excellent producers, but mainly for the work on breast cancer [Buddy Check 9].  We were even nominated for a national award for community service.  We lost out to a program where--I think it started in Atlanta [Georgia] where you could drop off infants of a certain age at a hospital rather than having so many babies thrown away, literally.  But just literally, it does-- it is a good feeling when you hear people say--it's, it's wonderful being nominated.  It was wonderful being nominated for a national Emmy, getting to go to New York [New York], seeing your peers who did community service programs and features, and be recognized with them; so, yeah, it's, it's turned out to be a very rewarding assignment.
Speaker 1: So morning news is often the civic source--I mean the source of civic information in the community.  Do you find that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know when we did the nine o'clock show it definitely was because we wanted it to be that something that people would wanna watch and get something--literally news that they could use.  We used to do a segment every Friday called 'Mind Over Money,' and we would have a telephone bank and we would have experts to come in and it was during the time of the, the, the mortgage (background noise).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  The morning show, especially at nine o'clock, was geared towards community service.  We would have events that were coming into town, we'd have the authors, but every Friday we had a segment called 'Mind Over Money,' and it was during the, the height of the mortgage crisis where property being turned over, you know, all of that, and then the, the plunge.  And we would have experts come on--national experts, local experts, coming on and talking about all manner of finances--economics, wills and, and all of that kind of--living will documents--whatever it needed to make you financially, economically secure here, there, after.
Story_ID: 662651
Speaker 1: Has there been an aspect of the--community service aspect to the shows you've been involved in that's been the most rewarding? What would you--
Speaker 2: As I said, the Buddy Check program is definitely the most rewarding aspect of community service that I have done here at Channel 9 [WDVM-TV; WUSA-TV, Washington, D.C.].  I've been doing it for twenty years. I've met an incredible--such incredible people of great strength.  I have literally met kings, queens, princesses, cabinet administrators, presidents, first ladies, but nothing is more rewarding than the men and women that I've met dealing with Buddy Check 9.  I do not know if I could be as strong as they are.  We've had cancer in our family recently and it, and it was my son [Andrew Skehan], and it was devastating.  He survived it but it was rough, and it was rough on a young person to, to go through this and the, and the effects it had on his body.  And he's doing well now, and thank God for that, but some of these people have gone through as much or even more pain and suffering than he endured, but they had this positive outlook on life.  It's, it's a faith in God, it's a faith in their doctors, it's a faith that they know they need to have to help their families come through this, and I, I'm just thrilled and honored to have shared their stories with the wider audience here in the metro area.
Story_ID: 662652
Speaker 1: You've interviewed entertainers, politicians--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --everybody from Laura Bush to Sir Ian McKellen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and Elmo (laughter).
Speaker 1: And Elmo, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And Elmo, yes.  Absolutely, I mean from public television [WYES-TV] in New Orleans [Louisiana] to here, I never could have imagined a career that would put me in the same room with some of these people--following Princess Diana when she first came to New York City [New York, New York], actually meeting the royal highnesses at the British embassy when they made their first trip to Washington, D.C. and, and following them.  I've been to Super Bowls when the Skins--the last time the Skins [Washington Redskins] won a Super Bowl I was there; I mean it's been an incredible career, and because we're in Washington, D.C., we have access to so many people, and because this is their local television station [WUSA-TV, Washington, D.C.], you find that these people know who you are, whether they're on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] or in the White House or at NIH [National Institutes of Health] or the district building [John A. Wilson Building, Washington, D.C.] or, or, or someplace in Fairfax County [Virginia] or Baltimore, Maryland even.  It's amazing, and you have access to these people to, to further educate your audience.  I, I--it's wonderful.  I'm, I'm still a teacher at heart, I don't know if you got that sense.  I'm more of the teacher, still, because in teaching, you impart information to your students; hopefully, information that they will use to, to move on.  And I think as a journalist, I am still educating the public with what they need to know, what they want to know, what they should know.
Story_ID: 662653
Speaker 1: Do you influence your s- scripts?  I mean, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My scripts for Buddy Check 9 are my scripts; I write them, I don't have a, a producer who does any of that so I, I do all of that.  The scripts for the shows--when we come in early in the morning, we go through all of the, of the scripts, and we make sure they are grammatically correct, that they speak in my language, meaning the way I would normally speak, and we make sure that we update because our producers have been here since maybe eleven o'clock, midnight, and they may not have gotten around to updating or maybe the updates haven't come, so in that sense I, I have a small role in what I say on air [at WUSA-TV, Washington, D.C.], but they decide--they stack the show, and we have a say like, "Let's drop this, we did this before, people have already heard that."  But the shows are stacked before we get here, and we fine-tune and refine the shows so that they speak the way we speak.
Story_ID: 662654
Speaker 1: What progress has the media made in terms of the depiction of minorities, you know, since the time that you started?
Speaker 2: I still think we have a long way to go.  I remember when we had a training session here and there was a video from Katie Couric about how you don't realize that you're leaving out another group until you realize the group you're in, and she said, you know, looking at certain news reports, she realized that women were missing because she was the, the woman.  And I think that's the same thing.  Sometimes we still don't include everyone because it's, it's not my group, I don't, I don't see me missing, and I think we, we need to help remind everyone that every group should be included in a story or--that's where I said before about the different sides, there's never two sides to a story, there always three or four sides to a story, it's not only crime.  And we have a producer here who is forever reminding people, "Southeast D.C. [Southeast, Washington, D.C.] is not just about crime and it's not just about poor people, the mayor lives in Southeast, the former mayor lives in Southeast.  We have a reporter here who's in South- lives in Southeast."  So she knows that it's not just poverty and violence and whatever, that you have families--good families, hard working families and--because she has that sensibility.  It's not an overt thing, but it is inclusive.  It's not that she's leaving out something else, but she's including the reality of that neighborhood.  And I think we still have a, a long way to go, we're doing much better.  I'm not gonna say we're not doing better but I think we still have a responsibility to, to make sure that you give the full picture of what the minority group is that you're, you're covering.  It's not just this one story today that defines that entire group for the rest of their existence.  There're other factors, there're other--the nuances to life.
Story_ID: 662655
Speaker 1: In 2006, you were quoted as saying that being in the business is like a reality show.
Speaker 2: Yes, the reality show was 'Survivor' (laughter)--outlast, out--outlive, outlast, out--out something else.  I forgot what the slogan of 'Survivor,' and I feel that I, I've done that in the thirty-three years it'll be that I've been in the business.  I, I've been here through a number of, of changes in administration, I'm still here.  I have been here through the changes in technology.  I think that is the biggest change because--I, I, read a story the other day that said 40 percent of adults turn to their children to help them understand the new technology, and I'm that way at home (laughter), and I'm that way in the newsroom.  I look to my younger peers to make sure that I'm--is this the way you do it?  And, and school me in the technology.  That's the biggest change 'cause we've changed systems, several systems, here since we started, so keeping up with the technology is definitely the new challenge of the 21st century journalist--learning how to blog and the best way to blog to get those views and to tweet and to Facebook and all of that.  I mean that has definitely changed the way we interact with our viewers, and how we disseminate the news, and sometimes how we gather the news.  You know, you can get a picture of that suspect that someone has talked about.  Once they've identified, you can go right to Facebook and find it and, and put it on--maybe not on broadcast, but you can put it on your website; there it is, right there--the immediacy of it.  My children [Alicia Skehan and Andrew Skehan] don't sit down and watch television news.  It's alert on the phone, it's alert on the watch, it's--that's where they get it from, and that's what we're not a part of, that generation that puts out those alerts, too.
Speaker 1: So it's either--the business is really--how do you see the business changing as a result of this?
Speaker 2: I hope that that there is still a place for the actual watching of a newscast, but you have to realize that things have changed, whether the newscast is going to be on this channel that you turn on from 6 to 6:30 or 5 A.M. to 7 A.M. or 4:30 to 7 A.M., or the news that you stream on the website--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --it's going to be some kind of a change that we have to adjust to.  But the basic tenet of the job--getting the facts, getting them correct, getting them out and disseminated to the public--all the facts, not slanted, whatever, as best you can, is still our primary job.
Story_ID: 662656
Speaker 1: In 2012, one of your colleagues announced that she had breast cancer--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --J.C. Hayward, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you wrote about that.
Speaker 2: I did.  I wrote about that, we did stories on J.C., we followed her through her, her diagnosis and treatment, she's been my buddy.  The whole idea of the buddy system is you remind a buddy to go to their annual mammograms and we're both October babies, and we were both seeing the same doctor.  I'd recommended her to a radiation specialist--radiologist--and so, "Had you done it?  Had you done it?"  She comes back from vacation in February of 2000 whatever it was, and she said, "I think I felt something. Can you come up and see me?"  And literally she goes, "Feel this, feel this, feel this."  And I said, "I am not a doctor, I don't play one.  It's moving but let's call Dr. Z, and that's Dr. Rebecca Zuurbier who was at Sibley Hospital [Sibley Memorial Hospital, Washington, D.C.] at the time, and, "I don't have her number," I said.  "I give it to you every time."  Got the number, made the appointment.  Dr. Z did see something on the mammogram, and that started the journey.  And at that time, when it was confirmed that she had breast cancer, she said, "Do you think I should go on the air and talk about this?"  And I said, "J.C., if anyone should talk about it, it should be you."  She's been a fixture on our air for forty some years, and just revered in the community for her service.  And I thought--and I think she knew that she could make an impact, and so we followed her from that diagnosis, debating--she was determined to have a double prophylactic mastectomy, and her doctor kept telling her, "You don't need to do that.  It's small, it hasn't left the breast, you don't need to do that."  "Oh, I wanna get rid of it."  So, we followed her to the change of mind, that "Okay, I don't have to be overly aggressive."  We were in the operating room with her when it was removed, and one thing she wanted was lipstick after it was all over (laughter).  So the station [WUSA-TV, Washington, D.C.]--as her welcome back--she was only out of the building--she was operated on a Wednesday; she had Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday, Monday--I think she took Monday off and was back here on Tuesday on the air--in her fabulous high heel Jimmy Choos, looking wonderful.  And she thought it was important to come back as soon as she could 'cause she wanted that to be the face of breast cancer survivorship--that if you found it early enough, that this is who you could be, not some person debilitated by the toxic drugs that were going to go through your body to eradicate the cancer, or someone who had been operated on so radically that it would take a longer period of time.  This is what early detection represented, and she did a wonderful job with that.  I had done a story a couple of--a, a year or two before on a radiation therapy that was called prone radiation, and I told her about it and she said, "I'm gonna have that, I'm gonna have that."  And so I said, "Look on my website, see what's going to happen to you."  And she was a candidate for prone radiation, which means you're face down, the breast hanging through, and the radiation just goes to the breast and it doesn't destroy any of the organs behind the breast like heart, or anything like that.  And the one question she wanted to know, "Can I keep my Choo shoes on?"  And she was able to do her radiation in her four inch Jimmy Choos--every time (laughter), so--and when the course of treatment was finished, again, this is what the picture of early detection and survivorship looks like, and she looked like a million dollars.  She was honored by a group that I helped found called News Babes, and it's the anchorwomen in Washington, D.C. all joining together instead of being our competitive selves, joining together to fight this common enemy, breast cancer.  We recognized her in 2013 as the face of survivorship.
Speaker 1: I know one of the public struggles with cancer has been that of Robin Roberts of ABC News.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, she's from Louisiana as well.
Speaker 2: She is from Mississippi--
Speaker 1: Mississippi, oh?
Speaker 2: --but she, she likes to Sa- I always think about that; she's from Picayune, Mississippi.  What is she doing with our Saints [New Orleans Saints]?  And she went home, and I remember for Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], she toured her area in Mississippi.  But her sister, Sally-Ann [Sally-Ann Roberts], is a long time anchor on the WWL [WWL-TV, New Orleans, Louisiana] affiliate; in fact, she's my counterpart in the morning on Channel 4 in New Orleans [Louisiana], and my husband [Michael Skehan] worked with Sally-Ann and her co-anchor, Eric [Eric Paulsen], were all friends, and so that's the real Louisiana connection, and I know she's recuperated at Sally-Ann's home after that first initial bone marrow transplant, and she has been, again, so public with her, her condition in showing the effects, and hers were much more difficult, a much--more of a challenge beating her breast cancer than what J.C. has experienced, and it makes a difference.  It does make a difference because people will look at that and say, "Wow, they've got it all, and they still have breast cancer.  And they have to put this public face on.  Well, I can do that, I can do that with my home, with my family."  And it does help people make some decisions of their own, and the main one is to get checked.
Story_ID: 662657
Speaker 1: Also in 2012--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --your, your son got in trouble, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.
Speaker 1: And this was a public (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was very public.  Our son was arrested, and he was arrested--initially, the call was like a domestic violence call with a girlfriend, and then it turned into a weapons charge, and that was a very distressing time.   He--it was November 1st, 2012, and all kinds of misinformation--that the woman was taken away in an ambulance.  It was our son because--as I said, Andrew was a cancer survivor and suffering still with the consequences of the cancer.  He had something called a soft sarcoma, and it was in the neck.  It's usually in the joints and whatever, but it was in his neck and it was right around his carotid artery, and it had already started eating into his spinal column, and he was just, you know--again, he could have been paralyzed from the, the neck down because that's where it was eating away, and had it gotten to the, to the nerve, that would of been it.  So he was the one taken away by ambulance.  But that was a long, hard, almost year of him being in a legal limbo.  Because of his condition, he was allowed to come home and be home monitored with an anklet, periodic drug testing--drugs were never a part of the, the situation.  The, the domestic dispute charges were dropped but it was the weapons charge 'cause they were not registered--legally purchased in another jurisdiction, but not registered in the district [Washington, D.C.], and that was the crime which took it out of the hands of the district courts and put it into the U.S. attorney's backyard and obviously much serious consequences for him, and he is back to living a, a normal life.  They did not proceed with any legal action against him, but it was almost a year before they made that decision.  So he's back at work, hopefully wiser, smarter--his health is better.  He had been--at the time of his arrest he had not been able to eat by mouth at all because a plate that was put in his neck to stabilize his spine tore his esophagus, so the food wasn't able to go down properly so he'd been on a gastric feeding tube for almost two years, until last Good Friday when things started to turn around and he had his best test and he goes periodically to Hopkins [The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland] for a test on his swallowing mechanism, which will never be completely normal, but it seems if the cancer--there's no evidence of the cancer--the sarcoma.  But that was, that was difficult, it was very difficult.  You know, I, I don't like being on this side of the camera at all, and I, I understand it.  I, I do understand it but I, I didn't like the way it was reported that, "Andrea Roane's son," you know; but I'm the mom at that time, at that point, and I was also worried that there would be more repercussions against Andrea Roane's son than Andrew Skehan, and--that's my married name, Skehan, and so very concerned about what that would mean for him but, as I said, we're on the other side of that, and he's back at work, he's healthier, and I hope wiser.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that had to be a very--a stressful year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was very stressful; I mean I only have two children, and I'm like every other parent, especially of a young black male, and I don't want my child to be part of the, the justice system, and that was all we ever, ever tried to get across to, to him.  I mean 'cause we have to talk to our men, our boys, different than we talk to our daughters--our, our young women, and that was what we tried to help him understand, and it was very difficult when those lessons didn't pan out the way we thought.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, are you still on the--you're still anchoring the morning (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I still anchor in the morning; I am still 4:25 to 7 A.M., and I have been substituting on the noon for the last couple of months, and--which I used to do as--you remember I told you I worked the noon with Bob Dalton; so I do that several times each week, and I share those responsibilities with Mike Hydeck and--who is my co-anchor in the morning [at WUSA-TV, Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 662658
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --is there anything major that you would do differently?  I realize you came--it all had a, like a serendipitous kind of (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I am just amazed; sitting here in this day and time with what I have done, what I have had access to, what I've accomplished, and I never, ever would have envisioned this as a career for me.  I should be like a lot of my friends, at a good age to enjoy retirement after maybe forty some years in the New Orleans Public School System, or some aspect of education, had I gone on for my Ph.D. maybe teaching on the university level.  At best, that's what I thought, and I thought I would be home in New Orleans [Louisiana] and, and I knew what schools I would send my children to and I, I, I knew what my life would be, and--but once TV came into my life, things changed, and luckily they changed for the positive, they changed for--I can't say a better because who knew--who knew--who knows what that life would have been had I continued on the education path.  But definitely changed, and just was eye opening to what other things were out there that I could do that I never thought I would be able to do, and from learning about how to operate a studio camera to learning how to write for broadcast news, which is very different than writing as an English teacher, very different than writing as a college professor, very different than writing as a writer in public TV 'cause you need length.  It's, it's just amazing.  I am glad I've been on this ride, hope it continues for a little while longer but, you know, the advice is the one that my parents [Ethel Simon Roane and Frederic Roane, Sr.] said, "Try it, you might like it.  When that door opens, don't be afraid to look on the other side, don't even be afraid to go in.  And above all, don't let any ism get in the way of the goals that you've set for yourself--not racism, sexism, ageism--any ism that's out there, don't let that be the stumbling block or the excuse for you not going in that direction," (points).
Story_ID: 662659
Speaker 1: From your vantage point, you know, being at the point of the news for so many years, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I think my biggest concern is the one that they see themselves--some members of the African American community see only what the media says they are, or what pop culture says they are, and sometimes that is not good, and therefore, they live up to that expectation for themselves, and I want this community, my community, to believe as I believed, that education is important.  There are still, with all that we know, with all that happened with the Johnson administration [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] and, and Head Start and whatever, there are still parents who don't really understand the value of education and their role in education.  This is not where the teacher loses pay because the teacher didn't do a good job, this is a situation where the teacher can't do as good a job as they would like if they're not getting the support at home.  That was what my education was about.  Yes, my mother was part of the teaching staff in my school [Holy Ghost Catholic School; Opelousas Catholic School, New Orleans, Louisiana], but when we left that classroom, those same values imparted by the nuns, imparted by the lay teachers, were believed in by my parents [Ethel Simon Roane and Frederic Roane, Sr.] and my grandparents, and the friends and family of my parents.  So, I had the support network around me, and I want my community to understand that you can't let someone else define who you are; you have to look in that mirror and say, "This is me, this is what I want for myself, now what do I need to go out and accomplish that?"  And do that.  It is not going to be easy.  Nothing worthwhile, as they say, is easy, but don't be defeated and say, "The man didn't allow me to do that," or, "Because I was this and came from this neighborhood," or, "I was this skin tone or that," whatever, "I didn't get what--." Forget all of that.  Just put that out of your mind and keep going forward.  There will be some road blocks that you have to go around, go under, go over, but you can do it.  Sometimes you just have to ask for help.  Don't be afraid to ask for help; somebody will help you, somebody will help you, 'cause if you're a success, then we're all a success.
Story_ID: 662660
Speaker 1: Once again, if you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: That I made a difference in someone's life--literally made a difference in someone's life, and that would be through the Buddy Check 9 program--that over twenty years we've had thousands of women and men who've heard my message, and some were re-encouraged, reenforced to do what they always did, reminded to do what they always did, but there was that one person who had forgotten to do it or didn't know how to do it, or had just put it off--out of their mind and decided that day, because they heard [HistoryMaker] Andrea Roane say, "Check your breast, schedule that mammogram and get your buddy to do the same," did it, found the lump, found it at its earliest stage, thereby making treatment easier, giving you more options in treatment, and then for a doctor to say, "We've gotten it all, you can go on with your life."  That I've made a difference in somebody's living, living well, or dying, that's what I hope my legacy will be.
Story_ID: 662661
Speaker 1: (Background noise) I know we, we discussed the troubles your son had and your daughter being in school during the crisis of 9/11 [September 11, 2001].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family.
Speaker 2: My immediate family?
Speaker 1: Yeah, immediate family (unclear).
Speaker 2: My--I'll start with the, the most important member of my immediate family--outside of my parents, my husband Michael Skehan, Washington [D.C.] native, but whose roots are in Louisiana; his mother was from Alexandria, Louisiana--Ruth Desselle [Ruth Desselle Skehan], and--that's her maiden name, and his dad, John Anders Skehan, Sr. [John Skehan, Sr.], was from--born in Mississippi but raised in Bogalusa, Louisiana; he played with a--like a Negro team in Bogalusa, good pitcher, long, lanky guy, and they--part of the migration from the South, moved here and lived here for about forty years, raised their six kids. Michael was number four of the six, and just a great guy, level headed, entrepreneurial spirit, and the person my father [Frederic Roane, Sr.] picked out for me--unbeknownst to me. They went to the same barber, and my dad came over and said, "How come you don't go out with him?"  I said, "Dad, I don't know everybody in TV."  He was a cameraman at WWL [WWL-TV, New Orleans, Louisiana], the CBS affiliate, and then one day, his college friend, who was now working with me at the public television station [WYES-TV, New Orleans, Louisiana], said, "There's a phone call for you in the green room; no matter what that person says on the other end, say yes."  And it was Michael on the other end and he was asking me out to a business dinner.  CBS executives were coming to New Orleans [Louisiana], and I said, "Yes."  And so we went out and--thought that was nice, and then he called again and we dated for about three months, engaged, and then married six months later, so a total of, of nine months, but it was surprising because we had worked together before and I didn't remember.  He was the audio guy on a series of interviews that I did with French speaking women directors, and the porn star Marilyn--Marilyn Chambers (laughter).  Don't know how she fit in with the French speaking directors but she did--he was the audio person and I didn't even remember that.  I had met him even before then but didn't know because when I first interviewed for that job at public television right out of the classroom, I went in and the project director, Bill Hess [William Hess], was on the phone cursing to the high heavens, and he was cursing out the news director at the WWL affiliate, Phil Johnson, because he had taken back the cameraman that was supposed to work on our federally funded program.  That cameraman was my husband.  Who knew?  So we were destined to meet somewhere along the line.  Just a great guy; we've been married thirty--we were married thirty-five--it'll be thirty-six years September 16th, 2014.  Thirty-six years of marriage, and we have two children.  Our daughter Alicia [Alicia Skehan], the one born in 1981--she's my public television baby; she was born before I came to Channel 9 [WDVM-TV; WUSA-TV, Washington, D.C.], and always artistic; beautiful girl, and she graduated from St. Ann's Academy elementary school here [Washington, D.C.], and then went on to the Academy of the Holy Cross [Kensington, Maryland], and then went to--was accepted at the Parsons School of Design [New York, New York], and she thought at one time of being a shoe designer but she is now a very successful senior handbag designer for a company called L and F USA [LF USA Inc.; GBG USA Inc.], and so she's worked on a number of well known lines that women who love handbags would recognize, including Coach and Juicy, and Kate Spade.  And our son Andrew [Andrew Skehan], he went to--they both went to Montessori school before the Catholic school, he also went to St. Ann's, was a year at St. John's [St. John's College High School, Washington, D.C.], did alternative school, then finished his high school career at Archbishop Carroll High School in Washington, which was the alma mater of his father and two of his uncles.  And he, he did a year at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] but college was not for him, but always technically inclined, so he now works for Skehan Communications [Skehan Communications, LLC], which is my husband's video production company, and we have big rigs, and so if you wanted to do a six camera shoot, call Skehan Communications and that's what he does.  And so our son works for him--and that's the family.  My mother Ethel [Ethel Simon Roane] survived my dad, and after her came Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].  She was long gone before anything happened.  She was watching it on television in Alexandria, Louisiana, and the Labor Day--that Labor Day after the storm, she moved in with us and has been living with us here in Washington, D.C. ever since; has made great friends, but a lot of people who had lived or were--had been born in Louisiana, so there's that Louisiana connection, and she has a great telephone tree of the friends that have survived since the hurricane in Louisiana, that she's still in touch with.  We come from a small family but close to relatives who are still alive.  We still have a home--we have a condo in New Orleans, so I do have a place to go home when I go home to New Orleans.  And that's the family--my brother Frederic [Frederic Roane, Jr.], as I said earlier, seven years younger, he moved here in the late '90s [1990s] and works for MARC [MARC Train Service] as an assistant manager there at Union Station [Washington, D.C.], so that's my little family.
Story_ID: 662662
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we haven't discussed we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I know I've jumped around as far as the years, and, and I've gotten some of the years mixed up 'cause I don't really think about this on a regular basis.  There've been so many things that have happened in my life, but I think you really captured the things that propelled me from one career to the next.  I, I can't think of anything that's important that I have missed except that, again, I've been able to do some fabulous things here at Channel 9 [WDVM-TV; WUSA-TV, Washington, D.C.]--travelled to Cuba covering the baseball game when they played the Baltimore Orioles a couple of--you know, several years ago--in the '90s [1990s].  I was going to Israel on a private trip when I found out from Komen [Susan G. Komen Foundation] that they were going to be hosting the first Race for the Cure [Susan G. Komen Race for the Cure] in Jerusalem, and I had a contact with the Israeli embassy here and I was able to go to Israel, go to Jerusalem, interview the mayor there, and put that on the air when we came back, and traveled to the [U.S.] Virgin Islands during a snow storm in Washington, D.C. to track down [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry's drug connection at one point.  And we weren't able to get close because the compound was guarded by a very ferocious dog, but it was snowing here and it was nice and warm in the Virgin Islands.  I've had an amazing life that is still going on, amazing career, and I think you've touched on the most important points about it.
Story_ID: 662663
Speaker 1: I didn't ask about this, and I ought to be flogged for this, but what has it been like since 2008 here in D.C. with a black president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]?
Speaker 2: You know, I'm not sure what it really has been like, I think the, the promise of having that black president here in Washington, D.C. has not been fulfilled.  I think the government was looking for more of a supporter than initially was felt after the inauguration.  I think there is that great sense of pride, though, of having a black president, but I think there is the feeling that we wish more could be done with a black president in office.  We understand that he is the president of everyone and he's made that very clear, but you would hope that because he does understand the plight of a big city and some of the challenges of a big city, that he would be more of an advocate--more outspoken when it comes to voting rights for this city and, you know, maybe not statehood, but at least voting rights in [U.S.] Congress for the delegate, and even the license plates, it took a long time for the presidential license plate to change to the one that reflects the fact that taxation without representation--he didn't change that right away and people thought he would do that.  So, the pride is there, but I would say that we still would like to see a little bit more effort on behalf of the city and the autonomy of the District of Columbia.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I've never met them, so--you know.
Story_ID: 662664
Speaker 1: I didn't ask this question either--and that's do you see yourself retiring as a, as an anchor?  And if you do, is there another project that you want to pursue that's lingered in the back of your mind?  I mean like a book or--I don't know--a documentary (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No book, no way (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No book, no way.
Speaker 1: Any documentary project--I don't know, you know.  Is there something else that you wanna do?
Speaker 2: I'm available for any offers out there; I hope that I have a little bit more longevity in this career as an anchor, and that's what I'm working--making sure I do the, the best job I have here, and I'm gonna leave the future really kind of to the future.  I have done some documentary work, so I think I could to that.  I think I could do voiceover books, I think I could just rest for a little while and take a break and maybe learn how to sleep normal hours 'cause it takes a long time for your body to acclimate to getting up at a normal time, and even with, let's say, a two week vacation I'm still waking up at two and three in the morning, so I think the first thing I would think about is just getting my body back to a normal sleep cycle 'cause we keep reporting how dangerous it is when you don't get enough sleep.  So I would like to preserve my health and get a little bit more sleep when that time comes.  Otherwise, I'm happy right now.
Story_ID: 662665
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.  She did her best and a little bit better.  She tried her hardest and then went beyond that, you know.  Yeah, I think that's, that's good--right?
Speaker 1: That's good (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think (laughter), I work hard, and so I just wanna make sure that just a little bit better than a hundred percent effort. That's (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you.
Speaker 2: You're welcome, great talking with you, Larry [Larry Crowe].  Thank you (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 662666
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me in 1972, my first trip to Europe. I was in Spain with my best friend Gretchen Lego [ph.].  We had a great time, we were there for fourteen days and seeing all the major cities, and then maybe going back; hopefully going back another time, and I did have a chance to go back to Europe, but not to Spain.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is first grade class.  Our teacher was Sister Ann Regina [ph.] at Holy Ghost elementary school [Holy Ghost Catholic School; Opelousas Catholic School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  I'm on the top row to camera left, and on the left on the lower row, I recognized Herbert Oubre [ph.], I remember him.  I don't remember the young boy next to him.  The third is Martin Thibodeaux, and I don't remember who is next to him, but I know Herbert and Martin and I, we also were in high school together at Xavier Prep [Xavier University Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Isn't she lovely?  And this is Andrea Theresa [HistoryMaker Andrea Roane], and this was at First Holy Communion for Holy Ghost elementary, and this was in April of 1957, and my mother was my second grade teacher, and she was also with Sister Ann Regina, the teacher who helped all of us be prepared for this very important sacrament in the Catholic church.
Speaker 1: Ahh, this was going back home, after Hurricane Katrina, to try and recover whatever we could.  We lived--we lived Uptown when I was growing up, and then in late '59 [1959], '60 [1960], we moved to the Gentilly area, the Pontchartrain Park area [New Orleans]. This was a community of middle class blacks, and so this was the home my parents had from, from '59 [1959] until Katrina, and went back with my husband [Michael Skehan] to try and get whatever we could from the house.
Speaker 2: This 2005 (unclear).
Speaker 1: And here we are again; this was the living room.  You can see all of the duct work that has fallen through; the black spots on the wall, that's really mold on the curtains in the, the dining room, and all of the debris that was left.  I mean there was really nothing left but it was amazing; a china cabinet tipped over, and some really fine crystal goblets--I have nine of the ten.  Only one was destroyed, and basically, they were cushioned by the water from Katrina, and then I have all of the wedding china that my mother and father had.
Speaker 2: This was a fantastic trip.  As you can see, it was in 1999; went to Havana, Cuba to cover the Baltimore Orioles playing the Havana nationals, and Fidel Castro was there.  I was amazed at the access we had.  We were in the bleachers but we were behind Fidel, and there really didn't seem to be much cover--very exposed, but it was an incredible trip.
Speaker 1: Upside down.
Speaker 2: I know, but they can flip it (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay, good.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: I was a New Orleans public school teacher, and I had been in the classroom for about two and a half years when I saw a posting for a job in administration, and this was part of my job as the principal or administrator for the New Orleans Center for Creative Arts [New Orleans, Louisiana] where the  high school for the performing arts--and we boast Ellis Marsalis [HistoryMaker Ellis Marsalis, Jr.] as being on that early faculty as our jazz instructor, and if you recognize the Marsalis name, that's because his son Wynton [Wynton Marsalis] was one of our first students.  He was in the class with Harry Connick, Jr. but Harry dropped out of NOCCA and went on to his great fame and success, and Wynton graduated and is as successful.
Speaker 2: One of the ways that I got one of my jobs, and that was being a performer.  And my kids, the kids that I taught at John F. Kennedy senior high [John F. Kennedy High School, New Orleans, Louisiana], got me involved in theater, and I did theater work, community theater work, at two places--Gallery Circle Theatre, right off the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana], and immediately off the French Quarter.  I also worked at Le Petit Theatre du Vieux Carre [New Orleans, Louisiana].  This was at Gallery Circle and it was our production of 'M*A*S*H,' and I'm there playing Lieutenant Colonel--I believe she was Bridget McCarthy.  It was a fun time, just a fun time, and it made me a, a better candidate as far as being an administrator of a performing arts high school.
Speaker 1: This was wild.  We were the, the trio; kind of like--not harpies, but we were the trio that moved 'Jesus Christ Superstar' [Tim Rice and Andrew Lloyd Webber] along, and I was the superstar to the right of your screen, one of the, the performers there, and we were doing it kind of--this was in the '70s [1970s], so you can see the--you can't see in this black and white picture, but colorful Afro wigs, and Devrie [ph.] was our Judas [Judas Iscariot]. He was a fantastic Judas.
Speaker 2: This is 1972.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: You should say it 'cause you have (unclear).
Speaker 1: This was 1972, and I don't know if you can make it out, but it's the Livingston tennis team, and I was the coordinator of cultural services at Edward Livingston Middle School [New Orleans, Louisiana], and one of my dear friends there, Emily--Evelyn, rather--Evelyn Menge--was a great tennis player, and she asked me to be with her on the tennis team.  I wasn't the greatest tennis player but had a lot of fun.
Speaker 2: People ask, "Who are your role models?"  These are my role models; this is my mother Ethel Roane [Ethel Simon Roane], and this is my father Frederic Roane [Frederic Roane, Sr.], wonderful parents.  This was right before they were married, and they were married almost fifty--fifty plus years, and just a, a wonderful, wonderful, nurturing family.  My father was the one who said, "Travel, travel now before you have any children because that will definitely kind of slow you down," and I took his advice, and that trip to Spain was one of the first trips that I took thinking of Frederic Roane and Ethel Simon there together.  Great family, couldn't have had better parents.
Story_ID: 662667
Speaker 1: --Nurturing--a nurturing family.  My mother was my second grade teacher at Holy Ghost elementary [Holy Ghost Catholic School; Opelousas Catholic School, New Orleans, Louisiana], so she was not only my teacher but also my spiritual advisor and--for First Holy Communion and the sacrament of penance, so very important in my upbringing all around.
Speaker 2: And here they are on their wedding day; my father [Frederic Roane, Sr.] was not Catholic and--but he was--most people didn't realize that because he was so involved in our Catholic upbringing.  My mother Ethel [Ethel Simon Roane], she is still alive, daddy died when he was eighty years old, just--almost shy of his eightieth, right around Easter, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is 1948, right?
Speaker 2: This was 1948.  My parents were married December 27th, 1948, so that was wedding day.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) This was--what's on the back of that one?
Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973].
Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973], I was a grad student wrapping up my master's degree at Louisiana State University in New Orleans, which is now the University of New Orleans [New Orleans, Louisiana], and I was doing an educational kind of thing, you know, for--I, I don't know what it was.  It was for class credit or something, and so that's the young me; that's all I'll say about it.
Speaker 2: Was it an internship or something?
Speaker 1: No, it wasn't an internship, it was just some sort of promotional thing.  I think it may be on the back what it says.  What does it say?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: The picture was a long I vowel. That's what we were trying to teach on this educational promotional video, and this was from LSU in 1973 and we used the puppets, you know, like Elmo and all the guys; we used the puppets there to teach the long I sound.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter), that's baby Andrea Theresa [HistoryMaker Andrea Roane], and I think I was three months old, maybe even younger, and--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  This is you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's me, yeah.  Why I kept the glasses on I do not know (laughter).
Speaker 2: And that's--this is from the Xavierian 1967 yearbook, Xavier Prep [Xavier University Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana], and why I kept the glasses on I don't know, but that's graduation photo.  And immediately after we took the pictures, everybody cut their hair--every girl.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  So that's it then?
Speaker 2: There's another marker here, is that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I just gave you some pictures but they're so small you can't really make me out.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Yes, I'm right there with the glasses in the front looking somber.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: What was that, student council?  Student council--I was a member of the student council.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Yes, that picture up there.  The one with the glasses looking somber (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Student council member, 1967.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Well, thank you very much.
