Story_ID: 19207
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.  My name is Marlene, M-A-R-L-E-N-E Owens, O-W-E-N-S Rankin, R-A-N-K-I-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Cleveland, Ohio on April 19, 1939.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am the executive director of the Jesse Owens Foundation.
Speaker 1: And now this is a tough question.  What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 31st.  You know it's the anniversary of my father's [Jesse Owens] death.  Yeah, today is March 31st, 2003.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: It's exactly twenty three years today, yeah.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Chicago, Illinois, Hyde Park, in my home.
Story_ID: 19208
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, my favorite food?  There are, I have so many favorites.  I like food.  I love chili.  I love beans, any kind of beans and lemon meringue pie is one of my favorites.  I guess you know the, I have a wide range of tastes but those are a few things that I absolutely love, so yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I like bright colors.  I like red and orange and white.  I like white a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: You know all the seasons are wonderful.  I really like the changing seasons and being in a location where you experience them pretty profoundly.  You know the winters are winters in Chicago [Illinois] and the fall, fall is, it can jump into winter pretty quickly but the fall can be very pretty.  Spring is lovely.  It's, it's a little slow in coming to Chicago.  You go a little further south maybe like Cincinnati, Ohio or something, it's green and beautiful and the flowers are in bloom because its' a little warmer there.  But spring is a wonderful time of year.  And I enjoy summer because you can be outdoors in, in the sunshine and not having to put on all the heavy clothes and that sort of thing.  So I guess I don't have a favorite season.  Winter is great.  I really do like watching snowstorms and being a part of that.  So it's all good.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: There are a number of places that I enjoy going.  Our family has a family home in Michigan and we all go there and, and enjoy long weekends or weeks in the summer or it, it's just a wonderful place to be.  Other than Michigan going away somewhere, we used to go to Phoenix [Arizona] for seventeen years I believe we went to Phoenix every, every year and loved it, had a great time.  My parents moved there in '72 [1972].  That was a fun place to visit.  I like, I like the Bahamas.  Oh gosh there--the one place I have not been and I really want to go which may end up being a very favorite vacation spot is Greece and going to the islands there.  So--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Now tell me do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think I do.
Story_ID: 19209
Speaker 1: Well let me ask you about your family history.  Not the whole family but how far back can you trace your family or what do you know about your ancestors?
Speaker 2: Not a great deal but I'm, I've begun to learn more because a genealogy chart was done by the Church of Latter Day Saints in Utah a couple of years ago.  It was, it was during the Olympics, yeah it was during the Olympics and there was an exhibit at the, the museum there which is a family history museum I think.  And they did some research into both my parents' family background.  It's a very you know it, it's really interesting cause it's really a tough thing to do when you're, especially when your parents are older because the records weren't kept in those days.  My, my father's father I don't doubt was a free slave.  I don't know but my father's father was a sharecropper and so there was not a great deal of record keeping although they were able to find a, a good deal of information.  One of the things that I, I found interesting about what they did find was the, the name can very.  It can be Owens or Owen and it just depends on how that particular part of the family chose to use it.  So initially I was concerned that maybe that was not, they were not on the right track but they felt pretty certain that they were and did send me a good, a good amount of the records.  My mother's [Minnie Ruth Solomon Owens] family is--my father's family is from Alabama.  My mother's family is from Georgia and the records there were even worse than my father's.  I only know about my mother's family because she would tell us what it was like for her as a little girl.  And it seemed that her father was very enterprising and so they lived extremely well.  They--her, her brother drove a car when he was like twelve or something like that.  And she always had wonderful clothes and she was sort of the, she was the baby of the family and sort of the apple of her father and brother's eye.  She had a sister and they, they were all very well dressed, lived well because her father bootlegged beer and, and moonshine and, and whatever else.  Their name was Solomon and we don't really, we're not sure about the origin of that name but it's, it--all of their names are pretty biblical you know Ruth and John and Alma and you know.  So they left Georgia in a hurry because I think my grandfather was being run out of town.  I'm, I'm not sure but I, I do think that it was under some not so great circumstances and that--.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) success of in Georgia (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah--exactly and so they had to take what they could and leave and they went to Cleveland.  What I did find in the records which I had never known because I think my mother found it so difficult to talk about, he--my grandfather [John Augustus Solomon] died at his own hand in 1935.  And I really think that it had a great deal to do with the fact that he could not provide for his family at the level that he had in--this is just pure, my guessing.  But I, I can't imagine that I'd be that far off, at the level that he had in the South and just could not seem to get things going for himself to take care of his family.  His sons worked and helped, helped take care of the family.  So I did find that in those records from the Church of Latter Day Saints that they found--we got the date of his death.
Story_ID: 19210
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you then about your mother, can you give us her full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: --It's Minnie, M-I-N-N-I-E, Ruth R-U-T-H, Solomon S-O-L-O-M-O-N, Owens O-W-E-N-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born April 27th, 1915 in Locust Grove, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Locust like the--?
Speaker 2: Locust.
Speaker 1: L-O-C--?
Speaker 2: --C-U-S-T.
Speaker 1: And where is that (unclear) do you know?
Speaker 2: I really don't know.
Speaker 1: You've never been--?
Speaker 2: I've never been there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well tell us something about her.  What was she like, you know where did she go to school and what were her early experiences?
Speaker 2: Mother was a very pretty young girl and very tiny, very small, had a great little figure, pretty skin and beautiful hair.  She was spoiled, knew she was cute and she, she had girlfriends in, in school.  She--when they came to Cleveland she was very young and as far as I can remember back she talked about junior high school which is where she met my father in junior high school.  And they began to be boyfriend and girlfriend.  And I really think he was her first and only love and she went on to high school.  She never really worked.  I think she in high school tried to work in a beauty shop where she shampooed hair.  She talked about that a little bit.  And she had little, little ventures out into the work world but they never lasted more than a day.  For some reason or another she, she didn't like it or just couldn't hang in there.  But I can remember when I was really small and she decided she wanted to work and she got a job.  And my sisters and I were, oldest one is, let's see Gloria is seven years older than I am.  And, and she--I, I can't remember whether she was left in charge or not but I must have been two or three and when my mother came home I was, my, the sister closest to me and I were out playing in the rain with umbrellas and little, little cotton dresses on and hardly anything else.  And she decided no I think where I'm needed is at home because you know here we are out playing in the rain and should be inside.  So she quit her job and I don't think she ever tried again.  But she was always, she had a full time job.  She took care of three girls, her home beautifully and her husband who she really was available for at all times.  So she, she really was the kind of woman who took care of him, you know.
Speaker 1: And that you know with his fame and notoriety--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I suppose that, that became--.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --a bigger job (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh it was an incredible job.  He was in and out of town all the time and she made sure his clothes were kept up and she packed his bag and had, that he had the things he needed.  And so you know she had a, she had a job.
Speaker 1: I can imagine even handling his communications, you know people trying to call him--.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --and writing.  That must have been a tremendous (unclear).
Speaker 2: I was and it got to the point where it needed to be passed on somewhere else.  But she was, she was really a partner to him in all of the things that he tried.  He too was entrepreneurial and, and, and enterprising and found a number of ways to make a living after the Olympics because the, the money was not available to athletes back, black athletes back then as it is today so he had to feel his way and find what would work for him, for him to take care of his family.  And there were any number of ventures you know, dry cleaning business in Columbus, Ohio and, and just all, all kinds of things.  But there was one that he did in Chicago which was a, a successful venture and that was his PR, his public relations and marketing company and he repped major corporations who would contract with him to represent them in the black community.  And one way that he did that was through a Saturday afternoon that he would have what was called Luncheon at the 24.  And all of the products of all of his clients were served at this luncheon.  It was sort, something like oh, the breakfast club.  I can't think of the guy's name who used to have the breakfast club was on radio.  And so it was--.
Speaker 1: Don McNeal.
Speaker 2: Don McNeal's Breakfast Club.  It was very similar to that.  And it was on Saturday mornings at a place called the Tiki Room.  And there would be over two hundred women who would come and my mother did all the cooking.  So every Saturday she would go and do all the cooking for these two hundred people and serve it.  So she, she was his partner in many, many ways.
Story_ID: 19211
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father.  Can you state his name you know give us his name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name is James J-A-M-E-S Cleveland C-L-E-V-E-L-A-N-D Owens O-W-E-N-S.  As a child in Alabama he was called 'JC,' which was a very common thing for blacks from the south.  They used initials a lot.  And so when he came to Cleveland [Ohio] and he was very shy and rather quiet and the teacher asked his name, he said 'JC'.  And she thought he said Jesse and from that point on Jesse was his name.  So that's, that's how he got Jesse Owens, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's the kind of family history that most people would not know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  That, that's really how that happened--.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now he was born in Alabama, what part of--(unclear) (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Oakville, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Oakville.
Speaker 2: Which is--I have been there.  We, we went there for the opening celebration of the Jesse Owens Park which is in itself a very interesting story.  The people of Oakville and Molton [Alabama] felt that there should be some sort of recognition of their son you know and they initially wanted a monument on the courthouse lawn in Oakville.  And the--it was fought.  I mean there was just no way they were going to approve a monument to a black man on the courthouse lawn.  So the community decided they would do something on their own and they constructed a granite monument, small with a plaque on a, a corner in Oakville.  And there it, there were many attempts to tear it down by the [Ku Klux] Klan and they would change it and rope it and but they couldn't tear it down.
Speaker 1: When was it erected?
Speaker 2: It was erected, you know I, I don't want to give you wrong dates.
Speaker 1: Well it doesn't have to be exact.  I'm just trying to get an idea of what time--(unclear)(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: I would say probably '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Seventies [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Something like that.  Yeah, yeah.  Maybe, maybe '80s [1980s] I don't know.  It wasn't, it wasn't a terribly long time ago.
Speaker 1: They were still trying--(unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah they did not want it.  And so the community was determined that there was going to be something and, and when that happened they wanted something bigger you know and better.  So there was, there's land right across from this little corner where they had erected this marble or concrete monolith and they acquired the land and part of it was purchased by a man whose name was Therman White who was a farmer in Oakville.  And it was fifteen acres and that is where they decided they were going to build a park.  And Therman White plowed the land went, took his tractor, plowed the land you know planted grass you know all of that, cleared it.  And he went as far as he could go without help in terms of making this park a reality.  And there were other people in the community involved in, in this dream and they, it really was a dream.  So when he reached a point where he couldn't go any further on his own he went to the county--in the south they have county agents because of the agricultural schools and, and because it's still an agricultural community.  And the county agent is a liaison between the universities and the community.  So he went to the county agent from, of Auburn University that was, that had the relationship with Auburn and he became very involved and his name is James Pinion.  Together Therman White and James Pinion built this park.  They raised over a million dollars with Mr. Pinion's help, built the park.  They, they spoke with us about it and we were just very impressed with what they wanted to do but wondering how in the world were they going to get this done.  You know it was wonderful to have that kind of investment and passion about doing something for their hometown hero.  But we just couldn't imagine how they were going to make it happen.  Well they made it happen and they built a museum.  There is a replica home on the grounds.  It is now thirty seven acres.  They bought more land.  There is the most beautiful monument I think I've ever seen that was constructed of bronze and--.
Speaker 1: Excuse me, it's a statute of him?
Speaker 2: It's a statute.  It is absolutely beautiful.  It was done by his name is Branko Medenica.  Branko is from Germany, lives in Birmingham, Alabama now and just does beautiful work and it is an incredible piece.  There are picnic areas.  There are, you know ball park space.  The biggest thing that they really want to do now is to build a track so that there can be high school track events held in the park.  The museum was designed by the same company who designed the civil rights museum in Birmingham.  So it's just beautifully done.  It is very impressive.  It's interactive for kids in school to be able to ask questions there.  It's a small movie theater with a film that runs.  It's, it is just remarkable what their drive, ambition and passion produced.  It involved everyone in the community, black, white no matter what.  They went to churches, they--.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: They went to churches, they, they, they did all kinds of things to raise the money.  The invited the family there when it opened and we have never had such a welcoming as we did from the folks in Oakville.
Story_ID: 19212
Speaker 1: Tell me, what's your father's [Jesse Owens] date of birth and can you tell us like what he was like and what were some stories?
Speaker 2: My father was born on September 12th, 1913.  He was a person with a heart as big as all outdoors.  He was generous to a fault.  He was very protective of his family, loved being a part of the, a part of a family, liked celebrations.  He just loved parties, celebrating Christmas and his birthday or whatever.  And my mother was just so good at that.  She made his coming home because he traveled so much.  She made his coming home a holiday.  There were always special meals and his favorite things and excitement because we missed him.  He was gone a lot.  And so when he came it was just always a holiday.
Speaker 1: In his early, I guess in his youth I suppose his family moved from Alabama to Cleveland [Ohio].  Do you know why they ended up--(unclear) (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: I think that they were trying to find a better life.  He had a sister, Lill [Owens], who was older and Lill had left home and moved to Cleveland  and was doing, doing well and would send the message back to them that life was better there and that they should come.  And his mother was the one who decided that the family would move to Cleveland.  So they all packed up and moved and I, I've always gotten the impression that he was kind of a quiet, shy boy.  I would imagine that that became even more pronounced in a new environment such as Cleveland where it's a city as opposed to a rural community and I don't doubt that that education in Alabama and the time spent in school was different than, than what was expected in Cleveland.  I don't doubt that he was you know kind of scared and, and shy which is how he got the name Jesse because he was shy.  But finding the running probably made a major difference in his life and the coach who helped develop him.  His name was [Charles] Pop Riley, well we called him Pop Riley.  And he really took him under his wing and not only was his coach but his friend.  And--.
Speaker 1: Now was this when he was in--high school (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Junior, junior high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Junior high school was where--.
Speaker 1: You know the name of the junior high school?
Speaker 2: Fairmont--Junior High school.  And Pop Riley spent time with him kind of teaching him lessons about competition that were also lessons in life.  And they remained very close for, until, 'til Pop Riley died.  But he was a very, very important figure in his life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he started running competitively when he was in junior high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah--.
Speaker 1: And so was he famous as a track athlete by the time he reached high school?
Speaker 2: By the time he reached high school the word about this young man's speed was out.  And the coach in high school, you know I don't know much about the coach in high school and I think he maintained his relationship with Pop Riley.  It was when he got to Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] in college that Larry Snyder who was his coach there fine tuned everything that he had learned from Pop Riley and, and, and made it much more of a fine tuned machine.  And that is where you know his, his performances really became nationally and internationally known.
Story_ID: 19213
Speaker 1: All right, and of course he [Jesse Owens] went to the Olympic games in 1936--.
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: --and won.
Speaker 2: But it was in 1935 that he had a big day in, in sports history which the records--many say that there will probably never be another day like that in that he broke three or four world records in (unclear) in one afternoon.  So it was an incredible feat.
Speaker 1: And the 1936 Olympics really just had a tremendous impact on the world.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Because here (unclear) they were held in Berlin [Germany] and talk about that.
Speaker 2: Well, it was politically you know a very volatile time.  Hitler was trying to showcase his athletes and to prove Aryan supremacy period, both athletically and in any other kind of way.  And they called the black athletes from this country the, the U--the American Black Legion and that they were sending their Black Legion over to compete against the, the Aryans.  And it was an interesting time and it was an interesting experience.  Oddly enough you know people often think that the athletes knew a lot about what was going on but communications were very different then and they were very much involved in what they did.  They were athletes first and they spent a lot of time training and, and trying to be the best at whatever it is they did.  And so there was not a great deal of emphasis placed on, on the politics of it.  Once the U.S. decided they were going to go to the Olympics you know the team trained to go.  My father always said it was just a, a wonderful experience.  He met some very nice people there.  His teammates were great.  He got in trouble a couple of times because the story of the Jewish athletes who were not allowed to run is really a true one.  The--they were not allowed to run on the relay team because they were Jewish and my father spoke up for them.  He spoke up and said that he thought should be allowed to run.  They qualified for the team, they were on the relay team, they should run.  And he was told that he would do what he was told and you know in other words butt out.  He, he just had this strong sense of fair play and it just wasn't fair that these guys who were on the Olympic team qualified for it and because of their religion were not allowed to run because of Hitler's feelings about Jews.  So--.
Speaker 1: It's ironic that black athletes are allowed to run and Jews are not allowed to run(simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, both groups--(unclear)(simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Incredible.
Speaker 1: --you know when it comes to racism in America and in Germany.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Exactly.  So that's one of the stories.  The other story is about Lutz Long who befriended him and that is a true story.  And--.
Speaker 1: He was a long jumper right?
Speaker 2: He was a long jumper, German long jumper.  And they, they became friendly.  And his son, after Lutz Long died in World War II, his son maintained contact and my father did see him when he went back to Berlin to do a film called 'Return to Berlin' done by Bud Greenspan.
Story_ID: 19214
Speaker 1: Well can you sort of--well you mentioned some of the struggles that your father [Jesse Owens] had around trying to you know, after you become famous you know for something, you're world famous everybody assumes you're doing okay financially but it's not like winning the, winning the Olympic gold medal is not like winning the heavyweight championship.  You don't get paid--.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --like (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's right you're an amateur and you're an amateur athlete and that means in and of itself you don't get paid.  Today people can parlay those gold medals into lucrative contracts but in those days you just, you just didn't do that, there--not for black athletes.  And he was one who just wasn't able to convert those gold medals into large cash contracts.  And that's okay because I think you know I say that's okay.  I'm sure he would have liked it to have been differently.  But I think that his journey to take care of his family was character building.  He learned a lot and he became who he, he became someone other than Jesse Owens the athlete.  He became Jesse Owens the man and the humanitarian and someone to be respected and admired.  It, it challenged every bit of his core and what he came to believe in and what he felt to be right.  But it, it, he--it never compromised him.  He was, he was truly a good person, you know.
Story_ID: 19215
Speaker 1: Now I want you to reflect back on your early life.  Give us a sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: Oh I remember really a, a happy life.  You know I don't remember anything about not having money or any of that.  It just didn't seem obvious.  We, we always lived in a very nice home.  My mother just had wonderful taste and was an impeccable housekeeper and a wonderful cook so you really didn't, if money was short you didn't know about it.  And so I just remember having a good childhood, not really being fearful of much and living in a few different places.  I think moving as often as we did made, tended to make me a little shy and a little less confident.
Speaker 1: What were some of the moves (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well I was born in Cleveland [Ohio] and we moved to Columbus [Ohio]  and I had to be an infant.  I only remember Columbus maybe at the age of two.  But we had to have been there for, no, probably for a year until I maybe was three because we moved to Detroit [Michigan] and I had to be--the reason I say this is because we lived in Detroit for seven years.  I was ten when we came to Chicago [Illinois].  So I know that I had to be three when we moved to Detroit and I started kindergarten in Detroit.  So the moves and being the youngest in the family I tended to be a bit shy and not as confident and pretty much attached myself to my older sister Beverly who was a year and nine months older than me and relied on her for, for friends and protection and everything else.  Gloria was older and was off doing what older sisters do.  And we would get in her hair and she'd be annoyed about that.  But I remember that we were with my mother a lot because my father was gone a lot and so that any time we made a move it was because he had changed jobs or, or something.  For example we moved to Detroit from Columbus because he took a position with Ford Motor Company which was a really good position and he worked in their personnel department.  It was at a time when there needed, there needed to be--there was a lot of unrest in Detroit and it was the Detroit riots which you probably know about were, were very serious.  And so, companies were trying to address the issues that had surfaced as a, after the riots and he was hired in the PR department, personnel department to do PR.  And so that was a really a very nice position and, and, that took us to Detroit and we were there for seven years.  We moved a couple of times while we were there so you know from one neighborhood to another and then well we ended up in a community called Conant Gardens which in, in and of itself is another story.  It, it's--there is a, a book being done by the residents of that community about that community.  It was a community of very middle class blacks that came about after World War II and it has a fascinating history and just a number of people who lived there who were successful in, in life you know.  So that's another story.  But it was one of those communities where you never locked your doors, you know.  It was the village that raised the kids.  You dare not do anything that you knew--if, if a neighbor saw it they could, they could tell you, you know not to do that and they would.  So it was that kind of, of community, just, just wonderful.  Ice skating pond across the street and you know kids pop in after ice skating and my mother would make hot chocolate and bake cakes and little pies and cookies and it was that kind of a life.  And there was a, it was a new community so there was always construction going on and there were vacant lots with high weeds and trees and stuff.  And our childhood imaginations made it jungleville and so we would play in, in jungleville and there were pads all through this, you know these lots where we would find our way through the jungle.  And there were snakes and all kinds of things in there so it was, it was great.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Conant Gardens?
Speaker 2: Conant, C-O-N-A-N-T.
Speaker 1: Conant Gardens?
Speaker 2: Conant Gardens--we left there in '49 [1949] and came to Chicago which was probably the most terrifying time in my life.  I was ten and I, I don't know it was just an uncertain insecure time for me.  I was--I loved Detroit so much where we lived and it was so you know peaceful and idyllic .  And I had--I was the kind who prepared for changes and moves by reading.  And so I read all the stories about Eloise who had moved to the big city and lived in an, an apartment cause I knew that's what was going to happen.  Well it didn't turn out to be quite that.  My--for the first few months we had to live with an aunt, my father's sister, because the building that my father had purchased in Chicago, that--and we came here because of employment for him, was not vacated and it needed to be, work needed to be done.  So we had to stay with an aunt until that was done.  And my sister, older sister left for college when we came to Chicago so it was just sort of this upheaval and I could see the, the stress on my mother.  It really took its toll on her and the uncertainty and this whole new environment.  And then once we got in school it was, it began to settle in although we had to change schools and that made it tough.
Story_ID: 19216
Speaker 1: Now where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: I went to Yale Elementary when we first came and--.
Speaker 1: Oh, let me just ask you, what school did you go to in Detroit when you were--(unclear)(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Oh Atkinson and--.
Speaker 1: Did you like that school in Detroit or--?
Speaker 2: I did.  Yeah, I did.  Yeah I, I think I was one of those kinds of kids who always got teased.  I hated it.
Speaker 1: What did you do?
Speaker 2: The boys would pick at me and you know and I just hated it.  But I liked school and it was, it was at a time when they had even little girls.  And I was quite young.  I was under ten, took Home Ec[onomics]., and we had to learn to sew and cook and all of those kinds of things.  So--they don't do that anymore.  But yeah I guess I--(brief pause).  Okay, so--.
Speaker 1: You were talking about being picked on in school and--.
Speaker 2: Well the boys you know just sort of--.
Speaker 1: Did people, I mean did you get a lot of attention for being Jesse Owens' daughter?  Did people know that generally or--(unclear) (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: When we were young they did know that and, but you know we didn't know.  We didn't know that that made us different or why that made us different.  We weren't really different.  It was just the way that people perceived you.  I think you, you find that out later.  And, and maybe that's what the picking at was about.  But I never really quite understood it.  And so we left there when I was ten.  I was in fifth grade, came here, was terrified.  The kind of mother my mother was, we were, we--she put us in the school, in the district where we were going to live even though we were temporarily staying with an aunt.  And that meant we had to get to the school by two or three buses.  Well instead of doing that, she would drive us to school and then she would come back at lunch time because I was so scared and bring us lunch and we would sit in the car and have lunch together, my sister, me and my mother.  And it was just so comforting because I was so frightened.  It was a, a new school.  I remember being the only black student in the class.  But, but I was a good student and so--but it was very intimidating to me because we had come from--it was an integrated school but it was much more integrated than being the only on.  And that was, that was problematic for me.  And then we transferred because it turned out we were in the wrong district.  Where we should be going to school was Park Manor so we transferred to Park Manor, yet another change and that was a much more comfortable situation for some reason.  Maybe it's because we knew this--I knew well this is where you're going to be and so began to make friends and, and it got better.  And then we had moved into our own building and life began to settle in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now where did you all live at that time?
Speaker 2: 6800 South Wabash.  It was a six flat building that my father bought and the people, you know they rented to people that they knew and liked so it was kind of one big family in that building, my aunt, his sister moved upstairs to the second floor and so it was a, it was a very nice, nice building.  We were there for a few years and moved to Hyde Park when I was fifteen so five years maybe we were there and then moved to Hyde Park and, and stayed there until I was married.
Speaker 1: Now what--did you like school when you were a little girl?
Speaker 2: School was--yes I did like school and I, I liked achieving because the standard at home though not spoken there was this pursuit of excellence that just was there.  It was, it was just a part of the way we lived and a part of the way we were expected to behave and perform.  So I liked achieving and doing well.  Well for one thing it gets you, it gets you a lot from your parents, it gives you, it gets, gets you nice feedback and it gets their approval and as children that's what we want.  And so it was--I, I very much enjoyed school and I did well in school.
Story_ID: 19217
Speaker 1: Now you went to Francis [W.] Parker High School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That now--.
Speaker 2: Public, public Francis Parker High School.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It's now [Paul] Robeson High School.
Speaker 2: Correct--yeah.
Speaker 1: That's what we call now Englewood it's near Kennedy King College.  It used to be Wilson Junior College.
Speaker 2: It was Wilson Junior College, Chicago Teachers College which is, which became Chicago State University and, and Parker Elementary school were all on the same campus.
Speaker 1: It was like a, a big sort of manicured kind of a campus.
Speaker 2: Right--It was really a, really nice campus.  In fact in those days it was, it was probably the most typical, it was written up in the "Tribune" [Chicago Tribune] as a matter of fact, as being sort of the classic test case or ideal school situation both in terms of its population, the student population with black and white students and performance and academics and college prep work.  It was, it was really considered you know a, a very good school.  Our, our competitor was Hyde Park [High School, Chicago, Illinois] and at that time Hyde Park was a, had very high academic standards and produced some pretty, pretty impressive-- graduates.
Speaker 1: As we speak today, Hyde Park High School has fallen on harder times and is really considered to be in Englewood, I mean in Woodlawn instead of Hyde Park.
Speaker 2: Oh (laughs).
Speaker 1: Most people don't--(unclear)(simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah it is considered but it, but it was Hyde Park High School and all the kids, if you didn't go to Lab [University of Chicago Laboratory School, Chicago, Illinois] you went to Hyde Park or [Francis W.] Parker [High School], those were the schools.  Kenwood [High School] didn't exist back then.  So those were the schools that black kids, middle class black kids--Hirsch was another one I think but that came along later because it was in a much more white area and there weren't a lot of black students there.
Speaker 1: There was a strong Jewish community were [Emil G.] Hirsch [High School] is.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Going over to South Shore High School.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.  Yeah, so the schools where you saw most of the black kids was--and of course Englewood.  Englewood was probably  100 percent black.  Parker was--that's why it was written up, it was because it was like 50/50 and Hyde Park was maybe 60/40
Story_ID: 19218
Speaker 1: Now how did you like [Francis W.] Parker [High School] and what--yeah?
Speaker 2: I liked it a lot.  I found it very challenging.  There was one particular English teacher who everyone tried to avoid.  But depending on what you wanted to do with your life you may or may not avoid her.  But her name was Miss Daley and she was tough.  I mean she made kids cry.  She was so tough.  In those days we diagramed sentences and it, it was, it's a fascinating process to do that.  You do learn a lot when you do it.  It's not easy when you first see it but it certainly teach, teaches you how to put together a sentence and therefore paragraphs and therefore papers.  So if you were going on to college it was must to take Daley's class.  It was a fun, a fun experience.  High school was great.  I was involved in cheerleading and the--other kinds of activities.  We would have, I forgot what--the classics or something like that they called it which was a show that you, that was put on by the students once a year.  And it was like a big, a big production.  And so I participated in that.  And let's see.  I, I think I was secretary of my class, my senior class.  But it was, high school was really fun.  It was--.
Speaker 1: Now were you particularly athletic in high school?  I imagine people expected you to be athletic.
Speaker 2: I've always been athletic.  I mean I, I can do sports.  We were not encouraged by my father to be athletes.  He, he really was the kind who liked, wanted his girls to be very feminine and very lady-like at all times.  And so he didn't, he didn't encourage participation, competitive participation in sports.  I mean it was fun to swim and you know that kind of thing but not competitively.  There were other things that he, he and my mother forced us into, in ballet, I think I took ballet from the time that I was five on.  And then as we got older and became young, young teenagers we took dramatics to, for speech--.
Speaker 1: Now can you remember your instructors for these things?
Speaker 2: These were private lessons.  Our, our dramatics coach I can't remember the name but it was in the Fine Arts building where the World Playhouse is, in that building on Michigan [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  And, and then we took charm and deportment so he was the you know sort of Victorian and wanted us to, to always speak properly, to, to be able to communicate with anyone because we did meet a lot of people and to be able to look you in the eye and, and say 'how do you do' and to be able to hold a conversation intelligently.  So we were put in all those kinds of classes and I didn't mind it.  I, I found it kind of fun.  My sister [Gloria] didn't like it at all.  But--and then charm school for you know posture and that sort of thing.  So that was, that was the, the kind of training that the two of them wanted for us.  So--.
Speaker 1: Now what were your favorite courses in school?
Speaker 2: I really, I knew that I was going to go on to college and when I--I really wanted to be and this sounds very funny now.  I wanted to be an executive secretary or a, a corporate secretary or a congressional secretary.  So I took business courses and, but, but was taking all the requirements for entering college you know.  I enjoyed very much shorthand.  I mean we, hours of shorthand and, and all of the, all of that.  I liked math very much, algebra and trig[onometry].  Now I did not take trig, geometry.  Those were, those were my favorite courses.  But the, but the secretarial studies I liked a lot.  So when I went away to college I pursued that.  I wanted to get a degree in what did they call it, secretarial something or other but it was in the business school and it was five years.  It was not just a four year curriculum.  And so I ran into a reality in the business school and that was, accounting was just a little beyond me.  So I decided maybe this isn't what I want to do.  That there wasn't a good fit in some of the other courses that you had to take that they didn't come--it's not that they didn't come easy.  It just really didn't seem to feel right.  So I changed my major in my junior year and--.
Speaker 1: In college?
Speaker 2: In college and--go ahead.
Speaker 1: Now I just wanted to go back to that.
Story_ID: 19219
Speaker 1: Now you graduated from high school in--?
Speaker 2: '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: --Yeah.
Speaker 1: You went to college at--?
Speaker 2: Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], left for college--I graduated, in those days they had two graduations a year.  There was June graduation and winter graduation.  I was a winter graduate so I graduated in January of 1957 and left for college in April because Ohio State's on the quarter system.  So I started at Ohio State spring quarter of '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now Ohio State's one of these huge Big Ten kind of colleges.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: I mean so you know how did you--you left Chicago [Illinois] for Columbus.  And did you have relatives in Columbus at that time or--?
Speaker 2: No, and my mother went with me.
Speaker 1: She actually went to college with you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's only the half of it.  My mother was really something.  Yeah she went with me and got me settled in the dorm.  I think I cried for two weeks.  I was terrified and--but I met some wonderful women.  They were upperclassmen.  In fact I had roommates,  I had two roommates.  We had a very large room.  We lived in an old dorm that had big rooms. One was a senior and one was a junior which was really helpful and they were both black.  They were from Ohio. One was from Lima [Ohio] and the other was from Cincinnati [Ohio] and they were just so nice and so good to me that helped me settle in and feel more comfortable.  And so that became, the Ohio State experience was just phenomenal.  I, I would recommend to any kid to go away to school and find yourself.
Speaker 1: Now, now your mother did come back to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Oh she came back to Chicago, yeah.  She, she went with me to you know make sure that everything was all right but she came back to Chicago, yeah, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's what mothers ought to do.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Sure, sure.  So, so it was a, it was really a good experience.  It was a lot of fun.  My sister [Gloria] was supposed to go with me and I was really counting on having her with me.  She's the one that is a year and nine months older and we have always been together.  And then she decided to get married and not go to college with me so I was just devastated.  So for the first time I was really on my own and had to make my own friends and you know meet people on my own and so it, you know was a time to grow up and, and I think I did--.
Story_ID: 19220
Speaker 1: Now what were some of the highlights of your college days at Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: It was, Ohio State was tough.  I mean it was, it's a big place but it's a small place.  It's like being in a small town and you really do get to know a lot of people.  And they get to know you.  And socially it was, it was great.  The black students really hung together.  I mean there was this real caring about each other, an investment in success.  There was a real investment in helping kids succeed.  In fact in, in our dorm because there were so few of us, incoming black students, we would have like a little reception for them to talk to them about their comfort level and to kind of almost assign a mentor.  They call it mentors now.  We were just sort of like big sister or something so that there would be someone that they could turn to if they needed support.  So it was just, it was just that kind of the, the way the students operated.  And then there were a number of things that happened.  I, I was put up for homecoming by my dorm.
Speaker 1: Homecoming queen.
Speaker 2: Homecoming queen.  And I was the first black homecoming queen at Ohio State.
Speaker 1: So you made it?
Speaker 2: Yeah--in nine--.
Speaker 1: That's a big deal.
Speaker 2: Yeah it was a big deal.  It was 1960 and it was the beginning of, of the civil rights movement.  And so it--.
Speaker 1: Ohio State got a lot of national attention (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes, they did.
Speaker 1: --because of their sports teams and--.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --and Woody Hayes was the football coach and--.
Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: The basketball coach?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Fred Taylor.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Fred Taylor yeah that's right.
Speaker 1: The Ohio State basketball team went to the NCAA.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Woody Hayes had the team (unclear) Bob Ferguson (unclear), Paul Warfield (unclear).
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: It was a big time, big deal.
Speaker 2: And, and not, not long after that Corinne, Corinne Huff won Miss Ohio.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So it was a time, a very interesting time and I, I was really surprised to win.  I honestly was.  And but I, I felt that I won because they knew who I was you know and, and I don't think--I think I finally have gotten past that, that, that's not necessarily true in a sense--.
Speaker 1: Did that make you feel like it wasn't fair for other people or something?
Speaker 2: It made me feel like you didn't earn this.  And I'm one of those who believes that you have to earn everything and so it, it didn't feel like I had earned it on my own.  But that passed you know.  It took a while but it did.  It was, it was a competition.  It--you had to develop a talent and perform it to forty different locations in two nights.  It was--.
Speaker 1: What was your talent?
Speaker 2: I sang.  Don't ask.  And one of the things that--it brought people together.  It, in the dorm it brought the girls together because we have a chorus line and it was a, and it was a show, it was a performance that you had to, you had to develop the costumes.  You had to do your music.  There was all these things.  You had to develop your publicity and everyone got involved in whatever that publicity was and the distribution of it and so it was all this pulling together for a common cause and it felt great.  And everyone was just wonderful working together so it was a lot of fun.  And then I can remember there was just this kind of spirit of giving because we also had to do motorcades and which meant you had to have a convertible.  And I didn't know anybody with a convertible.  They guys I knew, nobody had any money and so nobody had a car.  So the AE, I have to get it right, the AE Phi's [Alpha Epsilon Pi] Jewish fraternity gave me a car because they wanted to do that.  And so I ended up with a really nice convertible that I rode around in for the, for the motorcade but it was a very generous gesture.  One other thing that was really wonderful, just the spirit of, of giving and caring and a cause you know, whatever that was, the students, the black students got together even the ones from in town and the ones on campus and came to the dining hall which was a pretty large place.  And what they had done was purchased a horseshoe of a hundred red roses to say good luck.  The election hadn't taken place yet and they were all wishing me luck to win.  And it was very moving.  It, it really was moving.  They were invested because it meant something to them for a black person to win for a very first time.  So--.  It was a sign of the times.  The--it's an all campus vote so that everyone gets to, to vote.  And it was beginning to be where more students were investing in civil rights and so it, it was an interesting time.
Story_ID: 19221
Speaker 1: Now I wanted to ask you about that because the 1960s was the beginning of the student sit in movement.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In all the colleges, at North Carolina A & T [University] and at Fisk [University]and--.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --other colleges you know black students decided to enter these--.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --lunch counters and desegregate the towns they were in.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean how did you view all of this or how did it affect you at Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: You know we could go where we wanted to go.  And I don't remember being uncomfortable going anywhere and anyone telling me I couldn't be there or I couldn't sit in that seat.  It was, it was different.  Now they might have thought it but they'd dare not say it.  So it, it was different although its, it was a different time than when my sister Gloria was there because she was there in '49 [1949] to '53 [1953] and it was a very different time.  In fact they had a, I, I think they had a black student union and you couldn't, you couldn't go downtown into the hotels. When my parents were there--.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm, I'm sorry but you, what you said about a black student union you're not talking about an organization but actually a place where black students gathered--?
Speaker 2: Where they would, where they would--.
Speaker 1: --that was separate from the rest of the (unclear)?
Speaker 2: And I think they formed it themselves.  It wasn't like the university said, this is the black student union.  No, it's where all the black students went.  But prior to that when my parents were in Columbus and, and my father was in school there wasn't anywhere you could go.  You couldn't, you couldn't--he couldn't live on campus, couldn't live in a dorm.  You know there were just a number of prohibitions that didn't exist when I got there.  And while there were sit-ins in the South and we were aware of that, that was not the experience where we were.
Speaker 1: So you were kind of remote from the activity and--?
Speaker 2: At that time but you know as time went on it, it became less and less remote and certainly much more feeling and involvement in what was going on there.  But when, when you're in school you're in an isolated, very what would you call it, kind of circumstance.  My mother used to say you're, you got on rose colored glasses because, and that's, that's not life.  That's not the real world you know.  The college campus is something else.  And so, so you're very much myopic in terms of what's going on in, in life.  It, it changed of course but it took time for that to happen.
Speaker 1: Now at that time was your father, did he feel or did your family feel pressure to address the civil rights movement or somewhere (unclear)  they knew more than they had before?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say in the six--I wouldn't say in 1960 but I would say later on after that yes.  And there were, there were struggles within the family about how we felt about all of that and how my father, what position he took.  And, and he never really did.  I mean he didn't come out and say--and he was often criticized for not being much more of, of an advocate.  But he was never one of those who led masses.  He was very private and how he felt about things and how he addressed them was a very personal matter.  And I think he tried to effect change in his way and I know he did.
Story_ID: 19222
Speaker 1: I think at that time there were issues that were being addressed by a segment of the student population that were considered hippies.  In those days they were called hippies and they were concerned about race.  Those are the ones who voted, who would never have voted under any other circumstances but they voted because they felt strongly about having, supporting a black candidate.  There were discussions and sharing of thoughts about what was going on in the world.  At that time [John F.] Kennedy  introduced the Peace Corps and I can remember them coming to campus to interview students on how they felt about, would they consider going to the Peace Corps and what did they think of the concept.  And my husband, currently my husband who was my boyfriend then and I were interviewed and we, we really thought about going to the Peace Corps and, and ending up at some far away place.  And my mother [Minnie Solomon Owens] said to me "Now do you really think that you're going to live in a mud hut with a dirt floor and have to cook your own food?  Do you really think you're going to do that?"  And I said "Well maybe not."  So that was not something we did.  But--.
Speaker 2: '60 [1960] was the election, the big election, one of the tightest elections in U.S. history other than the one we just had a couple of years ago.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: With Kennedy and Nixon, Richard Nixon.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: And as I recall, the black community was split sort of on who they wanted to--.
Speaker 1: It was.  It was.
Speaker 2: My family was--.
Speaker 1: And I remember so well being in a motorcade, and this is not one of the things that I'm proudest of but I'll tell you about it because it's interesting.  Talking about becoming your own person and I guess I hadn't quite done it, but in terms of my politics it was just not something that was major on my mind.  And so there was a motorcade for Kennedy and Gail, Lena Horne's daughter Gail came and she and I ended up in the same car.  And she was very definitely for Kennedy and I was being very difficult, taking the opposite stand and it ended up being just a very unpleasant confrontation.  But you're right, the black community was divided and our, our exchange is just an example of, of that division.  So--.
Speaker 2: As you all are riding in this motorcade you were arguing over Kennedy (unclear)?
Speaker 1: We're having this--pretty terrible.  Yeah, I think she thought I was an awful person.  So--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, really has been the last time that black people were split between Republican and Democratic candidate.
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.
Speaker 2: It being 2003 now and it hasn't happened since 1960 I don't think?.
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah so, yeah I, I, I remember that.  But, and my roommate was very definitely a Kennedy supporter and, and we would have struggles.
Speaker 2: Now was your family at that time republican?
Speaker 1: Yeah--yeah at that time they were.
Story_ID: 19223
Speaker 1: Well you pursued a business course basically?
Speaker 2: I initially was a business major and then I, I changed my major to social work which was a much better fit for me.  It, it really was a matter of evolving and finding out where my strengths were, what, what was, made me feel good and what I had some competency in.  And so at that time the school of social work was in the College of Commerce [at Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] which was the business college so it was just a matter of switching over and I didn't lose a lot or lose anything by making that change.  I did go to summer school one summer and finished in four years which was an important thing because you just--those days you didn't take off to find yourself or, or any of those other things.  You, you went to school to get a degree so that when you came home you could get a job.  And at that time what was available for people of color was teaching, social work you know those, those kinds of positions.  And I never regretted it though because till this day I'm a social worker.  I am a clinical social worker.  I got my graduate degree at the University of Chicago and have practiced at family therapy and couples therapy and group therapy.  And I have loved it and when it was time to move on from there those skills just transferred right into management and--but it was still in the kind of the human service area because I moved into human resources and then became the director of the foundation which again is a people kind of business.  And those skills have still held me in good stead in that our students--I've mentored our students and one of the things that they say that makes our foundation different that we not only give money we give support.  And our retention rate of ninety seven percent is a testimony to that because you can give kids money but, but you got to give them a, something else to help them succeed and we've been able to do that.
Story_ID: 19224
Speaker 1: Let me just ask what is the Jesse Owens Foundation?  What does it do?  Explain what it does and (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Okay.  The Jesse Owens Foundation was founded in 1980 when my father died.  It was formed by friends and family because we wanted to continue his legacy and we didn't want him to be forgotten.  He was the kind of person who really gave back and he helped so many young people that it was just a given that we continue to help young people.  So when we formed the foundation our goal became to help kids to realize their potential.  And we then shaped five different programs that would help us accomplish that goal.  And our flagship program was the scholarship program and I'm going to explain in a few minutes why I'm saying was.  The scholarship program provides grants to graduating high school seniors to go to college of their choice.  But these kids are average students so C+, B- students who would not get funds from traditional scholarship programs.  We ask that they have given to their community and been volunteers and helped others throughout either their high school career or, or as long as they've been to you know do something for other people and that they have a financial need.  So that's the criteria.  Many of our kids are first time college students from their family, first in their family to go to school.  And because of that there's not a great deal of support from the family because they're not really sure what to support.  You know many of them didn't even know how to fill out the application or to, to complete certain segments for a financial aid or something like that.  So we have provided that kind of support in addition to two thousand dollars a year for four years.  Our grant is renewable and as I said we stay with them for up to four years.  We've had some wonderful kids go through our program.  They come from all over the country.  We've had them in seventeen different states and any college that they wanted to go to.  Just recently--oh let me just finish the program.  We also provided grants to kids who were not going to college who wanted to get some kind of special skills training so that they could become employable.  So the technical and skills training is what we called it and we would help provide funds for them to get that.  We provided funds for athletes who may be Olympic bound but because they could not afford the training or the equipment we would help support that effort.  And we gave to development in the arts for kids who were particularly talented and needed funds to help develop that talent.  And we gave to organizations who were young serving organizations helping kids in a similar manner that we are but in larger numbers and we would help support their programs.  Now these were not huge grants that we would give to organizations but it would help them to help special kids in their programs.  In January--my mother [Minnie Ruth Solomon Owens] died in June of 2001 and she was a major force in the foundation.  I am reaching an age when I would like to retire and my sisters are older than I am so when we thought about who could take this on we don't have a lot of money so we can't pay someone a huge salary.  We made the decision, we being family and board of directors, to endow the Ruth and Jesse Owens Scholars Program at the Ohio State University who will then carry on what we've done and scholarships would be provided in similar manner with a similar criteria but they would attend Ohio State.  Ohio State will continue to generate funds for that program and grow the endowment so it is a way for the legacy to go on and for, for it to live in perpetuity so that is what we've done.  So the foundation, there will be a segment--the foundation will continue to exist.  The programs have moved over.  The foundation will become an information and referral service because there are any number of requests that come in all the time throughout the year for--.
Speaker 1: So people know about it--(unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes, we have a website and we have a link to the Ruth and Jesse Owens Endowed Fund and to CMG Worldwide which is a management company for, that we use for, so that use of the name and image and likeness is managed by them for fees.  And then students throughout the world always seek information about Jesse Owens, it's amazing--special reports.  They're doing--a third grader, "I'm eight years old and I'm doing a paper on Jesse Owens," and they'll have a question or they'll want a picture or something like that so that will continue and I will manage that.
Story_ID: 19225
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about something you said earlier about the political pressures on your father and your family. You said I think when we first started actually that you know the athletes that participated in those Olympics in '36 [1936] and various things were pretty much innocent people trying to pursue athletics and they got caught up in the--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --sort of worldwide politics about race and, and international politics and all this.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: And then later you said too, that it was in the latter, I guess maybe towards the later '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s] that you know people started pressuring your family politically about being too conservative maybe or being you know--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What are some of those dynamics?
Speaker 2: As I said my father [Jesse Owens] was pretty private.  My mother [Minnie Ruth Solomon Owens] you know I don't really know how she felt.  She just sort of did not express a great deal.  I mean she felt very strongly about what was happening in the South of course, we all did.  And how you expressed that or managed that was very different among all of us.  My father wrote a book that really I think put him behind the eight ball.  It was called "Black Think" and he was heavily criticized for that.
Speaker 1: What was the essence--?
Speaker 2: And it's--I think that what he was saying is that in--you can accomplish anything in this country if you are prepared or you know present yourself in the proper way and are aggressive about it.  And that, that was not acceptable at a time when militancy was, was the call of the day.  That it was too passive, it was inaccurate that too many people had the qualifications and still couldn't make it.  He was one of them.  I mean he you know in spite of everything he, he ran into brick walls often but he would get up and you know keep trying.  And I guess, I think that's what he was trying to say but then they came out with another book, "I've Changed" and it was more an angry Jesse Owens which is so, was so much out of character for him I think.  So in, in the meantime my older sister and her husband were very much militant.  And there would often be you know struggles on how to manage a problem each having a different view on how that gets done.  And I, I don't, I don't doubt for a minute that that was the case in many families.  I don't recall engaging in any of the discussions.  I was a little more private about my point of view. The militancy frightened me.  I tend to be a little more passive than that and feel that there are other ways like [Dr.] Martin Luther King's [Jr.] approach to solving problems.  So we were all, we were all over the place in our family and--but I think we all agreed you know that the opportunity should be equal and, and you know all of that.  We all agree with that.  How you go about getting that is something else (unclear).
Story_ID: 19226
Speaker 1: Now what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know I am really concerned about the community because I think there is this divide that seems to be getting wider and wider between the black middle class and the economically depressed.  And that it's almost as if we're two separate cultures, that, that we don't even view the world--you know when I was younger and people, there were people who were poor but we all had the same values.  I mean we all wanted the same things for our families, set similar standards you know that kind of thing.  I don't know that we're all on the same page anymore or do we go about getting whatever it is we want so differently that even the language you know you, you can hardly understand.  I remember back in the '60s [1960s], '60s [1960s] when they talked about speaking what was it, Eboni--?
Speaker 1: Ebonics.
Speaker 2: Ebonics.  Well I don't know what they call it today but it's almost unintelligible.  You, you really can't understand what some people are saying.  It didn't--I, I know I'm beginning to sound, I know I'm old now when, when I start saying it didn't used to be that way, but it didn't.  There was a common thread that bound us all and there was this caring and sense of belonging and there was not this, this pronounced stratification that there is now and I'm very concerned about the black community and the kids becoming a part of the everything that goes on in this world and not just in that community.  (Brief interruption).  Valuing education and not just dollars but valuing what education can mean for you in the long term.  Kids are, are--everybody wants to be a basketball star and make millions of dollars.  Well that's not the real world and not all of them can be that.  And they leave school in eighth grade practically to--it, it's just distressing to be, to buy into what is, what I think is wrong with this country and the world and that is that the almighty dollar has become more important than life itself.  And that, that can be demonstrated through the drug culture and the killing that goes on and the, the lack of value placed on the human life.  And you say well why?  It's because I can, I can make in one night what it might take you six months to make by selling you know these drugs.  And if getting shot is, is a part of it then that's a risk I have to take.  To me there's something wrong with that.  It, it's very sad.
Story_ID: 19227
Speaker 1: I know you still are working but how would you--you know what do you see now as your legacy?
Speaker 2: As my legacy?  I think that I've touched a lot of lives.  I think I've helped a lot of people.  I think that I've made life better for them or helped them make their lives better.  That's a better way to put it.  By helping provide them with the tools to have the kind of life that they choose to have, not one that I've dictated or anything else but giving them the tools to use to have whatever it is they want in their lives.  And I think that if you can say you've left somebody better for having had a relationship with you then that's a very positive thing and I feel very good about that because I think that it's been my--the thing that I've done throughout my career as a social worker, as an administrator and as a manager.  And so I'm pleased to have touched lives and made them better I hope.
Speaker 1: This is slightly different but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a person who cared very deeply about others, invested herself in helping them have a good life I'll just say that, a person who loved her family and tried to be a good daughter, a good sister, a good mother and a good wife and a good friend.
