Story_ID: 640867
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is Jessica Donahue [Rocker's second wife, Jessica Donahue Rocker].  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Arthur, A-R-T-H-U-R, Montgomery, M-O-N-T-G-O-M-E-R-Y, Rocker, R-O-C-K-E-R [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Arthur Rocker, Sr.].
Speaker 1: And is there a story behind the name Rocker?
Speaker 2: Not that I'm familiar with, no more than that the fact that at one time the name was Johnson.  And we was Johnsons and we were switched over to Rockers down towards Mayfield, Georgia where my family came up.  Why that occurred I don't know but that's--I do know that there's plenty of--we was on the Rockers plantation. So, that's about it.
Speaker 1: The family was one time known as Johnson?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We was Johnsons at one time and then we switched over to the Rockers.
Speaker 1: And, so and you were, the family stayed in the region where the Rockers were?
Speaker 2: And the Johnsons.
Speaker 1: And the Johnsons.
Speaker 2: But for some reason they switched the name.  That's what my aunt told me and my dad [Samuel Rocker, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And so what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth, 6/22/45 [June 22, 1945].
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: At the present time I'm serving as chairman of Operation People for Peace [Operation People for Peace, Inc., Pensacola, Florida], which is a national organization.  Also I serve as chairman of the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] for the entire State of Florida.  And my third hat is that I serve as executive vice president of government affairs for LHS corporation [LHS Pensacola, Inc., Pensacola, Florida] which is a conglomerate of hotels.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: October 26, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at the Westin hotel [Westin Book Cadillac Detroit] here on Michigan Avenue, Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 640868
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions that we always ask and they only require a short answer.  They're sort of a warm up.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No, I do not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, that didn't take long.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No, I do not.  I like all of--the colors are very beautiful.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, not, not in particular.  Wherever I can go, I appreciate it and I can enjoy it, whether it's cold, hot, spring, or whatever.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No.  All the seasons are great seasons.  I think that's what really give us the opportunity to survive in such an environment--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the seasons.
Speaker 1: Well, the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Thank you, Jesus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 640869
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Samuel Rocker, Sr.] side, but we'll keep 'em separate and then put 'em together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full, full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Reba, R-E-B-A, Brunella, B-R-U-N-E-L-L-A, Rocker.  I'm, I'm sorry, Reba Brunella Craft, C-R-A-F-T [Reba Craft Rocker].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Mom was born in, I forgot her date of birth, but it was in 1919.
Speaker 1: Nineteen nineteen [1919]?
Speaker 2: Yes but--December the 22nd.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: December 22, 1919.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And where was she born?
Speaker 2: Statham, S-T-A-H-A-M [sic.], Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay. S-T-A-T-A--
Speaker 2: H-A-M.
Speaker 1: H-A-M, all right.  I, and well, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and, and--
Speaker 2: Well, my mom's dad was named Reuben [Reuben Craft], R-U-E-B-E-N [sic.]. And her mom was named Louise Austin [Lula Austin Craft], A-U-S-T-I-N.  The Austin family on my grandma's side, from my understanding, moved from Virginia to Georgia, and how that happened I don't know, but that's where they met, you know, my grandpa.  And then afterwards we lived there in the, in middle Georgia, Statham is around Athens, Georgia near where, where the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] is, in that target area.  We, they moved from there to Atlanta [Georgia], the entire family.  They talked in terms of the fact that they, there was a lot of cotton there and things that they didn't want to do.  But from my understanding, my family was able to, was well read because they used to read about the Bible.  The Bible was something that taught them how to read.  I do know that just before they left, mom was making quilts and when they got to Atlanta, she used to make quilts and, and her uncle, my Uncle John [John Craft] who was her oldest, next to the oldest brother, married a woman out of that middle Georgia area and she made quilts.  And mom and her used to make a lot of quilts over Georgia, and they did it for years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they operated their quilt- quilting out, out of Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It got more active in that, in that area.  It was a cash business and during those days you weren't supposed to have a cash business.  You could, you, you, you have to go in the back room.  I mean it was, it was like selling moonshine.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it was like--
Speaker 2: It was against the law for, for anyone of black, or Negroes, to sell anything and get caught because under most cases you was either involved with the government or some law that said that you couldn't do it.  I don't know what it was but I know they was always quiet about what they did (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was a secret in the family.
Speaker 1: So they'd have to register some place or, or--
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: --did they, did they, it may not have been possible for them to register some places.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Now, now--
Speaker 2: I just know that they couldn't talk about it.  And only certain white people that they would slip and sell the quilt too.  I never did see any white men, but I used to see white women all the time as though they was ducking and hiding, and it was, I don't know, as I look back.
Story_ID: 640870
Speaker 1: Yeah I wonder what the issue was here because Atlanta [Georgia], you know, is famous for black business on Auburn Avenue and all that.  Not that--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) she [Rocker's mother, Reba Craft Rocker] needed to have a, a store, you know, to do that but I don't know what the issue was.
Speaker 2: Well, Atlanta and where we came up was Grady Home projects [Grady Homes, Atlanta, Georgia].  Grady Home projects was right there in what you call Fourth Ward [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia].  That was the mecca of Negro businesses.  That was the mecca of, of poverty as well.  And the mecca of the upper, you know, Negroes who lived extremely well in that target area.  They did have a number of businesses but we couldn't go outside of that perimeter.  It was a so many square miles you just didn't walk on the other side.  And the whites could walk in, and when they walk in, I knew that you better go to scrambling and go in somewhere unless he's coming in collecting insurance, it used to be different insurance people, I guess.  I don't know what they did.  But everything we done was within that target area.  I do recall the time that my brother, Robert [Governor Rocker], next to my oldest brother, went on the outside of the area, went somewhere, and some white people threw asphalt, some hot asphalt all over him.  And the people in the community was screaming and hollering and mama was all upset.  And lady came and said, "Robert coming," and, I saw Robert and it was a lot of blood and something I don't know what it was, but the asphalt, I was very small maybe--I was small, you know, maybe four or five, but from that point on, mama used to always warn us about doing anything.  The Atlanta, it was the mecca.  I remember that my brother, Samuel Williams [Samuel Rocker, Jr.], my oldest brother, he and A.D. King [Alfred Daniel Williams King] and Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--Martin and them lived about a mile from us, three quarters of a mile, and their church was next door to the church we attended.  We attended Wheat Street Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia], they attended Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].  They was right there practically in the same block.  But I remember my brother used to throw the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], and A.D. used to throw the Pittsburgh Courier.  And it was always A.D. King, there was always a concern, by mom, she used to tell 'em, "You make sure you go here, don't go there," and it was always ducking and hiding selling the paper but watching out for whatever reason, I don't know.  But I think it was primarily, as I look back, it was the white man because of this issue that occurred with my brother, Robert.
Story_ID: 640871
Speaker 1: Well let me go back to your mother's family history.  Now you, so did your mother [Reba Craft Rocker] then grow up in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: My mother did grow up in Atlanta, once they moved from Statham [Georgia] they stayed in Atlanta and we moved into Grady Home housing project, the area that you mentioned was the mecca, the black mecca of Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Was Grady Home, so Grady Homes was off of Auburn Avenue (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Auburn Avenue was just one block away from us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Sweet Auburn.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, did your mother have a chance to finish in school?
Speaker 2: Mom went to high school, where she went to high school I don't know.  I don't know if they had up to the twelfth grade then but she, she read and write--she used to read and write quite well.  And, and she understood math.  They had to, you know, exchange money quite often and she could count.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What high schools--are there, are there more than one high school that serves that Auburn area?
Speaker 2: The, the elementary school was Yonge Street [Yonge Street Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. The high school was Howard High [David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's where mostly all of the folks you've heard of, historically came out of Howard High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Irregardless to where any Negroes lived at that time, they would all walk to school to Howard Avenue.  There were some guys that would walk as far as twenty miles a day to get to high school.
Speaker 1: So chances are she probably went to Howard then, you're thinking?
Speaker 2: No, she went to a school somewhere in Statham, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Oh, there then now, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So she went to high school before she came to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, right.
Speaker 1: --Atlanta.  That's why, what I was asking is did she grow up in Atlanta--
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know what--
Speaker 1: So she grow up in Statham?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then moved to--
Speaker 2: Atlanta (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Atlanta as a young woman.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  All right.  Okay.  So, now did your mother have any stories about growing up that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: Basically the stories she shared is one that I sort of mentioned to you about the fact that they had to leave from Statham.  It wasn't no money down there unless they do hard work, and you couldn't really make any money.  She used to tell me about her dad [Reuben Craft] was a preacher and used to carry his Bible all the time.  And her mom [Lula Austin Craft] took care of them 'cause it was twelve kids.  And they all lived there in Statham, Georgia.  And they had some land, I don't know what happened. They lost the land.  I know they went to some church in that target area called Fairfield [Fairfield Baptist Church, Statham, Georgia].  I think that's the name of it, Fairfield.  But they wanted to sell quilts, and they came out of Statham or either they got ran out of that area, I don't know.  It's just--
Speaker 1: So there's not a clear story on what happened (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's not a clear story to my knowledge because most of my older brothers are deceased now and they could tell me the story much better now.
Story_ID: 640872
Speaker 1: You mentioned being run out, and I know there was a documentary done about three years ago about people being run out of different counties in Georgia and other places in the South, black people actually being, you know, their land confiscated and physically run out of the county.  And in the one county that, I remember Joseph Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery] was appearing on 'The Phil Donahue Show' about the one county where they don't allow blacks in the county you, you know, what I'm talking about in Georgia.
Speaker 2: During those days they had blacks in the counties, but I think that they could live in certain sections as long as they pick cotton and clean, and, and, and do labor around their homes.  I think they welcomed, at that time what they called Negroes, they welcomed them in the area but they just had to have a certain place.  But I know my dad [Samuel Rocker, Sr.] on his side, they was ran out.  Now, I, I don't know the story behind that, I just always heard they had to run out.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, to answer that--
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: --there was an issue about Forsyth County [Georgia]--
Speaker 1: Forsyth County.
Speaker 2: Forsyth, yeah.  And that was an area that, that had, if any, any blacks.  But as the story goes about Forsyth, what was peculiar, I heard about Forsyth, but Marietta, Georgia, you couldn't walk, you couldn't go across the bridge or you couldn't go downtown Atlanta [Georgia] when I was coming up because you weren't allowed in that area.  Only during daylight hours you could go into white areas, and you could into those areas to cook, and you had to be out of there when the sun goes down.  You weren't walking home or nothing.
Speaker 1: Oh, so the sundown laws--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --there.  A fellow wrote a book about that ['Sundown Towns: A Hidden Dimension of American Racism,' James Loewen], about three or four years ago too--
Speaker 2: Oh I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: --from Illinois, and there were sundown towns all the way up to Wisconsin (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Where you couldn't--yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  All I knew, mom [Reba Craft Rocker] would tell us to, you know, warn us all the time don't, don't, don't go, whatever we did, we did within Fourth Ward [Old Forth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia] because a lot of times when I look around and I see all of these kids, we didn't, you know, we, we had a TV later in life but the only thing we used to do is make, we used to make our own scooters out of wood, make our scooters, we used to make our own toys.  Christmas was never like Christmas is now that I know about, you know.  We just didn't celebrate like that.  I think over the years people started giving presents and all of that.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: But I didn't know nothing all about that.
Story_ID: 640873
Speaker 1: I wanna get to that.  Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --we were gonna go chrono- we wanna finish, finish your mother's [Reba Craft Rocker] story--
Speaker 2: Oh, but that's so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and then go to your father's [Samuel Rocker, Sr.]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right.
Speaker 1: --but, but yeah.  So did your mother, so--it sound like there was a, a whole lot of information you probably heard from your mother but you can't really, you don't know exactly what happened in a lot of these instances.
Speaker 2: No, all I know is that all twelve of 'em, well really Hattie [ph.] died, Hattie, that, her older sister, died in Statham [Georgia], and then eleven of 'em, they all came to Atlanta [Georgia], all of 'em along with the mama [Lula Austin Craft] and the daddy [Reuben Craft], grandmom and grandpa.  And they start migra- they, they, they when they came to Atlanta, they learned certain skills and they scattered.  That's how my Uncle Craft [ph.] end up in Chicago [Illinois].  He left from Atlanta, he goes up to Chicago.  He end up owning a service station up there in Chicago.  Matter of fact, he became a deputy sheriff up there.  And that was just big stuff for us when he would come back in town and drive his Cadillac, and we used to see his badge, that, it was just, just news to us.  And then we had another Uncle U.L. [ph.], he left from Atlanta and he went up to Chicago, and he became a cab driver, then he owned some cabs up there, and also he used to have a, got in the nightclub business, and he was in the number business.  I don't know what they call it, is it the bug, something up there.
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: Something.  But--
Speaker 1: Policy, the numbers, they call it different things, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, they did.
Speaker 1: They called it policy and, and numbers.
Speaker 2: Oh, we, we called it the bug--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Atlanta.  And he was real good in that.  But, and, and the others stayed in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: So these are your mother's brothers then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Those are the two that migrated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 640874
Speaker 1: Let me then go to your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father was Samuel William Rocker, Sr. [Samuel Rocker, Sr.].  No, Samuel William Rocker, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Dad was born--Jessica [Rocker's second wife, Jessica Donahue Rocker], it--does it have a date of birth (laughter), okay.  It don't have one, I think it was 1916.
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixteen [1916].  So he was little bit older than--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1916.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and, was he from the same area?
Speaker 2: No, dad was from a place called Mayfield, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was called, Mayfield, Georgia is where the family lived, and they had, they lived on a plantation called the Rockers, R-O-C-K-E-R, and the Johnsons at one time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, had, had your father's family been on that place since before the Civil War or--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  They'd, they'd been down there a while and I just don't know.  It was, my grandpa was a preacher.  And dad used to say that white people taught him how to read from the Bible.  He learned how to read from the Bible.  And he, he became a preacher later, but dad learned how to read.  And he would, one thing I never forgot, he would always talk, he and mama [Reba Craft Rocker] sometime, about white people who was good that was Christians.  They, they would say that quite often.  And be careful in being around them when they not because they could be very mean.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: You had two sides of that coin and you gotta, yeah, yeah.  So, so could, could his father read, his father was a--
Speaker 2: His father read.
Speaker 1: Your grandfather?
Speaker 2: I, I don't, I think he did because he was a preacher.
Speaker 1: Well, what was his name?
Speaker 2: John [sic. Anderson Rocker], I think it was John.
Speaker 1: Was it John Johnson or John Rocker?
Speaker 2: John Rocker.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They all migrated to Atlanta [Georgia].  They all came to Atlanta, including the grandpa, all of them moved up there.  And they end up meeting my, my mom there.  He had a brother named Big John [ph.], Big John was, was--no I'm sorry, my grandpa had a brother name John, Big John, Big John.  Big John worked on a railroad track.  And he was so huge, he stood like, they said he was about one of the tallest men in the world.  And his joints was so thick it's like two fingers would be one finger.  Dad was the same way.  My father was 6'9", just double jointed, just huge.  And Big John left and he went, he left and went where they had railroad tracks all the way down towards Alabama.  And when he went in that area, he had a number of children.  And that's how so many Rockers came up.  They claimed that was Negroes, they claimed that they was from Big John the railroad man. He, dated two or three women in those, in different places. J.W. on the other hand, Uncle J.W. was my dad's brother, he migrated to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and became a Church of God minister up there in that area, J.W. Rocker.  Then after Uncle U.L. [ph.] came to Atlanta, he, he end up in New York at the harbors.  Uncle U.L. built ships.  He was very known for building ships.  I used to ask, daddy used to say Uncle U.L. built ships and I used to--
Speaker 1: So, now, now did he work on a big, big ships at the ship yard?
Speaker 2: No, he did all the cabinetry, what they call cabins.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Made the cabins for the ships.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he could do it by himself.  And dad said that he used to make all the bathrooms in that area.  He always built bathrooms.  They, they really weren't bathrooms, it was outhouses.  That's what U.L. really could do.  And ended up in New York and became a cabinet maker or something.  But, became very successful I heard.
Story_ID: 640875
Speaker 1: Now you know there was a pitcher for the Atlanta Braves named John Rocker who, white guy--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I think he was from the South.  I believe he was from the South.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was he was any relation to the white people that your--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's ironic you say that because his daddy brother was out of that area Sparta, Georgia.  They were related in from Macon, Georgia.  And John Rocker, he was huge double jointed too.  And if you may or may not have known my, my brothers was great football players.  And my nephew [Tracy Rocker] is presently the coach on the Tennessee Titans.  He's big, tall, double jointed (laughter).  It's just something about the Rockers.  They been huge and I was the smallest of the bunch (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, when you say double jointed, what do you mean?  Now I've heard this--
Speaker 2: I, I, I--
Speaker 1: --all my life and I've had--
Speaker 2: Double jointed means they, their fingers was like two of 'em in one, their knees was not like yours and mines they was big like double knees, their feet was double. Where I wear a six, where I wear a ten now, they could have worn a fifteen or eighteen.  Everything was huge on 'em.  Their shoulders, everything was double.  That's the way they would say during those days, double.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Double the amount of black folks.  Black people wasn't that big many, many years ago.  I remember my mama [Reba Craft Rocker] was small.  My uncles and a lot of people around us, black folks wasn't really tall people, they was small.  And the ones that was huge and big was the ones that would be used for heavy duty labor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well actually, I, I guess it was our ancestors was small.
Speaker 1: Could be, could be, I don't know.  I, I, I know, everybody's larger now than they used to be, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now it's different.
Speaker 1: In Europe they're, you know, 16th century people were about 5'2", I mean an average height for a man was--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --5'3" or 5'4".
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, now they're like, of course, much bigger.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So.  Yeah.  So we're, we're, more like- likely bigger too as a result of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --whatever happens in this country (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Story_ID: 640876
Speaker 1: So, now your father [Samuel Rocker, Sr.], so he came to Atlanta [Georgia], did he come to Atlanta after he was high school age?  Did, did he go to school at all and if he did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Under- understand their high school was different than our high schools.  I think they went as far as the sixth, seventh, or maybe the tenth grade or something, and then they could go on to college or do different things.  I don't think they had it, their systems was set up in the South like the North was.  I think it was totally different.  What's high school to us, was high school a little different than what, what it is in numbers.
Speaker 1: Well, a lot of schools were called high schools (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To indicate what, you know, when he graduated where, how, all I know my dad was a good reader.  A good mathematician because he end up being a taxi cab driver and had quite a number of 'em, and, and a preacher.  And he did well.
Speaker 1: And you said a white person taught him how to read, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He said--
Speaker 1: A white--
Speaker 2: --white Christians.  And, and mama [Reba Craft Rocker] used to say that--that white folks helped them learn how to read and all of this stuff.
Story_ID: 640877
Speaker 1: Yeah, we had a correction for--about your father's [Samuel Rocker, Sr.] birthday, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It was--
Speaker 2: Dad was born October 11, 1911.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was that it?
Speaker 2: (JESSICA DONAHUE ROCKER):  October 15, 1911.
Speaker 1: There we go.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: October 15, 1911 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) October 15, 1911.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  Here we go.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right.  Thank you.  Now, okay.  So, your dad like you, what, he did go to school, and he learned how to read and write and, and so he came to Atlanta [Georgia] when he was a young man is that right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he came to Atlanta from my understanding around sixteen, seventeen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, now what did he do when he got to Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Dad was, I know he used to work for Coca-Cola Bottling Company [Coca-Cola Bottling Company].  He used to handle--he used to drive, he used to be a chauffeur there for the Montgomerys. At that time, I think the Montgomerys owned a big share of Coca-Cola, and dad used to drive for them.  And then when he wasn't driving, he used to stack the Coca-Colas on the truck.  That's what I remember him doing.  And I also remember him like reading the Bible all the time and going to school or going somewhere, you know, concerning being a preacher.  He used to go to different churches.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because he end up being a pastor.  But he did that during my early life, and then later he went on his own, he said that you couldn't, you couldn't make no money working for somebody else.  The biggest thing that we got to do, dad's biggest complaint was to get out of the housing project there in Atlanta, to get a home, and mom [Reba Craft Rocker] wanted to get out of the housing project [Grady Homes, Atlanta, Georgia] and get a home.  And they said that they didn't want no government cheese or, it was something else they used to talk about, but they, they just had to get out of there.  That was his goal.  And finally we moved to a home.
Story_ID: 640878
Speaker 1: And then dad [Samuel Rocker, Sr.] started a taxi business--
Speaker 2: Well, about, about how old were you when you, when you moved to a home out of the projects [Grady Homes, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 1: We was about--no, you know what happened?  We left from the housing project and moved to a house over there on Georgia Avenue, at the dead end of Georgia Avenue, where black people was migrating over in that area.  So we was able to get a house over there.  We, we stayed there up until I was seven or eight.  Then we moved to our own house when I was like nine years old, eight or nine years old.
Speaker 2: 'Cause--okay.  So they were renting the house on Georgia Avenue?
Speaker 1: They was renting, renting a house--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --on Georgia Avenue.  They got out of the project.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: I remember the projects had cement floors.  There was nothing on our floor, but I used to remember the other floors where the other kids lived, they had something on their floor but we never did have nothing on our floor.
Speaker 2: You mean like carpeting or something?
Speaker 1: No we lived on, we, we was on concrete floors.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know but the other kids had what, carpet?
Speaker 1: Other kids had something else (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wood floors.
Speaker 1: I don't even think it was carpet, it was something, it was--
Speaker 2: Linoleum or?
Speaker 1: Linoleum, yeah.  Something like that but we, we never did have that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I think it was always something about them ducking and hiding, trying to make a living because by then I think we had about, they had about nine kids.  And they was, Dad was always trying to make some money on the side.  Mama [Reba Craft Rocker] was trying to do something, and I don't think they could do it in that project--
Speaker 2: Okay, but (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) bring in cash.
Story_ID: 640879
Speaker 1: Let me kind of go back a little bit to when your parents met.  Now--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) is there a story that's told about how they met?
Speaker 2: All I remem- Mom [Reba Craft Rocker] used to say that Dad [Samuel Rocker, Sr.] met her and he was tall, good looking.  And I do remember my dad used to do a lot of singing and had singing groups even when I was young.  But, but Mom said that Dad used to sing a song, (singing) "I see somebody just like you, sharing breakfast just for two.  A dream that never, never will come true."  And she used to laugh about, I heard it so often, because she said, I said, "Well why, why was it so funny mom?"  She said, "Because we, we never had no two, it ain't been two.  All of these children at home.  It was a bunch of us.  So he tricked me with that song," yeah.  And, and it was like, that's all I ever knew about them dating.  It was a song that she liked.
Speaker 1: Well, that's a great story.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's a great story.  So, so he, he wooed her with a song and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that song.
Story_ID: 640880
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' dispositions, their, their personalities, their, their looks, the way they walk and talk and, and what they stand for, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I loved my mom.  I loved my mom better than I loved my dad [Samuel Rocker, Sr.].
Speaker 1: We, we won't tell anybody (laughter).
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: No, but okay.
Speaker 2: So who they took after I don't know.  I mean, I don't know where my mama got her mannerism from or dad got his.  I just, of all the persons, I thought dad was always working.  He was always saying, "Reba [Reba Craft Rocker] they getting, something gonna happen.  They, I can't do this, I can't be a roofer." Every- everything that--he used to complain all the time about what he couldn't do.  And mama be at home, you know.  She come in, she used to say her prayer daily and sing her song but it was a bunch of us, a bunch of us.  In Grady Homes [Atlanta, Georgia] it was only three bedrooms.
Speaker 1: Can you name your brothers and sisters for us starting with the oldest and put yourself in the--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --order.
Speaker 2: Samuel William Rocker, Jr. [Samuel Rocker, Jr.], the oldest.  Next to him was Governor Robert Rocker [Governor Rocker].
Speaker 1: Now is there is a story behind that?
Speaker 2: I don't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Governor Robert Rocker it sound, sound like he was--
Speaker 2: I, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Mom named him Governor.  I guess during those days they would just name people from names that they were familiar with, rather than names that was given.  Like sometime it was required, she told me, white people wanted you to use, like my Uncle U.L. [ph.], they said that's, that's what you call him U and a L.  My Uncle R.C. [R.C. Craft], R-C.  You, you couldn't say a name but you, but a smart Negro could say a full name.  That's the difference, I don't know.  That's what I understood. So, she tried to name us all names and the only name she knew was what she actually could read.  And I guess that's how she said Governor Robert Rocker, 'cause it had to be a governor.  It could have been Governor Robert then something I don't know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That was Robert, he was born after Samuel; then it was my sister Juel Rezella Rocker [Juel Rocker]; then from Juel Rezella Rocker, it was George Rodger, R-O-D-G-E-R, George Rodger Rocker [George Rocker]; then my brother, David [David Rocker], it was David Douglas Rocker; then my sister, Ariminthia Mabel Rocker [Ariminthia Rocker]; myself, Arthur Montgomery Rocker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Arthur Rocker, Sr.]; my other sister, Jacquelyn Linda Rocker [Jacquelyn Rocker]; then it was Dietrich, Dietrich Ann Rocker [Dietrich Rocker]; Ida Mary Rocker [Ida Rocker]; Iris, Iris, I-R-I-S--
Speaker 1: I-R--
Speaker 2: I-S, Iris.
Speaker 1: Iris.  Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: Reba, R-E-B-A, Rocker [Iris Rocker]; Murray Lumpkin, L-U-M-P-K-I-N, Rocker [Murray Rocker].  Now, that's the only story I know about a name, Murray Lumpkin, that was the doctor who delivered him.  'Cause one day I was asking her, "How you come up with these names?"  And she told me about Murray's name.  I said, "Well, how did I, you come up with my name?"  She said, "Your name was Arthur Montgomery because daddy drove for Arthur Montgomery"--
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: --"at Coca-Cola [Coca-Cola Bottling Company]."
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: That was the only--
Story_ID: 640881
Speaker 1: So, you have a big family you said, and three rooms in the, in the projects [Grady Homes, Atlanta, Georgia] in the beginning when you were--?
Speaker 2: Well, what, what was funny, Dad [Samuel Rocker, Sr.] wanted to get out the projects, and where we moved to, was a house on Georgia Avenue, and what was ironic, it was a house, it was a zoned home, and he used to do a lot of things.  He, he really became his self then.  He told Mom [Reba Craft Rocker], "You got a house here, all the children live here and now we can do better."  And the house only had three rooms, it was smaller than the house we had on, the housing project.  It was three bedrooms there, living room, and a kitchen.  But Dad, we end up on moving on Georgia Avenue with three rooms, I never could understand that.
Speaker 1: Now, is that what they call a shotgun house with the three rooms and in a row?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, well, yeah, yes that's, that's what it was, yeah.  It was three rooms, yeah, that's right, yeah, that's what it was something like that.  Adjacent to another house, so it was just one house but it had two, two units.
Speaker 1: It was a double, oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Two, two units.  And Dad was just so proud of that place.  And he said, "Now I can do things," and the next thing I know, he had all of these wood crates from the Coca-Cola Bottling Company, they was piled up in the back of the house and he used to sell the wood.
Story_ID: 640882
Speaker 1: There was the Tennessee Egg Company across the street.  And at Tennessee Egg Company they used to bring in all these chickens, and my uncle R.C. [R.C. Craft], Mama's brother, used to work there.  Where ironically, I, I was due to go to school I think in the second grade, I never wanted to go to school.  I wanted to be there with my mom [Reba Craft Rocker].  And so when the chickens would come out of the, of the Tennessee Egg Company they said that if a chicken came out you can keep it.  So I used to go up there and stand, and when they would turn the corner with the chicken truck, one would co- invariably come out the crate or either when he stopped the vehicle, they would jump out the crate and come through the gate.  It was always one or two doing that at, during the day, so I would always be there to get a chicken and run back home.  And when I ran back home that was the biggest hug I could get. (Crying) I just wanted to be hugged.  Now, that I look back, it was too many of us, too many kids, you, you really don't have no attention.  All you can do is be a part of it and just love your mom because you just don't get nothing.  Then later, after we stayed there for a while, Daddy [Samuel Rocker, Sr.] started a roofing business, he used to do roofing on the side.  He used to sell wood on the side.  He ran his church [Zion Hill Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].  He just did a lot of things to make ends meet.  And I was getting a little good at chickens, picking up chickens and the, the people told Mom if, if we catch your boy back in, in the front again getting chickens he's gonna be in trouble.  So my mom told me--Uncle R.C. told me, 'cause Uncle R.C. worked at the chicken place, said, "You have to go to the side and get the chicken."  So I never, I went to the side of Tennessee Egg Company, I used to stay on the side on that little side street back there because they said if anything came out of there you could have it.  Well, I never did see anything come out, I used to go home empty handed.  And Uncle R.C. finally came by the house a couple times and he was sitting there, and he said, "Are you getting any chickens?"  I said, "No, sir."  He said, "Just stay on that side and keep looking."  So I went to the side and there was a chicken came out and I saw it, and I ran down to get it, and when I went to get the chicken, I saw Uncle R.C. and then I saw a white man and the white man came after me but I had two chickens.  So I went to running as fast as I could, I said I better not go home, I'm going to go around the back way, because I was scared 'cause mama always told me to get one chicken and I didn't know what to do with two of 'em 'cause I grabbed two of 'em.  So I ran around the back, I took one of the chickens did something with it, he end up in the, in the back yard.  I went around front, the white man was screaming and hollering, he didn't come after me, he just came--so the, the same day, my uncle came and said, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Arthur Rocker, Sr.] I won't be at Tennessee Egg Company no more."  I said, "Well what happened?"  Mom said, "What happened?"  I was sitting there.  He said that, "The white man saw me throw the chickens out."  I said, "I saw you."  He said. "Well, you told me you never seen a chicken."  I said, "I didn't get those chickens because those chickens never came through the window so I could get them.  The chickens you talking about when I was in the alley, it looked like somebody threw 'em out and I just never would get them."  I thought the only way I should get a chicken if he, if he walking to grab it.  But Uncle R.C. was stealing chickens, throwing 'em out the window and I never touched them, so I was just totally confused.  And they said, "You was supposed to got them chickens that I was throwing out."  I said, "I didn't know that (laughter)."  And so, I said, "Well." Then I later learned that the two chickens I got, that the white man, his supervisor, finally learned that he was throwing chickens out.  So, he came down and telling us about it, and then he came back and he told mama, "I'm still working for Tennessee Egg Company."  I said, "Why?"  "'Cause they learned that nobody was getting them chickens I had thrown out, it wasn't Arthur."  So somebody else was getting chickens.  You, you, see what I'm saying?  The ones he was throwing out the windows, I wouldn't touch because they just didn't appear to be the type of chicken I want.  I used to like the chickens that fall out the crate, run out the, the gate and I grabbed the chicken or come down the walk, to come down the road, and I see him and then I go grab him.  But not somebody throwing 'em out the window.  There wasn't no fun in that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this is mistaken comedy of errors then?
Speaker 1: Yeah. (Laughter) Right.  So that, that was, that, just crazy stuff.
Speaker 2: But he got his job back?
Speaker 1: He got his job back and he stayed at Tennessee Egg Company and I continued to get chickens.
Speaker 2: Interesting.
Speaker 1: Then we moved from there--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to this house.
Story_ID: 640883
Speaker 1: You would lurk around for chickens instead of going to school you were saying?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened is that when I went to school, pi- the kids laughed at me because when we was living in Grady Homes [Atlanta, Georgia], I told you about Grady Homes, I went to school there and this lady named Ms. Dixon [ph.], she was a mulatto And she, she had, Ms. Dixon had a big eye, like this eye was big, big, then she had a little bitty eye on this side, and then she would take out her teeth and lay 'em on the, the desk.  And she would have me sitting up there near her while she did all these things, and when she look at me and was telling me how to do math and everything or read I, I just sat there and wouldn't say nothing because I was scared.  Here's a lady that looked like that, I just couldn't deal with it.  And I would go back home and tell mama [Reba Craft Rocker], and mama say, "You gonna have to go back to that school and stay there."  And so finally we moved from there over to place I told you where we moved to, the, the house.  And it was time to go to school there--
Speaker 1: Now before we go further, and what was the name of the school in Grady Homes?  So what do they call--
Speaker 2: Yonge Street [Yonge Street Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Yonge Street?
Speaker 2: Y, Y-O-U--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was Y-O-N-G-E, not Y-O-U-N-G, Y-O-N-G-E, Yonge.
Speaker 1: Y-O--
Speaker 2: N-G-E.
Speaker 1: --N-G-E, okay.  Yonge school, okay.
Story_ID: 640884
Speaker 1: All right. And then when you moved you started go to--what?
Speaker 2: The school that I was supposed to go to was Croman, Croman [ph.].
Speaker 1: Croman?
Speaker 2: C-R-O-M-A-N. That's the elementary school that I start going to.
Speaker 1: And you were how, how old when you moved to, you were about seven or eight you said?
Speaker 2: Well, I was on and off in school when the first grade, second grade, and then we moved, I was on and off in school in third and fourth grade 'cause I was getting chickens, or either when we moved over there near the house, the, the, the three, the three bedroom house, I mean the three room house. There was a, it was a, it was a railroad track, you, you had to leave from the house, turn right there, where the chicken place was [Tennessee Egg Company], where they, they chickens, bring, bring in chickens and process eggs.  There was a big railroad track there, it was about six railroad tracks.  And mama [Reba Craft Rocker] said that the people on the train would run over you on the train track.  So the time that I was supposed to go to school was different than the time that my brothers and sisters had to go.  And I was sort of scared to go across the track because the time that I did go that way, there was a lot of people down there and it was, a boy that was killed on the railroad track.  Well, I saw all of these people standing there and he was, he died on the railroad track.  It was time for me to go back to school one day again, coming from school, there was a girl killed on the railroad track.  And mama told me they killed Negroes and that's what they was talking about, you know, around mama and dad [Samuel Rocker, Sr.] and everything and I was sort of scared to go across that track.  That, that was school.  That, that's why I didn't, never liked going to school.
Speaker 1: So the, the boy and the girl were killed by a railroad train or--
Speaker 2: By the train.
Speaker 1: By the train, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They were just run over.  What I would do, if a train was there, they would tell you to come across, there was also a man and mama said, "If he tell you to come across don't go."  There was a white guy used to be out there telling you, "Come, come on, come on across."  And if you come across the train'd hit you.  So--
Speaker 1: Was this a trolley or the--
Speaker 2: No.  Regular railroad train (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Railroad train okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, just, just railroad trains.
Speaker 1: It was the big--
Speaker 2: Big train.  That was the big, that was the place where they had all the trains to come right down there to be repaired or something.
Speaker 1: Like the train yard or--
Speaker 2: Train yard, yeah, that's, that's it.  That's the word, train yard.
Speaker 1: So you had to cross a whole train yard?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Now, okay.  Now, okay.  That makes--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  It was a train yard and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, to answer that question, did I go to school?  Well, yeah, I went to school but I thought when I go to school, I was sort of scared of the teachers 'cause of Ms. Dixon [ph.] and then the kids, the kids, the kids was, I just wouldn't talk, I wouldn't do a lot of talking, I just wanted to be home with my mom and getting chickens.
Story_ID: 640885
Speaker 1: So you got off to a bad start at school is what you're saying?
Speaker 2: I did and somewhat I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it was hard--
Speaker 2: --it had a lot to do with what I did but as I, as I continue on I finally gravitated into being a part of schools, you know.
Speaker 1: About--but what age were you when you think you finally (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I think when we moved from there and the train yard and moved into our home, it was a new day.
Speaker 1: Now where, where was your home (unclear)?
Speaker 2: That was in, that was in Atlanta [Georgia].  We moved into a subdivision called Thomasville [Thomasville Heights, Atlanta, Georgia].  That's where, at that time, they would say Negroes was moving to.  It was a whole subdivision of nice homes.
Speaker 1: Were these bigger homes and--
Speaker 2: Well, that's what we used to, that what we used to say, you know, you, we used the term Negroes then.  You never used black or African American, it was always Negro.
Speaker 1: Oh, no, I was asking if it was a bigger home?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was big.  It was like three bedrooms.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was big.  It was, had a dining room, it had a kitchen, and a living room.  It was big to us.  And by that time it was twelve kids.  And my respon- all the boys, all the boys never was there at the same time really.  Look like they would come in, in different shifts or something.  I don't know.  I, I don't know.  In our bedroom, it was only, it was four bunk beds and I would sleep in the closet on the pallet or either sleep at the end of one of their feet, and that was punishment.  My brothers would say, "You, you gonna sleep at the bottom of my feet," because something I did or said during the day.  So in order to not to receive the punishment, I made my bed in the closet on the pallet.  It didn't bother me to sleep at the foot of the bed, it's just that they made like it was supposed to be so bad.  I never, as I got older I was, went to thinking maybe their feet stunk but I don't know.  It didn't bother me.  I just wanted to sleep in a bed (laughter) but the pallet was fine.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how old were you when, when you all moved to this house?  I mean to this--to the house?
Speaker 2: I was at least nine years old.
Story_ID: 640886
Speaker 1: Now, here's a question I have not asked but you kind of answered it already a number of different ways.  You tell good stories.  But we always ask this question: what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights, sounds and smell.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The sight was--what, what age?
Speaker 1: Well, just growing up through, I guess, from birth to high school [Luther Judson Price High School, Atlanta, Georgia] (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, it was different because when I became like eleven, ten to eleven, I was sort of sent away from home to be with the pastor of a church.
Speaker 1: Well, it's all right, you know, wherever (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But during that time I don't--
Speaker 1: --wherever these experiences happened, just--
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  The train yard had a smell but it was never anything else that really was a part of me.  I don't--
Speaker 1: I guess the chicken place [Tennessee Egg Company] must have had a particular smell.
Speaker 2: I, well, see, you, you gotta remember now, like I just told you earlier, to sleep at somebody, the bottom of somebody's feet that didn't bother me.  And, to steal a chicken and break his neck and blood scattering everywhere, my brothers and sisters used to look at me and thought I was--"Look at him."  I mean I was unusual in the sense that nothing really bothered me, smells or nothing.  Matter of fact, where we lived, I used to clean up the bathrooms, even down there as we continued to live.  My job was to clean the bathrooms.  The others would always complain about cleaning the commode, it was never a problem with me.  Eating leftovers, my sisters and brothers would say, "Yuck look at him."  And I, I liked to eat the leftovers from my mama's [Reba Craft Rocker] plate or my daddy's [Samuel Rocker, Sr.] plate.  I never thought the way they used to think.  I'd eat leftovers from a friend that would eat.  And they would say, "You want some here, take this," and throw me bread and I would eat it.  So nothing, never bothered me in the sense of sight, smell, nothing.
Speaker 1: Well, it could be good sights and sounds and smells.
Speaker 2: I never, I don't remember them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Well, now when you were in school was there any particular subject you were interested in--oh, hold on.  We, we have to pause here.
Story_ID: 640887
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was there any particular subject you were interested in in school that--of all the things that were taught?
Speaker 2: All subjects, I, I enjoyed, I enjoyed all subjects.  I had sisters and brothers and they would work with me, and you could never--you, in, in my house, you could never be dumb because there was tutors everywhere, my sisters and brothers.  They all became college graduates.  They all were successful.  But, and, and, and of all of them, they said that I was the dumb one, the stupid one.  I heard that a lot of times but they was always there to help me.  My brothers didn't say it, but my sisters, see, I came up in the midst of the girls, Mint [Ariminthia Rocker], Jackie [Jacquelyn Rocker], Iris [Iris Rocker], Ida Mary [Ida Rocker], I was in the middle.  So growing up with them is a little different than growing up with my brothers.  They complained all the time about me.
Story_ID: 640888
Speaker 1: Even when we used to go to church, my dad [Samuel Rocker, Sr.] had a church, and we used to catch the bus when we lived in that house, I told you about the three bedrooms, we used to catch a bus and go over there to Buckhead [Atlanta, Georgia].  See his church was over in Buckhead, which is a plush area now.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And it wasn't plush then?
Speaker 1: No, no, no it was a farm, it was a cotton field.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: Before they developed it--
Speaker 1: Before they developed it, it was cotton and corn.
Speaker 2: Right (unclear).
Speaker 1: And we used to go the dead end of, of Atlanta [Georgia] and then walk about twelve miles to church--
Speaker 2: But (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) 'cause that's where daddy was going.  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Twelve miles?
Speaker 1: Twelve miles.  They said that's how far we was walking.  Of course, I didn't know it at that time we, we just--
Speaker 2: Walked (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) we just never thought about that.
Speaker 2: --twelve miles so you, it would take you what about three hours to get to the church?
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: 'Cause you can only walk about two to three miles an hour.
Speaker 1: We, we walked, and we got there.  We would get up, we would do what we have to do, and my oldest brothers, my, the big ones did not go with us.  The little ones all of us had to go.  Now, my oldest brothers would go because in that same area where we, we would see each other was called Johnsontown [Atlanta, Georgia].  Johnsontown is the heart of Buckhead right now, where you catch the rapid rail system [Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority] and go into Buckhead, that's where Johnsontown was, that was the migration of black folks where that, where that fine, everything fine over there, all of that was the migration of black people that was called Johnsontown.  And Johnson owned the plantation, this white guy that owned hundreds of acres up in there.  And it was a big area that we would go to.  And, and going there, the way I used to make money was going--they, they had a, they had the church had an outdoor house, and I would tell Deacon Raffert [ph.]  that I'd go in there and clean it.  And he would give me, you know, a nickel, dime, or whatever, I don't know what he gave me.  But whatever he gave me, I was glad to have.  So I was--clean the bathrooms up there, I'd clean the bathrooms up at anybody's house.  Everybody knew me to clean the bathroom, and all of them was outdoors.  And they all was stinking because they was just a bunch of woodsheds.  So the folks who came to the church, we would always eat there in Johnsontown 'cause my mama's sister was there.  She had two sisters who lived in Johnsontown.  And then Uncle Jim [ph.], who was my uncle-in-law, he lived in Johnsontown but he never went to church.  All the men in that area, a lot of 'em, I used to just see hanging around, they call it a rock cafe.  You would walk about a half of a mile or three quarters of a mile, there was this place sat on a rock, it was a cafe, 'cause the rock was there.  You had to climb over that rock to go in there.  And in there's where they used to sell moonshine, liquor, all the women would be there, and all the men would stay there but it was a bunch of children in that little place that all came to the church.  The only--dad, dad was the assistant preacher down there and he was trying to be a preacher so he, he, the Reverend Steve let him be an assistant so--
Speaker 2: Now, now what was the name of the church and what denomination was your--
Speaker 1: Baptist, Zion Hill Baptist [Zion Hill Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this is Zion--
Speaker 1: Hill--
Speaker 2: Hill.
Speaker 1: --Baptist Church.
Speaker 2: Baptist.  And the pastor was the Reverend Steed, was Steed?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Reverend Steve.
Speaker 2: S-T-E-E-D?
Speaker 1: No, it's really Stephen.
Speaker 2: Stephen, okay.
Speaker 1: So we just said Reverend Steve.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Was that his first name or his last--
Speaker 1: Last name.
Speaker 2: Now, that's Steve?
Speaker 1: Stephen, S-T-E--
Speaker 2: Stephen, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) P-H-E-N.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: But we just called him Reverend Steve.  I mean that's what I used to hear everybody say, Reverend Steve.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Nobody said Stephen.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know.  But then we would go there, we would get there and we had to stay there all day but we had to get out of there before it got too dark--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --because once it got dark, we had to be home.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: So how, how long would it take to get home from that church in Buckhead?
Speaker 1: It was a long time.
Speaker 2: So, in order to get home before it got dark, what time would you have to leave?
Speaker 1: I don't know but--
Speaker 2: Just--
Speaker 1: --I knew we--
Speaker 2: --kind of knew you had to--
Speaker 1: --we, we had to get home.
Story_ID: 640889
Speaker 1: Understand getting home in the dark was getting from--getting off the bus and getting over to where we live 'cause it was dark in Fourth Ward [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia], that's no problem, we walked home but we couldn't, it couldn't be dark out there where white people live.  You, you're not supposed to do that.  That was just something you didn't do is walking in their communities when it's dark 'cause anything can happen.
Speaker 2: Now, what were the bus rules in Atlanta [Georgia], could you sit anywhere you wanted to on the bus?
Speaker 1: Well, we was taught to be very submissive to white folks.  It was, when we first start going out there, it was about eight or nine of us had to catch the bus.  Dad [Samuel Rocker, Sr.] would teach us how to be submissive and mama [Reba Craft Rocker] would too.  You get on the bus, you say, "How you do.  Thank you, sir."  And by doing that enough time and enough of us, he would give us a discount and say you had good chillens or good, they at that time, good chillens.
Speaker 2: So the bus driver wouldn't charge everybody?
Speaker 1: Everybody.  So he would send us towards, we knew where to go, we all sit in the back, and we'd be very quiet.  You couldn't say nothing.  And you get off the bus the same way, and you walk in an orderly fashion because you're going down the dirt road where people driving cars and it was white people, and you'd had to be very quiet.  You couldn't make noise when they come.  I never shall forget the time they used to--if they'd stopped and said something to Daddy he would say, "Yes, sir," real loud.  "No, sir. Yes, sir, I'm the preacher."  And that was it.  And then we'd go on to church [Zion Hill Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].  But, one of those things.
Story_ID: 640890
Speaker 1: My brothers and sisters always were supportive in teaching me.  So I didn't really have to go to school that often up until that time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--
Speaker 1: 'Cause every time I would go back, I knew what was going on, and the people, the teachers used to look at me because they couldn't understand.  Well Jackie [Jacqueline Rocker] would tell me what to do. But I sort of kept up with everything 'cause they told me.  Now when we moved to this new house, down in the subdivision called Thomasville [Thomasville Heights, Atlanta, Georgia] and it was brand new, everything was brand new, and kids had, was moving in there from all over various places of, of Atlanta [Georgia].  I mean we just, it was about 100, 150 homes.  Out there we had a, the, the baseball players.  My brother told me they was the Negro players.
Speaker 2: League, okay.
Speaker 1: League [Negro League], they used to come out there and play on that field, we had a big field.  All them used to come there.  And the school I went to was a good school.  I really enjoyed the school because I just enjoyed school at that point.
Speaker 2: You said your, your sister, Jackie, really spent the most time with you?
Speaker 1: Jackie and Mint both of 'em spent a lot of time with me.
Speaker 2: That's Arimintha [sic.]?
Speaker 1: Ariminthia [Ariminthia Rocker].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We called her Mint.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We called, Jackie, Jackie. Jacquelyn, Jackie, you know.  They called me Head [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Arthur Rocker, Sr.].
Speaker 2: They called you Head?
Speaker 1: Head.
Speaker 2: Really?  Like--
Speaker 1: 'Cause my, you know, my, I had a huge head, I don't think it shrink yet, but I was classified as Head.  And I'm gonna show you a picture of me shortly.
Speaker 2: Well, it's funny how that works in families, that that people grow up thinking that their head is too big or their nose or something like that and because of what their brothers and sisters tell 'em.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: When there's really nothing wrong.
Story_ID: 640891
Speaker 1: You brought that up about the nose, it's like when I went into the [U.S.] military, my dad [Samuel Rocker, Sr.] told me that he really didn't want me to go in but everywhere where we used to grow up in this community, there was Jewish folks, and they always lived in the back of the store but they all, all of them had stores in our community, everywhere you go there's always a Jewish store.  So dad would say, "Go up there and you better learn how to count your money because the, the, at the Jewish store, the Jew, will Jew you, so you better know how to count money."  And we used to go up there, and we had to count our money and Mr. Cozman [ph.] would sit there and say, "Count your money."  The, the, the Jewish man would say, "Count your money."  He'd stand there and I'd count, count.  If you didn't know what you was doing he'll say, "Okay, bye."  And when you come back, if you learned, he'll say, "You learned how to count."  It was crazy.  It was just crazy things that went on in the community.  And you always knew what kid would get gypped in the store because they, they weren't aware of what to do.  But before I went in service, dad had told me about getting in service and, you know, being with Jews.  And I said, "Well how do they look?"  And he said, "They all have pointed nose, long nose, and they all have hair that's like your sister's hair, Juel [Juel Rocker]."  I said, "Juel?"  He said, "Curly."  I said, "Oh, okay."  So I went in service, I met all of these people, they was all type of Spanish folks, this folks, I mean it was just and I went overseas.  Well, I never could find a Jew, I didn't know--
Speaker 2: 'Cause nobody fit the description that your father gave?
Speaker 1: Nobody. (Laughter) And so, here I am, it was time to get out of service and a friend of mines was on his way over to Vietnam, and from my understanding he didn't, he didn't make it back, but he and I was, he, he said, "You," he said, "you're not going?" I said, "No.  They're not going to convince me to go to Vietnam.  I will sit here, they can put me in jail.  I can rot, but I'm not going over there 'cause my brother's over there and he told me what they do."
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, I'm gonna stop, we're gonna backtrack, gotta get to the high school (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, but, but let me tell you about the nose deal.
Speaker 2: All right.  So this is still this nose story.
Speaker 1: So, this still the nose deal.
Speaker 2: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 1: So anyway, he said, "I'm going."  And I said, "Well when you get over there, if you find a Jew, let me know."  So he looked at me and he sat back down and he went to talking to me, he said, "What did you say?" And we went to talking.  I said, "I just wanna know what a Jew look like."  And Martin [ph.] said, "I'm a Jew."  And he had been my friend (laughter) for, two years.  And I just didn't know that he was a Jew.  So I learned that what dad had told me wasn't right but I believed it.  So my point is we all had funny names of people and everything else but it really in actuality wasn't, but your parents were such a big influence on you.
Story_ID: 640892
Speaker 1: Back to school though.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--okay were there any particular teachers in grade school that were really important to you coming up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ms. Dickerson [ph.] in my first grade [Yonge Street Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], although she looked like she looked, but I learned a lot from her 'cause I was scared.  I heard that mom [Reba Craft Rocker] said I used to do well and run out of her class because I didn't want to be near her.  Mr. Harper [ph.], was, was a favorite teacher of mine, he, he, he was--he just taught me and he was nice to me because we, we couldn't afford lunch, and at that time they would send me down to eat pi- red beans and cornbread, and I would go down stairs to eat red beans and cornbread at school.  I never did see my sisters there eating but I would always eat there.  But Mr. Harper not only was a good instructor, he from time to time gave me money, and he was real nice to me.  And he had a wife named Ms. Harper [ph.] and she was an artist.  And both of those people was good people in, in school.  And they meant so much to me.  He always, he would always talk to me about education.  And he would always tell me that I'm really going to succeed 'cause I'm real smart.  He said, "You, you're always doing something around the school, you know, cleaning or doing something, so you're gonna be very successful."  But he had a distinct smell, since you mentioned smells, he always had a smell.  His breath smelt like some stinky, foul cigarettes.  I later learned it was cigarettes.  But every time he used to talk, he used to stink up the whole room.  And but he, he was one of my favorites, people that I will always go around and talk to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In elementary school.
Story_ID: 640893
Speaker 1: So when you got to high school [Luther Judson Price High School, Atlanta, Georgia], did you have, was your goal just to get out of high school or did you have a profession in mind or what, what were you thinking when you started high school?
Speaker 2: By the time I got to high school, mom [Reba Craft Rocker] and dad [Samuel Rocker, Sr.] had sort of given me to Reverend Borders.
Speaker 1: Now when did this happen?  This happened before high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, around the, around when I was ten--
Speaker 1: Oh, you were ten years old (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) eleven, about eleven.  I was more or less under him.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, who was Reverend Borders and how did this happen?
Speaker 2: Well, Reverend Borders was a person that we knew when I was at Wheat Street Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia].  He was there in Fourth Ward [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia], right there on Auburn Avenue.  He had a big church there.  Matter of fact, five thousand people was there.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And his mom [Leila Birdsong Borders] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is this the famous Borders, Reverend Borders and what's his first name?  Reverend--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  William Holmes Borders.
Speaker 1: William Holmes Borders, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is a--yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, I sort of moved in with them, you know, and, and start working around the church and being in the parsonage and being at his home on the other side of town.  And when I got with Reverend Borders, I began to be influenced by him.  By the time I got into high school, I wanted to be like Reverend Borders, I wanted to walk like Reverend Borders.  I wanted to dress like Reverend Borders.
Speaker 1: So this is Reverend Borders, this is the legendary Reverend Borders--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that everybody in Atlanta [Georgia] knows. I think the church (unclear) a plaque in honor of him in front of Wheat Street now.  Williams Holmes Borders, I heard his name--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a lots of times.  This was 1956?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When you were eleven years old?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So but how did, so you attended Wheat Street?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Our family, when we lived in the housing project [Grady Homes, Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Our family used to go, the housing project to Wheat Street, and my dad came up through Borders.  He sort of was around Borders.  He and Borders fell out because of something dealing with some music, you know, he was into music, dad was, and had a gospel group, and it was over some money and, and all of this and, they just argued all the time, and dad said he don't wanna be with him.  So that's when he went to carrying us way to the other side of town, to the church [Zion Hill Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] that had accepted him and that was on my mama's side, her sister's church back down Johnsontown [Atlanta, Georgia].  But my brothers, they stayed there at Wheat Street and I end up there.  And Reverend Borders knew our family for years, we was a part of 'em.  And--
Speaker 1: So, now how did they, you ended up like living with Reverend, so you lived in Reverend Borders' home with, during this time?
Speaker 2: I would live in his home, and I would live in our home, and then I would go to his house after school.  And then if I go to his house after school, I would go downtow- I would go back to the church or go, or go home on the bus with my brothers.  And my brothers would meet me downtown 'cause Ms. Borders [Julia Pate Borders] would drop me off downtown or Reverend Borders, and my brothers would be there and then we all catch the bus and go home.  So it was time spent there, it was time spent at my home occasionally.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But most of the time you were--
Speaker 2: I was around Reverend Borders.  A lot of action.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was lot of things that I enjoyed.  And the time that I was in high school [Luther Judson Price High School, Atlanta, Georgia], you know, I start wearing suits and neckties, carrying a briefcase.  I never wanted to be like the other kids.  My sisters and brothers, I didn't think as, as I continued to be with Borders, I felt as though they, they was not like me.  We was different.  What they ate was different than what I ate.  The way they would eat was different than the way I would eat.
Speaker 1: Explain how, what was, what was the difference?
Speaker 2: Well, they, they taught me how to eat.  It was part of my teaching to eat a certain way, to do certain things.
Story_ID: 640894
Speaker 1: I would be with Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders] at different meetings.  When, when--for instance, like during the integration period and all of that, there at the bottom of the church, Reverend King [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.], you know, Martin's daddy, Martin Luther King dad--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --he used to come there and he and Borders used to get in so many fights, literally pushing each other.  Then, you know, Reverend Borders at one time was over the School of Religion [sic. Department of Philosophy and Religion] for Morehouse College [Morehouse School of Religion, Atlanta, Georgia].  He, he, he end up not being there because him and Dr. Benjamin Mays got in a big argument and he left from there.  And I used to drive over there with, he, he used to have me in the car, sitting there in the class, or I would always be around him.  But my job was to clean.  I would clean like his room or do his bathroom or I would go over to the house where his wife was, I would do all of her roses.  I would sit with Ms. Borders [Julia Pate Borders].  We'd--sometimes she just would sit and sew and knit and while she's sitting she would talk to me about different things.  And I just saw a lot of things go on.  I heard Reverend Borders was organizing for the buses.  Reverend King said, "They gonna kill you, you, you living out there in that house, they gonna kill you.  You leading all these preachers, and they gonna kill them to."
Speaker 2: Now, now, what did Reverend borders, had he organized the pastors into some kind of coalition--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he organized the preachers for the bus boycott.  He organized housing.  You know, at one time we couldn't move out of Fourth Ward [Old Fourth Ward, Atlanta, Georgia].  And he moved over there on Hunter Street [Martin Luther King Jr. Drive], Hunter Street was the plush area that blacks folks finally took on.  The pastor's brothers moved over there.  Mr. Milton [L.D. Milton] moved over there that used to own, I'm sorry Milton with the bank [Citizens Trust Bank, Atlanta, Georgia].  T.M Alexander [T.M. Alexander, Sr.], Mr. Yates [Clayton R. Yates], the Yates pharmacies [Yates and Milton Drugstore, Atlanta, Georgia].  All of that movement on Hunter Street, Borders led.  And ML King, Reverend King, never wanted people to move from Fourth Ward because he said you're just a troublemaker when you do them things.  Benjamin Mays never wanted a situation where so much trouble. They always believed the best thing to do is to continue to build our, our own communities and keep our own things going.  And they was, they was fighting.  I never, I knew A.D. King [Alfred Daniel Williams King] because remember I told you my brother [Samuel Rocker, Jr.] used to throw papers with him so I can always recognize him.  I knew ML King, Martin King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] because he used to come to Wheat Street [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].  I would sit downstairs and I would look up in the balcony, there he was, and he would be there.  And Reverend Borders at Wheat Street, you know, we had white people and used to come in and Reverend Borders used to look up at (gesture) King and do that.  He never, he never called his name, they used to just waved (gesture).  But--
Speaker 2: So they weren't particularly close and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They was close.
Speaker 2: They were close but they--
Speaker 1: King, Jr. was close to Borders 'cause he used to come to the parsonage at night.  I never could understand what was the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --rationale of that.  He used to come and knock on the door, they go in the room, they'll talk for hours, I, I, I don't know what they talked about but Reverend Borders would just have me sitting there and sometimes I'd like to go to sleep but he, I would go off to sleep and then if he walked in the room I was sleeping, 'cause I was tired from either going to school or something, when the people leave he say, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Arthur Rocker, Sr.]." I said, "Yes, sir."  "What are you doing sleeping?"  I said, "I was tired."  And he say, "Don't you ever sleep; you listen boy."  But I was tired (laughter).
Story_ID: 640895
Speaker 1: So about 19--now this--'56 [1956] was, I think, that was the year after the Emmett Till--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --tragedy of him and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I heard about Emmett Till.
Speaker 1: So did you, did you see his picture in--
Speaker 2: Emmett Till, I don't know about all of it but I remember--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but I remember all of that.
Speaker 1: Do you remember seeing his picture in Jet magazine?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember that.  But I remember Thurgood Marshall come, Thurgood Marshall he, he used to stay at parsonage.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The, the guy that came from New York [New York], the congressman, Clay--
Speaker 1: Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.], right?
Speaker 2: He used to come.  You, you know, this man who's running for, for president, what's, what's his last name?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Romney [Mitt Romney]?
Speaker 2: Romney, I, I don't even pronounce it.  His dad used to--
Speaker 1: George Romney [George W. Romney], yeah, right.
Speaker 2: He was close to Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders].  He used to come very often.  It was the man from Tuskegee [Alabama].  The preacher out of Chicago [Illinois], I forgot his name.  Oh, Jackson.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Joseph Jackson [Joseph H. Jackson], right.
Speaker 2: Everybody came to Atlanta [Georgia], I met.  And it was a situation where it was a lot of talk, and during the years I was there, it was a lot, it was just a lot of talking concerning the movement, concerning Daddy King [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.], concerning Benjamin Mays, concerning what we gotta do, and they just talk.  They just did a lot of talking.  Hosea Williams was--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: James Baldwin used to come and, and that's how I learned James Baldwin.  And I even used to sit with him--and, and Reverend--James Baldwin was good, Reverend Borders would allow me to sit with him and talk to him and when I was getting up in my teen year, he would say, "Now I don't want you with him at certain times of the day."  And I used to go and see him and say, "It is now seven o'clock, I'm not supposed to be here."
Speaker 1: And you would actually tell him that--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  And he would sit there and laugh at me.  And he would talk for a few minutes and he'd say, "You could go back son."  And he would just laugh all the time and I never could understand why Reverend Borders didn't want me around him at a certain hour.
Speaker 1: You didn't understand then right, but you, do you understand now?
Speaker 2: Well, I've heard things, but I never saw it.  You know, I, I don't know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It doesn't mean, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But of course--
Speaker 2: I understand now.
Speaker 1: History says now that James Baldwin was gay--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but that doesn't mean he was a, he would be a pedophile or anything (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I, I, now I know.  I understand.  But I'm saying I, I, he never, I never knew, the only thing that I knew about something like that was the church up there where King now, you know, over on Johnson Avenue up there where they lived, where the witness, where Reverend King wife [Alberta Williams King] came from, there was a Catholic church up there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: We, we could there and play basketball but I later learned you could not say nothing to the priests, you couldn't go inside of his room, and my sisters could not go nowhere near the nuns that was a, that was a no-no in the black communities.  It was okay to be, go there and train, but don't--go to school--but don't go in their rooms with them.
Story_ID: 640896
Speaker 1: Who else, now this is quite an, an education you're getting with Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders], you know, with all these people, these notables coming in and out. Nineteen fifty-six [1956] when you moved in, was the year of the Montgomery Bus Boycott, so did you, did, was that discussed in the, in the, do--
Speaker 2: Revered Borders was only dealing with Atlanta [Georgia] and I know King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] used to come there--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and they used to talk, what they talked about I don't know as I've mentioned.
Speaker 1: Then were you, you aware at that age, Montgomery Bus Boycott?
Speaker 2: I was, I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this was, it was in the news but in--
Speaker 2: What I was aware of is the fact that where I lived, over there on Hunter Street [Martin Luther King Jr. Drive], where Reverend Borders, when he moved out there, that, that I couldn't go two blocks in the park because they had a few snakes in the park that belonged to the black community out there.  So we, we you weren't allowed to go down there, it was a beautiful park but there was snakes all over it.  They brought snakes.  And I do know--
Speaker 1: So the white people brought, brought, put snakes in the park to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was snakes all over the place.  It was snakes running up the street.  I mean it was a beautiful community but they used to drop snakes out there.  Reverend Borders used to get all these phone calls.  They would tell him they on their way, and they gonna kill him.  And I mean this is not one or two calls, this like every, every five or ten minutes there was a phone call, phone just ring, ring, ring.  She [Rocker's second wife, Jessica Donahue Rocker] has the same alarm 'cause I tell you where did you get that alarm from you remember?  On her phone.  And it's a certain sound of that phone, every time I hear it I think about Borders.  But what he did was put a cross, and that cross is still there 'cause his daughter [HistoryMaker Dr. Juel Pate Borders] live in that home, and they used to tell him what they gonna do and he said, "Come on, I'm right here (makes sounds)," as though he was shooting.  He said, "That's what you're gonna get, but--if you get past the cross." And the cross sat in his window because you had to go up this big driveway, and the house was long, it was a big house, it was long and pretty.  All them homes out there was huge.  And they bought 'em from white folks and they took over that community.  And they had shotguns, Paschals [Robert Paschal and HistoryMaker James Paschal], T.M. Mil-, I mean they, those guys was ready.  They were loaded.
Speaker 1: So, so who else lived there, you said Paschal lived there too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Paschals brothers--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --lived in that area on that street.
Story_ID: 640897
Speaker 1: Sam Williams [Samuel Woodrow Williams]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Sam Williams was the, was a guy, he took Reverend Borders' [William Holmes Borders] position over at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  Reverend Borders used to be over the School of Religion [sic. Department of Philosophy and Religion].  And he used to teach, taught religion 'cause he had a, had a earned Ph.D.  And he--Mays [Benjamin Mays] put Roland Smith and Daddy King [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.] in Morehouse, and he said that Daddy King was a dummy.  He never, never had no degrees and the only reason he had a church is because of his wife [Alberta Williams King].  He, he was preaching at his wife's church [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] and the Williams had plenty of money.  And so they were always fighting, and Sam Williams lived right down the street and later--
Speaker 2: Wait, wait, wait (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when Sam Williams (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Let's just kind of go back 'cause you've covered a lot of ground, and it's a lot of important things and I don't want get 'em mixed up.  You're saying that because of Reverend Borders moving to Hunter Street [Martin Luther King Jr. Drive]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and bringing other middle class blacks with him--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --to that area, it created a crises for other black leaders of the city?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Rev- Daddy King.
Speaker 1: He hated it.
Speaker 2: Dr. Mays, they didn't want him to move there and they felt like under pressure to--
Speaker 1: Well, Mays (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) to distance themselves from the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 2: --put some distance between them.
Speaker 1: --they, they thought it was just stirring up mess.
Speaker 2: So, so further than, correct me if I'm wrong, is it, Rev- Dr. Mays replaced Reverend Borders because of him moving to Hunter Street, did he replace him--
Speaker 1: They fell out.
Speaker 2: --as, head, head of the--
Speaker 1: They fell out--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Because Mays began to listen to Daddy King and Roland Smith.  And Roland Smith came out of Chicago [Illinois], didn't he?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know I don't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think Roland Smith came out of Chicago.  He was rich as I don't know what.
Speaker 2: But he replaced, Roland Smith replaced--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: --Reverend Borders with--
Speaker 1: Daddy King.
Speaker 2: Daddy King.
Speaker 1: And Roland Smith (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) and Roland Smith.  And this is at the school of theology at Morehouse?
Speaker 1: School of theology and Morehouse School of Religion [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And then he brought in Sam Williams as the theologian.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: When, when Sam Williams came in to Morehouse, that's when Morehouse began to sort of accept Borders because Sam Williams said, "You can't write off Borders, he's well learned in theology."  That's what the whole thing was about.
Speaker 2: So Williams basically vindicated Borders, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Not that he wanted it, he was already there, I mean he, he, he started the school.  It was Borders who started the School of Religion there at Morehouse [sic.].
Speaker 2: Now there's enough drama in this little story here to take up hours and stuff to really get into all this.  But this is, this is an interesting story.
Story_ID: 640898
Speaker 1: So, Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders] still had his church [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], right?  And he did, did he ever go back and teach at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: No.  He really didn't need to because he was busy on his own from that point.  There were so many ministers gravitating towards him, and then he took on moving out there, and he was always busy going to--Borders could raise any amount of money that you could need anywhere, including when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] or other movements--like Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker] there in New York [New York].  I know he was active with him.  And then the man that you just named, what was his name, Jemison [sic.] or the one from Chicago [Illinois], the big time preacher that was over--
Speaker 1: Jackson [Joseph H. Jackson]?
Speaker 2: Jackson.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He, he didn't want too much to happen in Chicago.  And I know him and Borders, Borders was with him, got him elected, and Jackson used to come to the church and they used to argue about Chicago. And there were some preachers up there in Chicago that I remember came down on the train.  And Reverend Borders was talking to 'em and they just kept talking about Jackson, and it was some young preachers.  Now who they were, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Now this is, I know what this issue is.  Jackson was elected to the National Baptist Convention [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.], right?  As its president.  And as the president of the National Baptist Convention, he became in conflict with ML King, Jr.--
Speaker 2: (Makes sound).
Speaker 1: --over his presence as a, you know, his emergence as a leader.  And some say that Jackson was jealous of Dr. King, and so what he did, instead of when SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] was formed, instead of Jackson putting the strength of the National Baptist Convention behind SCLC, he told the members, and the National Baptist Convention the largest black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --organization in the United States or then Negro organization--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --huge organization, he told them that they should not be involved in civil rights, they should be only concerned with saving their souls.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: So that, that isolated Dr. King and his supporters.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And he kept the bulk of the Baptist Convention away from Dr. King.  Which is now is, I mean the legacy of Dr. Jackson now is somebody that stood, let his own ego stand in the way of civil rights.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, right.  Well, there were some other preachers from, from--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they, they probably were having (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Chicago that wanted to do some things--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --in busing, and I don't know what it was. Chicago was the place that was just as bad as Atlanta [Georgia] and Borders (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But they couldn't get the corporation of Jackson--
Speaker 2: Jackson, no, Jackson weren't gonna work with 'em.  But Borders said he would come, and they could come back there and get money and I- who they was I don't know but I know he worked with J.T. [J.T. Jemison]--
Story_ID: 640899
Speaker 1: I remember when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died.  I remember Borders [William Holmes Borders] met with Coretta [Coretta Scott King] several times.  Coretta concern was the men wanted all to have relationship with her.  They wanted her.  They wanted to do something with her, that's what she said.  And she said that, they wanted to do something with her.  She said they'd taken all the money, "I don't have nothing, that's what they doing."  She said, "Reverend, it is bad."  And she named 'em, and he would sit there, and they would talk.  So he called his friend Creecy [Howard W. Creecy, Sr.], Reverend Creecy used to be over near Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and they started having Coretta go out and speak.  And Borders distanced his self from SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].  And now, Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy] was his friend, used to come up there at the church.  They would talk all the time.  I don't know, but I do know that Hosea Williams, that's how I learned of Hosea Williams, he pulled Hosea Williams from there, and someone was complaining they gonna kick him out of SCLC, and Hosea Williams said he, he didn't know where to go and Borders said, "You can stay here and you'll name it SCLC."
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it was so much mess.  And I know finally they named it Atlanta SCLC but it was right there at Wheat Street church [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] where Hosea Williams ran it.  And then Coretta got in a building over there, where he called along with Darnell [Milner L. Darnell], Reverend Gar- Darnell was over Gammon Theology, Theologian Center [sic. Phillips School of Theology, Atlanta, Georgia], and she started her office there and he, she started with some women and that's when she started her crusade and she got away from the men.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So that's when she founded The King Center [Martin Luther King, Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 1: Well, she, she start working on that but the first thing she had to do is get places to speak.   And--
Speaker 2: To try to establish her own income (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Trying to establish her own, so she can get an income.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Because it was so much money coming into SCLC and they was getting the money.  And she said that she needed her children to be supported.  And they knew that Borders was tied up with them, including Daddy King [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.].
Story_ID: 640900
Speaker 1: What was Daddy King's [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.] position when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I think he eventually got a concern about her [Coretta Scott King].  But, you know, Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders] was so vengeance, he had a lot of, he was really mean about King.  King had told, had told Milton [L.D. Milton], and told the people who Reverend Borders was going with.  And Reverend Borders told the people, different men, who King was going with.  And they used to walk up and down the street, refuse to ever be on the same side of the street.  So what Borders done, he said, "I can get him."  He bought up everything around Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] and owned it, and said, "Now since he said he wants to grow sitting up there talking about," I never forget he used to, I heard him say it, before the ministers, "now he sitting up there talking as he got older about what he gonna own, I own everything around Ebenezer." And Reverend Borders bought ten thousand acres of land.  He sold groceries, shopping center, the, the, the place over there where the housing project, credit unions where he, he told black people after the bus boycott that, "Y'all gotta have, you keep carrying money to the white banks and we not gonna put nothing in there.  We gonna put it in the credit union [Wheat Street Federal Credit Union, Atlanta, Georgia].  And all these Cadillacs around here, we gonna finance them ourselves."  And then the people in the church start buying through the credit union.  He said these women, there was a bunch of women, they was mulattoes.  We had, they used to be all over the place, they used to come up there to the parsonage, and where they came from I don't know, but they had a lot of money.  And Borders used to say that they gotta find a place for them, and that's where it end up this big high rise 'cause they all went there, and when most of 'em died it was so much left to the church and to the community it's because he found a place for them to come out of all of these towns where they own land and had all types of problems.  But it was a lot of issues going on down there with Reverend Borders.  And I was right there.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I had to listen.
Story_ID: 640901
Speaker 1: Now we galloped through a lot of time in this (laughter) we went over about twenty years (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it's all during my high school years.
Speaker 1: But, but now, now--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) left (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) where did you go to high school?  What was the--
Speaker 2: L.J. Price High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Now where, L.J. Price is in the neighborhood there, right?
Speaker 2: L.J. Price is a, is an area school that was somewhere like twelve miles or fifteen miles from my home.  And we had to walk down the railroad track to get to it.
Speaker 1: Now was it near Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders] house because--
Speaker 2: No, it was in that other community we moved in--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --where we was, we had a new home, a three bedroom house.  And it was Luther Judson Price High School [Atlanta, Georgia], the Wildcats.
Speaker 1: Okay, well now were you still spending most of your time at Reverend Borders?
Speaker 2: Yes, while I was in high school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Even though you were in high school?
Speaker 2: When I left from school, I would go over to Reverend Borders' house, and believe it or not, most of the folks there or a lot of the teachers there, they all went to Wheat Street [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] anyway, and they all knew I stayed there at the house or something.  And I would dress like Borders, and I would anxiously run to the meetings that they would have 'cause I always used to enjoy the looks of the people face when they fighting.  I knew it was gonna be a battle on, on at the ministers union.  And I used to get me like a particular seat because when Reverend Borders finished he would always ask me, "Where were you boy?"  I said, "Behind the curtain," but I wasn't behind the curtain I was always sitting in the audience, but I never let him know it because he told me, "I don't ever want you sitting in the meeting.  You go behind the curtain and you wait until I come, you hear me?"  I said, "Yes, sir."  But the action was in the meeting.
Story_ID: 640902
Speaker 1: Well you were around then when they started challenging, when the students from Atlanta U [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] started challenging the desegregation laws of downtown Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I was there.  I heard the conversations that went on.  He was very active.  And what Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders] did, he used to go and meet with the white folks and tell 'em.  It really helped the community when the desegregation of lunch counters and everything.  There was another guy that got it, it was Lonnie King [Lonnie C. King, Jr.] out of Atlanta. [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond--it was, he already knew Julian people.  His folks was, I think they was educators.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: His father was Horace Mann Bond who was--
Speaker 2: Sure was.
Speaker 1: --president of--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --some black colleges [HBCUs]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And Borders was close to him.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And Borders just knew certain people and knew their children.  And he sort of was, couldn't, he couldn't be a bad child out of nobody.  In other words, even if you did the worst of things, Borders was always there to say, "You gonna do better, and let me tell you why."  He was that type of person.  I don't think he, he condemned anyone.
Speaker 1: Except for, Daddy King [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.], right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: That was one man that he went to his grave the same way.
Speaker 1: Well, it's interesting cause Daddy King is what I, from what I have read now, I, I wasn't there, but what I read, Daddy King was almost like self taught pastor, you know, he learned how to read the Bible and he, when he came to Atlanta he married the daughter [Alberta Williams King] of the pastor of Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], became Martin, you know, of course, Martin King and, and that's how he rose to become the pastor of the Ebenezer 'cause he, he was the son-in-law of the pastor.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But in his own, his own learning, I guess in terms of theology it was kind of thin, you know.  Just, you know, by basically self taught and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, and Borders was a Ph.D., and you were saying Borders thought that Daddy King was not as well trained.
Speaker 2: I think it had a lot to do with women.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think it had too much to do with education.  I think they both was involved heavily with women and I think that that was just one of the issues.  Now--
Speaker 1: The same women or--
Speaker 2: I--he--Daddy King told Milton [L.D. Milton] at the bank who Reverend Borders was going with, and Borders told one of the deacons at King church who he was going with.  It was just clashing each other.
Story_ID: 640903
Speaker 1: But what was ironic, when I was with Ms. Borders [Julia Pate Borders] she would talk to Ms. King [Alberta Williams King], the women used to talk among themselves.  And Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders] would come in and say, "Who you talking to?"  And she would say, "Juel [HistoryMaker Dr. Juel Pate Borders]," her daughter, when I knew I had gave the phone, it was Ms. King, but I weren't supposed to say Ms. King when I picked up the phone and Reverend Borders was there.  Well, the key to it is the code.  The phone used to ring, right?  You didn't pick it up 'cause you knew it was the white folks.  If you called the house and you had the code, he had a code, that you'd pick up the phone.  She had a code, that she could pick up the phone.  So I could pick up only her calls, never Reverend Borders calls, nobody could pick up his calls.  You didn't touch his call.  So I knew that the situation was, she would talk to Ms. King, she would talk to other, Ms. Mays [Sadie Gray Mays], Benjamin Mays' wife, Sadie Mays, was very close to Ms. Borders.  She was a very well learned woman; she came out of Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  And they would just talk among themselves all the time.
Story_ID: 640904
Speaker 1: Here you are in a position. Did you ever--I guess, well it happened when you were so young--but here you are, when you look back at this, can--or, do you kind of--well I'm kind of marveling as I'm sitting here hearing you tell this story of being in position to see so much going on (laughter).  And from a vantage, you know, of the person cleaning out the toilets and doing this stuff (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: But here you were seeing everything, all the wheels in motion here.
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't really, never meant anything to me and it still doesn't now.  It's just that I came up with Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders] and I knew what had happened during this movement.  When Thurgood Marshall would come and sit and talk, and Luther [Luther H. Foster, Jr.], the man over at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and the other man, was it George Carver, the one that talk, (makes sounds) talk like that--
Speaker 1: George, George Washington Carver.
Speaker 2: That one.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, he was dead before--then he would talk about him or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: He used to talk, he that's, that's they say he's, (makes sound) he used to mock him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he had a high voice they said.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so (laughter) I don't know.
Speaker 1: There's a rumor that he had, he had actually been you know, castrated by--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --white people (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I learned that later.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I don't know but then nobody ever--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I've never read--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --anything (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I learned that talk there.  Then there was other college presidents.  Every, they, they used to, those people just, they used to communicate all the time.  It was a network of cities and states and folks that I would know.
Speaker 1: Were they mostly Baptist or would they be--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were women, just folks that you later learned, like Johnson that Ebony mag- the magazine.
Speaker 1: John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson].
Speaker 2: John.  The, the, the people over--black people used to own all of these big insurance companies.  Spaulding [Charles Clinton Spaulding], the, all of those was Borders' friends (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Herndon [Norris Bumstead Herndon].
Speaker 2: Herndon's, those, those people was his friends.  There was a man, what's the guy in Chicago [Illinois], had a big insurance company and a bank. They used to call quite often.  Borders used to go there.  He lived in these places.  So he was always busy.  But his wife [Julia Pate Borders] was always there as a very sweet, caring person.
Story_ID: 640905
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at all this, did, do you, do you still have respect for the, for the upper black leadership, I mean, after being exposed to so many aspects of them, the highs and the lows.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, although Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders] didn't like Benjamin Mays, when I came back from the [U.S.] military, I was at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and Warren Cochrane, who was close to Reverend Borders he started the Negro Voters League [Atlanta Negro Voters League], he said, "Do you know, Art Rocker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Arthur Rocker, Sr.]?"  And Benjamin Mays said, "Who?"  He said, "Come here son," he brought me near. He said, "Now, he came up with Reverend Borders."  He said, "I need you to drive for Benjamin Mays."  Well, I knew that, that they used to talk about each other and I said, "I don't know where I'm supposed to drive him."  They said, "To an- his wife is sick."  That's what Mr. Cochrane told me.  "Reverend Mays' wife is sick, I mean Dr. Mays' wife is ill, and he needs someone to carry him to and from the place where his wife is ill.  He doesn't wanna drive no more."  And I said, "Sure I will sir."  And I said, "So where I'm supposed to come?"  And he told me.  And I started driving for Reverend Mays, I mean Dr. Mays after I had came back from the military, and I told Reverend Borders and--
Speaker 1: So is this in '70s [1970s] or, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think it was the '70s [1970s] yeah, when I came, '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s], yeah the '70s [1970s], right.  And I told Reverend Borders, and Reverend Borders said, "Yeah Miss Sadie Mays [Sadie Gray Mays] is ill."  He said, "You drive for him and you help him."  And I wanted to ask him did he like--
Speaker 1: Dr. Mays?
Speaker 2: --Dr. Mays, but I sort of feared, and I never did say nothing because he told me, "It's good that you're driving for him 'cause his wife is ill."
Speaker 1: So they had their disagreements but they, you know fundamentally they--
Speaker 2: But I think they came, I think they came back together--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --someway because him and Borders sort of came back together during the movement 'cause Borders kept going over there and meeting with him concerning so many students.  It was so much happening and they came, but it was King, Daddy King [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.] who they didn't do anything with.  And finally I think Daddy King started doing a lot of things.  But Borders never dealt with him.
Story_ID: 640906
Speaker 1: Okay in high school [Luther Judson Price High School, Atlanta, Georgia] then, did you, now did you take the college prep course in high school or did you take the general course or did they have a business course, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --which one?
Speaker 2: When I was in high school, I was busy going over to Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders] and I, I never took any, I never participated in nothing in high school, nothing.  I would go to school, and then go over there.  I never went to a football game.  I never participated in anything.  I was in art and I enjoyed art and I went into the closet, there was a man named Mr. Turner [ph.], he was a big, fat guy.  He, he, he told me to go in the closet, and I think I was in my junior year, he said, "Climb up and find something," I was looking for something, he closed the closet door while I was in there and he was pushing my behind and I was confused on why was he pushing me and so he went out of the closet and he said, "You okay?"  I said, "Yes, sir."  He said, "Here's the keys to my car, you can use my car to go to Reverend Borders' house."  I said, "No, sir, I, I can't drive."  He said, "But you need to learn."  I said, "But Reverend Borders don't want me driving."  So I went, I told Reverend Borders that he put me in a closet and did that and Reverend Borders said, "Don't ever go in the closet with him number one, and number two, do not let him teach you how to drive."  He said, "Ain't Mr. Greer [ph.] there?"  I said, "Yeah I know Mr. Greer."  He said, "You know, Mr. Greer used to go to church."  I said, "No, I didn't know that."  He said, "Mr. Greer fell out with me 'cause Mr. Greer drunk liquor."  I said, "I didn't know that."  He said, "Yeah, he used to drink a lot of liquor."  And so, he said, "But he can teach you how to drive because he teach folks how to drive."  And I got with Mr. Greer.  But the art was something of interest to me; I really wanted to get into art.
Story_ID: 640907
Speaker 1: High school you liked art?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And did you have any sense--now, you have this exciting life, I'm supposing you're getting paid too by Dr. Borders [William Holmes Borders] on some level right?  Is he--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  Reverend Borders paid me so much a week and sometimes his wife [Julia Pate Borders] but I really, the, the reason I'd get the money, I would use it for car fare or I would always use it to go buy my mama [Reba Craft Rocker] something.  That was my heart.  Then when I was in high school [Luther Judson Price High School, Atlanta, Georgia], I wanted to do art, I never did get into art, I left it alone because he told me to leave it alone.  And he said, "You need to do some baseball." I said, "No I'm not going to do that."  He loved baseball.  So anyway my, when, when, when I got in my senior year is when I really blossomed because at that time the high school wanted to do a yearbook and they said, "If somebody could go out and raise money for the yearbook--," we had a meeting, "if you could raise money with the yearbook, and if you could help us do this big thing, because we having problems getting money into this school."  That's what Mr. Cureton [Robert E. Cureton] said, the principal.  And so I, I knew they used to talk about different white folks.  They used to talk about a man at the bank, Coca-Cola Company [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia], and I used to hear Reverend Borders talk about 'em.  And people used to complain.  So I got, as usual, I dressed up and I was with my briefcase and I started going to these places asking for money for the school.  And they would ask me my name and I learned how to do certain things.  I used to wear a hat.  And I used to could take my hat off like this and do this and bow because mom and dad [Samuel Rocker, Sr.] had taught me that.  And I said, "Could you please give us something?"  And then after I did it for about three or four months, they had this big assembly and they called me up and asked me to stand, and the principal said it was more money raised by me than ever in the school and they never had that much money.  I never knew how much it was, but they said, "You're now Mr. Senior," and they gave me Mr. Senior for my class.  How much money it was, I don't know but I do know it paid for the yearbook.  I do know some of the money was used for other purposes there in the school, for the seniors and other people.  But it was some good money.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And they thanked me for it.  And I felt good about it, but that was it.  Then I went into the [U.S.] military.
Story_ID: 640908
Speaker 1: Now, when you were, you stayed at Dr. Borders' [William Holmes Borders] house, did, did you have your own room over there?
Speaker 2: No.  I could sleep in his bed, or I could sleep in the twin room.  Reverend Borders' room was sort of quiet.  He, he, he kept his doors closed.  And Ms. Borders [Julia Pate Borders] sometimes would make up his bed or I would go in and make up his bed or this other lady that was there, I forgot her name, she used to make the beds up, and I would sort of float.  But I used to like going in Reverend Borders' room, sleeping in his bed.  It just made me feel good.  They had twin beds for me but I didn't like that room.  Then at his home, Ms. Borders, when she made the dress for her daughter, the gown for Juel Borders [HistoryMaker Dr. Juel Pate Borders], they said that wedding, I didn't go to it, they said the wedding was like the queen of England.  It said the thing ran all the way, a long way.
Speaker 1: Oh, the train--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of her gown?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I never shall forget the time that I stitched and made the little flowers.  I enjoyed that.  I enjoyed sitting with Ms. Borders because she would always be very peaceful, and she would talk about different things, and different women on the block for me not to deal with, and certain folks who was very well known, and she didn't want me practically dealing with them.  And, but Reverend Borders dealt with 'em.  And I was, used to tell her.
Story_ID: 640909
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of high school [Luther Judson Price High School, Atlanta, Georgia] graduation, now you, you came out of there in 19--
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 1: --sixty-three [1963].  Yeah, this is when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and them were in Birmingham [Alabama].  There was a lot of stuff, the March on Washington was in '63 [1963], you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and all that.  Now, you had brothers and sisters that were at college, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My brothers, Bulldog [Samuel Rocker, Jr.] he was at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  He was at Morehouse.  My brother, Robert [Governor Rocker], was there.  I don't, I don't know, my brother, Robert, he, he start doing Muslim with, he was a Muslim, he switched over and I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To the Nation of Islam?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't understand what that was about but he used to deal with the man that died, he used to come and see Robert.
Speaker 1: Elijah Muhammad or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Robert used to go see him.  It's another one, one of 'em, whoever used to put out the, the, the thing 'cause Robert started one of those things where you go to church.
Speaker 1: A mosque?  A mosque?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You mean Malcolm X?
Speaker 2: Malcolm X. That's who Robert dealt with that man.  The tall man.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's used to come around.  Robert used to be with him.  And daddy [Samuel Rocker, Sr.] used to tell him not to do that.  And then I think Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders] talked to him but it didn't do no good because he, he wasn't a part of Borders.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: He never was.  And he used to tell me that, you know, "Don't you get all confused with that mess because," you know, "this--you gotta do things on your own"--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --"and leave those people alone."
Story_ID: 640910
Speaker 1: So when you graduated from high school [Luther Judson Price High School, Atlanta, Georgia], did, did--were you thinking about going to college?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, why not (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wanted to--
Speaker 1: You, you, you--
Speaker 2: What happened I--
Speaker 1: --were around all these educators and--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --and your, your brothers--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --are in school--
Speaker 2: No, never.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wanted to--when, when I was around the Borders [William Holmes Borders and Julia Pate Borders] I ate, and I wanted to eat.  That's what I wanted to do.  When I graduated from high school, during that month out, Reverend Borders was doing things and I used to go to the house and it was always a problem trying to get something to eat.  Then when I go home, I never liked being home because I, they had problems if I come in, it, it just wasn't food that I think that I wanted, it just, something.  And this man had came to the school once and talked about the [U.S.] Army and that you eat and you can travel.  And I went to see the guy and said, "Where can you travel to?"  And he told me.  And believe it or not, I asked him, "Can I carry a briefcase?"  He said, "Yes."  I wanted to eat and carry a briefcase.  So I went in the Army.  And--
Speaker 1: So this was immediately after, after graduation?
Speaker 2: After graduating, I went in.  And Reverend Borders told me, "You be very careful and you stay in touch with me."  And my mama [Reba Craft Rocker] and dad [Samuel Rocker, Sr.], mom didn't wanna see me go.  And they was drafting black people from every place at that time.  They was sending them over to Vietnam.  So I had told the guy, "Now I need to do something that I can't fight because I'm not, I don't," and they had a problem but they let me in, I don't know why, I became a clerk typist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you, did you take a typing (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Typing test and all of that.  And I end up being in the [U.S.] military and I ate good.  And everything was going fine until they start telling me that they was going to teach me to go to Vietnam.  You know, how to react in Vietnam (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 640911
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now let me just pause just a second here and go back to--graduation's in May or June?  Which one (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) May.
Speaker 1: May.  Okay.  This is 1963, I think it's in May or June that Medgar Evers is killed down in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You probably heard about back--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --then.  And then later on, March on Washington is planned.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and the meanwhile SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] is busy in Mississippi and--
Speaker 2: A number of things.
Speaker 1: --Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in Birmingham [Alabama].  That's when the hoses were, were put on the kids but as you were graduating the kids in Birmingham were being hosed--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing.  And, I guess, it was still, they're still desegregating downtown Atlanta [Georgia], I guess, there with [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond and the others.
Speaker 2: Wherever.
Speaker 1: So, I'm, I'm just trying to put content (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah they was all--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --down there.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And, and let me tell you how I learnt about a lot of it, is when I was at Fort Jackson [South Carolina]--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and then August in Fort Benning [Georgia], I would come back home.  And I would see Borders [William Holmes Borders], and I would see and hear a lot things about people meeting. I didn't put on my uniform because he told me, "You don't have to wear that," you know, and I had thirty days to be with him.  And he just told me, he kept telling me, "Don't go to no war."
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: So, so you were actually in the [U.S.] Army when the March on Washington took place?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you didn't go?
Speaker 2: I didn't go.
Speaker 1: I would suspect that Dr. Borders went?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I left in June of '63 [1963], I did not return until '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay.  I mean for (unclear) I mean, you know, for--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And I mean back and forth but I never dealt with the issues.  And matter of fact, I returned to see Ms. Borders [Julia Pate Borders].
Story_ID: 640912
Speaker 1: Now, let's--I'm gonna take you back now to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --sixty-two [1960s], '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So when they're trying to get you, they're, they're talking about transferring you to Vietnam, you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) While I was in the [U.S.] military--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --like in '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brother was, George [George Rocker] was drafted at that time and he was upset.  And I went back home and mama [Reba Craft Rocker] was in tears telling me, "Don't do this."  So I, Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders] said, "Don't you do it."  And really, I was anticipating doing it until Borders told me not to do it.  And so I went back to the military and I told the people that I wasn't going and they said, "You're gonna have some problems here."  And at that time, I was in Germany.  And I would write letters back to Reverend Borders and Ms. Borders [Julia Pate Borders] and tell 'em that, what they was saying to me.  And so I told the people in the military that I came here, they said, "If you don't, if you don't do what's right, you, you keep the same rank you are.  You'll never be able to get any--." I said, "Well, I'm not going, so I'll keep the same rank," and I did.  I came out, I went in as a E1, and they give you E2, I came out as an E2 and that was it.  I didn't go to Vietnam.  My brother did.  It was devastating.  It was devastating.  My friends, they all died. The guys that I knew that I would write to, not one of 'em lived.  That's why I'm thankful for Borders telling me not to go because I was going to go to show off myself.  That was it.
Speaker 1: So how did your brother do?
Speaker 2: My brother, he's deceased now, but my brother came back, he went to college, he got his master's [degree].  He went all the way up the ladder with the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] became the regional director and he was still tainted of drugs.
Speaker 1: From Vietnam?
Speaker 2: From Vietnam.  My other brother who left, who went, he volunteered to go after I came out of the military, Murray [Murray Rocker].  Murray is now in Atlanta [Georgia], homeless and he's been outdoors since Vietnam and he's still there.
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, the Vietnam War was a devastating--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --war.  So any other, now you were stationed in Germany, right, you said?
Speaker 2: I went to Germany.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And that was a nightmare because I was there alone and they kept sending me to psychologists and continued to do things to mess with my mind about Vietnam and telling other soldiers a lot of stuff about me to make sure that, that whatever their agenda was, it was their agenda to get people to go to Vietnam.  There was two guys I knew, one of 'em last name was Love [ph.] and another guy George Lane [ph.] and I know they disappeared in Germany to keep from going.  And it was just, it was, it was just a nightmare being there.
Speaker 1: Well, well let me just kind of answer the questions here, now you refused to go to Vietnam, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You were ordered to go to Vietnam but refused.
Speaker 2: Told 'em I weren't going.
Speaker 1: Now this, is this like a court martial time or what?
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, what did they do, what did they do?
Speaker 2: I don't know, you know, as I look back I don't know what really happened.  I was sending things to Reverend Borders.  Reverend Borders was calling people for me.  I'd rather not even think and imagine the names that he talked to but I know he had a concern and he told me to, "Write me as you're over there and tell me what's going on," and I continued to write him.  And I believe that whatever happened when they carried me, when I was in Germany, I stayed there for three months into this camp, they was anticipating, they, they knew--I couldn't write.  For some reason, the guy told me, "You cannot write anybody."  And, that, that, that is something that totally isolated me.
Story_ID: 640913
Speaker 1: Now, when I was in [U.S.] military, I made a lot of money.  A lot of it because I didn't drink.  I went out twice with a girl that the guys told me to go with her and I paid her.  And later they was laughing about what I did because they told me to describe, "What did you do?"  And I told 'em, and they all laughed and said, "You didn't do nothing."  So I didn't understand that.  So I did it again, and then they went to laughing, white and black said, "You just leave things alone."  So I stayed around and kept my money and I went in the lending business.  I used to lend money, and whatever you need I would have.  And they would pay, they would borrow a dollar and give me fifty cents back.  I, I made good money.
Speaker 2: So fifty cents on the dollar.  So they, they, they'd give you a $1.50 back when they borrow a dollar?
Speaker 1: That's right.  And they used to do twenty.  And I used to always tell 'em, "If you don't want it, don't get it."  There was one incident occurred where there was a guy named Thomas [ph.] from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  He remind me of my daddy [Samuel Rocker, Sr.]. He was huge, tall, and big.  And he had a buddy from New York and they came in the room once to attack me after being out, you know, all night, they was drunk or something.  So Thomas took the top of my bunk bed and said he was gonna take my money.  And he shook it and he threw me off the bed and his little short buddy, I forgot his name from Philly, was standing there, they said, "You're gonna give us your money."  I said, "No, I don't think so."  And the other guys in the room, you know, they woke 'em up and I jumped Thomas, and when I jumped Thomas I had no, I never got in a fight in my life.  And it was something about hurting someone or killing someone.  And I wanted to kill him.  And I threw him over my back and I jumped on him and I had this bottle that I grabbed, and I was beating him in the head trying to kill him.  And they pulled me off of him and Thomas began to be my friend and never bothered me no more.  And he even helped me, you know, when I would go out, yeah, I would go out some time downtown and he would say, "I, I could show you a place where you can drink Coca-Cola, and the other guys from the [U.S.] Air Force and places won't bother you but at least you have a chance to get off post."  And, and I was thankful because I had a chance to look at the women, to see them because I couldn't do nothing with them.  Ms. Borders [Julia Pate Borders] told me don't ever have nothing to do with a white woman.  I was, it was evolved with me.  And then when I did have something to do with 'em they laughed at me and told me I didn't know what I was doing.  So at that point I left it alone.
Story_ID: 640914
Speaker 1: I finally got out of [U.S.] military and I was glad and I went to see Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I think he had a lot to do with them not doing something to me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--
Speaker 1: I really do.
Speaker 2: So were you having any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause he had a concern.
Speaker 2: Were you ever arrested or anything for that?
Speaker 1: Never.
Speaker 2: Never, okay.
Speaker 1: No, no arrests.  No, nothing like that, just a lot of, a lot of stuff.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I never heard--
Speaker 1: CIA [Central Intelligence Agency].
Speaker 2: You think the CIA had something to do with it--
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  I used to work in intelligence just, and the CIA was always there.  And they was guys, white guys that used to wear these suits and come around, but I was an intelligent S2 they called it.  And I never shall forget the time that one of 'em told me that, "You, you came up with the Borders."  I said, "Yeah, what about it?"  And they showed me a piece of paper and said, "This is what they say about you."  I said, "What they say?"  They said, "You talked about you don't want no rank and this is what Ms. Borders [Julia Pate Borders] said about you."  And it said, when I read it, it said Ms. Borders said, "Don't ever let him supervise anybody."  And then it was other stuff that was typed up by Ms. Brown [ph.] who was my dear teacher, I loved Ms. Brown.  Matter of fact I put her down as a reference.  And he showed bad things that Ms. Brown did.  And it saddened me to see this.  And so they said, "And you working for the Colonel," Colonel Walker [ph.], I, no, working for Colonel Walker, yeah, Colonel Walker who's over the, the, battalion, "you his driver and his typist.  You know, he don't want you around him."  And I said, "Well."  So I sent a letter back to Ms. Borders and said, "Did you write anything?" and she never responded.  So I felt as though Ms. Borders had did it, and later I learned that she was critically ill, and I went home to see her.  That's why she didn't write me back.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So as I reflect over it now, I believe those was letters that they just made up (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: To kill my spirit.
Story_ID: 640915
Speaker 1: So when you came back, now you, after loan sharking in the [U.S.] Army (laughter) you had a lot of money.
Speaker 2: I had good money.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you come back to Atlanta [Georgia] in 1966?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right?  Okay.  So what was going--now by then how, how had Atlanta changed?
Speaker 2: A lot.  Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders] was there.  He was wearing coveralls, these things that come up to here, you know, coveralls.  And he used to tell me about the people down there at SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and so much going on, them years '67 [1967], '68 [1968], it was just so much going on.
Speaker 1: Now, this was, he was dressed like that because of the Poor People's Campaign, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] said--
Speaker 2: I don't, I never knew because he just changed his whole image.  He would wear coveralls and then he, he still, he, he used to run everything but he always used to sit up and talk to me more.  He, he was different than what I remember him being.  He would talk to me like I was on his own, same footing and I guess it's because I was older that I could really understand what he was saying. But, and I told him some things that saddened me when I had met with Ms. Borders [Julia Pate Borders] when, when she was dying.  I said, "I'm hurt because she told me some things."  And he asked me, and I told him about it.  And he said, "Well, some things you must leave alone."  He said, "But you--." I said, "But you don't want me to ever say anything about it?"  He said, "It really doesn't matter because, you know, she's gone and she had a good soul, and I loved her."
Story_ID: 640916
Speaker 1: But this is '66 [1966], like '67 [1967], '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: This is when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] criticized the Vietnam War himself and got in trouble with the Democratic Party.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: I don't know if you remember he, he made a speech--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Riverside Church [New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do recall that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: I recall that he--
Speaker 1: Shook up the LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] administration--
Speaker 2: LBJ and all of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But the Vietnam was the worst thing you could go to even before he even talked to. That was people knew in the black community you couldn't go but they was drafting folks and throwing 'em in there.  No one wanted to go there.
Speaker 1: Right.  Did--well, you were in Germany the whole time but did any soldiers ever come back and tell you about what happened to them?
Speaker 2: They never lived.  All my friends, and then I had friends that finished high school and the ones, there was two of 'em came back, Byron [ph.], that when I finished the [U.S.] Army I wanted to go see him because I heard he had went in the Army and he lived through Vietnam, so I ran over to see Byron and he said--really I ran to see Byron's sister, I wanted to see her, Janet [ph.], because she had, I had talked to her in high school [Luther Judson Price High School, Atlanta, Georgia], and she wouldn't go to the junior and senior prom with me so I figured that since I had came out the [U.S.] military and I had, you know, pocket full of money and I had dreams of what I was going to do, so I went to see her and she looked at me and said, "No, no."  I said, "You never did go to, you know, to the junior, senior prom."  She said, "Well, you know, who, who wanted to be with you?  You used to wear a suit, you didn't do nothing and you probably still don't do nothing now and you came out the military and you told me you did nothing."  So I said, "I just wanna see your brother" (laughter).  So I switched the conversation.  So I went to see Byron, and she told me where he was.  And Byron was one, one of my dear friends.  And I said, "Byron, what's up?"  And he looked at me and he couldn't talk and his mind was totally gone, and he was just there shaking.   And I knew something had happened to him.  And I called her and said, "What's wrong with Byron?"  She said, "He's been like that since he came from Vietnam."  I said, "You didn't tell me that."  She said, "You didn't ask, you just wanted to see Byron."  So that was it.  And Byron died.  Early (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So.
Story_ID: 640917
Speaker 1: So what did you plan to do when you came back? You, you went to, you met with Dr. Borders [William Holmes Borders] and did you have a plan for--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --going to school or something (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I went into school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I met with Dr. Borders--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --I was saddened by Ms. Borders [Julia Pate Borders].  I was saddened by so many things she had told me about him.  And I didn't know how to deal with him, and I would go to see him and I was questioning a lot of things that he would tell me because of what she had said.  So I was very confused in my life.  And I told him that I'm going to go to college, school, Massey Business College [Atlanta, Georgia].  And by then I said dad [Samuel Rocker, Sr.] got a church [Zion Hill Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] and I might preach.  And he told me, I said, "I'm going to go to Massey Business College because I need to learn, learn something about business, you know, and everything."  He said, "Well you do it."  He said Arthur [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Arthur Rocker, Sr.] whatever you do, you're gonna be a success with it."  I said, "Well, how's that?"  And he told me, "What you did."  I said, "What did I do?"  He said, "Number one, you, you, you was at my house, you watched over Ms. Borders.  You answered the phone.  You would always peep through the, the windows and come back and tell me when people was out there.  You would, the church [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], you was always peeping."  I told him I didn't know that.  He said, "Yeah.  You, would you, you, you're gonna do well.  You, you real good and you listen good.  And everything I'd ever told you to do, you do boy.  And you're gonna be very good whatever you do and you're gonna be very successful.  So you go to Massey, you can go to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], you go anywhere you want to."  So I went to Massey and then I went to Morehouse.  The third month, Dr. Benjamin Mays called me in and said, "You will have to leave Morehouse."
Story_ID: 640918
Speaker 1: We left it on a cliffhanger with you in trouble at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], you said. But before that, it seemed like I should have asked you like what, I didn't wanna--know how to deal with it, but you said that Mrs. Borders [Julia Pate Borders] told you some things about Dr. Borders [William Holmes Borders] that made you kind of look at him in a different way.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Well, what--
Speaker 2: Ms., Ms. Borders was on her death bed and I said, "I'm gonna be here and stay here."  So I was there and I said, "What do you want me to do?"  She said, "Just sit."  She said, "I want you to say that prayer that you used to say as a kid, you know, when you was coming up at the house."  And I said, "Well, you know, I don't know. You--I, my prayer is not that good, your prayer is better."  And so anyway I said my prayer.  And I said, "When is Reverend Borders coming?"  She said, "I really don't want him to be here."  I said, "Why you don't want him?"  She said, "Because God is taking me away.  I have--," she had cancer of the stomach.  She said, "I," she said, "I raised the kids," she raised Juel [HistoryMaker Dr. Juel Pate Borders], she raised Billy [William Holmes Boarders, Jr.].  "I did all that I could.  I was at the church [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], all those people, and I organized practically everything.  From time to time, I even wrote different things for him in his books and in his sermon.  He's never really cared about me.  It's always been Holmes. I know everything that he did with so many other women.  I built an educational center [Christian Education Building, Atlanta, Georgia], all those people.  I worked with the credit union [Wheat Street Federal Credit Union, Atlanta, Georgia].  God is taking me, Holmes is the one that need to go.  Why is God taking me Arthur [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Arthur Rocker, Sr.]?  He's the one that been the sinner, and I don't want him here."  And I said, "What I'm supposed to do?"  And we talked.  I mentioned some things to her, and I told her I would never discuss them.  She said, "I know, I know."  And that was it.  And I used to go back there and eventually she died.  But she died with bitterness and I discussed it with him. And he told me, "You keep living and you keep praying and you pray for me."
Speaker 1: (Pause) Interesting story.
Story_ID: 640919
Speaker 1: Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] we were left on the Morehouse, the last roll.
Speaker 2: I enrolled at Morehouse, I was there a month, month and a half, maybe two, maybe three.
Speaker 1: Is this when you were driving Benjamin Mays?
Speaker 2: Nope, before (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  This is before.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And Benjamin Mays called me to his office and told me get off this campus.  "I want you off in one hour."
Speaker 1: Now, how long have you been at Morehouse when this happened?
Speaker 2: Maybe two or three months.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: He said, "You have created a nightmare for this campus.  You're the worst thing that ever occurred.  You have no interest in school.  You wanna use people.  I want you off my campus, one hour.  And if you don't get off this campus, I will have the police to come and get you.  And then you tell Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders] about that.  I don't think he knows about you."  I said, "Okay.  I'm gone."  And he said, "And while you're at it, I'm gonna get rid of some of the professors who was involved if they lie and don't tell me the truth about you."  I said, "Whatever."
Speaker 1: What was this about?
Speaker 2: I was selling liquor on campus.  I made a lot of money selling liquor on the side.  I used to get pints of liquor and sell it. Moonshine or make up bottles of liquor in my bathtub then carry 'em on campus and sell 'em.  And he didn't appreciate it because if you didn't have no money I would let you try it free.  It didn't cost me nothing but a bottle of liquor and I poured alcohol and stuff in it and people drunk it and I would make the money.
Speaker 1: Now it sounds like the philosophy of the modern drug dealers, they give you the drug first and then you--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So now is this something you learned in the [U.S.] Army or--
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't drink.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just wanted to, to do something because it was so many people there and I did well in the [U.S.] military.
Speaker 1: Did you, did you sell liquor in the military too?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just lent money.  And it was so many students on campus and they used to drink and I didn't, so I figured they spending this much money why can't I make it?  And I tried it.  And I was doing well.  So I went to Massey Business College [Atlanta, Georgia], which was downtown Atlanta [Georgia], and I graduated from there.  It was a white school.  And I didn't have a problem going through it at all.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what, when did you graduate from Massey Business College?
Speaker 2: I think 1969 or '70 [1970].  I don't know.  I gotta look in my notes.
Speaker 1: So is it a one year program or two years?
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: Two years, okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Now, okay.  So you were at, okay you were at Morehouse for about three months, right?  And--
Speaker 2: One, two, three months at the longest.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that was in sixty was that still in '66 [1966] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Six- let's see '66 [1966], '67 [1967], '69 [1969], six- '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969], okay.
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968].  It could have been '68 [1968], '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I went in there, I couldn't, yeah, it was in September, and I know I was out of there fairly quickly.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But I used to still be on the corner closing out things 'cause people owed me money, so I stood around there for at least three or four months.
Speaker 1: And did you, did you have any trouble--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --in that three or four months?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  Nothing at all.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I worked.  I worked on a job at different places.  I used to go back and tell Reverend Borders what was happening.  I worked for a couple companies and I used to go and tell him all the bigotry that was happening, and things that was happening on these jobs.
Story_ID: 640920
Speaker 1: Now, at this point now did he [William Holmes Borders] have someone else doing some of the functions that you were--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --responsible for?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: And I suppose--so no--
Speaker 2: He--
Speaker 1: --nobody, nobody answering the phones and doing any of that?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.  Ms. Borders [Julia Pate Borders], all of that stopped.  Now understand I was just a person that they had. But they never had anyone that would answer the phone or do those things to be, to do what I done.  It, it, like my brothers worked for the church [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], my brothers, David [David Rocker] and George [George Rocker], they did the cleaning at the church and they was out there doing everything but they never had, they would never deal with no telephone, they never would be around Borders listening and all of that stuff.  They was just dating girls and, you know, George end up going to [U.S.] military.  David got a good job, I heard that he had done, David said he did something organizing people and end up being at General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] with the union there and he, he did well, UAW [United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America; United Automobile Workers].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: He did very well.  My other brother, Bulldog [Samuel Rocker, Jr.], he by the end, he had left Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], he graduated from Morehouse, he went to New York [New York].  He was worked as bursar for the City College [City College of New York] there.  Then he end up with American Management Association, AMA.  My other brother that I told you about that was the Muslim, Robert [Governor Rocker], he left that, he went to work for a place called A and P [The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company] the grocery store.  He end up being, moving into a produce manager and they was gonna make him a store manager but he died very early.
Story_ID: 640921
Speaker 1: Just different things was beginning to take place in the community where we could ride downtown in the '60s [1960s] over into '70s [1970s].  Ride downtown, get jobs and begin to become, you know, just, you know, just things was a lot better.  Better than what dad [Samuel Rocker, Sr.] and mom [Reba Craft Rocker] was doing, that's for sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, what I haven't ask you about was the assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  Now you, you were in Atlanta [Georgia] during all of that drama.  You told us a little bit about it, what happened with--
Speaker 1: I was in the [U.S.] military.
Speaker 2: --Mrs. King [Coretta Scott King].  In '68 [1968]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Then when I, when I came out the military in '68 [1968], I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I thought you came out in '66 [1966]?
Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I was in the military.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the assassination of Dr. King (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then once I came out--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Dr. King, I had nothing to do with that.  I sat in the parsonage where Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders] participated because it came right by Wheat Street [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] and Borders told me to stay there.  I never could get involved in nothing, Borders only allowed me to listen. He never wanted me to go nowhere, never. And Ms. Borders [Julia Pate Borders], never.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Never.
Speaker 2: So, so when Dr. King was assassinated and they had the funeral and all that you saw, you just saw it--
Speaker 1: I just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the procession?
Speaker 1: No, I saw a lot more than that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I saw a lot of tears.  I saw the church at its worst.  I saw a lot of sadness.  I met people that was, the ladies, the two ladies that lived across the street, the mulattoes ladies, Miss Murdohl [ph.] and someone else, Reverend Borders was concerned about his death and I went there, they told me to come there 'cause I was at the parsonage and they said, "Dr. King died." I said, "Yeah, I know."  And they start crying.  I went home, mama was crying, daddy was totally, I never in my life saw so much crying and sadness.  We weren't supposed to talk about it.  We weren't supposed to be mean to people.  We was, weren't supposed to get angry.  We just supposed to cry and be peaceful.  That was the message.  That's the message I got.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it was just a sad day.
Story_ID: 640922
Speaker 1: I think during those days, for years it was sad.  Those were some difficult days, those years.  I never forget the time Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders] said to the guy that became--with Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]--
Speaker 2: Gore, Al Gore.
Speaker 1: (Shakes head).
Speaker 2: Uh--
Speaker 1: Vernon Jones [sic.], Vernon--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jordan.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: He was there sitting on the porch and I think he was with the Urban League [National Urban League] or something--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I know it was something.  But I, I never forget he was there, it was some other people there with him and Lonnie King [Lonnie C. King, Jr.], it was group of 'em.  It was like fifteen of 'em standing around.  And I think when he had passed away it was over with but it was all, everyone was so sad and disappointed, and when they talked it was sadness because I used to see Reverend Borders said he kept saying, I keep seeing him wave in the balcony 'cause he sat in the balcony.  And I later learned he was slipping in church.  He weren't supposed to be there.  That's when I learned why Reverend Borders was talking to the group.  He said, "He wasn't supposed to come to the church because of Daddy King [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.] and I, but he would come in and listen to my sermons," and they was all agreeing with him, that how he adored Borders.  And he wasn't allowed to, but nobody knew he was slipping in because he would only come just before the sermon and leave out before benediction.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I didn't know that.
Speaker 2: You know, this is a, just for those who are listening to this and don't understand it, there's a, they just maybe a couple, the churches are just blocks away from each other.
Speaker 1: A block.
Speaker 2: A block, yeah.
Speaker 1: Really, half of a block (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  Right.
Speaker 1: That's how close they were.
Speaker 2: Wheat Street [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] and Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ebenezer, right.
Speaker 2: So is--a lot of people could check him out trying to get in there if they were going in if he (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well, the thing about it, I later learned from as I was in this movement, I later learned from C.T. [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. C.T. Vivian] and others, that King would go there and in his meetings, like when Hosea Williams came and Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]--and, and Jesse knew Borders.  Jesse took the sermon I'm Somebody [I Am Somebody], and I have it there about I'm Somebody, how Borders, put 'I'm Somebody' ['I Am - Somebody,' William Holmes Borders] together and Jesse was there and Jesse will tell you, he, Reverend Borders, lectured him on I'm Somebody and they was laughing because they had came there to the church and he had preached that sermon and Jesse was there, and that's how he got this thing about I'm Somebody.  But Vernon Jordan was there and Vernon said that he knew Martin.  You see he grew up with him, Vernon Jordan.  And it was just sad because the man had been passed away for at least a year and it was still sadness.  Everyone talked and they would just cry.  And everyone was mourning and weeping for at least two years.  It could have been longer.  And it was so much bitterness and hate with white people about him.  Nobody never liked him.  I don't think--and, and then Borders told me that and the sad thing about it, and I'm jumping way ahead of this, Coretta Scott King, although Reverend Borders had said to that group, "They would never like you," and Coretta tried all she could to pacify white people with everything she done.  And she did an outstanding job because she was able to get the King Day [Martin Luther King Jr. Day].  She moved beyond the men trying to used her.  She did great work but when she passed away, it really doesn't matter.  If you remember the people that marched in Georgia, all those black people that came out and very few black- whites that actually marched, and as I look back over, it was very few of 'em.  But now that I look at it, it's so many of 'em involved in his dream.  And Reverend Borders said that, "We all was sleeping and sad but one day America will wake up. And I won't live to see it."
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sorry to jump ahead of you but (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it's all right.
Story_ID: 640923
Speaker 1: --Trying to think of the reverend's name from Richmond, Virginia that, oh, he was, he was, Wyatt Tee Walker's [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker] mentor, and--
Speaker 2: If he was a part of Wyatt Tee Walker he's a part of Borders [William Holmes Borders].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I tell you Borders was, and Wyatt Tee was close.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a person that founded the Richmond Improvement Association [sic. Petersburg Improvement Association, Petersburg, Virginia], you know.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: You probably you, now, okay it's ringing a bell but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm saying Richmond Improvement Association.
Speaker 1: He has a three, a three name name too, like a Doctor So and So and So.
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: You know?
Speaker 2: --you talking about, and it ain't Proctor [Samuel DeWitt Proctor].
Speaker 1: Proctor, yeah.  Samuel--
Speaker 2: Oh, man.
Speaker 1: --DeWitt Proctor, yeah.
Speaker 2: He lived, he lived at the parsonage [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] on the front porch.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause I know we hadn't mentioned him but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --I, he would have to be--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he lived there at the parsonage.
Speaker 1: Samuel DeWitt Proctor, and--
Speaker 2: They loved each other, him and Borders.
Story_ID: 640924
Speaker 1: Did Borders [William Holmes Borders] also have a close collaboration with Vernon Johns?
Speaker 2: Vernon Johnson where was he from?
Speaker 1: Vernon Johns was the pastor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Johns.
Speaker 1: --in Montgomery [Alabama] before Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] got there.  He left--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --just before Dr. King, and he has a legacy of his own.  He's a, he's a, he was supposedly a genius, I mean a man that could quote scripture, you know, I mean, the, the Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], anything he kept all these--
Speaker 2: I don't know if he used to travel to Montgomery, he traveled everywhere.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I know that he was a part of that new organization that started with the preachers.
Speaker 1: What--
Speaker 2: That King led.
Speaker 1: SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No not--something new?
Speaker 2: Progressive [Progressive National Baptist Convention].
Speaker 1: Oh, the Progressive (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When it split.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Borders was a part of that.
Speaker 1: You're talking about when the National Baptist Convention [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.] split, it was in '61 [1961] in Kansas City, Missouri [sic. Cincinnati, Ohio] and [HistoryMaker] Reverend Gardner Taylor.
Speaker 2: Gardener Taylor--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --was his friend.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And Dr. King formed the Progressive--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --United Baptist Convention [sic.].
Speaker 2: That's right.  You bring about some names that now it's really coming back to me.  It was Gardner Taylor.  Taylor--Gardner used to come to the church [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But Borders was a part of that, but Borders also kept a relationship with Progressive, and he was actively recruiting people to go to Progressive and he also was part of National.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: He supported Progressive and National, but he was glad to see that younger group get started.
Story_ID: 640925
Speaker 1: One of the figures I've heard a lot about from people in the, in the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] is Reverend Hosea Williams--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --who has a interesting position of being kind of, the person that pushes stuff over the hill, you know, I mean in a way that not everybody was happy with when he would do it, but it would end up turning out in the long run.  But and what I'm, I mean by that is that one example is the, the march on Selma [Selma to Montgomery March] across Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama].  This is something that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had instructed the C.T. Vivian [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. C.T. Vivian] I think not to, and Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] not to be involved in, but Hosea Williams stirred the church up and marched them across the bridge where everybody got beat up almost killed.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yep.  But those are the kind of things that he would do with, did, did you have any recollection of his personality and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, he moved there. Borders [William Holmes Borders] gave him, the educational center [Christian Education Building, Atlanta, Georgia] was right next door to the parsonage.  And Reverend Williams was saying bad things about Ms. King.  He was saying that who she was going with.  He was just saying all types of stuff.  He was talking about Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy].  He was talking about Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery], he was--he, Hosea was out there.  And then in Atlanta [Georgia] he was doing all type of work.  Well, Borders weren't supposed to do deal with nobody like Hosea Williams.  Hosea was a drinker.  He used to drink a lot of liquor.  He dealt with a lot of women.  He played poker nighttime.  Big number man.  And Hosea used to come around Yonge Street [William Holmes Borders Drive] 'cause he used to park his car there.  And he'd get out the car talking and Borders used to say something, they used to argue at each other.  And eventually, he start hanging out with Borders, and the next thing I know, he had a center there at Wheat Street [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], and Borders embraced him.  The next thing I know, Hosea began to do different projects the way he was doing projects and doing various things.  It was wonderful for Atlanta. Feeding the hungry, started at the Wheat Street church.  He just went on and blossomed and Borders was right there with him.  And I think what Hosea really needed was Borders because Borders would say that, "Hosea needs me" (laughter), to settle him down.  And when he used to come around Borders would holler, would say, "Hey rabble rouser what are you doing today?"  And Borders would be on the church pew and I'd be sitting there and Hosea get out his car going in and say, "I gotta tell you," he said, "where we are."  And Hosea became one of the greatest leaders in the Civil Rights Movement.  And he was that long before King.  He, he, he not, not before King, he came in with King.  He was (unclear).
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: His dad [Willie Wiggins], he used to say his dad is responsible for him drinking so much, 'cause his dad had drunk and stayed drunk and lived a long time.  Hosea had talked about the persecution that civil right folks had done.  And I also learnt that during the King--
Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute now.
Speaker 2: --persecution that, that the civil right leaders had done to him.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, that was his concern.  Hosea didn't like nobody because he was totally shocked and surprised about the way they did things once King died.  It was the money.  It's the money issue.  And it was just a big mess.  Andrew Young would come around.  They all would come around Borders.  I mean that was the haven.
Story_ID: 640926
Speaker 1: And Borders [William Holmes Borders] would walk Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia], and Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery] was his friend, but during those days, it was the younger people that he was really impressed with.  Not, not that Lowery wasn't but it was the Hosea Williams, the Andrew Youngs [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], the other ones that had came in town (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And did you meet James Bevel [HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel] too?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bevel.  Yeah, Bevel was a, a great guy.  He used to love Reverend Borders, used to come over.  They all would migrate there.  And there was another guy named Barber [ph.]. Barber was a guy that used to sleep outdoors.  And he used to be a great writer and he did a lot of writing. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] used to look at it.  But he loved living outdoors, so Borders always told him he could sleep back there on his back porch since that's where you wanna go.  It's better for you to sleep back there.  But eventually they found him sleeping somewhere near Wheat Street [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] outdoors and he died there.  But Barber was a great writer from my understanding. From what Borders told me.
Speaker 2: But he, he just lived outdoors, he was a homeless man and--
Speaker 1: That's the way he wanted to live.  But he was well learned but he just didn't like--I don't know why Barber did that.
Speaker 2: It sound like a very interesting community of people--
Speaker 1: It was (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that you were associated with.
Story_ID: 640927
Speaker 1: Now when you--well what did you focus on when you were at the Massey Business College [Atlanta, Georgia], yeah?
Speaker 2: Business administration, accounting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wanted to make sure that I learned about accounting.  It's been a fascinating situation for me.  Reason being is because at the church [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], there was Deacon Ferris [ph.], he was a guy that used to handle all the money for the church.  And back behind the curtain, when I say behind the curtain it's not per se behind the curtain, what it was, was a room about half this size, from here to there.  Deacon Ferris would be there.  And that's where all the money was counted.  It was, as you well know we had over five thousand people.  It was thousands and thousands of dollars used to be counted there.  My brothers worked there, they couldn't go in that room.  No one could go in that room but me.  Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders] would sit in the room and he would let me come in the room 'cause I, you know, he would tell me, "Go get my Coca-Cola and meet behind the curtain."  And they would sit there and they talk.  The only thing that I picked up was the word accounting, accounting, accounting.  And I kept talking about accounting and learned that it meant keeping books and what have you, and that's what I wanted to do.
Story_ID: 640928
Speaker 1: So you studied accounting at, at Massey Business College [Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yep.  Then I, then I, later got married in '68 [1968], '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And then--
Speaker 1: How did you, you, you and your wife [Rocker's first wife] meet?
Speaker 2: She went to high school [Luther Judson Price High School, Atlanta, Georgia] with me.  I met her because they had people--I was a senior, they had people running for different things in the high school, and I think they had this tenth grade, and I saw her and I said, "You should run for tenth grade."  She said, "I can't do that because I don't have clothes and I'm not a part of that.  And I, I'm not that way."  And I didn't quite understand what she meant.  And as we continued to talk, she was talking about the only way you could win is number one, at that time you, your, you had to be a school teacher, you know, in this school, and it had to be your child, you had to be mulatto.  Well, I told her, you know, "You're fairly bright, your mama is mulatto, isn't she?"  She said, "Yeah but my mama don't teach no school."  I said, "Well, the students are the ones that vote for you.  And what happen if we would get you elected?"  And I mobilized people and she got elected.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this happened in high school?
Speaker 2: It happened in high school.
Speaker 1: So did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Also when I was in high school, they nominated me to be over the youth Democratic Party [Young Democrats of America].
Speaker 1: Oh, really, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Down at the Butler Street YMCA [Atlanta, Georgia]. Because the students came in and they was talking and I was dressed up and I, I wanted to be like Borders [William Holmes Borders] 'cause I been at so many meetings, and I just took over.  And I told 'em the best way to organize students, particularly sixteen year old, and it was dealing with the Negro Voters League [Atlanta Negro Voters League] and they needed those kids to go out and knock on doors.  And I told 'em, you know, I, I relayed it to that group and they, we went out and told people where to go to vote and register.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so this young lady was still available when you came back from Vietnam [Vietnam War] then?
Speaker 2: No, I called her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I called her and we start dating.  And when we start dating, her, she was, she was afraid of her daddy, and I was, I used to pick her up from work and we would drive down the street.  Her dad was coming this way when we was, when I would taking her home and she used to duck and she said that the daddy had always told her that she could not get in a car, you know, with a man because she would be a whore, and he didn't want his daughters to be whores.  It was three of 'em.  And, and that's why he left, because, the mama, he claimed, had dated someone else and he left.  So therefore, we was--it was nothing I could do but take her to work and come back, you know, different things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so but you all got married in '68 [1968]? Or '69 [1969] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968].  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 640929
Speaker 1: So what did you do after graduation from Massey [Massey Business College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I end up driving for Benjamin Mays.  Also end up working with Warren R. Cochrane.  Dr. Cochrane, his wife was at the University of Syracuse [sic. Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York].  They was mulattoes and he told me about what the mu- he, he taught me the history of what it meant to be his color.  And he was telling me about different people that done different things during the, for King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] that I didn't know about.  He said that, "We, we was at the colleges and we will get students in, yeah, black students.  A lot of us out there but we're not supposed to tell them who we are."  He also explained to me about the banks downtown, that there was a couple mulattoes there that was working on different people to open up the system for us.  And he named 'em.  And I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: By mulattoes you, are you talking about people that were, look like they were white but were--
Speaker 2: No, no (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) black? In the, in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they looked they white--
Speaker 1: But they were in the bank in the--
Speaker 2: As white but you'd never knew that they was black, but you weren't supposed to know it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See and this is what I learned later.  You know, after I got married and began to talk to Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders], they went to telling me about the ladies, you know, the, the high rise being built, they was widows that their husbands was very wealthy.  During segregation days, believe it or not, there were so many people, blacks, that made a lot of money, more money you could imagine, and they kept it in cash.  And that's when they start opening up black banks.  But most of these people was mulattoes that they looked like they white and some of 'em and they would marry people that looked like them.  And when they would die, the wives had a chance to move in and to--back to the black communities and that's what they done.
Speaker 1: So, oh, wait a, wait a minute now.  Okay.  Now, I, I, I thought that's what you were getting at.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You were saying that these very light women--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --actually passed, married a white man--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then brought that money back to the black community after (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they married a black man that was a mulatto too.
Speaker 1: Oh, and they both--
Speaker 2: But when the black man died, they end up being a single person, so they end up there at Wheat Street [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] and Reverend Borders knew it, I don't know how he knew it, you know, Ms. Borders [Julia Pate Borders] was that way too, his wife, almost white.  Well, she looked white.  But the, the point is they all knew each other, all over America.  They knew who was what.  Period.  And Warren Cochrane explained that to me.  And that's how we was able to accomplish so much of what he told me with black colleges [HBCUs] and everything else.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That group.
Story_ID: 640930
Speaker 1: That group also was the group that fought the integration movement 'cause they was making so much money.  It was just a lot of money.
Speaker 2: Oh you're talking about black middle class--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and the business people.
Speaker 1: Made a lot of money. More than you could imagine.
Speaker 2: Yeah, integration I've, I've heard a lot of people say that integration though, destroyed a lot of black, businesses because they weren't allowed to compete with the white ones on their level and when black folks started going to the white business, the black ones had no clients.
Speaker 1: Well, that was brought up but then too, in Atlanta [Georgia] I think it helped. It helped to--I'd heard that story, matter of fact I had talked to Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders] about it.  And he explained to me, "While you was here at the church if you went over to Reverend Price's [Flay S. Price] church," which was First Baptist [First Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], "who church looked the best?"  I said, "This one."  He said, "So don't believe it."  In other words, if I went to a white church, a big white church, it didn't look as better as Wheat Street [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].  And that was after, you know, during segregation and after segregation.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So it's a myth.  Although they made a lot of money.  Like daddy [Samuel Rocker, Sr.] made a lot of money in the taxi cab business.  And then when they integrated, daddy was fighting them and telling them don't form an association with the white group.  They wouldn't listen.  They formed the association and now it's controlled by a monopoly, a major firm runs the cab companies.  The same in Atlanta when Borders was fighting later for the school issue dealing with the, the school teachers.  We had the national association of teachers union [American Federation of Teachers], which is a black organization, and he fought them to tell them, "You can maintain, you can maintain your situation, your tenure, you can maintain things a lot better if you kept your organization black because you control your pension, you control what goes on."  Well, as it went on, the legislators voted it out.  They fought to keep it, and now look at Atlanta.  It's the worst education system but it was based on, years ago it used to be based on the union had the teachers in the teaching business, were the one that recruit other teachers.  And it was a unique system because they got good educators who thought like they did.  So it changed with integration.
Speaker 2: Hm.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Same, with the police station.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 640931
Speaker 1: Now do you have any stories from the days you were driving Dr. Mays [Benjamin Mays]?
Speaker 2: Yep.  Dr. Mays, (audio disturbance) I told Dr. Mays that--people said--when we would go see Sadie Mays [Sadie Gray Mays], she was in the hospital, I said, "Now, you do know that they call you Buck Benny don't, don't you?"  He said, "I know that."  I said, "Okay.  You do know that Ms. Borders [Julia Pate Borders] was a mulatto and your wife was a mulatto?"  He said, "I know that."  And I used to say things to him and he used to tel- that's all he would say.  And I used to, when I carried him over there back and forth, he finally told me after a year driving for him, he said, "Tell me what place I can go since you, you know, know people around Atlanta [Georgia], what place I can go to bury my wife that's not a mulatto, tell me."  I said, "There's a guy named Alfonso Dawson and he's blue black like you."  He said, "What's his name?"  I said, "Alfonso Dawson."  He said, "Where is he?"  I said, "He's right around the corner from you.  He just built this brand new building."  He said, "How you know him?"  I said, "I go over there because I clean his bathrooms."  And he said, "Why you cleaning bathrooms all the time?"  And (laughter) I just told him that I get paid, just like everybody else.  He said, "Why don't you just clean the whole building rather than the bathroom?"  I said, "I haven't thought about that.  I might consider that."  And that's when I started to cleaning buildings too.  But to make a long story short, he went over there and he met Alfonso Dawson.  And Dawson was jet black from south Georgia.  And when they buried Sadie Mays--that was the talk of Atlanta.  That he would give that body to a man that's only been in town a year and a half or two years and nobody never knew how Benjamin Mays would do something like that.
Story_ID: 640932
Speaker 1: Now, what--the story you're put- the picture you're kind of painting here is that, is that internecine tension in the black community over color, and which also is, it sort of goes along with (unclear) money too, in, in Atlanta [Georgia] and maybe other places to, but, but that's, that's a--
Speaker 2: Well, I think, I think the, what had happened is that it sort--it's not sort of--they literally had a lot of money.  They was industrious people.  I don't think that the situation exists like it was tension.  The tension exists during my years of coming up.  Like when I told you about my wife [Rocker's first wife] in the tenth grade said this is happening, before then they never thought about all of this.  Other, other people in other age groups, it was that generation that come up, our generation, was the generation that thought about having our own thing and doing our own thing.  We didn't think in terms of, for instance, like we believed that anyone could be a queen.  Their mama didn't have to be a teacher.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then we also believe a number of things that we became our worst enemies, because we helped legislation be passed that outlawed so many issues where you had organizations in place like the Pullmans [Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters], the unions, black unions, all of that stuff was busted up and the AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations] came in and they became sort of involved with all of 'em, larger groups.  So it's a lot of things happened during this, the boomers' years that didn't happen during the Borders [William Holmes Borders] years.
Story_ID: 640933
Speaker 1: Now we're in the early '70s [1970s] now when you were driving for Benjamin Mays and working for Warren Cochrane?
Speaker 2: Warren Cochrane--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the community foundation.  Warren Cochrane came back from New York [New York], he was over the Butler Street YMCA [Atlanta, Georgia].  The Butler Street YMCA was an all-black YMCA.  You had black YMCAs that was established in different places.  And in New York there was one that was established where there was whites involved.  But they brought Warren Cochrane up there to be general secretary because he was strong with the Negro Voters League [Atlanta Negro Voters League].  He was a great organizer.  He came up there, [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jordan was up there, Wyatt Tee [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker] was up there, a lot of folks, New York was the mecca of trying to get something done.  The, the congressman I think he had died or he could have--something but they was all up in New York doing a number of things.  And Warren was such a pioneer here, so he came back to Atlanta [Georgia], when I say, I'm sorry we're here in Detroit [Michigan] but I'm saying Atlanta.  We came back to Atlanta, he was able to get money from the Coca-Cola Bottling Company, the Trust Company of Georgia [SunTrust Banks], Life of Georgia [Life Insurance Company of Georgia, Atlanta, Georgia], all of these major places.  They put about $5 million in a foundation.  He hired me to be his organizer and to literally run the place where he was the executive director.  And we had $5 million, the responsibility we had was to go into the black community, give away money to repair homes that they was living in.  Some people had moved into homes and after getting into the house, it was a new arena coming in called fair housing.  But they was moving into housing but there was something else going on called block bustering [block busting].  Block bustering is when the white community bought up, bought property from white people and put two or three black people in there that didn't have an income, had a lot of children, scare the community and they ran out, and some blacks began to move in and the credit situation was a little lenient because whites was helping each other get out of one place and even the banks, the white banker was helping finance other blacks.  But a lot of blacks was getting into these places that did not understand the significance of owning a home.  Your hot water heater goes out, you have to cut the grass, you have to buy a lawn mower.  Sometimes you have to buy another door, screen door, it was a whole new lesson had to be taught.  So what we did, the $5 million would go into the community.  We would teach you how to buy a door, what to do with a hot water heater, how you buy another TV, what you do, and we would lend you this money because we did not want a situation to occur the way it was happening that second mortgage companies or pawnshops was buying, getting lien on homes and selling their homes before the people could be in their a year and a half.  So the foundation was set up for the purpose of lending money with no interest rate, and my job was to give it away and to find the people who needed the money. And I did that.
Story_ID: 640934
Speaker 1: I left there, I did that for three years and I told Warren Cochrane that I wanted to go to Albany State College [Albany State University, Albany, Georgia].  I went to Albany State College, and I was at Albany State College for three years and a half.  While I was at Albany State College, Lonnie King [Lonnie C. King, Jr.] with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] came down there, and told the groups that--I was a sophomore--Shirley Chisholm was running for president. This was Shirley Chisholm was running--
Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973], '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Shirley Chisholm was running for president.  And I organized the buses (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)(Unclear).
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: (JESSICA DONAHUE ROCKER):  I thought it was '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy-two [1972]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (JESSICA DONAHUE ROCKER):  Shirley Chisholm.
Speaker 1: Chisholm was '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  I'm sorry.  She was running in si- the election of '70 [1970] so she was starting to run in '71 [1971], '72 [1972], I guess.
Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971], '72 [1972] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause election year was '72 [1972], yeah.
Speaker 1: So I went to Albany State just about around that time. But prior to then, you know, Jimmy Carter was the governor of Georgia, right?  And also I had met Jimmy Carter during the days that I was doing community work for Warren Cochrane, because he was a senator, he was very active.  But to make a long story short, I got in Albany State College, Lonnie King came down there and he said--I told him who I was and he said, "I remember you.  You used to stay at Reverend Borders [William Holmes Borders] house."  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Yeah."  And he called back, he called Jondelle Johnson, and she was over there, she was with the NAACP.  And someone else, I can't think of their name, Hooks--
Speaker 2: Benjamin Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks]. Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's who it was.  Hooks was there, he knew me from being around Borders.  And Lonnie called there and said, "There's a boy down here, you might not know him but Reverend Borders raised him.  His name is Art [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Arthur Rocker, Sr.]."  He, Hooks said, "Yeah, I know Art, yeah, the little short guy."  He said, "Yeah."  He said, "Yeah get him to organize the kids.  He could do well."  I organized the whole campus.  They said, "We can get one bus to you." They had to get four buses.  We went in to a city, where it used to be the Democratic Party used to allow anybody to come in and vote in Georgia as a delegate, right, as long as you came in, and long as you say that I'm- show a Georgia credentials, and as long as you say that you was a registered voter.
Speaker 2: So, so you can vote in either a primary or independent it didn't matter?
Speaker 1: No, just a delegate.  So you can have, so you can vote in the State of Georgia whose the delegates, the delegates is the one that vote for the President.  Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was running now, far as he was concerned, everybody in Georgia, he had.  He didn't think in terms of that.  Lonnie King and them, did not visualize that we would go to a convention and take over the whole thing. The white folks left.  They couldn't believe that many people came in and we was all registered voters and we all signed up and we voted for Shirley Chisolm.  And it hit the newspapers.  And Jimmy Carter said it was the most well organized event that ever take place.  And you could talk to Lonnie King today, I think he's still living, and Lonnie King would tell you, that's what put black voters on the map for Georgia and every place else because Jimmy Carter didn't want that situation to happen again and he brought in the other blacks and began to put them out there to show that when he go into Virginia they can get the right delegates and everything, 'cause that was one of the most embarrassing moments he had, and he was glad to see it.  That's what Lonnie told me.  So I did that.
Story_ID: 640935
Speaker 1: Then the president called me, Hayes [Charles L. Hayes], in his office.  Told me I had to leave the campus.  When I went there, I went there with my wife [Rocker's first wife].  I, when I went to Albany State College [Albany State University, Albany, Georgia], I went down there in a old broke up car.  And I had to work, so I got in the cab business, driving cab part time.  And we lived in the housing project, it was a brand new housing project came up, C.B. King project [ph.].  And I, we lived in that.  I drove cab for about two months and I bought the man's cab, that one cab that he had, and I start driving.  And then eventually he was having some problems, in my second year, I brought the whole cab stand and I had students working for me.  And then I was in the painting business.  I used to paint people homes because when I was with community foundation, Mr. Cochrane [Warren Cochrane] complained because I was always trying to figure out how I could get more involved in selling something but I couldn't, you couldn't lend somebody and turn back around and sell 'em.  So I was taught that, I couldn't do it.  So these are things I wanted to do.  So they called me in the office, Hayes told me, "Art [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Arthur Rocker, Sr.]," the dean of academic affairs and president was sitting there, they said, "You're gonna have to leave campus."  I said, "Why?"  They said, "You got a prostitute ring, we know it.  You have some of the professors on the campus particularly, your dean, you knew he was an alcoholic, he signed for you to take advance courses.  You took all the series 300 and 400 course."  "I did.  He didn't let me start in my freshman year or my sophomore year, I jumped to the senior, junior, and senior courses and my transcript will show that."  No one can do that.  "You're totally wrong, and this issue about prostitution, the whole nursing division is involved and we know that.  We, we don't want you on this campus and you best leave."  Well, I didn't pay too much attention to him.  I went off campus, I kept hanging around and Mayor Motl- Mon- the mayor of the city called me.  He said, "I wanna meet with you.  You're starting this nightclub down there and it's a lot of rumors that you into prostitution. And your cab company that's all y'all do, and you use the campus, the students."  I said, "But Mr. Wiggins [Morton "Motie" Wiggins], you receive 35 percent of the black vote.  I got it all for you."  He said, "I know it.  That's why I'm telling you to leave because there's some things coming down and I don't want you to be in this city.  I know you've done wonders for me.  Now if you come to work for me, I'll hire you.  You can work for the city, I'll give you a top job better than you can ever have."  I said, "Yeah but that don't--I can't make no money."  He said, "Yeah you can."  So I didn't wanna do that.  And I went back on the campus, my wife was extremely disappointed, we had one kid [Monica Rocker Greenwood].  And we left and came back to Atlanta [Georgia].  And I went into real estate, passed the real estate thing.  And I met a group of Jewish guys, one of 'em had owned a lot of property there in Albany [New York], and we start selling property and homes over in the Grand Bahama Island [Bahamas] and I sold to a lot of entertainers and people and went to transporting folks to the Bahamas.  And went--got in real estate.
Story_ID: 640936
Speaker 1: Can I go back a little bit.  I just wanna know how, how did they get this idea you were running a prostitution ring?  Where did that come from?
Speaker 2: There was many girls on the campus [at Albany State College; Albany State University, Albany, Georgia] at that time when I was on the campus, we didn't have no money. (Long pause) We had nothing.  A kid would, a girl would come to college and we had--veterans had a check, a girl would come to college, they had nothing.  They couldn't live on campus, they couldn't afford it but they was trying to graduate.  There was guys that was with fraternities and, and they had nothing, I would give 'em jobs painting houses.  We'd go around paint houses at a reduced cost.  I had 'em driving taxis to, to ones that was the key organizers of the fraternities.  And the money that they would receive, I never got one dime of it.  I only provided the transportation.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And it was wrong.  If a person needed someone yeah, I introduce it to him.  And that was my job and responsibility and it's up to them, and the guys that actually went with 'em, you know, and leave 'em at a place, we knew exactly where they were, we knew exactly about the hotel.  We already had people, students planted next door, fellows that I knew.  And we knew everything that would take place.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And they was able to get money and go to school.  And a lot of the money went back home, and they would tell mamas and daddies that we was just waiting tables.
