Story_ID: 569146
Speaker 1: My name is Denise Gines and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you state your name and spell it for me please?
Speaker 2: Surely, [HistoryMaker] Timothy Lee Richardson, T-I-M-O-T-H-Y, L-E-E, R-I-C-H-A-R-D-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: July 28, 1958.
Speaker 1: Your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: And you occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm the vice president for military services special projects, Boys and Girls Clubs of America.
Speaker 1: What is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Atlanta, Georgia, it's the Boys and Girls Club headquarters.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: It's July 4--July--September 14, 2007.
Story_ID: 569147
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess so, kind of a honey brown.
Speaker 1: What about a favorite food, what do you like to eat?
Speaker 2: I love fish.
Speaker 1: Is there a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Now, when you go on vacation do you have a favorite destination?
Speaker 2: No, it's the next one, wherever the next exciting pla- wherever it's going to be is going to be a E ticket adventure.  So, wherever it's going to be, I'm looking forward to learning about it.
Speaker 1: All right.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, success comes in cans.
Story_ID: 569148
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mother and her family.  Tell me your mother's name, spell it for me and tell me when and where she was born?
Speaker 2: Okay, my mother Christeale Dandridge, C-H-R-I-S-T-E-A-L-E, Dandridge, D-A-N-D-R-I-D-G-E, was born in Los Angeles, California.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: All right we were talking about your mother.
Speaker 1: Yes.  The spelling I think that there was the question?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Would you like to know about her?
Speaker 2: I want to know where she--well she was born in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and what year?
Speaker 1: See, I'd, I'd, I'd have to back it out.  But, she would, see would have been, let's see fifteen, forty-eight, forty--'40 [1940], '41 [1941], somewhere there, somewhere in there, I don't know exactly.
Speaker 2: Okay, and yes now do you--did you know her parents?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And what where their names?
Speaker 1: Alyce Dugan [Alyce Owens Dandridge] was her mother and her fa- her father Armbra Dandridge, my grandfather.  I, I didn't actually know.  He was gone by the time I, I came around.
Speaker 2: What was his birth name?
Speaker 1: Armbra, A-R-M-B-R-A.
Speaker 2: Dandridge?
Speaker 1: Dandridge, yep.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, where did they live?
Speaker 1: Los Angeles.
Speaker 2: Oh, everybody's from Los Angeles?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, was there any story of them or Alyce and Armbra's people coming from anywhere else other than Los Angeles?
Speaker 1: Yes, I know much more about my mother's side of the family.  My, my, my mother actually died very early I was maybe four years old.  And my grandmother reared me.  So, I, I know a fair bit about that side and, then a bit about the other functions.  The, they were Owens.  And the Owens family, my grandmother's people were the Owens.  And they had come across from Chicago [Illinois], they had been in Chicago round you know the early '20s [1920s] and thereabouts.  And my great-grandfather [John Owens] decided that he wanted you know that California was the place to go.  And had you know had taken his, his young wife [Christeale Owens] and young, young children out to California.  Well, one of the stories involved him halfway out in the middle of the desert somewhere the, the bus driver decided that he was gonna have to, you know, "Nigger you're gonna have to get off the bus here," you know.  This--he's a very small, unassuming man, brilliant man, he spoke Chinese and he spoke Russian, brilliant guy, columnist, but that's another story.  You would--he's the last person you'd expect to pull a revolver from his (laughter) but needless to say they made the trip safely so.
Speaker 2: And this was the Owens?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Gr- great-grandparents of yours (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Story_ID: 569149
Speaker 1: You can go ahead and tell me about your grandfather.  You said he spoke different languages?
Speaker 2: My great- my [maternal] great-grandfather [John Owens] actually (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Great- okay, great-grandfather Owens.
Speaker 2: Right.  Owens, yeah.
Speaker 1: We're still talking about Owens?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They, they lived over near University of Southern California in Los Angeles [California], a small home.  And I, I believe he had worked in the postal service.  And right about the time that the McCarthy [Joseph McCarthy] era was going on.  This was a man who would, you know, again, he was always interested in the world, his, his home was like a library.  There are books on everything, everywhere.  And so, I, I gather from my [maternal] grandmother [Alyce Owens Dandridge] and others that he was--would go out to hear these different lectures, you know on you know socialism and this that and the other.  And in that era you know all it would take would be someone to drop a dime say that, that you know they suspect that your--.  So, he had lost his a job as a result and I don't know what all happened in terms of you know getting on the record.  And so, he did what he could to maintain himself beyond that.  But, it was a big blow to the family I gathered from them.  My great-grandmother, his wife, Christeale Owens, she--another very small person.  I remember her being very small but she, she loved her some kids.  Boy she would, whenever the kids where around she'd be sparkling.  And always had treats for everybody hidden.  And, and Grandma Owens would I remember that there was a big to-do that she for some reason seemed to be travelling you know.  So, she was a part of different groups and this that and the other.  I was a little kid maybe four or five years old and I remember we went to the airport to see her off because she was flying off to Turkey.  Well, as a four year old Turkey is a bird you know and like: "Grandma's going to Turkey," you know.  But, there was some conference of some kind.  And I re- I learned later well I'd, I'd gone to the other events that she was involved with.  And she was always be decked in gowns and this that and the other.  And it wasn't until years later that, that, that, I, I, I, I learned that one of these (unclear) one of these groups that she was involved with was the Daughters of the American Revolution.  And I thought you know (laughter)--I, I don't question it, that's the group, that they, that she was involved with.  And as I retrace the steps from memory, when I'm, whenever I'm in Los Angeles.  The one that building that I remembered going to this big hall with all the marble and all the--it was you know the DAR hall you know.  So, go figure.
Speaker 1: Well, was there any talk about interracial marriages or slavery or any of that?
Speaker 2: Not, not really, you know the big, you know dark stain was you know certainly there was there were mixed feelings about my, my great-grandfather.  There was a degree of pride that he had, you know, he had sort of hard beliefs and he was this learned man, and, and all of that.  But, then of course the reality is that there's no income coming in.  You know from you know that's the, the role.  So, there was that sort of tension that people don't like to talk so much about, these are things I've been able to piece together.  So, not, not so much about, not much about Chicago [Illinois] or, or anything you know, any, any of those, those tales, no.
Story_ID: 569150
Speaker 1: So you spent time with your [maternal] grandmother [Alyce Owens Dandridge]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And tell me about the times with her (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, well, she was a grandma's grandma, she used to call me her Mr. Sunshine.  You know, every time I'd wake up I guess I'd be singing or something, say--and my, I have a younger brother Lee [ph.].  And you know have my, my mother [Christeale Dandridge] having died so soon and of course, my grandmother, stepping into, to, to you know rescue us from the social service system.  That was the only mother I had ever known and I tell you I, now we grew up in South Central L.A. [South Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], which at the time was I mean, that's, that was the black repository you know.  That's where the good, the bad and the ugly you know pretty much lived.  And we lived a lot more near where the ugly was.  But, I, I, I, I walked in this and I loved in this and, and I it was just there was never a question in my mind that I was going to be a, a something a success, a--because this woman it was just real clear, that was her expectation.  From a very early age and by gosh if there was anything to celebrate if you know, if you made a crayon drawing it was the greatest crayon drawing.  "Look at this everyone, look at this crayon drawing."  So, it was this protective veneer she put around that, that convinced me that, life was not what I was seeing on a day to day basis.  And that included people being you know, you know murderers and all manners of horrible things.  And alcoholism and drugs and all were coming to be popular in that area.  You know, this was the Watts riots was during that period.  You know, we, we had the National Guard come in and you know raid our house looking for weapons.  And you know all manners of crazy things.  But, it just it was like a, it just washed over me, I never, never knew that I would be.  I knew that, that I was going to be better than what the circumstance was.
Story_ID: 569151
Speaker 1: As far as your [maternal] grandmother, what type of person was she?
Speaker 2: She was--everyone--in, in, in public housing is, is where we lived, the projects.  It's like a village you know there's--and there's subcategories of the village.  Well, she was one of these people, she was sort of a mother to the community, so there were always, she was making popsicles for the neighborhood kids.  She was you know like the old Bill Withers song, 'Grandma's Hands.'  You know, the local unwed mother, she's there to sooth them.  There was always somebody in our midst and it was clear that she had a special place.  Ms. Alyce [Alyce Owens Dandridge] everyone called her.  But, you just took it for granted that's the way you treat people and that was instilled as, as a part of my fabric as well.  That, that you treat people with, with the greatest expectation that you expect them which you expect them to be.  Maybe not what there are right now, but you know is in them.  And you have them help them rise to that standard.  But, and of course she was just very involved she was the best mother a kid could have.  She was at all the school performances, she was at, you know, she was there.  And looking back on it, I think that's a part of what, we you know there were times where we were counting the days until the next you know government check would come because there might not be food for the next three days, but we always seemed to kind of make it through.  But, that stuff never it never sunk in, it was just you know this is what we do, so.
Speaker 1: So, your grandmother didn't work outside of the home?
Speaker 2: Well, she, she did for years but then when she now had two young children you know we're four and three.  That changed her role.  So, she was a domestic, I'd known her to be a domestic. Prior to then she had worked I know she had worked in food service.  I remember her talking about the Hollywood Palladium [Los Angeles, California] and she worked, and all the stars would come through and you know she would get to talk with them and meet with them and all that.  I hadn't thought about that for thirty years.  But, but yeah, so she, she worked and then she would actually take us on some of her, some of her jobs as we got a little older, we were helping.  But, she'd take us along.  And then I think before too long you know health and, and all, she, she just, just gave it all up and--
Speaker 1: Do you know how much education your grandmother had?
Speaker 2: High school, yeah, high school and I, I, I think that a part of her expectation is that I, I, I mentioned to you about her father [John Owens] and her mother [Christeale Owens] very--you know, in, in, in, in, in black culture and in the projects you know, you can be chided for sounding (laughter) speaking English (laughter) okay.  And you know but that was just the way it was, it wasn't, it was just this is the way we communicate.  And so I think she, it's my understanding that she in fact had, had been a, a teen mother herself.  And had felt very frustrated by the barriers that had been before her, though she had skills and, and so forth.  And we're also talking a different era as, as, as well.  So, being a woman, being a black woman in the '50s [1950s], '40s [1940s] and so forth.  And with a, you know, high school education that, it, it was hard thing so.  But, I think that's also what she, she it she was seeing a change in the world and so she saw that change being there for her grandchildren.  This is a better world I can send them into if we can keep them on the straight and narrow.
Story_ID: 569152
Speaker 1: Your father, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father's Irving--well he, he's Irving Mothershed, but his, his mother my, my paternal grandmother had married a man, Richardson, so he was Richardson for a short time and then when he got to be of age, he changed his name back to his, his actual name, which was Irving Mothershed.
Speaker 1: Spell that for me?
Speaker 2: M-O-T-H-E-R-S-H-E-D.  And the story on that goes that his, his father well that's not too it would have been his grandfather.  They had come across--you had asked about the histories and all.  Well, let's see that would have been--see his mother was Irma [Irma Lee Stuckey], my Grandma Irma, and Willie Mothershed.  And so her, my grandmother's mother was Doshie [Doshie Stuckey] and her father was Napoleon, Napoleon Stuckey [ph.].  So, Napoleon Stuckey and Irma--Napoleon Stuckey and--
Speaker 1: Doshie?
Speaker 2: --Doshie gave birth to Irma (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Irma?
Speaker 2: --and there were I think six or seven kids.  And I, this was in Kiblah, Arkansas, K-I-B-L-A-H.  And so the, the as the story goes I don't know how much fact--
Speaker 1: You, you can tell as much, but tell me how to spell Doshie before you go, go forward?
Speaker 2: D-O, D-O-S-H-I-E.
Speaker 1: All right, now yes--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --please tell us the story.
Speaker 2: So, as I understand it that you know as slavery had concluded that large groups of folks started heading westward.  And there apparently in this particular part--it's right near the, the Texarkana area.  Where the three states come toge- where the two states [Texas and Arkansas] come together.  Well, three Texas, Louisiana and--
Speaker 1: New Mexico?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no anyway Texas, it's near Texarkana.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, so they had these land grants and that basically the freed slaves could apply for one of these grants.  Now, many of them couldn't read or couldn't get the word, they couldn't get the word out.  But, by some hook or some crook my ancestors had found out about it, got in the paperwork in and we granted a, a land hold.  Now, some of the stories that have come out of there, well you know that, that, this is in the time of in- incredible segregation and they had read and run signs.  And what these in, in the, the next nearest town, it's probably a five mile stretch between the, the small little enclave and it had its own little store and little this that in the other was the, was the, the white town you know.  And basically the sign said you know, nigger if you can read this you better run, you know.  And so, this was the environment that they lived in.  So, I had heard these stories from my grandmother.  And it, it wasn't until I actually had a chance to go to see this at a family reunion probably three years ago now.  And see this place and it all made sense, all made a lot more sense.  There's this road that it's--if you didn't know it was there you would miss it.  And it weaves back into the woods you know.  And then for as far as you can see there are these homes today, there, very, very well kept homes.  The people have moved, they had moved away to find work in the North or in the defense plans out west.  And they have sent money back to, you know to restore the homes.  And so, it, it, it was this incredible sense of community and connectedness that I had just never known and of course if you're on that road its known that you somehow are connected to the people on that road because it is, it's a good stretch into the woods.  But once you're there, there was a griot there, this fellow, big smiling face you know.  And anything you wanted to know about anybody in the community, he'd be happy to tell you, you know.  How are you connected to and after the quiz and the pass and you knew who you were connected to, he'd launch into, "Well yes, I never really liked your great-grandfather he was kind of a knucklehead you know and--.  But, boy, your, your great-grandma, what a great lady," and so forth and so on.  And off he went with the stories.  And to, to, to sense that this was the actually land that in fact your great-grandparents owned and tilled and you know survived on.  And some of the structures are still there, though you know most of them are now, all of them are now deceased.  It was an incredible feeling to, to actually be on this land.
Story_ID: 569153
Speaker 1: The name Mothershed--
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: --do you know where that name came from (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes (laughter).  The story was that when they landed there--landed--when they, the wagons stopped there, that basically they had to come up with a name for the paperwork.  And the--my--would have been my great-great-grandfather looked over and he said why I know I've got a mother, there's a--build a shed over there, so I'm Mothershed, put my name down as Mothershed.  And it, it's such a distinct name I went on a hunt for, for years to track my, my father's [Irving Mothershed] side of the family.  Because I didn't know them when I, from when I was a child.  And it was a pretty name to track.  And it turns out that one of the Little Rock Nine, that, that, the Thelma is her name.  Thelma Mothershed [Thelma Mothershed-Wair] was one of the girls that was, that integrated Central High School in Little Rock [Arkansas].  Now, I've yet to confirm that she was connected, but it was in Arkansas, couldn't have been too many Mothersheds around, so.  I'm, I'm hopeful, and if not it will be a good story to tell if we get to meet, so.
Story_ID: 569154
Speaker 1: Now, more about your father [Irving Mothershed].  Now let me get the information correct.  Your grandmother Irma [Irma Lee Stuckey] was a Mothershed and then she married (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, she was a, well she was a Stuckey, she married a Mothershed [Willie Mothershed].
Speaker 1: Okay, she married okay, so Doshie [Doshie Stuckey] and Napoleon [Napoleon Stuckey (ph.)] were--?
Speaker 2: Well, Stuckeys.
Speaker 1: They were Stuckeys?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they gave birth to Irma Stuckey.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, she, she married a Mothershed, and that's when your father was born?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, his name actually was Mothershed--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: She remarried--
Speaker 1: She remarried to a Richardson?
Speaker 2: Correct.  And so she wanted you know--this was a different era they wanted all the names to match.  And so, my father who was a pretty strong willed fellow all of his days.  Soon as he had a chance to legally change it back he did.  But when I was born they were teen parents he was a Richardson then, which is how I came to be a Richardson [HistoryMaker Timothy Lee Richardson].  I haven't had (laughter) the guts to change mine back, so I'll keep mine the way it is.
Speaker 1: Tell me more about, about your father and your relationship with him?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Where did he go to school--did--well I'm sorry--did he share any stories about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Not so much you know I, I, you know I'd come to know him as a grown man, I was thirty-five I think.  And you know it was a cautious feeling out initially, it was pleasant but it was you know, I, I hadn't known this man until I was thirty-five years old.  I'd actually come to meet his mother, probably in the prior year and then we tracked him down.  My understanding of his life at the time is, he was--he had sort of a troubled youth.  And, that as I mentioned he had met my mother [Christeale Dandridge] while they were in high school.  And my mother they begot me and in that intervening period he was incarcerated for something or another stealing a car or something you know.  And so of course when he, he got out and presented himself you know my maternal grandmother [Alyce Owens Dandridge], who was kind of helping things along, really didn't, you know didn't want to have a whole lot to do with this troublemaker that had you know had impregnated her, her daughter.  So, you know the separation occurred at that point and you know pretty much all things were good within the household.  There was no, no real need to connect, but and I didn't really know because most of the kids in the neighborhood were in simi- some similar situation.  But it was as I got to be a man that I realize, I, I'm missing half of my you know my genealogy--half of my lineage I don't know anything.  And so, a search for him helped me locate him and you know my, my sister and younger sister and others that have come after.  My Uncle Charles [Charles E. Richardson] who's like my best friend now and, so here we go.
Story_ID: 569155
Speaker 1: Now tell me more about living in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: Wow (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You--well let's start with your earliest childhood memory.  What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Prob- my earliest memory was, we were a part of a small little, little Christian church nearby.  And it was a big deal taking photographs and we I remember, I don't remember who was around me, I was three or four or something.  But, I remember being out in front.  And it was a big thing to be in this photograph and we had to stand up just so.  And I come to, I've actually seen the photograph since it was, it was photographed with my mother [Christeale Dandridge] and my brother and I think the pastor or something.  And it's one of the few photos I actually have my, the two of us together.  But, in terms of the ongoing kind of early memories there was a train that ran in front, of our, our place a freight train freight line and so you, you couldn't really forget the sound of the freight train on, on like clockwork going in front of the house.  And the other one is my [maternal] grandma [Alyce Owens Dandridge] liked to cook and she of course she had do this professionally.  And she was able to turn anything into just a great meal and, and the house always smelled like something great so that was probably it.  You being awaken by a great smell or you couldn't wait to get home to the great smell.
Story_ID: 569156
Speaker 1: What sounds, sights and smells remind you of your childhood?  So you told me the sound, the train, and the smell of your [maternal] grandmother [Alyce Owens Dandridge] cooking.  What sights take you back to that time?
Speaker 2: Wow, well it so happened that this particular housing development the Pueblo Del Rio housing development [Los Angeles, California] was right where planes heading to Los Angeles Airport [Los Angeles International Airport, Los Angeles, California] would bank and so they would slow down to bank.  And so, they would slow down to turn to get into the flight path to, to land.  And so one of my, my vivid memories is just sitting and watching these planes in the sky and you know you could read the tail numbers you know.  And you could, you could see the different you know logos on the, on the tails and they matched the ones you saw on television you know.  And I would wonder, where, where is that plane coming from, where's that, where, where's it going next?  Or who's on that plane you know?  There was this connectivity with this, this, this plane in the sky.  And of course they, the, the, the slight sound you can hear in the distance.  And of course it was this the housing development was nestled in an industrial area so just to the east of there were all kinds of mills.  So, you'd hear the, the mill whistle you know going off at six A.M. I guess to draw the workers in or--.  You know you'd always had the sound of trucks and, and that kind of thing going on.  And, and, the, the, the unmistakable sound of, of a bus you know, there was always this my grandmother didn't drive.  So, she was really keen on making sure that we had exposures to different people, different places.  She, she would make sure that if something occurred that we read about or you know she was al- there was always, there were always things to read around the house.  And, and if there was, this was the '60s [1960s] you know.  So, if, if you know the civil rights news would come on or you know an assassination would occur we'd always be talking that there are bad people but don't put all certain type of person in one bin or all the whites, all the blacks all the this that and the other.  So, long story short is she, she didn't, she didn't drive and we'd get our exposures by bus and that was a familiar sound, all the sounds of a bus.
Story_ID: 569157
Speaker 1: Give me a description you talked a little bit about living in the projects, tell me the name of the projects again--
Speaker 2: Surely.
Speaker 1: --and then give me a description of the neighborhood: who lived in the neighborhood?  Who were your friends?  Who were some of the merchants?  You know, the composition of the people that lived in the--the families that lived in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Okay, well we lived in the Pueblo Del Rio [Los Angeles, California], Pueblo Del Rio projects, a city by the river, village by the river.  There was no river but (laughter) had a nice sound to it.  And it was nestled--well the buildings were, were, were two-story places they're so small I've since been back.  There're just so small, I can't believe people actually lived there.  But, brick, real hot in the summer, no air conditioning, lot of window opening and sitting outside, that kind of thing.  Originally they had fruit trees in the back so you'd have the fragrance of the--I remember as a young child the, the, the orange and lemon trees in the backyards, and they since had, had, taken them out.  But, the--it was right on the, on the bus line, the bus would go right to the center of Los Angeles [California].  And so, that's where people would go in and they'd transfer go on to where they had to.  Most of the people there, you know the, the nature of, of public housing is, people--that the last safety net so you're not on the street.  So, you had a lot of you know people who were infirmed in some way you know older people.  You know, you had you know many, many, many single fam- single parent families there, largely mom heads of households, largely not working, on public assistance.  In terms of shopping and so forth, again my [maternal] grandmother [Alyce Owens Dandridge] didn't drive so, there was a, there were a couple very small little shop- little food shops mini markets if you will, within a couple of blocks.  And certainly the ever present liquor store, there were tons of liquor stores around.  The development, the housing development we lived in Apartment 311, okay.  And the development was, was bisected by the railroad tracks.  So, on our side were the older buildings and they probably were built in the 1940s I would guess.  And then the newer buildings they were maybe built in the 1950s had to have been.  And the newer ones were the--reported to be better and so forth.  There was a little classism going between the two sides of the projects.  But, go figure.
Story_ID: 569158
Speaker 1: Other, sort of notable features of the area.  It [Pueblo Del Rio, Los Angeles, California] was a block from where the, the, the--during the '70s [1970s], it was the Patty Hearst, SLA sh- Symbionese Liberation Army shootout.  Where they had you know had a, surrounded the place and set it on fire.  And they didn't know she was in there--that was a block away.  But, but it was, it was just home, you don't know any different.  It was where, where home is.  And I remember the advent--well I think of life in, in the, the time as being pre-Watts and post-Watts, you know.  We were probably--we were on 54th [Street] and Long Beach [Avenue].  Watts [Los Angeles, California] started around 100th [Street] so we're like fifty blocks from Watts.  But, right about the same you know area east.  And so prior to Watts there was this, kind of a general sense, we're just folks, we're just trying to make a way, a nice safe little place.  And you know Watts was the epicenter, it's where you know the rioting of 1965 erupted.  But it didn't--it wasn't localized to Watts.  And so, you know several s- few little stores that, that existed that were looted and burned and so forth.  And so it changed, it changed the whole landscape, so to speak.  Sort of a moonscape, you know there were, there were no--it took a long time for anything to ever be re- to replace it.  And to people like us who had no car, it, it, it became more of a hardship in terms of the day to day life.  And so, the young boys about my age you know we would--bicycles became the big thing and so we had little bicycle crews you know.  We'd ride to neighboring Huntington Park [California].  Now, at the time it seemed like forever to get there.  But, this was a strip they had the big Huntington, annual Huntington Park Christmas Parade, and it was even on TV.  And it had all the stores and the chain stores and they had a J.C. Penney's [JCPenney].  And we could ride our bikes there put--and we could get a nickel ice cream cone at the Thrifty Drug Store [Thrifty Corporation].  That was a big thing and a nickel for one scoop, a nickel per scoop, so fifteen cents you had a big heaping ice cream cone.  And you'd ride, we'd ride our bikes to the industrial area, and I'm thinking my gosh this seemed like forever to get there.  And, and I've done it now it's maybe a mile and half (laughter) you know but it seem like so far.  But, it was a different world.  It was a different world, there was the world of, of possibly of haves of things you see on television that the, of people walking for pleasure and driving cars and the life that's out there.  The life that's possible.  Very different than a mile and half, two miles away, where I lived.  Which was you know people at the lowest rung of probably their existence, or of on the, on their way in (unclear) as the elderly are on their way out.  They're poor you know hardly anyone with much means or resource.
Story_ID: 569159
Speaker 1: Tell me about, about your elementary school.  What elementary school did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to Holmes, H-O-L-M-E-S, Holmes Avenue Elementary [Holmes Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California].  And it was surrounded by the public housing.  So, it was basically I guess built for the purpose of, of supporting the children from the public housing development.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the teachers there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Pretty much (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were there--
Speaker 2: --all of them, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Who was most influential to you, or encouraging maybe?
Speaker 2: You know there were two or three, my, I remember kindergarten, Mrs. Neely [ph.].  And, see my [maternal] grandma [Alyce Owens Dandridge] had mentioned that we had books around the house.  And she was always reading the--something to us.  So, I could read when I got to school, I could read.  And so, to kind of occupy me, she would have me read to the other kids, you know and so.  And I was of course sort of the teacher's pet, because I was this, this symbol of what you know, what we'd like to have happen.  And so, Mrs. Neely was kindergarten.  Then another influential teacher was Mr. Edwards, Titus Edwards [ph.].  He was my fifth grade teacher and he was, he would always come to school in a bow tie.  And he sp- he spoke very curtly.  But, but both of these teachers you knew that they had your best interest at heart and they had the highest expectation for you.  And you know they built the first addition to that school in probably fifty years.  It was a new wing and in the fifth grade they presented me with the key to the new wing as sort of the, I'm the symbol of the future.  I'm the student that we kind of, the kind of student we want to turn more, of, of into the world, so.  But, Mr. Edwards was one of those fellows who would talk about the bigger world you know.  And you'd spend fifteen extra minutest during lunch break and he'd be talking to you about things other than just the studies.  And it made you realize that there was more to life than what was immediately around you.
Speaker 1: Were all of your teachers black?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, Mr. Welch [ph.] would have been fourth grade.  Now, Mr., Mr. Welch was gay and he was, he was a tough guy (laughter) you know.  And he, he, he encouraged me in the arts.  And he actually during high school, my grandmother had been very artistic and I guess it must have come out somewhere in the school.  So, he had arranged for me during the summers to go to art school, run by the city.  They would, they had I guess they'd be called magnet programs now, where they take kids with a special ability and, and group them together so they advance their skills.  So, I mean all things said, I've, I've had some incredible experiences even then, which was you know the, the probably the lowest part of life.
Story_ID: 569160
Speaker 1: Let's talk about two things you mentioned, one was that you loved to read.  What were you were you reading be- besides magazines?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me what magazines were in the household--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I seem to remember, well I remember my [maternal] great-grandparents [Christeale Owens and John Owens]--Alyce [Alyce Owens Dandridge], my [maternal] grandmother's parents coming to visit periodically.  And I don't think they drove either, I don't know how they got over there.   But, they somehow, it, it was, you know it would have been an effort for them to make it.  But, I remember them bringing magazines or books or and, and my great-grandmother was really big on something for the baby so she'd bring, you know the little readers you know.  You know like 'Little Train' ['The Little Train,' Lois Lenski] or something.  And so there always seemed to be those around the house but it was an easy leap once you know who to read to now to want to read the National Geographic, so or whatever else happened to be around--Look or some of these magazines.  And of course, they much more interesting because they had real world pictures and it sort of tied to this theme of this bigger world.  You know the seeing the airplanes and wondering where they came from.  And the teachers talking about, "Oh I was in San Francisco [California]."  Oh, oh what, where's that, and that--understand what's that all about.  So, Look, Life was around the house.  I remember it just, there just always seemed to be something, and they might be tattered but they'd be there.
Story_ID: 569161
Speaker 1: You talked about the arts.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Did you know that you had a talent for arts?  You said your [maternal] grandmother [Alyce Owens Dandridge] was artistic?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What types of things did you do--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as far as art at home and then at school?
Speaker 2: Well I only knew that I really enjoyed it, so I remember watercolors and there'd be watercolors there.  And I remember looking at that or, or, or, or the, the crayons and the creating some work and thinking that's not what I intended I, I wa- intended something much better than that.  But, of course with this praise and encouragement that I was receiving I keep turning out these pieces that seemed to get better.  I didn't, I, I, I, don't know if she was just trying occupy me or she actually saw something in me, I, I, I don't know.  But, what ultimately did happen is, as a, as a young adult I, I'd been an apprentice jeweler and I had worked in the finest stores in, in Westwood [Los Angeles, California] and Beverly Hills [California] and you know on my own I'm eighteen, nineteen years old and I'm working in these high-end stores.  But, it was that, that interest in art you know, that, that, that kind of carried through.  So, when I got older I got to junior high [Thomas Alva Edison Junior High School; Thomas Alva Edison Middle School, Los Angeles, California] and high school [University High School, Los Angeles, California] I realized there were students that were much better at art than I was.  So, I'm, I'm not so sure I had a talent but, she did--I played cello in school.
Speaker 1: Was this in elementary school [Holmes Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California] or--?
Speaker 2: Elementary, yep.
Speaker 1: You played the cello?
Speaker 2: Yep, yep, yep, played the cello.  And, but I didn't have any kind of focus and I didn't like carrying that huge instrument around.  So, then I wound up being in the drama productions at the school, drama productions, kids, you know, grade school kids.  But, I'd be in all the productions and just really enjoyed that.
Story_ID: 569162
Speaker 1: What other extracurricular activities did you participate in?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Were there any organized sports?
Speaker 2: Right, there was a, a neighborhood sports team and I must have been in the sixth grade maybe, maybe I was a little bit older.  But, I was you know, I was, I sold newspapers, I was a paperboy.  And then you'd take your papers and get a big stack of them and (unclear) them in through the--you know the big factories you know and you have your regular customers.  But, the sports thing really didn't catch on until later and I was in high school [University High School, Los Angeles, California] and college.
Speaker 1: What did you do on, on the weekends?  What was one of your favorite pastimes (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Loved, loved to ride my bicycle.  That was always big, it was a big thing you know this is a different day, you know.  But, I remember being twelve years old and, and I'd have bus fare and I'd, I'd get on the bus at twelve I'd go to a Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers] game, you know.  I'd get on the bus I'd go to the beach.  I'd get on the bus and I'd got to the airport [Los Angeles International Airport, Los Angeles, California] and sit at the observation deck with a sandwich and watch the planes come and go.  I'd get on my bicycle and ride until it got dark.  And I'm be you know I'd ride to some relatives house halfway across town or to Huntington Park [California] as I mentioned or someplace that would be safe.  Now, even then you had be wary of gang areas or areas you were concerned it wouldn't be safe.  So, you'd kind of, of stick to the, the routes, but there was no fear about going out and seeing the world.  So, bike travel was, was, was popular, local travel and my [maternal] grandmother [Alyce Owens Dandridge] would probably once a month we'd go somewhere, we'd go to Lincoln Park [Los Angeles, California].  Lincoln Park had a lake, oh, and had little paddle boats in the lake, you know.  You'd pay a dollar and you got around or fifty cents or whatever, it had a merry-go-round.  It had people from all over the place there, and everyone was so calm.  It had ducks, we'd go and we'd feed the ducks, we'd take a loaf of bread and just feed the ducks for, you know hours.  It was, it was a thrill, so we would, she would periodically I'd say probably once a month we'd go do something like that on the bus, okay.  And I remember one time we had, she'd allowed us to fish with a safety pin and we caught these little sun fish in, in the lake.  And of course we're little kids eight, nine, ten years old and, "Oh please, Ma, let us take the--." So, we'd get a carton of you know a milk carton and put the, the little fish in, they'd never make it all the way home you know but she, she let us do it you know.  One particular sound from those days, I remember the sound of the--I don't know what they call it, but the mechanism with the merry-go-round, the automated music making machine.  It would always intrigue me more so than, than the ride it was the music you know.  And it was like this, this, all these different elements being the song, changed each time you'd ride.  And I remember at sunset there was, there were these vendors who was selling these little birds on a string and for a--I think they were maybe a quarter, maybe a dime I don't know.  But, there was a string and a, a stick and this little simple bird.  And the tail when you'd swing the stick, the, the tail would spin and it would make a chirping sound.  And it was the biggest thrill, she'd buy us you know one, one each.  And then we'd let the bird chirp and it might make it all the way home (laughter) s- unbroken.  But, I hadn't thought about that for forty, fifty years either, so.
Story_ID: 569163
Speaker 1: Do you go to junior high school or do you go straight to high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had middle--junior high school, yes.  I went to Thomas Edison Junior High School [Thomas Alva Edison Junior High School; Thomas Alva Edison Middle School, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Now, what you, you went into Holmes Avenue Elementary School [Los Angeles, California] in 1963?  And so, this, this is about 1969 when you go to Edison?
Speaker 2: That's correct yep, yep.  And I remember making--I was--I made the honor roll the first you know the first you know the first couple of semester I didn't really know what that meant you just go and you do what you do and you get good grades and it's just what you do.  And there were, there was a woman there, an algebra teacher an older white woman, Apger, A-P-G-E-R, was her name.  And she was fiery, feisty somebody and she loved her kids, man.  And there was a, a pod of us who had come from elementary school and, and we had clearly tested very well.  And we were the ones who were in the, you know the higher placement kind of, but basically everyone at the school was being written off, you know.  It's like well they're gonna wind up and I remember there was this Sergio Camacho [ph.] was his name. Now at Holmes Avenue, surrounded by the projects my world was all black you know.  These were all the largely black folks, a few Latinos.  When I went to the, the middle school--the elementary school--middle school--junior high, there were you know much, a much greater mix of, of kids.  And but, you know this again was in an era where there and maybe it's not so different than now.  But, there was, there wasn't so much expectation that you know, and, and, the evidence of all that, that was around that, that these kids have a shot.  So they weren't teaching them with that expectation that you are going to be great, you, you can be whatever it is.  Don't dream, don't think about anything outside of that.  I remember, Ms. Apger, we were choosing, choosing classes for high school as we were winding down middle school.  She would, we'd go in and speak to the counselors independently and they'd look at our transcripts and help us decide.  And she had, she, she had, quizzed us when we returned to class, and, and so she turned beet red, she--kid Sergio Camacho nicest guy in the world and one of the best students in the class.  And they had put him in for horticultural studies.  Basically he was going have horticultural studies as a high school major.  It's like they didn't even look at his grades it's just you're a Latino you're gonna pick grapes, you know.  And she turned beet red, she went down and she cursed (laughter) she cursed those people out and she came back red, you know.  She was just like--she had clearly devoted her life to, to creating opportunity and, and, and, and you know, helping people maximize who they could be.  And she was frustrated by the system that, that was in place.  So, anyway junior high was a great time, of, of great discovery.  Another fellow was the, the counselor, Oscar Morgan [ph.] was his name.  Slender man, kind of, he kind look like the actor, what's the fellow's name, Morgan Freeman, you know.  Slender you know, very affable, clearly (unclear)--he was the school counselor.  Now one of the, he took a special interest in me I don't exactly know why and you know I had, you know some of my classes were in, in the school office there.  But because I was in the office I was hearing more of what was going on and you realize that you know there were you know kids that were pregnant in the school.  And you were learning that--not--they weren't--gotten pregnant in the school.  But, they were you know, they were, that they had learned it, you know there were drug issues and things I had, I, I, I wasn't naive; I knew at that those things were around.  But, this was the first place I'd been where they actually had a, there was a school guard, you know.  There was a policeman that worked in school and that was a strange kind of and he was armed, (laughter) he was a real policeman you know.  I, I, I never had to think about really before because Holmes Avenue was a little village.  And now we're at these different places and you know, you, you'd walking through gang territories, don't leave too late after school, because you might walk through the wrong street and get beat up or robbed or something.  And so it just changed my, my view of the safety of the world.
Story_ID: 569164
Speaker 1: How did you avoid falling into some those traps?  You know, of being involved with gangs and drugs?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well it was plenty prevalent.  But, I, I had you know when you're living in place like that you see the whole life cycle of drugs.  You see how people start you see the middle phase you know if there's such a thing as a high period.  And you see the crash and so I knew that I didn't want to be any, any of, any of that.  So it was just a manner of common sense and so self-preservation.  I had also had a, a ton of examples you know.  I my--an aunt that I never knew, had died from a horrible accident.  She'd--had fallen on some glass and bled to death before she was probably twelve or something.  Before she could be treated, so I this story was very hurtful you know so this lost was hurtful to my [maternal] grandmother [Alyce Owens Dandridge] so, I, I knew this story.  Of course my mother [Christeale Dandridge] had died very early and so my, my thinking was that, if something happens to me, it won't be because I didn't maximize every chance that I get, that I'm not, that I'm, I'm not gonna leave any stone unturned and, and if something happens it's because it just happened it won't be because I wasn't ready.  But, there were so any examples of the Sergio [Sergio Camacho (ph.)] example where you could do everything right and you're still you know cast aside.  So, there was this, this drive and part of it was just fear, you know.  When you're looking around and there's literally death all around you, you know.  Literal death, someone shooting somebody, someone overdosing on drugs, the first person I ever knew I knew a person--I was six years old--who overdosed on drugs, you know.  The person wasn't six years old, she was maybe nineteen, but I knew this person.  And so I, it gave me a very early understand of, of the tenuous nature of life.  And that was it was something to be cherished and that you had to work at it.  It, It wasn't going to be handed to you.  You had to work at it, if you wanted anything out of it.  So, with that as a, you know a template it made life pretty easy, work hard, stick with the right group, be the best you can be and it seems to have paid off--
Story_ID: 569165
Speaker 1: This was in the '60s [1960s] and the Civil Rights Movement was going on and, and you alluded to the Watts riots also.  Did it, did the Watts riots affect you in a big way?
Speaker 2: Well, in a direct way, yes.  Because now to get basic food you know we had to walk the you know maybe it was a half mile to the, the small little it wasn't really a supermarket but, you know but it was the next source of food.  I mean that was a regular you had to do that every you know--.  But I think the bigger thing was it, you know as a child you shouldn't have to see buildings burning, you shouldn't have to hear gun shots.  You shouldn't have to have the National Guard or police squads and--
Speaker 1: I guess what I was asking you know mentally and in your home what did your [maternal] grandmother [Alyce Owens Dandridge] to say about all that was going on?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was the learning of what was going on?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the, the, the first learning was that you know, because she had, had the kind of life she had had, was to protect these children.  And so, you got an appreciation while other kids might chasing the, you know, the police car, or the ambulance or whatever, that, that wasn't gonna--that's not where you're going to be.  But, I, I think that people that live in places like that [Watts, Los Angeles, California] are so precariously perched on the edge of failure that, you know, the, the, the, that it was, it was just one more psychological but even if you nothing to do with any of it you weren't touching it in anyway, it was going to directly affect you your day to day life.  Of course, it became very much a police state thereafter.  So, that was you know that was affecting your day to day life.  But, but it never affected so much the expectation, on my grandmother's part, on us.  It was just one more thing you had to you know negotiate through.
Story_ID: 569166
Speaker 1: Now tell me more about your days at, at Edison [Thomas Alva Edison Junior High School; Thomas Alva Edison Middle School, Los Angeles, California].  Did you become more actively involved in different activities?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, well there's so much more to junior high school.  I was involved with the stage crew we'd you know, we'd, I'd do lights or I'd do the sets or.  I remember really this, I'd, I'd always loved to read, but I was--my first year there I, I found I really enjoyed writing.  And, and so I had written something 'The Terror of the Timbers' [ph.] was the name of the piece, and it was sort of a horror thing, you know.  And, and the teacher just fell in love with it, you know.  She'd put an anthology of all the students works and mine was the first one in there it clearing better way better than, the, the other things.  But, it was this idea of this, this concept of conveying your ideas so that other people could see the image, they could see the images that you see that that really excited me, got me very excited.  And, it, it, it, so happened that my, an uncle a man Bob Goodwin [Robert L. Goodwin], who was married to my [maternal] great aunt, my [maternal] grandmother Alyce [Alyce Owens Dandridge], her sister Della [Adella Owens], who is, she's like my mom now.  She had always taken care to expose us to things and that whole word exposure it huge in my life.  These people that made sure I had exposures to things. So Bob, the man she was married to at the time, he was the first black man to sell scripts to episodic television.  So he wrote the pilot [sic. "Love and the Hustler"] to 'Love, American Style' he wrote some 'Bonanzas' ['Bonanza'], he wrote some 'Big Valleys' ['The Big Valley'], he wrote some 'All in the Familys' ['All in the Family'] there's a show called 'The Outcasts.'  He was, if you go to UCLA's [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] library today and you want to learn how to write a western, one of his works will be there, okay.  And this was my uncle, and at that time, he had taken his savings and was producing his own film and it was called 'Black Chariot,' well he involved family members.  Well, when he would write these stories for television, he would use family member's names.  And I was upset because he would always use people other (laughter) so you the character would be you know Denise was in the bar and did this that and the other.  Well, there was never Tim [HistoryMaker Timothy Lee Richardson] in the bar.  So, anyway but it was so thrilling that we'd all gather around the television set to see you know 'Bonanza' and it was by Robert L. Goodwin.  And it--so he was a huge influence in that way and then I later actually lived with he and my Aunt Della through high school [University High School, Los Angeles, California].  But, so Edison was, was it was just a time of exploration, it was a bigger pond to swim in.  And, and I seemed to be pretty good at some of these, these things.
Story_ID: 569167
Speaker 1: And so you graduate from Edison [Thomas Alva Edison Junior High School; Thomas Alva Edison Middle School, Los Angeles, California] in--
Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventy- '73 [1973]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is this when you moved to live with your aunt?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes you know--I've given you a little flavor for the area.  Now, when I graduated from Edison, based on where I lived there were two high schools I could have gone to.  One was Jefferson High School [Thomas Jefferson High School, Los Angeles, California], where my Uncle Louie [ph.] had gone and the other was Huntington Park High School [Huntington Park, California].  And I, I think the family got together and there had been riots at one of the schools you know late in the school year the year prior and you know there'd been, basically it was sort of like this kid need a chance.  And, he's not gonna get a chance in either of these two places I mean we'd just might as well phone him in now, phone his life in now.  So, they (unclear)--the, the adults got together and discussed it and said well they, my Aunt Della [Adella Owens] and my Uncle Bob [Robert L. Goodwin] they had four children.  And loved my cousins we always got along really well, and so they said well great, come to go to high school [University High School, Los Angeles, California] with us.
Story_ID: 569168
Speaker 1: You were going to tell me a story about how you were gonna move to your aunt's house.  But, what about your brother?  Tell me about your brother.
Speaker 2: My brother Lee [ph.], Lee as far back as I can remember the, you know, we're a year part, I'm a year older.  And there was, I, I at the time I just thought it was little brother annoying things, you know, things that he would do--I was probably part of it too.  I had come to learn as I got older that, that he actually had a disability a learning disability, pretty, pretty serious one.  And so, initially, initial this--my Aunt Della [Adella Owens] has been--after my mother [Christeale Dandridge] died and they were close in age I think she took a special interest in us, to see that we would be okay, sort of stepping in anytime she could.  So, with Lee and I'm not sure again a kid with disability, learning disability which they didn't even really understand at the time.  In Holmes Avenue Elementary School [Los Angeles, California] (laughter) and, and Edison Junior High School [Thomas Alva Edison Junior High School; Thomas Alva Edison Middle School, Los Angeles, California] was you know basically he was, he was doomed, you know get a comfortable stand on the corner somewhere.  I mean that a bunch of knuckleheads in a room, there was not much teaching going on.  And so, again the family got together and elders and said look you know we have to do something here and so they, they air lifted Lee out during junior high school and he went to live with my Aunt Della.  Got tre- you know excellent care and diagnosis and you know small classrooms and actually my brother couldn't read, you know.  And, and that was part of the problem was that he couldn't make out what he was looking at.  And of course in the, the prior school setting you're just dumb, you know.  So, anyway that was the first bit of diagnosis and, and that kind of thing for Lee.  And so, he--we were separated, he went off to, to live with Aunt Della, you know and Uncle Bob [Robert L. Goodwin] and the cousins and you know.  And this is the all-time coolest aunt, now you ask what we do on weekends, there was always something that--now they lived closer the beach so that was a common thing.
Speaker 1: What, what part of, what area?
Speaker 2: West Los Angeles [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: West Los Angeles (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they, they, they always because of my Uncle Bob, it always--first it was the Westside [Los Angeles, California] that was like oh, chichi, this is where you know, the, the black middle class lived was on the Westside and then they moved from there to Malibu [California].  And so, they were in Malibu.  And you know, I remember stories about Lee Majors would send Farrah Fawcett by to pick up a script for 'The Big Valley,' you know and that kind of stuff.  And they had a private beach.  I mean it was private because there was a lock on it, but I mean.  But, you'd go to the private beach you know, and you'd go to the beach period, you know.  What a, what a wonderful thing, so it was, it was fairy land to get to go to Aunt Della's house.  And it was always calm and there were no sirens, and there was no, no threat that anyone's going to do anything to you.  It was just wonderful and so, they moved from there in '69 [1969], they moved from Malibu to Bel-Air [Los Angeles, California].  So, for future generations who won't get this reference there's a television show called the 'The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air,' my brother Lee and I are the original fresh princes of Bel-Air, we went from the projects to Bel-Air.
Story_ID: 569169
Speaker 1: Anyway Lee [ph.] was there and, and I, I--Lee has the biggest, most loving heart of anybody I know, always has.  But, Lee today is a living on the streets of La- Las Vegas [Nevada] somewhere, you know.  And I don't even, I wouldn't even know how to get in touch with him, okay.  But, at the time we, so after Lee was there, he was there maybe a year before I was.  And then when I transferred to high school now this would have been University High School [Los Angeles, California].  And, and again this was a few years ago, so this was in a time of, of, voluntary busing you know.  Back in that period Boston [Massachusetts] was having all the riots behind busing you know all that, so L.A. [Los Angeles, California] didn't want that to happen, so they maintained a certain ratio of racial balance they would have to be, it would have to be enforced.  So, the, the buses would pull up, largely with kids from Baldwin Hills, which is another area of Los Angeles.  And bring, these, these kids and, and they kind of walked on egg shells you know, it's like am I allowed to be here and all that.  Of course I knew I was allowed to be there 'cause you know I could walk home if I wanted to.  It was really an interesting thing to observe when I got there.  Now, this was another huge transition I went from a school that was Latin and black and poor, to a school where I was going to school with the, the movie stars kids.  And you know I mean just it and, and of course was in the drug era when it was much more permissive.  They kids were growing marijuana in the horticultural department because the teacher was sort of oblivious, and they were, they had whole farms.  It I just saw how life can be different for a person and, and of course I always wanted the best for myself.  So, it's like oh you can have a better way to go.  And, and it was at Uni that of course my, my cousins had gone there before. My, my older cousins and, and my cousin Kathy [ph.] is two years older, so she was like my big sister.  She had all these beautiful friends and I get to hang out with the beautiful girls and they had cars and I can go riding with them and it was, it was super.  And my cousin Chip [ph.], John [ph.] was by that time in college and so he had a car, working and also he'd take me places.  So, I, I was, I was in high cotton as they say, just having a good ole time.
Speaker 2: Now, in spite the fact that, that Edison [Thomas Alva Edison Junior High School; Thomas Alva Edison Middle School, Los Angeles, California] didn't have such a great curriculum, you still were, were a pretty good scu- student?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So did that continue--
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) once you got into this environment?
Speaker 1: Good, good question, actually what I learned was that what was good by Edison standard, when I got into this, this environment where these children had been bred from birth to go to college, that I was behind, I mean behind them.  And so, it was sort of a shock because my, I was always a, I was in the top tier and now I was somewhere down in, in the bottom, not the bottom but somewhere in the middle.  And I also, it was a very strange thing because where I had felt this, this, this nurturing connection with several teachers and was, there were, you, you could feel it this palpable support.  My experience at the high school was that you know some of the administrators they were looking under rocks trying to find you know students, that, that didn't belong in the district to ship them out, you know, particularly the minority students you know.  And so, they were trying to con- in fact trying to confirm that that Bel-Air [Los Angeles, California] address was my address and wanted to visit and see my clothing there and what have you.  So, this was a very different experience and in many ways, now it was certainly not safer in junior high and in elementary [Holmes Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California] and in, in that living environment.  But that sense of belonging and that sense of, of what's the word I'm looking for?  There, there, there's this, this selfness that, that, that, I felt every day in those places I knew the rules I got to this new place and there were no life, there were no safe houses, no people you could--familiar sounds or smells or any of that kind of thing.  I wasn't afraid you know I wasn't worried about it, but, it just it was, it was really different.  I mean went from, from the one school to the other that was largely Mormon--it was an interesting mix, Mormon and Jewish, they were the two larger you know sub-groups there.  And you know there's no real--for this tall skinny black kid there was not a lot of quarter for you know you know, no, very limited social circles whereas the whole school was my oyster prior, now, where do you fit?
Story_ID: 569170
Speaker 1: It was a great time and the experience, and from there I had taken this art interest.  And how it happened, there was somewhat of a hasty enrollment my first semester and there was a teacher that all the students hated, Jerald Chive [ph.] was his name, red headed, big block headed man.  And he had a lisp and Jerald Chive ran the jewelry pro- there was only one of two schools in the, in the City of Los Angeles [California] they had a jewelry making--not you know  beads and trinkets I mean legitimate jewelry making design you know.  And none of these students were taking this, this concept very seriously they didn't have the skills, the interest they were kids you know.  And this was high-end knowledge you're dealing with you know acids and you know molten metal and so forth.  So, anyway he had this reputation for being incredibly strict and so no one took his classes.  And because I was a late enrollee, there were a lot of spaces so my first semester I had three jewelry making classes.  Only because you know we had let's get the school year started then we'll put you where else you need to be.  From the very first day we hit it off like this, I had this art interest then you know, he was looking for serious students.  So, ultimately when I graduated I became the--each department would name the ou- most outstanding student, put, their name in front of the school [University High School, Los Angeles, California] on a plaque you know, each year.  And my name was on the plaque, I couldn't believe that I was actually on the plaque in the front of the school, for, for jewelry making.  But, from there I had been given an apprenticeship while I was in high school to work in, in Westwood [Los Angeles, California] at this, it's no longer there but--.  Westwood is right adjacent to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], and it's high-end shopping, and that kind of thing.  And I had a, a career day and the, the jeweler there like me so much and saw that I knew what I was doing and invited me to come and work there after school and then later in the summer and then you know on.  So I mean my sort of jewelry making universe picked up from there, so.
Story_ID: 569171
Speaker 1: I want to go back just a little bit, and you were talking about the two different communities.  And the kids were able to be bused in from Baldwin Hills [Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, that's come to light--'Baldwin Hills' I know is a new television show all about Baldwin Hills and how they play it up on television today is that this was a black middle class neighborhood (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Was it that way then?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so talk to me about Baldwin Hills?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, in, in at that time Baldwin Hills had gone through a horrible dam breach and it had flooded a good portion of it and I think that would have been in the you know mid-'60s [1960s], '65 [1965] maybe, '66 [1966], so it you know.  Basically many of the whites who lived there--and it was, it's prime real estate overlooking the city--had moved out.  They also had a huge concentration of, of, of apartments there.  That area was known as the jungle, because it was like one apartment after another sort of like the projects actually.  And so, anyway that was a large concentration of blacks there because as the whites moved in you know they'd (unclear) for the house.  And so, the black middle class folks moved in.  And that was I guess the nearest concentration so that the school could meet its quota of minority students and not have, be involved with the mandatory you know law.  So, that was where they came from.  But, it was these were kids, but it was interesting because these were you know children of doctors and other you know, you know working people.  And but they, there was this mystique about going to the school, you know.  It's like oh, kids walking on egg shells and not really living, not being themselves even.  Just you know there would be little, little clutches of people whispering and talking.  And I'm thinking this doesn't feel right.  So, but the campus was beautiful I mean it was nothing like I had ever seen.  It had, it was built, it was originally Warren G. Harding High School [Los Angeles, California], but it had rolling, it was built on--the main building on a hill and it kind of rolled out the back.  And they had a creek that ran through the campus and they had a huge horticultural area as I recall.  We were horrible in sports--Uni [University High School, Los Angeles, California] was horrible in sports they used to call them Puny Uni and they'd, they'd get whipped by everybody, it was (scoffs) anyway.  We'd all go to the games and things.
Story_ID: 569172
Speaker 1: What other activities in high school were your, did you grades pick up and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they, they, they kind of stabilized you know.  I, I went through several bits of culture shock in that first year kind of figuring out where I fit and that kind of thing.  And also, realizing that you know I really was gonna have to perform to, to rise.  But, but I hadn't really been, I had, no one had talked, I knew that going to college was a good thing.  But, I didn't know how to get there, (background noise) I didn't know--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: All right so, by the time you--at--are you now looking for a way of going to college?  Because you said there was no one--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --there to really guide you?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah I, I think that had I stayed in the, the--Edison [Thomas Alva Edison Junior High School; Tomas Alva Edison Middle School, Los Angeles, California] and gone onto whatever the local school would have been, that I would have been in the top tier of whatever, and then you know even if my skills weren't up to the par with, with the top students at University High [University High School, Los Angeles, California], that I probably still would have you know, that, there would have been an expectation that you're the best that we have, by God get out there and do it.  In this new environment it was like you know it I, I sort of had the sense that you're, you're being cast kind of aside you know.  And, and it was just strange because all of my life up until that point I had been in the center of things and, and that it was like well no there's a new game here.  The other thing that I had to idea with, well see up until that point I had never known anyone that had money you know.  I mean you might have a car or a job but I mean my next door neighbor was Esther Williams.  And you know I caught the school bus at Alan Alda's house I mean that's, that's different (laughter), way different.  And so, that--all of this was a learning curve and great lessons for the rest of my life.
Speaker 2: Who were some of your friends at school?
Speaker 1: Well, that was the other thing you know and, and because we all came from the same place in elementary and junior high, I had tons of connections and friends.  And, and in this setting of course the, the high school that's a cliquish period anyhow, but now you had further divisions by religion and by color.  And so you know there were no other black kids on the school bus (laughter) and there, and there was sort of a curiosity but what I basically learned was that it took me until my high, my senior year to realize there're great people everywhere you know.  There's you know, there are knuckleheads everywhere (laughter), I didn't know that you know I was kind of learning.  But, there weren't a ton of friend because you, you, you had limited access outside of the school day.  There were you know because they went off to Baldwin Hills [Los Angeles, California] or they went off to where ever they went off to, they weren't living on my block certainly.  So, my friends really became my family, my, my four cousins, two younger and two older.  You know my brother, you know and then you know we, we I was very, became very interested in jewelry making, so I followed that, that thread.
Story_ID: 569173
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, who were some of the, the children, your classmates?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Were there any star children that attended that school [University High School, Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: Oh, tons, Della Reese's [HistoryMaker Della Reese-Lett] daughter attended there, we weren't, she was younger so, we didn't really hang out or anything.  But, Sammy Davis' [Sammy Davis, Jr.] band--E.G. Rhodes [ph.] was her name so, George Rhodes was his, his bandleader.  And she was, she was fun.  And but, but the real issue wasn't so much the people it's just that, that, the, the new dynamic was that after the school day was over you dispersed to, to the four corners, so it wasn't a natural way to get together.  And of course the real friends were my cousin Kathy's [ph.] friends and she had some, some really neat girlfriends and they were a little older so that first year was, was wonderful.  But, that was the circle that was it.
Speaker 1: Did you pursue your, your drama, at this school (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, no never, never pursued that, but the, the artistic piece was the, was the jewelry making.  And I mean I took that to the highest level, far beyond what I thought.  It was like I had, I had a teacher [Jerald Chive (ph.)] that actually was connected and concerned, so that I had an interest in you know it, it really worked out well.
Speaker 1: So, did you go to the prom, did they have a school prom?
Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't you know when I got to high school I, I, I recognized that, that you know I was sort of there on a pass.  You know I was living with my aunt [Adella Owens] and uncle [Robert L. Goodwin] then I knew that you know they were doing their best to, to--but I didn't want to eat too much, I didn't want to you know I'm just glad to be here, kind of a thing.  And what I remember, I, I remember graduating from high school and the prom was happening and I, I was adding it up in my head, okay that's going to be, it's going to mean an outfit, that's gonna mean all these fees.  I said it was good enough that I graduated, I'm happy that I graduated.  I don't need all that, I would love to have had it, but I didn't know where to go ask for it, so and, and I'm sure had I asked they would a way, but I, I wasn't going to ask.
Speaker 1: So, what year do you graduate?
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976].
Story_ID: 569174
Speaker 1: You said you didn't have anyone to help you decide on college, so what happened in, in that vein?
Speaker 2: I was, sort of half seeing this girl Laura Smith [ph.] and she had two sisters and anyway they lived on the Westside of town [Los Angeles, California] but they--both parents had graduated from UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], the father was a teacher and kind of sort of a quasi, pseudo, revolutionary type, at least in his mind you know.  But, he was intently focused on you know uplift and you know and so he would you know drum it into your head, you're going to go to school, you're going to go to school.  So, we--I was over there and now this was August after high school graduation [from University High School, Los Angeles, California], and I didn't know what I was going to do.  I mean I was working, I was a jeweler, I was making good money for a kid I had my own car you know this was big deal.  But, I didn't exactly know where I was going to, to be I knew I needed to be in school, didn't know how to do it.  So, Laura's mom, Elsie Smith [ph.], never forget her, the most loving, gentle woman, smooth face and--.  She, but long story short is Elsie said, "Tim [HistoryMaker Timothy Lee Richardson]," and I'd always go over right about you know Sundays--drive over right about four or five o'clock on Sundays, knowing that dinner's going to be on at six.  And I was--they would say why don't you stay and they knew I was going to do that you know.  So, we had a little talk as we would have and she said, "Tim, what are your college plans?"  And I said, "Well I don't really know," and she said, "Well I'll tell you what.  You can have dinner tonight, but don't come back until you can show me that you've enrolled at the community college."  And I fretted about it.  I didn't know what to do, how she, she says it's real easy, and there were two right nearby. But, unless you can show me that registration form that's like your meal ticket to come back.  So, I bit the bullet and I went down, I took all the tests.  I said that was so easy and you know so the, the rest is history, from there I went on.
Speaker 1: So, what school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I attended West Los Angeles community college [West Los Angeles College, Culver City, California], and it was a new work campus it was really like the thirteenth grade you know.  It was, it really hadn't progressed I mean they were in bungalows and, and what have you.  But it was a time of just tremendous discovery one I was, I was in college.  And, and I realized where, where, where I was, while I was in high school, I didn't really get a sense that I was all of that, that I could I, I, I was at the top of my game or that I was you know, that I belonged.  I got to the college and it was like oh, I, I, I'm back into fitting in again.  I, I understand this, I'm I, I, I can max this game out--
Story_ID: 569175
Speaker 1: The other thing that we were talking earlier about from, coming from the sort of the hard side of town there was this fear, you know it's like don't look down, don't look back, keep moving forward you gotta keep swimming you got to keep your (unclear), your legs paddling.  And so I'm now in the swim, you know I'm moving ahead it felt great.  First semester did okay, my [maternal] grandmother [Alyce Owens Dandridge] died that year and I had never known that kind of pain, I never really had loss you know.  And I just collapsed I actually I was working at the jewelry shop, the, the manufacturer, manufacturing company [Innisfree Manufacturing, Inc., Los Angeles, California] and my Aunt Della [Adella Owens] had and uncle [Robert L. Goodwin] had called with this news and I listened to it and it didn't really register and I said well thanks for calling you know.  And the, the owner of the company pulled me to the phone I went back to work, it didn't even register.  And I got there working I'm, I'm polishing you know ten thousand dollar diamond piece you know and it hit me and I just let go you know.  And this thing is raveling around, making a clutter of racket and you know and so forth, and of course they don't want me on the floor, messing up these pieces.  So, anyway they sent me home and but it was, it was the, the defining moment because I realized I was alone in the world from that point and I certainly felt that way.  And I took all of my pursuits much more seriously thereafter, this is what she would have wanted after the loss that she had experienced with her, you know her kids and so forth, so.  It was a, it was a turning point it was the worst thing that ever happened, worse feeling I ever had.  But, it was the best thing to happen because it was like she passed the baton to me at that point, like, okay, I've given you all you need, go, go get 'em.
Story_ID: 569176
Speaker 1: What was the name of the manufacturing company that you were working for (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was called, it's no longer there, it's called Innisfree [Innisfree Manufacturing, Inc., Los Angeles, California], Innisfree and I learned that was a park near where the owner lived and it kind of had a catchy name, but Innisfree jeweler, jewelry manufacturing.
Speaker 1: How, how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: I-N-N-I-S-F-R-E-E, in fact I just talk to the owner.  He taught me a lot, Jewish guy, who he was a young guy, really young, he wasn't a whole lot older than I was.  Neil Aronow was his name and he has a big jewel, diamond place in downtown Los Angeles [California] now.  But, what I learned from this guy was focus he was as direct and earnest as you could be and in that business it's all relationship and your word and all that.  And he gave me a chance you know and he taught me, and but the best thing he ever did was he modeled, see when you come from a place like I did, when there aren't the traditional you know role models so you there's no daddy to look and there's no, you know not a lot of healthy people around you know.  You learn to filter one quickly who's, who's on your side, and who's not, who can add value to what everyone has something they can teacher you.  And you learn quickly to determine what those things are and to build relationships to get this knowledge and, and these exposures.  Well, Neil was one of these guys, he had his own business, he was the youngest of three partners but he ran the, he ran the show.  He was, now he smoked like a little chimney (laughter) but I learned the importance of your word from this man.  And (unclear) I called him recently.
Story_ID: 569177
Speaker 1: You talked about back in high school [University High School, Los Angeles, California] about the religious makeup of the school, but did your family attend church?
Speaker 2: My--when I was with my [maternal] grandmother [Alyce Owens Dandridge] we would go rather infrequently.  And, in our family it's really more about how you live in the spirituality that you, you live by.  So, there really wasn't a lot of church going as side from funerals and you know the odd wedding but, no I was say no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So what happens how long do you stay at West Lo- West Los Angeles community college [West Los Angeles College, Culver City, California]?
Speaker 2: Well, I was by that time I had my own apartment so I was working and I stay there in the process I started playing basketball for the school.  And so, I, I finished in three years, it was a two-year program, but I was also working so, I finished in two years with a business--associate's degree in business.  But, the, the coach had said if I had come back for the following year.  'Cause now, now mind you I don't know what I'm going to do next I mean I just know that there's no safety net.  There's no mama to go home to, there's no you know you're grown now.  So, I knew I had a job and I was going to finish up.  So, the coach, great guy, Charlie Sands, said, if you come back and play for me one more year, my second year of eligibility.  That he would guarantee that and this was the hon- most honest man I ever met.  And, and he would guarantee that I'd get a scholarship somewhere and he knew coaches all over the place.  So, I came back and played for him and made up some of the first semester grades and all that and I made all conference and you know which was amazing 'cause I had all these other guys played in high school.  I just started playing in college and I had three schools come calling.  And one, my best friend we met the very first day of college, Bob Williams [ph.], my, my best friend today.  He's out in Louisiana.  Bob had played on the team and then gone on to Chapman University was Chapman College then, now Chapman University in Orange County, California [Orange, California].  And I had been out to visit him a few times and so Chapman was one of the schools because they had met me and, and Bob was well-respected, we're gonna get another Bob you know.  And I wound up going to Chapman, so it took me four years, so it was '76 [1976] to '80 [1980], I graduated in 1980.  And then I went on to Chapman University.
Speaker 1: And what did you major in at Chapman?
Speaker 2: Well, my plan had been to study geology, which is the closest to gemology that a college offers it's the same, it's just the study of you know gems, rocks and minerals.  But, they had changed the program between when I left West L.A. yes, long story short is I switched from geology to business.
Story_ID: 569178
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty [1980] you go Chapman [Chapman College; Chapman University, Orange, California] and you, you were telling me that you changed your major to business?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, how long did you go to Chapman?
Speaker 2: I ultimately graduated from there in 1986.  I had to drop out, I run out of funds you know I had played there one year and one year of eligibility and that covered my expenses then and I was able to go back to take like half a semester and be able to, but it's a private school I had no backup and support.  And so, ultimately I wound up taking you know one odd class after another at night and you know this place and another.  And that's what I could afford and ultimately in '86 [1986] got my degree.
Speaker 1: Where you still working at Innisfree [Innisfree Manufacturing, Inc., Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: No, no, no I had moved to another county by that, that, that's the colleges are in two different counties.  I, I was introduced to the Boys and Girls Club [Boys Clubs of America; Boys and Girls Clubs of America] movement through my experience at Chapman.  It was a work study they knew I didn't have money to go to school.  And they said this is the only way that you can come back is if you sign up for work study.  Meaning that you work and a percentage goes to the college and you get to keep you know a very small percentage.  And so I signed that and I started working at the Boys and Girls Club [Boys Clubs of Tustin; Boys and Girls Clubs of Tustin, Tustin, California].  I had done work at a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] when I, as a younger person, loved it.  And from the very first day that I walked into the Boys and Girls Club I got their mission, I got what they were trying to do, I completely bought into what, what they were doing for families and for kids.  And I guess in some ways it was, it was the place that I never really had myself.  But, I saw that they were trying to improve the lives of all these children and I wan- I wanted to be a part of that.  And I, I immersed myself in it, and have had no regrets.
Speaker 1: So you began work- and you, you continue to work for them?
Speaker 2: Yes, that, that was my start twenty-seven years ago.
Speaker 1: And what was your first position?
Speaker 2: Part-time assistant something it was (laughter) it was not really much of a position.  But, it was I guess appropriate for an entry level position.  It was, it was you know most people co- would have considered it like a summer job almost.  For me I saw the bigger picture, I saw what having caring adults around these kids and these kids were you know this was Orange County [California] now.  This was a coming together of all my prior experiences.  Orange County had the perception of being you know wealthy and, and but these are hardworking lot of single parent families, lot of dual income families but barely getting by.  And they needed a place for their kids.  They saw it as you know a place, safe place for their kids.  But what I appreciated was that this was, this was a place for these kids to maximize their, their--they didn't have to be great students, they didn't have to be anything, they just had want to be there and, and go by the rules.  And they had a chance to be with people that wanted the best for them.  And most of them really gravitated toward that.  I--this is the place for me.
Story_ID: 569179
Speaker 1: So, this as you said allowed you to continue to go to school and take those classes (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Nods head) Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, at Chapman [Chapman College; Chapman University, Orange, California], do you remember who the president was?
Speaker 2: Yes, G.T. "Buck" Smith, yeah.  He was one, he and his wife [Joni Smith] they just, they, they you felt like they cared for you.  You felt like they knew your name you know.  It was a small campus maybe two thousand students.  But, I remember some of the early activities.  He would actually seek me out.  And sit down and want to talk me and tell me about yourself?  And then really seemed to have an interest in my, my wellbeing.  But, it was another one of these, these--had I not gone to University High [University High School, Los Angeles, California] and been then through that culture shock situation it would have been that all over again in Orange County [California] at Chapman.  I mean at the time Orange County was point 1 percent black, .1 percent black.  And these were, this was a small private school, liberal arts school.  I remember my very first night there I was doing laundry and one of the fellows saw me and, and doing laundry.  And he's quizzing well where you from and I'm telling me and then we're talking.  And I'm thinking we're making, building a friendship and he says, I said well I'm here and I'll be on the basketball squad.  And he said, "Oh," one of tho- one of those, like one of those, like dismiss you like (gesture) you know.  So, okay you know that's what I'm in for.  But, it was a place of great discovery I mean I, I ran for, I was a student body senator.  I ran for student body president, I lost by like twenty-five votes to a frat [fraternity] guy.  'Cause the frat guys all vote together.  Gosh, I wrote for the, the school newspaper, I played basketball on the, on the squad.  I, I mean I, I was on--the president had like a, a cabinet if you will of students he would get advice you know from them.  I mean it was a, it was such a small place that it was easy for me to be in the middle.  I could do all the things I always wanted to do, you know.  And, and I just thrived and flourished there.  I mean I didn't have to worry about food, my goodness I could go and eat all I wanted every night.  I could--so it, this was wonderful thing.  I had a car oh my goodness so I'm a big man on campus now, you know, this is heaven.  And then I'm there with my best friend [Bob Williams (ph.)] for crying out loud.  So, we had a, we had a great time there.
Story_ID: 569180
Speaker 1: And is this where you met your wife?
Speaker 2: No, no, I met Rosemarie [Rosemarie Richardson], she was bringing her nephew to the Boys and Girls Club [Boys Clubs of Tustin; Boys and Girls Clubs of Tustin, Tustin, California].  And you know there were you know the, the social scene really wasn't--well it wasn't I didn't feel there was a lot of opportunity for dating and such I didn't feel that comfort in that environment [at Chapman College; Chapman University, Orange, California].  And so, she had come in and she was, she had just gotten out of the [U.S.] Marine Corps, she was an air traffic controller and she was bringing her nephew in, who was six or so.  And quizzed you know quizzed him about his mom and she, "No that's not my mom that my aunt."  "Oh really," you know.  One thing lead to another and we started dating and seeing each and--.  And at that was period where I had, I was working now full-time for sustenance.  And I was now out of school.  I, I had--that was the period I had to drop out, you know I just I couldn't--
Speaker 1: Was this about '81 [1981] or '82 [1982]?
Speaker 2: This would have been '83 [1983] maybe, eighty--early in eighty--'83 [1983].  And so, I felt very broken I felt you know I felt I'm a failure you know all that my [maternal] grandmother [Alyce Owens Dandridge] expected from me, and all that I expected from myself.  I and I wanted to go to that finish line and I was on the path, I was performing.  I didn't have, I didn't have a nickel, I didn't have a nickel.  And so, I, I, I said to myself as a twenty-two year old, or twenty-three, I guess I don't know how old it was then would say.  I said well you know okay I, I can't be a college graduate like I wanted to, or at least in the way that I, I.  So, I'm going to be a good dad and I'm gonna be a good family man.  I'll move into this phase of my life, I close one chapter and, and head this direction.  And so, about a year later we were married.  So, we had Damon [Damon Richardson] and you know and, had a little life and bought our first house and, and thereafter my son Bradley [Bradley Richardson] was born.  And so, you know when it's a choice between feeding your son Bradley or going back to college you feed your son Bradley, so.
Speaker 1: And what did you wife do for a living?
Speaker 2: She worked at a computer company and this is at the advent of computer technology and they had some kind of a thing called disk handler, it's a computer machine, and small company and I believe they're out of business now too, but that's what she did.
Story_ID: 569181
Speaker 1: What was your next position because now you're working full-time?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, you know the way Boys and Girls Clubs [Boys Clubs of America; Boys and Girls Clubs of America] work is each one is its own little business if you will.  So, I, I was now I think athletic director, so I oversaw you know all the sports and fitness programs.  And having been a college athlete that was a very easy job to, to fulfill.  But what happened about, now Orange County [California] then probably now was one of the most expensive places in the country to live.  When I was single no problem, do I have a tank of gas you know I have some peanut butter I can make it, right.  I'm loving what I'm doing, I'm active I'm having a great time.  I'm helping people, and (unclear) this is heaven.  Well, when you're married and then you now have a child and you now have a home and you know the mortgage company wants that check every month.  I couldn't, I could--really couldn't--I couldn't afford to stay in, in the work anymore.  And so, I was looking for other jobs and I--it was killing me because I, I loved it so.  But, I wound up looking for I--anything that would pay more basically.  I looked at the police department I looked at, I, I had known all the policemen in that small town and their dying to get me to join them, their still friends some of them.  I looked at sales, I looked at anything that would pay more.  And long story short was the word got out and my reputation had gotten out in the wo- in this Boys and Girls Club field that I caught the eye of someone--there was new money that was created from the, the 1984 Olympics [1984 Summer Olympics, Los Angeles, California].  And they were looking to hire positions to teach across the country.  Well, here it was, here's this opportunity to, to do more, see more, be more.  And so, I, I, I rather than have me leave this work, this, this position paying more, paying at least as much as what I would have been paid on one of these other jobs, allowed me to stay in the work.  So, here we are.
Speaker 1: So, you stayed in Orange County?
Speaker 2: Well, actually no, the, the regional office I, I've now left the local Boys and Girls Club [Boys Clubs of Tustin; Boys and Girls Clubs of Tustin, Tustin, California] for a position at--the regional office at that time was in North Hollywood [California].  So, paid more but now I'm commuting, it didn't make sense to sell the house because my wife [Rosemarie Richardson] was working and all that.  So, was commuting sixty-six miles each way to, to work.  Well, you know we figured we'd try this new thing out and see if it works and but it was killing me and killing our cars and but I did it.  Great exposure, really hard on a marriage.
Speaker 1: So tell me what did you do in your new position?
Speaker 2: Well, I created the position there, the, the job was to perpetuate Olympic sport in the Boys and Girls Club movement.  We'd received these funds as a result of the torch run, so they basically wanted to, to have more clubs that had great athletic facilities and a good number of the Olympic teams have come out of the Boys and Girls Club.  But, by accident you know we have pools, we have gyms, we have athletic directors, we have competitions but there was no feeder system leading towards the Olympics.  So, the idea was to connect those dots.  And so, the real goal was a good number of the clubs that had been involved with the torch run around the country were saying we want to see some service for this involvement that we had.  So, almost immediately they gave me a credit card and sent me on the road.  And I was flying to Memphis [Tennessee] and Atlanta [Georgia] and points beyond teaching these courses on how to do more with what you already have to involve more kids in sport.  Great job, great chance to see the country.  Great chance to hone my skill as a trainer and connect with people.  So, I did that, again real hard on a young family.
Speaker 1: S- so what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, we were divorced you know.  And it was, it was a hard--as divorces are, it was a hard thing to have happen.  And my son Brad [Bradley Richardson] was probably about five at that time.  And at that period in my life I was really clawing f- to get that next rung.  Again as I said before you know I was, I had been running up until then, running don't look back, don't look down, just keep, keep running, you know, run, run, run forward.  And so I kept, kept running you know kept running towards the next, the next ring, the next 'cause that's--you need money to do all the things you have to do.  But it was, it was difficult time, it was a big loss.
Story_ID: 569182
Speaker 1: So, you continue to, to do the, the training--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for how long?
Speaker 2: Well, really one position bridged into another.  After the divorce, there was a position at the New York [New York] headquarters that oversaw all the training and all the sports development, and all the programs for the country.  So, it was a natural position and the head of the department said we've had our eyes on you for a long time and it you'll take the position we won't even list it, you're the guy if you want it.  So, you know it's--on paper it seemed like more money and I certainly something I could do and do well.  And took the position and went to New York, and there I was, doing the job, yeah.  Redefined all of it, I just it, all these new places they just presented opportunities--in, in the same way going to the high school [University High School, Los Angeles, California] was this bigger pond and then going to the college [Chapman College; Chapman University, Orange, California] was a bigger pond.  Well, here was this, this work bigger pond and it was like, my gosh, I can influence literally millions of, of the health of millions of kids.  And that was a huge turn on to me, certainly fitness since I had sort of a chubby kid you know.  Not as (unclear)--you know my [maternal] grandma [Alyce Owens Dandridge], you know my grandma's--grandmas don't encourage your kids to run around, mine didn't encourage me to run around so much.  Just eat and you know be nice and sit at home and that kind of thing.  So, you know when I got to college and, and I was able and I was even in adaptive PE [physical education] in junior high [Thomas Alva Edison Junior High School; Thomas Alva Edison Middle School, Los Angeles, California], I mean that's like the lowest rung.  You, you, just you know, do you have a club foot?  Do you have s- what's your problem you know?  We'll take you right.  We're gonna go bowling, that's gonna be our PE class.  I mean that was where I was.  And to get to college and make the college team you know, you know.  And then then all the exposures that came from that meant so much to me.  And, and I, and so the thought that I could now help children with their--not only fitness but their, their self-esteem.  And all of that kind of thing, through the programs I would design through the corporate partnerships I would bring.  It was again this, this ex- this rush of excitement, wow I, I'm in this incredibly influential position.  Now, don't muff it, don't you know, don't muck it up.  So, anyway I took the job and immediately made some great changes.  Not too long after that there was an opportunity to work with Nike [Nike, Inc.], Boys and Girls Clubs [Boys Clubs of America; Boys and Girls Clubs of America] to work with Nike.  And it had come to us from a local Boys and Girls Club out in Oregon.  But, Nike said we're a much bigger company we'll continue support you, but we want to, we want to have more of an impact around the country.  And so, you know I was relatively green but they really liked my ideas.  And one thing lead to another we got a small relationship, maybe $10,000.  It went to $100,000. It went to a million and the million wound up being a $5 million relationship, which was the biggest relationship Boys and Girls Clubs at that time had, had ever had.  You know I was in the center of it, I was making this happen.  Now, I had resource I had the vision, I had the connections to make some of these things a reality.  So, as a result we were able to double the number of kid- Boys and Girls Clubs was able to double the number of kids that were involved with fitness and sports from 1 million to over 2 million in a matter of about four years, which was unheard of and a huge focus of that was getting more girls active.  Because about that same time the organization became Boys and Girls Clubs of America and it had formerly been Boys Clubs of America.  So, local clubs were looking for ways to involve more girls, so I designed the mechanism to help, help make that happen.
Story_ID: 569183
Speaker 1: Tell me more about the, the history of the Boys Club [Boys Clubs of America] and then the Boys and Girls [Boys and Girls Clubs of America] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: 'Cause we didn't go into that--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but that's important to know.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: So, tell me a little history?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Well, Boys Clubs of America was started a hundred years ago, just celebrated its hundredth anniversary and the, the focus, it was started by three women in the Northeast.  And the focus was basically to provide a safe place to during the non-school hours where they can r- they can, rise to their fullest potential as, as individuals.  So, there's all manners of activities focused on the kids interest.  Taking their interest and, and at the same time weaving in their needs.  Well a hundred years ago it was they need to know you know skills, employ- employability skills, so they teach them sign painting.  At the same time they might need to know hygiene might have been an issue.  So, while they want to sign up for the maybe the sports league you'd weave in those things that they need to have.  And the, the idea is just mushroomed we've been opening a new Boys and Girls Club gosh a new site every business day for the past six or seven years.  And it was--when I realized the, the, the what the real focus of the work was which was to help every kid that walks in feel a since of belonging, a sense of competence and sense of influence and usefulness.  I said gosh those were the things that help round those corners as a kid that I needed.  But, now there's a place you can go to do this.  And now, I'm in a position overseeing all of these clubs.  And, and one of the, the prime ways the kids want to come in is through their, their sports and fitness and activities.  Gosh I'm in a very important position that, to, to, make this happen so.  So, Boys and Girls Clubs has been around a hundred years.  We've got, today we've got over four thousands sites, serve over 4 million kids.  It's primarily focused on kids from disadvantaged circumstances it's a building centered operation with a full slate of services.  Technology center so a kid from South Central L.A. [South Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], where I grew up, can go in and there's no computer in the home.  Well, they can go into a computer lab (unclear) learn computer skills, there may be no computer in the school.  But, there's one at their Boys and Girls Club.  So there's a full slate of needs and interests, activities staffed by professionals and volunteers and it's, it's just all things wonderful for the kids that need it most.  Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] has a Boys and Girls Club she opened one, Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] opened a Boys and Girls Club in their hometowns.  The most exciting thing is when you, get to meet some of these kids that grew up--Bernard Shaw was, was a kid in Chicago [Illinois].  And they talk about don't look at me today, when I'm Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], who's a Boys and Girls Club alumnus.  Don't look at me when I'm you know Bernard Shaw, look at me when I was little, little Bernie in the South Side of Chicago.  When I was little John, John Singleton, little shy John Singleton, the film director, at the Boys and Girls Club in South Central L.A.  And I went to this place that protected me that make me feel safe, it saved my life.  It, it helped me realize who I was and gave me a chance to try new things and be a success.  And to note that it's being replicated now, it's on Boys and Girls Clubs are on every [U.S.] military base in the world, that's my present position.  I oversee that relationship.
Story_ID: 569184
Speaker 1: So, did you leave New York [New York]?  When did you leave New York?
Speaker 2: Yes, b- the, the organization [Boys and Girls Clubs of America] moved down here see it would be fourteen years ago, so that would be '93 [1993] I guess.
Speaker 1: So, from about '88 [1988] to '93 [1993] you were in New York?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Yes, yes and yeah it was, it was I wish someone had told me about Atlanta [Georgia] before now, before then 'cause I love it, I tell you.  Sense of--there's a sense of people have manners, (laughter) you know, it's affordable.  I, I love it, there's neighborhoods I mean it's really very nice and beautiful with all the trees.
Speaker 1: So, in 1993 they have this new initiative with the [U.S.] military bases is that right?
Speaker 2: Right, well actually it was '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: Ninety-one [1991]?
Speaker 2: It was during Desert Storm [Operation Desert Storm] and now I left out a whole chapter of my life.  What I tried to do is, is maximize every opportunity, you know.  I'm, I'm not looking back, I'm not looking down, maximize every opportunity.  And so, I realized that every other national youth group was a part of the U.S. Olympic Committee.  And so, why aren't we on there?  You know I'm in charge of sports and fitness, why aren't we in there?  And so, I filled out the paperwork and did all the, you know hearings and all that, so, got us into that group.  And then since I was there if you're in the group you have to be on the board.  So, then I was on the board of the United States Olympic Committee, our job was to prepare the Olympic team, okay.  But, the magic of the Olympic team is, how big is the feeder pool?  So, here we had at the time I don't know 2 million kids involved with sports and fitness, that you know were heading, we, we could head that direction.  So, we started some great initiatives to, to develop and culti- we had several kids make Olympic teams that came out of our program.  And again, here's another whole bigger pond.  Now, I'm sitting next to Henry Kissinger at an Olympic Committee meeting.  Or, I'm sitting next to you know Harvey Schiller, the head of the Olympic Committee, who's taking me under his wing as his you know little mentee.  And it just--it's changing, it's changing the world again, okay.  So, there was some, there was some connection between the Olympic world and the, and the well of course the Atlanta hosted the Olympic Games [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia].  And I was the Maynard Jackson--(laughter) like I sh- can speak in the same sentence as Maynard Jack- be spoken about in the same sentence.  But we were both the envoys--that created a position of envoys were basically problem solvers prior to and during the games.  And of course now I'm, I'm working with Maynard and he's taking me under his wing and cultivating me and growing me and teaching me.  And I still sit on his foundation's board, his youth foundation's [Maynard Jackson Youth Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia] board.  So, this whole life has been about getting in bigger and bigger ponds and learning, using the same skills of, of, of paddling in deep water, to, to greater and greater success.
Story_ID: 569185
Speaker 1: So, after the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia] is when, well no, you actually got involved in the Atlanta [Georgia] project, or the [U.S.] military project after the Olympics?
Speaker 2: Well, no it was prior to, during, that, that was the connection.  In the [U.S.] Olympic Committee there are all these generals because you know the young--the military is all young people that are fit and active and they can feed into the Olympic team.  The Desert Storm [Operation Desert Storm] war [Gulf War] was, was brewing and that had broken out.  And I'm sitting and these are my colleagues now, so we're sitting around over lunch and I'm saying I don't know what Boys and Girls Clubs [Boys and Girls Clubs of America] can do to help the soldiers, but we want to help.  And, and we don't know either, but come to Washington [D.C.] and we'll let you sit with someone and you can work something out.  And so, what came of those discussions was a national outreach effort, we provided free childcare services for any military person or active duty, or reservist anywhere in the United States at any, at any one of our Boys and Girls Clubs, no question asked.  You get a free year of services, which is a huge relief on, on the, on those families going through that stress.  Of course that was a very short war.  And it was our effort Boys and Girls Clubs' effort had been hailed as one of the top project that had ever been done of its nature.  And they said we want to do more, but you never asked us for anything, you only wanted to help, and from that, started negotiation with each branch of service.  Now each branch I don't know if you much about the military, but each military base is, is like a little city; they're completely self-sustained.  They could lock the gate and they could thrive.  They'll have schools, they'll have everything for families and, and supermarkets and what have you.  And they have youth centers because they need a place for the kids to be after school.  Well, these places are immaculate, they're spectacular facilities.  And what the military really liked about Boys and Girls Clubs is we're excellent in program development.  And we can go to Corporate America and find support to underwrite these great initiatives.  So they said we can't do that, we would love to make use of these great programs.  We'd love the trainings and conferences you folks do and we love that you make grants available to your local sites.  We want to be a part of this camaraderie and magic that the Boys and Girls Clubs has.  So, from the, the, the Desert Storm outreach project and we served about eighteen thousand kids.  Which was you know we'd never done anything like it, but I invented that connection.  But I still had these military friends from the Olympics so you know through them I met the right people and one thing lead to another.  So I negotiated this arrangements with each branch of the military so that all of their on-installation youth centers became Boys and Girls Club affiliates.  And that partnership represented a 20 percent growth of Boys and Girls Clubs you know the overall number of Boys and Girls Clubs.  So, today there are a half million mili- children of military dependents in countries as far away as Bahrain or Korea [South Korea], or, or Cuba, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and they're using the same Boys and Girls Club programs.  And if that doesn't give a person a sense of pride, hey, it, it does for me anyway.
Story_ID: 569186
Speaker 1: Some of the places that you just mentioned, where you have--on [U.S.] military bases, where you have Boys and Girls Club [Boys and Girls Clubs of America] we were talking off camera about, about Cuba.  And if you can describe the situation there and show how crucial it is to have a Boys--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and Girls Club there--
Speaker 2: Surely.
Speaker 1: --tell me about that?
Speaker 2: Well you know as I said every military base in the world has--their youth, if they have youth living on their base they have a youth center and those centers are now affiliated with Boys and Girls Clubs.  Though the services that during the non-school hours are vital for those kids, if you're in a foreign land you don't speak the language, you can you know, you, you, you, you--may there may not be a pro-America sentiment in, in, in, in the community in the state.  You know, you, you, you're moving every couple of years anyway as a military family, so you have all of these, these elements challenging you.  So, you know in Cuba, you were interested in that, I was there recently and this place of course their hostilities are still high between United States and Cuba.  The Cold War never ended there.  It's of course even higher stress level with the, the, the detention center there from the war.  And, so these families and children are asked to pretend that everything is normal while security is at the highest level ever.  You're in a hot, humid climate you can't even leave the base [Naval Station Guantanamo Bay, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba], it's surrounded on one side by water and the other side by the, the Cuba, the Cuban countryside.  And you know these kids are stuck there, and so, my job for the Cubas of the world, the Bahrains of the world.  The Ko- Koreas [South Korea] of the world, is to add value and, and opportunities for those young children.  In fact just this week a young woman in Ramstein Air Force Base [Ramstein Air Base] in Germany was named our S.T.A.R. Award--Major League Baseball sponsored an award that recognizes sportsmanship.  So, this young woman and her parents will be flown to the World Series to enjoy a week with the commissioner and meet the players and so forth.  And she, her essay was above and beyond all others, there were some thousands ones of ones were submitted.  So, my job is to be the broker of the things that we do well to our military partners.  To make sure they get their fair share of resources and opportunities and certainly we do trainings for them.  It's a great job.
Speaker 1: Now, in each country that there's a Boys and Girls Club, is it Boys and Girls Club of Germany--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of Cuba?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well we're chartered by [U.S.] Congress, Boys and Girls Clubs of America is chartered by Congress.  And so, we actually can't open a facility--I'm also in charge of international projects.  So, I get probably fifty requests a year from around the world saying we want one of your clubs in our country.  We can't do that, we're not licensed to do that, but because a military base is U.S. soil we can work with them.  And, there's no greater pride that a person can feel than helping the families and kids of these soldiers, sailors, airmen and marines that are out there with literally their lives on the line.  And to know that you're bringing some comfort to that family because they don't have to worry about where the kid is.  And you're adding value to them.  It's probably the most rewarding thing I've done in my life.
Speaker 1: So actually it's Boys and Girls Club of America because it's on the base--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --which is considered American--
Speaker 2: Yes, soil.
Speaker 1: --soil.
Speaker 2: Yes and actually it--different services handle it differently, so it might be the Ramstein Air Force Base youth center, a Boys and Girls Club of America affiliate, it's a long title but they have their own it, identity before we came along.
Speaker 1: I see and who supports these--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --different clubs?
Speaker 2: Well, in the United State the traditional clubs, each local club is its own entity so they have their own boards of directors and they find corporate funds, donations, fundraising event and so forth to, to keep the doors open.  In the military that's--it's a function of the base in the same way that the aircraft mechanics are or whatever, so their funding comes completely out of the federal budget.
Story_ID: 569187
Speaker 1: What's next for you?
Speaker 2: Wow, great question.  Well, I am recently married to--
Speaker 1: Congratulations.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much, very recently in the past month to Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] professor, digital media artist, filmmaker, international filmmaker [HistoryMaker] Ayoka Chenzira.  Who's also a HistoryMaker (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A HistoryMaker, yes.
Speaker 2: Yes, and we there's no collusion here we, were not, weren't married at the time, so.  But, what, what's next for me is I keep referencing this business of running, and you know, not looking down, and not looking back and of that.  Well, I can finally stop running, this woman is--ah, she's all things wonderful.  And so, it makes it a joy to go home.  Makes it a joy to plan our next adventure together.  That's the next big thing and you know my, I have a son, Bradley [Bradley Richardson] I reference earlier, I have a, a daughter Camille [ph.] and she's fifteen in boarding school up at the Lawrenceville School [Lawrenceville, New Jersey].  So, at some point, I'm not pushing it, but at some point I'll get to be a grandpa.  And Ayoka has a, a daughter who's married and Haj [Haj Chenzira-Pinnock] and her husband, Tyrone [ph.] live in New York City [New York, New York], so they aren't, they're jet set, business types right but at some they'll, they'll give us a grandkid and that will be the next, the next phase.
Story_ID: 569188
Speaker 1: Is there something that you haven't done that you would like to do?
Speaker 2: Well, there's so much need in the world.  I've been my, my, my basic fabric is geared towards helping, helping someone.  Because so much, so much has happened in my life because of little interactions with people, helping--people have helped me see things in a different way and in a simple conversation.  And there some much need in the world.  I do know that my vision is that whatever it is is going to impact large numbers of people.  That's what energizes me.  I, in my in the international part of my job, I, I consult countries as they try to start something like Boys and Girls [Boys and Girls Clubs of America] and so I'm excited about one project that's starting in South Africa.  It's going to use our model, modified of course for, for South Africa, it will be in on township, in the townships there.  And the idea is to take local, local culture and local dynamics and basically create safe places, because there are no safe places in these townships today.  And you know I'm still working out the kinks and I'm working with locals on the ground.  But, to take this knowledge this career of knowledge and have it continue to help children someplace in the world is somewhere in there.  But, I think the other piece of it that you know because of the way, I, I grew up I, I never really felt that I could, I could, I could and stop and smell the roses.  And I know that, that's a big part of what's coming up is just walking some, walking a lot, walking my dog, okay.  So, that, that's what next, I guess the other thing is figuring out how to just be a greater impact for good 'cause there are a lot of bad things in the world.  And in most situations there's a, there's a point at which the thing goes south and it goes bad.  Or that it could be something better and to identify more of those.  Don't exactly know what, in what realm they'll be (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well--
Story_ID: 569189
Speaker 1: What are your concerns for the community?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well we live in the greatest country and I've seen countries all over the world, I've lived in countries all over the world.  We live in the greatest economic power in the world.  Once we legally got past some of the, the poisons and evil that--from slavery forward.  You know I came from that generation that we were the first group of folks that you could, you ask me about my favorite saying, success comes in cans, you could actually think about going to college.  You could think about owning a home wherever you wanted to do.  You could--there were no legal restrictions.  But to think that today in my country, our kids, a good number of them are not taking advantage of the, the riches that are before us.  One of the, the, the, the thoughts I'm still playing with but, there's a, there's more young black in prison than there are in colleges today.  That's the golden ticket, education and knowledge, yet right at that point where that kid, that community, that whatever could have gone one way or the other it didn't.  And those kids are now, I'm not going to say they're lost but their way off track.  That's something I'd like to, to devote more time to, I, I'm on the board of a, a group called the National Guard ChalleNGe [National Guard Youth ChalleNGe Program], a GED [General Educational Development] program.  It's a second chance for kids that have been washed out of schools and they earn their GEDs.  And they have to, they have a mentor plan for a year after when they graduate.  And they have to have either school lined up--a trade school, a career a job something before they'll let them go back to their, to their home community.  Huge success, sixty thousand kids have been through this program it should be six hundred thousand kids because the dropout rate is at an all-time high, for black and Latino kids.  It's right around 50 percent dropout of, they don't make through high school. And there's a lot of factors in there you know I think maybe some of this No Child Left Behind [No Child Left Behind Act of 2001] might be in there somewhere.  That school, some schools that the low road and just dismiss kids that are under performing.  Because their rates will still look good and they'll get their, you know, their raises and such.  I don't really know what the whole problem is but I know with all this wealth that this country has there's a college on every corner begging for students.  You know my wife [HistoryMaker Ayoka Chenzira] is a professor at one of these schools, yet something's happening to derail these kids early.  If I could impact that, that would, that would be one of those things you could put on my tombstone that I'd be additionally proud of and in addition to what I've done with [U.S.] military and, and other groups.  But, there's too many we're just, we're just giving away.
Story_ID: 569190
Speaker 1: If you look, look back over your life, is there something that you regret or something that you would change?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, let's see.  (Pause) Well, things that I would change, things that I have done, I, I don't really--I can't think of too many, you know.  I mean had I, had I had the bigger magic wand and I could have changed some of the circumstances you know.  Some of those, those financial hurdles or you know exposure hurdles of whatever, but I would have done that.  But, that wasn't within my control.  I am about as happy a person as you're going to interview with my life, and Jackie Robinson said no life--life has no value except to the extent that it, it impacts other, it helps others, and I absolutely believe that to be true because I feel that I'm the most fulfilled per, person on earth.  And for the past twenty-seven years [with the Boys Clubs of America; Boys and Girls Clubs of America], I've been helping people be their absolute best person, their best selves.  So, I guess the idea would be to do more of that.
Story_ID: 569191
Speaker 1: And you're getting a lot of help from stars or, or people in the public eye, who have gone through Boys and Girls Clubs [Boys Clubs of America; Boys and Girls Clubs of America] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Nods head) Yes.
Speaker 1: You, you mentioned a couple, but I know that Denzel Washington--
Speaker 2: Yes, great guy.
Speaker 1: --has a book out that talks about his, his start in the Boys and Girls Clubs.
Speaker 2: Yes, funny you should mention the, the book is called 'A Hand to Guide Me,' Denzel Washington's first book.  It's a New York Times [The New York Times] bestseller.  I think it was number six as high as number six on the list.  The celebrity types I alluded to a few of them earlier I mean everyone from Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], to John Singleton, the director, to Jackie Joyner-Kersee to Joan Benoit Samuelson--they're, they're in all walks of life.  And I've never been in a room with ten or more people where one person didn't stand up and say, yes I was a member of a Boys and Girls Club but also they say, had it not been there for me, I would not be the person I am today.  So, yes these people Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] has opened a Boys and Girls Club, Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] opened a Boys and Girls Club in Plains [Georgia].  It's interesting, for, for a number of years maybe eight or nine years I oversaw our Alumni Hall of Fame so I had to research I had to find these people.  And in fact the Denzel book I helped research that book, find some of these folks to be interviewed.  What's so exciting and further e- further draws me into this work is, to a person it's almost script they say, don't look at me when I'm head of a company today.  And when I'm a congressman today or you know and Olympic athlete or Michael Jordan today, who's also a club alumnus.  Go back to when I was you know shooting there with no hoop on the back in the Boys and Girls Club director to let me, let me practice and to help no get with the wrong crowd and, and that kind of thing.  And it's, it's the same story, you can just change the name, of the, of the, of that, that person.  And to think that I'm a position to help those magical people, I'm such a small player but if I can help them do a better job, I, we, we change the world, change the world.  You--as you entered the building you saw our alumni hall of fame wall.  Try it sometime.  Mention Boys and Girls Clubs to just--in a room of ten people and amazingly it's never happened once, where someone didn't say, I was there and it helped me, not only helped me, but it saved me, it kept me from bad situations.  It was the safe place, safest place in my town during the non-school hours.  How can you beat that?  It's, it's interesting 'cause it's a product of this great country.  In, in that this concept I'm in charge of international projects, this concept won't work in some countries because of the, the dynamics between the rich and the poor and the, the all manners of other issues.  In this country you have the people of means in a community or, or in the country we have some of top business leaders in America on our board.  And they give above and beyond what anyone should be ever asked to give.  And we don't ask them, they're happy to do it because they see the results.  It's sort of the best of what this culture can be.  And it's where, it's kind of this crosscurrent between the haves and the have-nots, in helping the have-nots rise to be better than what the circumstance would dictate.
Story_ID: 569192
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I'm reminded of some of the words of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] about not, not being the big pine on the top of the hill, but being the, you know if you're going to be a shrub on the side be the best dang shrub you can be, he didn't dang but okay.  That some of that, but, but also he talked about you know if, if it can be said that I helped somebody.  If it can be said that I devoted my life to being a good dad.  And making the lives of people better that maybe couldn't help themselves right at that moment then I would, I would feel fulfilled.  But, it's been a pretty good life.
Story_ID: 569193
Speaker 1: Because this information is going to be available to the future generations what message would you like to send to the future generations?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Gosh, I would say, first that especially if these future generations are here in America that the golden ring is there to be had, you know.  And that anything that's going to dis- and I'm, here I am the classic success story, from the projects to the White House [Washington, D.C.].  I've been to the White House three times, at the invitation of the president.  That all things are possible if you stay the course and you, you.  Someone once said success is easy, all you have to do is be willing to do what the next person is not willing to do.  Okay so, those folks that might look around, particularly those folks who might look around and not think that their circumstances would dictate that their dream, their success is impossible.  That, that that person hearing my voice and look at my face and know that it's true, that that dream can come true.  To just stay the course and do those things that other people aren't willing to do.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not talked about that you would like to, to say?
Speaker 2: Wow (pause) just that (pause) my experiences in life have allowed me to see, some of the greatest social change in the history of the world you know.  And I got to see it from the vantage point of an orphan kid, starting out in the projects of Los Angeles [California].  I've been able to be in the company of in, in a working relationships with everyone from you know Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] to you know, business leaders around the country to you know to the icons of, of sport.  And I've lived a fairy tale existence you know. I've lived a fairy tale existence.  At no point would be this be the path that you would think could be possible unless you had this business this--the--that saying in the back of your head saying this success comes in cans.  If you don't think you can, you can't okay.  And, and if, if you won't, you won't be able to see, if you don't see that bigger vision for yourself, it will never, it will never come to pass.  But, the biggest thing is that everything that I've seen a big vision.  I found loads of people that wanted to help me get there, that they wanted to jump in and be a part of that success, people from all walks of life.  So, so to those future generations know that if you have a vision, you have a dream and you're making progress toward, not just talking about it, but taking progress toward it.  That help well come in the morning, there's coming to be help there, you just have to stay the course.  And, and, and have that vision and believe it.  So I guess that would be it.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you so much for taking the time, I know you're a busy man.  That you would take the time to share your story.
Speaker 2: Thank you for your time.
Story_ID: 569194
Speaker 1: Okay, that's my Grandma Alyce Dugan [Alyce Owens Dandridge] and my brother Lee [ph.].  That's probably about 1965.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay that's my Grandma Alyce Dugan [ph.] as a younger woman.  And I don't know that's probably 1950 maybe.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, that's my [maternal] great-grandma Bertha Dandridge on the left and my mother Christeale [Christeale Dandridge] on the right and she was graduating junior high school.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's brother Lee and I with probably the present we got that, that year and in front of our public housing unit there in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: This is my [paternal] great-grandfather Napoleon Stuckey [ph.] and he lived in Kiblah, Arkansas.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good.
Speaker 1: This is my Uncle Charles Richardson [Charles E. Richardson], who's six or seven years older, is down in Macon, Georgia.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This was two visiting generals, Major General Mike Rochelle [Michael D. Rochelle] on the right and General Freddie Valenzuela [Alfred A. Valenzuela] in the middle, we're talking about something or other.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good.
Speaker 1: My son, Bradley Richardson, this was probably taken two years ago, as he graduated from the National Guard ChalleNGe Academy.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is two of the, the domestic senior leadership of Nike [Nike, Inc.].  And their names escape me at the moment.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: Charlie Denson [Charles D. Denson] was one.  That's my sister Charlene, Charlene Richardson [ph.].  It's taken about five years ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This was a with my--one of the early meetings with my father, Irving Mothershed, and his then wife in California this is about fifteen years ago.  That would be what two thousand and--eighty--'95 [1995], '96 [1996] thereabouts.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's Aunt Lizzie Jackson [ph.], who left Kiblah to work in the plants in Oregon.  And that was taken probably another fifteen years ago, probably the year '90 [1990], 1990 I think.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This was at the United States Olympic Academy, I was the head of the U.S. delegation.  This is about the year 1991.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my Uncle Wanny [ph.] is his nickname--William Mothershed [ph.] taken about 1990.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This was a quite a while ago, this was with Denzel Washington, Boys and Girls Clubs of America's national spokesperson.  And he was at one of our conferences (unclear) in Seattle [Washington], probably 1989.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Well, the one on the left is my father as a child, so I have no idea when that would have been.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay I have no idea when that was and woman at the bottom right is my [paternal] Grandmother Irma [Irma Lee Stuckey]--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Bottom right?
Speaker 2: Would have been or was it will be upper right I guess, based on where you are.  But, that's my Grandma Irma, former Irma, Irma Stuckey, and she died Irma Ramirez [ph.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, this one.
Speaker 2: Chapman College [Chapman University, Orange, California] on the basketball squad about 1981.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: With Arthur Ashe probably around 19- oh gosh 1985 maybe.  Well, maybe around 1990, anyway, we've done some projects with Arthur.  God I was young.
Speaker 1: During my jewelry making days, that was how I made my living in someone snap a shot of my hands.
Speaker 2: This was accompanying the Olympic team to meet the president [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] at the White House [Washington, D.C.], it would have been the 1996 Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia] I guess.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Working with the United States Coast Guard on a site visit, this was over in Hawaii.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  This was a photo of all the milit- the leaders of all the childcare programs in the [U.S.] military and this was taken in 2005.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, yep.  This was the first visit to the Clinton White House with the Olympic team.  And with Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] and she actually remembered Boys and Girls Clubs and wanted to talk about it.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION: This is another small one.
Speaker 2: All the neighbors at the Pueblo Del Rio housing project [Los Angeles, California] having water--
