Story_ID: 98193
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Carey Lane.  Sir, could you give us your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: James Earl Reid, R-E-I-D, James, E-A-R-L, R-E-I-D.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 9, 1942.  Place of birth is Stump Hope Farm Princeton, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay now how do you spell that again?  It is Stump?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Stump Hope Farms.
Speaker 1: Stump Hope, how, how do you spell that? S-T--
Speaker 2: I believe it was Stump Hope (laughter).
Speaker 1: S-T-U-M-P.
Speaker 2: S-T-U-M-P, H-O-P-E.
Speaker 1: Oh, Stump Hope, okay.  Stump Hope Farm, Princeton--
Speaker 2: North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, Princeton North Carolina.  Okay.  Is there, is there significance attached to the name Stump Hope?
Speaker 2: Actually what's on my birth cer, cer, certificate is Johnston County.
Speaker 1: Okay, Johnston with a T?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay and sir what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Sculptor.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: August 2nd, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry it's August 3rd, my correction.
Speaker 1: Okay and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At my home and studio.  This is my temporary studio for now.
Speaker 1: Okay in Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 2: In Baltimore City, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 98194
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask.  They are "People" magazine-ish type questions and they just require a short answer.  First one is sir what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food--I haven't the slightest idea, seriously.  Fruit.  I love fruit.  I can binge on fruit and nuts.  Fruit and nuts.
Speaker 1: Okay, do, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I would say spring and, spring and fall.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I've never vacated, va, gone on vacation.  But, if I did I would--well I'll tell you what I used to do I used to go back home to North Carolina when I was a kid.
Speaker 1: Okay, now the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or, or saying?
Speaker 2: A phrase or saying I used to say to my students: "You're the artist."
Story_ID: 98195
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Pernell, P-E-R-N-E-L-L, Barnes, B-A-R-N-E-S and that was her maiden name and last husband she had was Roland White and so her name became Pernell B. White.
Speaker 1: Okay, when was she born and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in North Carolina and I would have to imagine in the same general area was I was born.  I don't know exactly what county, but--
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --pretty much around Goldsboro [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a date, birth date?
Speaker 2: It's either June, I'm sorry June 15th or--I haven't visited my mother's birthday for a long time now, but June 15th, 1921, or June 15th, 1922.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's questionable.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How, how far back can you trace that, that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, what I know is that my mother's father evolved out of North Carolina and they were primarily sharecroppers and I, you know, experienced some of that as a child myself when they would work in tobacco fields, work in cotton fields and on the property they some white overseer and, but I imagine they got their own farming in too.  You know they had some of their own things, but they were pretty rugged strong people at least what I can remember and pretty straight forward.  I remember my grandmother, Hattie Barnes.  I didn't experience my family but so much as I, you know, experi, I visited the side when I was a child, but Hattie Barnes told me once that you know, you know I was the man of the house and this of course years after my mother had separated and left my father.  His name is John Lee Reid.  She left him when I was two years old and moved here to Baltimore [Maryland] and at the time my grandmother told me that she was actually visiting us for a period of time, stayed with us for a period of time and in essence it was my house.  I actually had bought it, first house I had bought when I was 19 years old.  I moved my family out of the projects.  We lived in the projects in Cherry Hill and, but my, the statement my grandmother made was significant for me and it was my house and she said, you know, and there was no father there.  There were suitors to my father, to my mother, but no father there and--
Story_ID: 98196
Speaker 1: So you grew up basically away from your father [John Lee Reid] right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did, did you spend any time with him at all or did, did you have any interaction with him?
Speaker 2: I only had interaction with him once when I was a child.  He came upon me in North Carolina when I was visiting and asked me if I knew who he was, and he said he was my father and he proceeded to offer me a quarter and I refused it.  And that's earliest time of interaction, probably the only time until I was an adult when I made an effort - this is a few years actually before my mother died - I made an effort to see him and when I was at my aunt's funeral in North Carolina and I asked to see him and he came, came around and saw me and so that was a reconnect.  My, I was deliberate purpose on my part was to reconnect and acknowledge him and acknowledge my roots and who my father was.  Fathers--I grew up without a father, but fathers are very important in my belief and I thought it was important for me to know him some, begin to know him some.  My mother [Pernell Barnes White] died two years after that.  I think he had been trying to reconnect with her, though he was married and had another separate family.  I have a brother, one stepbrothers and sisters, totally new family and the--is it possible to stop I'm--
Speaker 1: Yeah we can pause.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So, that connection with my father was very important.  Reconnecting with my father was very important and 'cause I have son, I have a son and my son had a son and so I wanted the generational connection and my concern and what I acknowledge for myself is that fathers are really important and particularly in the black family where they tend to be absent as my father was absent in my life.  But, I found out through reconnecting he was a pretty good guy.  He wasn't as bad as my mother said he was,
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in fact at his funeral he must have been very, recognized very popular because he had a full house at his funeral, so he must have been very significant in his own way and stood out in the community that he had everybody, he filled, he packed the church.
Story_ID: 98197
Speaker 1: Now did he, did he [his father, John Lee Reid] talk about his family much to you?  Do you know much about his family and what they--
Speaker 2: Most of what I know is from mother [Purnell Barnes White] and of course my own experience in visiting.  My father's brother, for instance the story is that he walked I don't know how many miles, but a great number of miles to the doctor when I was sick with double pneumonia, and he was that kind of guy and, and the, my, not my grandmother on my mother's side, but my grandmother on my father's side was pretty mean.  She was very mean to my mother, and probably the reason why they separated.  And, and, but I recall going to my mean grandmother's funeral and you know was there, you know, sitting with the rest of the relatives and there was two pretty girls, digressing with the story, there were two pretty girls in front of me and I kind of like took a liking to them and did not know that they were my cousins.  So, when we got out I was, outside of the funeral I was pretty disappointed.  But, they were, the Reids were basically pretty good people, you know, and I'm proud to be a Reid.  I'm also proud to be from the Barnes side of the family too.  I think the Reids might have been a little bit more successful than the Barnes, but the Barnes were stronger in my eyes and in, in character, at least I had more of a relationship with the Barnes side of the family, my mother's brothers and sisters and even shared part of their, their own growing up because they were only say eight years or more older than I was.
Speaker 1: Now, now did you--is there a story about how your parents met that they told?
Speaker 2: I haven't the slightest idea.  The only kind of stories I have in that regard is the fact that my mother worked at, in Goldsboro [North Carolina] in an insane asylum and you know, and that might have rubbed off on me, I don't know, I doubt it though (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did she have stories about working there or, any good stories about working in?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah but I can't recall them really, but I, I do recall that fact that she worked at one.
Story_ID: 98198
Speaker 1: Are there any stories passed down through the family on either side about, about the past or, or the history of that region of these families that you remember?
Speaker 2: They just--there were just characters in my family to me that were folklore characters, type characters.  I had a mean uncle Fate that was--
Speaker 1: F-A-T-E?
Speaker 2: F-A-T-E, that, my mother's brother, that was pretty good to me.  I stayed with him one summer and you know he was quiet, but very mean, very mean.  He was, raised hell all the time, a really bad man in terms of relationship with others.  He lived alone by himself in a little shack.  The things I can remember is that they were all at that time, at that period they were all kind of more less living in shacks, little clapboard, you know, housing and Fate's little shack was very small like one person and I had an aunt Eldora (ph.) who had a larger shack, her and her husband, Bill, I mean aunt Eldora.  See I can't think of their name now, but another aunt.  But, what I--the, the--see there was Donnie (ph.), there was Eldora, and I'm trying to think of the very heavyset one that sort of set, he house set way back in the woods and they were just characters.  I mean to me as a child they were just char, they were real characters like aunt Donnie and I know the real perpetrator was aunt Donnie herself, but they both, probably both made and sold moonshine.  And I remember her taking a gallon of moonshine and sticking it up her dress to hide it when the police came, that kind of thing, but I also remember that the hospitality and food was great.  The corn they cooked was fresh.  The chicken they cooked was fresh, freshly killed and so the food was always very, very tasty and very good and that's the most important part of my memory is that, the hospitality and the food was really good.
Story_ID: 98199
Speaker 1: Okay, now did, did you have any other siblings--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have a sister.
Speaker 1: --from your mother and father?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have a sister--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and her name is Leora.
Speaker 1: Is she younger or older?
Speaker 2: She's two years older than I am.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so your, your parents had the two of you and then they split up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How old were you when your mother moved to, when your mother moved to Baltimore [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Two years old.
Speaker 1: Two, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's right you said two years old.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you really basically grew up in Baltimore except for the time that you were visiting--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in the summers?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, spent most of my life here more of a Baltimorean than a North Carolinian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 98200
Speaker 1: Now is there--do you have a--what's your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory?  I have various memories I can, but you know the memories sort of dissipate as you get older.  The kind of memories I have was in, I live in the, before I moved to Cherry Hill [Maryland] I had lived in the Banneker Homes and, what's, what's called the Banneker Homes, which is near the Maryland--(unclear)--, what was in the Maryland--(unclear)--.
Speaker 1: Named after Benjamin Banneker?
Speaker 2: Yes, Banneker homes.  They were project government homes that we lived in then, and I remember incident of having to go to church and I went by myself and in going to church I had to cross the railroad tracks in going to church and when I get there my experience in church wasn't that, it's more frightening than, than, than bringing me into the church because when you know, when women would jump up and start shouting and falling out in the floor it, it sort of frightening me more than engage me and so that was the beginning of ali, really my alienation from the church.  But, I always felt as a child and as an adult that really didn't need to be a part of the church and because I've always had what I consider a special relationship with God and, or the higher power or the higher being and, and I always felt special because of that.  And you know--as, as, as, as I child I had the ability to, to explore.  I wasn't contained as much children and in certain locations, but where I lived it is generally an open area and so I had a lot of opportunity to explore and explore my imagination and in a sense see the world, to see the world from, from my young perspective and I began to ask, you know, what I considered heavy philosophical questions, you know, very early, you know as I stood and looked out at the world.  You know, what I, what for me was a major philosophical question was who am I and then why am I here, you know, and--
Speaker 1: That's interesting 'cause very few people admit to that or even say that and I've always wondered why people don't wonder that, you know.  In all the interviews I've conducted hardly anyone says that.  It seems like it would be the first thing you would think, think of to say, tell yourself, to ask yourself what, what are we doing here, yeah.  But, you know, for some reason people never think to say that if, if they are wondering that they never--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --come forward with it.
Speaker 2: What follows that is, is to figure out your relationship with other people and how, you know, how that works with you and how you work with that.  This is very important to me 'cause I mean like you know as an individual you look out at the world, at least I do, you look out at the world and you're not looking at yourself, but you're really looking out at the world, so there's big questions, they're big questions to, to know and to understand.
Story_ID: 98201
Speaker 1: How old were you do you think when you first started, you know, as, asking those questions?
Speaker 2: I was around, I would think I was, I'd be six, might have been younger, it might, you know, not much older than six, around that age.  I don't know if I began to go to school.  I just know that I was in a world that I considered to be the world I live in, lived in and the world had particular kind of definition to me.  It was very community-based, you know, very much a black community with white community on the other side of the tracks so to speak away from us.  And then I began to relate with the fact that you know we're in a white world as, as I evolved in a white world when I began to exposure bigger spaces and places like when my mother took me downtown and I'll look up at the building and basically all of, generally the people around you then were white people and that, you know, there's a certain kind of what you, what, what an individual I believe is searching for is his relationship to things, you know how he fits in, you know, and what significance does it have, you know.  But, the thing about being recognizing that you're in a white world you begin to realize the, well at least as a child, begin to realize the issue of racisms and I began to realize it's impact on me and on the rest of us really.  The--I recall as a child then that you know signs were on water fountains white only.  I recall those things, and this was when I was very little.  I recall, you know, trips South with my mother when we'd go on vacation to North Carolina to where my family, extended family was and I remember, you know, riding the train and just that whole feeling, a fabric of, of you know being in a white world and a white society and the difference that we had.
Speaker 1: So, you were checking out the political relationships in the sense of power, who was running, running, who was living where--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in relationship to which your own prospects were.
Speaker 2: Right.  I was a very, very sensitive, I've all, always been very sensitive, very sensitive to my surroundings, very sensitive to my relationships and all, 'cause you always, I mean, like you have to you know be aware of your, of, of those things that oppose you, that are your--I just was a very sens, I've always been a very sensitive person, very aware and very conscious of things in that sense yes.
Story_ID: 98202
Speaker 1: What were some of the--what did your neighborhood look like and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up there?
Speaker 2: In growing up, I mean, 'cause it's progressive but--the sights I remember you know kids, you know, we were, we, we bounded, the kids bounded easily and we began to develop our friendships and, and play, you know, integrate, integrating with each other.  I remember very, some very talented kids.  There was a kid named Tommy Welcher (ph) who was, who should have been, he, you know, a ball player, professional baseball player.  He was very good at homemade base, you know, playing and making homemade gloves and, you know, snatching out the air and all that sort of stuff.  I remember the family across the street from me, the Harts (ph) and, who had the first TV in their home.  We didn't have a TV.  In fact, the Harts had a color TV because they put the color screen over top of the black and white (laughter).
Speaker 1: --Oh that film, that color thing--
Speaker 2: Right, so we (laughter).
Speaker 1: I remember that.
Speaker 2: I remember them watching Joe Louis and Ezzard Charles fight, you know, and we played hard as kids and had good close relationship as kids.
Story_ID: 98203
Speaker 1: Yeah. So, we were talking about sights and sounds and smells of growing up and you were talking about some of the sights and sounds of your neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Yeah--(unclear)--we--you're not asking this questions, but, I mean for me to bring, recall what I remember in terms of growing up for certain is what I consider visual, visual images of, which had to do with my experience and the--one of the visual image of myself with my head, you know, between my, you know, my knees drawn up and my head, you know--(unclear)--and I'm drawing up, sitting out against a telegraph pole and with this really powerful hungry headache.  I, I had my, you know--and I remember my mother coming home from work that day, you know, and saved the day 'cause she had, you know, lugged some bags of grocery which she had some boloney or whatever for boloney sandwich.  Anyway, the point is that the, the, my mother came in and saved the day and the hunger, you know, dissipated.  I remember ex, ex, out of body experiences of levitation and I could fly and I even developed a concept, a sculptural concept from that called Once I Could Fly.
Speaker 1: Now, you're talking about actually getting up off the ground?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean this is something that, that you, you do in a conscious state or, or?
Speaker 2: I don't know what it was.  I only know that I would go into an alter state, basically that tren, whereby I would transcend the, the situation.  I could be as would normally would be amongst other kids there playing, and I would close my eyes and I would rise to the position of being able to see them still playing from above.
Speaker 1: Could you see yourself still there too or?
Speaker 2: Down, no.  I was no longer on the ground.  I was actually looking, I was within my own consciousness looking at the other kids playing below me, and I would at will move wherever I wanted to go and I, if I wanted to go down to the school house area I would go there.  I would just go there and still have that perspective of looking at things from above and, and actually experiencing it and I just ride around at will.  And that, that concept of myself as a child, you know, with the levitating amongst the other, above the other kids playing has evolved into an artistic concept of mine, you know, of once I, of a sculpture called, Once I Could Fly
Story_ID: 98204
Speaker 1: Okay, now what you just described is very unusual and what do you make of that 'cause I mean and, and did other people, I mean do you think it's, it's an internal thing, I mean you only or I mean 'cause what you described is something that if other people--did other people see you actually flying or was it in your own consciousness that you were doing this or what?
Speaker 2: In my consciousness, they saw me flying.  In fact, they turned to look at, check me out--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I don't know what they were experiencing, but I--
Speaker 1: I guess if it was real, I mean they really, if you really were flying in the neighborhood, the neighborhood would be talking about it, you know--
Speaker 2: I imagine.
Speaker 1: --they'd had the news out there as I would guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, but you said in your consciousness this is what was happening.  Now, pe, people describe this similar scene and I read about 'em and I've heard about the people, but they when they describe themselves looking at themselves from above or looking at scene from above as if they're not, no longer bound by whatever--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and, but it's, it's, it's something that had been described numerous times by people, by people--(unclear)--.  I don't know--'cause that's why I asked you if you could see yourself.
Speaker 2: For me that was a great experience, you know, flying and being able to fly and, and I, I characterize it as once I could fly because you know once you become more conscious and more adult and I mean you it seems that your body gets heavier and heavier.  And the, the ability to soar and to, to go outside of yourself and really experience the and view the world in a, in a, in a distant perspective and a really, just really check it out at random and at will I mean it's, it's something that really a child could probably really do as, where as an adult cannot really do because they're so bound by these, the physical self and their own consciousness in terms of their limitation and ability.  You know, ra, you know the child's perspective is freer, a lot freer than what ours is.  I could also run across water, and I actually did that until I became conscious of the fact that I was running across, across water.  I would--there was a drop, what we call a drop near the Banneker Homes where we lived and we played down there a lot and this very exotic bird I'd never seen before, you know, and very skinny, very exotic bird went tu, tu, tu, tu, across water.  It ran across the water.  I saw it and I said to myself I can do that, and I started running across the water.  I actually was running across the water, this little pond, until I became conscious of the fact that I was running across the water.  As soon as I became conscious of the fact that I was running across the water, I sank straight, went straight down into the water and you know this is the kind of freedom and the kind of, to what made experiences as a child in terms of my capabilities, you know, and also the imagination, you know, a very imaginative environment, you know, not the limits or constraints of the city, but sort of open spaces where you have a lot of freedom in terms of experiencing nature as well as experiencing people.
Story_ID: 98205
Speaker 1: So, you kind of think that, you know, you lose something, I guess, when you get older, a certain amount of--(unclear)--when you look at the world or something--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Actually when I started drawing, I mean started my study of drawing, now my serious studying of drawing, I was advised to get this book by an author named Nicolaides, Kimon Nicolaides, "The Natural Way to Draw" and the opening directions of that book is to become a child.  You know, it was very, it was very intensive study, but the very first direction was--well first of all it said learning to draw is learning to see, but you learn to see through your sensory perceptions and your sensory understandings and so you have to develop your senses.  You have to really amplify the development of your senses, and the, so you have to become, be like a child.  You have to get into it.  You have to experience it and not just as most adults do and most individual do period.  They, they experience the world in a detached manner.  They do not experience it by ex, experiencing it, you know, by being a part of it and being natural, being, releasing yourself to, to, so that you really truly can, can experience it.
Story_ID: 98206
Speaker 1: Now your formal study of drawing, I mean, or, as you call it, your serious study of drawing that started later in life, but did you, did you draw like when you were a child?  Did you actually draw when you were a child?
Speaker 2: Yeah I drew, but I drew by copying from the Sunday paper, you know, copying, or copying cartoon characters in the, not only in the paper but also in some of the comic books or someone.  But, my, you know, my actual earliest experience with drawing is actually witnessing my mother [Pernell Barnes White] draw for the kids in the projects.  She'd sit down and draw the houses that we, project houses we lived in, and I saw coming out of that magic and that's what really drawing and experiencing drawing and beginning to see the world in the eyes of the artist is what it is to me, it's magic.  You know, it's just bringing something to life on the page or just bringing, bringing life forward.  It's creating a life of its, of its own aside from the person creating it.
Speaker 1: So, so your mother basically drew to just--did, did she draw just to amuse the kids around or did she, did she take it any further than that?
Speaker 2: No, she never took it any further than that.  In fact, she lost it.  She also said it herself if you don't use it, you lose it, and she lost it, so I mean I was amazed as I, 'cause the magic she showed demonstrated to us in what she could do then, you know, it inspired me enough to, to do it and to, to, to carry it forward.  And when I had the opportunity to really carry, to really carry it forward and be, begin to recognize that I want to really be an artist, I mean, the artist was my vocation, my perspective vocation, you know, I drew upon that, the, the magic of those moments, you know, when my mother would, that my mother demonstrated to us.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a hard time finding materials to draw with or, or on when you were a kid?
Speaker 2: No, 'cause you know, if you know anything about kids they're very resourceful.  They can create a world with practically nothing.  You understand they, they--no, so all I needed was a piece of paper.  I don't care if it was lined paper, with lines running through it or whatever, all I needed was a piece of paper.  You know, the perfection of it as, as, as a product wasn't that important to me then, but only what was important to me then was the experience and experiencing the magic of drawing.
Speaker 1: The reason why I'm asking is because I know, I know and have done, I was my kid myself and looked for shirt, cardboards, or anything I could find to give me--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --at least a surface 'cause we did not have a stack of drawing paper at home--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so you just kind of scrap around for whatever you could get and other family members would look out for you and try to give you something every now and then, they knew you were gonna draw on it--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, so was that a similar experience?
Speaker 2: Right, it's a very similar experience.  There was no draw, drawing pad or nothing, anything like that, that would be purchased from the store.  Now, in my, you know, elementary school period there might be some paper that I might have been able to confiscate from the school, but like I said it could be just plain line, lined paper, you know, or any paper I found that could, that I could, you know, work with and gain the experience that I was trying to get.  But, I found that drawing is the most important experience one could have that learning to draw is learning to, learning to see and, and by seeing you incorporate all of your senses.  It's a very, most important experience you could have in your formative and your professional life experience as an artist.  That's--
Speaker 1: The drawing is fundamental.
Speaker 2: It's fundamental.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's, it's, it's like learning your ABCs.  It's the, it's a calligraphy into, you know, into understanding whatev, ever it is you're trying to draw or the language, learning the, learning the language of whatever it is you're drawing because everything has a language, an implied language visually, you know through its, through its actual subject and form and structure and character and, you know, whatever nuances of light and shade or whatever kind of things and then we think there's a multitude of things to bring into play into a drawing to actually give it some visual strength.
Story_ID: 98207
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now when you-- what school did you go to?  Do you remember the name of your school?
Speaker 2: The, were you speaking of the earliest schools or--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --when coming up?  Well, it was in the Banneker Homes and there was an elementary school I, I'm not certain, but schools went by numbers then and school--I do not know.  I cannot recall, but maybe it might have been school number 42 or something; I'm not certain.
Speaker 1: Okay, well how, how was grade school?  How, how did you like school?  Did you like it or?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'm a, I've always been sort of a different kind of person, you know, you know, and I'm still, I'm still that same individual who was trying to figure out who he is and etc., etc., and what, what I'm here for and all that sort of stuff and so as a student and I was probably was very, very regular in a sense, but I was always kind of shy too, and sort of distant.  I mean, I didn't really, you know, you know, get, you know I didn't raise my hand that often or whatever, I sort of laid back and paid more attention to what was going on and, and listening rather than being active, you know, directly active and what was going on.  And in so a process of discovery, you know, certain things began to open up to you into the world, your understanding of the world and so forth.  I remember certain, a certain kind of experience like the first time I put my hand around a little girl's waist and the excitement I felt and put my hands around her waist, you know, because we were doing a square dance and, you know, and you know I felt that little tiny waist and that lively little girl inside of that dress and, and it was, it was, it was exciting, it was a connection, so a memorable connection so to speak and I forget where we were.
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--distracted you (laughter).  We tal, talking about school--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --yeah and how, how you liked school and you said you, you observe a lot.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I really liked school.  I, I liked school, I mean, I liked, again knowing, learning to know some things and so I think I was--I wasn't an outstanding student, but I think I was a pretty good student.  I've always been a pretty good student, but not really an outstanding 'cause I wasn't trying to stand out.  I was trying to really just absorb and learn in my own way.
Story_ID: 98208
Speaker 1: Could you, could you not draw in class?
Speaker 2: I think in the earlier days we always were encouraged a little artistic activity was always encouraged and when I got into junior high school I had a very exciting art teacher named George Barrack (ph.) who really did a lot for me in terms of letting me know that just what an artist could really do.  You know he did everything.  He drew, painted, did lettering, all kinds of things and did posters and whatever, everything for the school.  He was very prolific and was a great example for a young artist in terms of their development.
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to do some of those things too in his classes?
Speaker 2: I do, I did, I did a lot of drawing and I mean I did drawings.  I recall a David and Goliath drawing I did, and I imagine--I remember myself being pretty good, not necessarily the best in the class, but I imagine myself being pretty good then, you know, doing things, I mean doing drawings and so forth.  I couldn't do all of that calligraphy and cartooning then, but I did acquire that skill later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: One of my favorite subjects believe it or not is history and it's probably the most favorite subject.  I mean, I like the other courses of study and we're moving along now 'cause, because favorite subjects don't really evolve until you start getting into the junior high school, high school kind of thing.  You really begin to get into the meat of subjects and importance of, you know, certain directions that, in terms of your understanding and growth kind of thing.  I think I was pretty good in social studies, and I got really good grade, grades in history, social studies, and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As, and art, and I didn't--you know I didn't really initially, you know, see myself as becoming an artist.  Though I could draw and I did things that, that naturally was in that direction and I did things well, generally well by comparison to other students in that direction, I didn't see myself in that like really becoming an artist until my, it was high school counselor, I think about tenth grade, asked me what do, what do you wanna be?
Speaker 1: Now what high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Southern High School.
Speaker 1: And were you still living in Banneker?
Speaker 2: No, I mean in, in the Ban, Banneker Homes, no.  Southern High School I was living in Cherry Hill [Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay, so when did you move?  At what age did you move to Cherry Hill?
Speaker 2: I think I was around nine, eight or nine years old when I moved to Cherry Hill.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to a different grade school there?
Speaker 2: Yeah I went to--actually I finished up, I finished up the elementary school in Cherry Hill.  I think that elementary school was 152.  Then I went to junior high school in 181.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And from there I went to Southern High School, which was in, in South Baltimore, and Cherry Hill of course was where the other two were located.
Story_ID: 98209
Speaker 1: Southern High School, now what was that like?  Was that an all black school or was it a mixed or what was it?
Speaker 2: Well, just before I got there the white kids were hollering we don't want no checkerboard classes (laughter), so it was, it was a white school.
Speaker 1: So, you were one of the first black students in the school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I mean I think the, the, the class that really integrated was before mines, but you know it was all in the press and in the news before I got there that you know they were hollering we don't want any checkerboard classes.  So, I expected a lot of issues and resistance whatever, you know, when I attended there.  But I act, actually had a great experience at Southern High School and that's where I met--George Barrack by the way backing up was at 181 who taught me in junior high school 181 and Alan Kasmicki (ph) was my primary art teacher.  I had other art teachers, but Allen Kasmicki was my primary art teacher at Southern High School and that's where I really made my breakthrough in my development and that's where the guidance counselor asked me what do you wanna be and there was earlier my, my I recall my guidance counselor in like probably my junior high school or elementary school I said, I think it was elementary school, I said I wanna be a guitar player.  Had no idea how to play a guitar, I only liked the music, you know.
Story_ID: 98210
Speaker 1: This would have been at the advent of Rock and Roll, right, 1957?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --'58 [1958] something like that
Speaker 2: Really strumming a guitar, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I liked the music and I liked the guitar.  I just imagine--
Speaker 1: Chuck Berry and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: -- Bo Diddley and people like that.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, but I had never, you know, we were--my family wasn't, we didn't have musical instruments around.  It a been nice though if I had a piano or a musical instrument I think I might have drifted in that direction if it was there, but it wasn't there and so all I could do is imagine from my experience by listening.
Speaker 1: Who were your favorite musicians then, I mean, who, who were you listening to and, and what kind of music was your family listening to, you know, I know you said that they didn't and you didn't go to church a lot, so I guess it wasn't church music so much, but what did you listen to at home and--(unclear)--?
Speaker 2: Actually what I listened to at home was church music and what I listened to was some of those real sassy songs that were coming on the radio and the popular music of the time and the more, more I, more black oriented kind of music, popular music and I really thrived on that, you know, from you know early childhood on and I still do.
Speaker 1: Who, who were some of the artists that you remember that you really liked?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the artists I liked, of course Nat [King] Cole, Ray Charles--(unclear)--, Billie Holiday.  You said, you men, you mentioned Chuck Berry, but I liked all of them, you know, the, the early Rock and Roll stuff, you know.
Speaker 1: Frankie Lymon, Fats Domino.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, all of them.
Speaker 1: You had so many, the Coasters--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --Drifters--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Persuasions--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Platters--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Right, coming up.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I remember the era.  I got a brother the same age as you, so I, I, I thought maybe you know it might be the same stuff, but was--now you said your neighbors had a TV, did, did y'all have a television?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think we had a television until I got to Cherry Hill [Baltimore, Maryland](laughter).  You know like my buddies who, Roderick and Lynwood Hart that lived across the street they had the TV and we always watched their TV when the, when the big events came like the Joe Louis fight or Ezzard Charles fight or some other events, Howdy Doody (laughter).
Story_ID: 98211
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah about the guidance counselor if you wanted to be a, wanted to be a guitar player.  You were saying by the time you got to high school you had never picked up a guitar so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah as I said I, I initially wanted to be a guitar player, but when my guidance counselor asked me what did you want to be reality sort of, sort of checked in.  I'd never picked up a guitar, so that was sort of beside the point kind of thing and knew that I liked guitar music and so forth, but he, so he looked at my report card and said you got good grades in art why don't you go see Mr. [Allen] Kasmicki [ph.] and see what he has to say and that was great.  That was, I mean, I went to Kasmicki and asked him, you know,--oh, but what the, what the guidance counselor said see what he thinks about your becoming an artist and so Ka, Kasmicki said to me yeah you, you have some ability at art, but when I was your age I was much further along, so you really have to study.  And that's all the prompting I needed.  He, with a little more direction from him, he turned me on to the book "The Natural Way to Draw" by Kimon Nicolaides.  And he also turned me on to three volume set of books called "Modelling" by Ed Lanteri, and this was a three volume set on, on modelling and sculpture, modelling and claying, and, and forming representation of human figure and animals, etc., and so I pursued those books and I took him at his word that I had to study.  So, according to Nicolaides, I mean, like he had a whole schedule set up drawing three hours a day, five days a week, and I got the two boys named Lionel  and Cordell to model for me after school and they modeled for me three hours a day.  They, they used to help me serving papers and so they, you know, because we know, we knew each other so they, they modeled for me and they modeled for me in swimming suits, so I can real, swimming trunks rather, so that I could really learn the, the human figure.
Speaker 1: This is in high school right?
Speaker 2: This was in high school.  And so I was just like I was practicing my violin I was drawing three hours a day, five days a week constantly.
Speaker 1: You were drawing live people--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --instead of just comic strips and--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where I leaped beyond the pack and you know the rest of my high school classmates.  I actually leaped beyond the pack and became very, very proficient at drawing.
Story_ID: 98212
Speaker 1: Yeah, few kids have really drawn from live people, I mean, you know.  Most kids actually do draw from comic strips and books and stuff.  They don't really draw.  There's a--what's the advantage of drawing, you know, live, I mean I know what is but (laughter), just you know--
Speaker 2: Well the advantages is that, I mean, you, you're right there, you're in the physical presence of your subject and you're able to see the, the bare nuances of, of, of your subject, which is a human figure in various, you know, attitudes, gestures, poses, and so forth, and on the different light sources and so forth which helps you to see it physically and round and so forth.  So, it much more better than copying from other pictures and so forth, you, and besides what happens is you, what happened to me is the development of my natural skill, you know, in seeing and drawing the way, interpreting a drawing, interpreting the subject, which my subject was a human figure, you know, you know from my own eye, from my own perspective.
Speaker 1: It's like I guess it's the difference between doing secondary research and primary research, you know, the research about what somebody said about something rather than, versus actually going to the source.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's. So--
Story_ID: 98213
Speaker 1: Did, did you do any sculpting?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did two sculptures while I was in high school [Southern High School in Baltimore, Maryland].  One was my very first sculpture was a bison, what's supposed to be a bison.  I'm saying what's supposed to be (laughter).
Speaker 1: --It didn't look like a--you didn't have a live bison I guess at home?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  See I only had a recollection of, and I really admired James Earle Fraser's nickel with a Bison on it with an Indian on one side, the Indian head nickel with the bison on the other side.  You know, but when I went to do my bison I, it, it came purely from my imagination.  I had no bison posing for me.  I didn't either bother to look at the Indian head nickel with the bison on it.  So, my bison looked a little bit like a bear (laughter) and it looked a little bit like a buffalo.  It was big, it was real, really powerful, that is the point, my bison was, I mean I caught, I caught the massiveness and powerful, you know, physical presence of the bison.  But a little, with a little--you know bison's legs at the, they have massive body, body mass, but tapered and thin legs at the bottom by comparison.  So, my high school teacher [Allen] Kasmicki suggested that I make them heavier so they would hold up as sculptor, so I made them heavier.  So, I had these bear like legs (laughter) with big hooves (laughter) on, on them, on them, so, but I was very proud of it.  It was very--I'm, I'm, was well, very well done though.
Speaker 1: Do you still have it?
Speaker 2: Yeah I still have it, I still have it.  It's a little chipped and broken here and there through years.  I lost a fractured part of it, you know, but I still have it yeah.  And the second sculpture--
Speaker 1: What did you sculpture out of?
Speaker 2: I sculpted it out of clay, which was oil-based clay and that's was high school art clay that we used.
Speaker 1: Pliable kind that you can dry.
Speaker 2: Plasticity.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It doesn't dry, yeah it doesn't dry, yeah.
Speaker 1: It stays pliable.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it stays pliable.  The only thing you have to work it in your hand to get it malleable.  It, it starts out being a little firm and you by working it, it gets malleable and usable and you're able to shape it more towards the subject or detail that you want.  The, the other piece that I did was a self-portrait and I, well because I looked, I studied for myself then, so I had my model and I really had a very intense observation and study of myself, which is the interesting thing about doing your own portrait, doing your self-portrait, you become very introspective in, you know, your observation of your facial features and characters and so forth, character and so forth.  But, again I'm almost back to that subject who am I and I defining it in the clay, you know, trying to say I'm working it out in clay, I'm learning something about myself in the physical sense, you know, how I'm made, you know, physically, you know.  And that's interesting about sculpture you dealing with a physical imagery, a physical presence, now that's kind of different from the drawing or painting, which is illusion, you know, I really am creating physical form and presence.
Story_ID: 98214
Speaker 1: Now, what did your, what did your family think about your art work and what you were doing, you know, how did they feel about it?
Speaker 2: Well, two things, my mother [Pernell Barnes White] said to me when I was busy studying, you know, when I was drawing three hours a day, five days a week, plus I was doing a sculpted bison and a sculpted portrait, you know in addition to that and my mother said to me this is her own belief because it's her own life--she's reflecting on her own life experiences and she said to me boy there's no such thing as a black artist (laughter).  In a way, she was saying I was like, you know, wasting my time, this is in her world and I understand there's no such thing as a black artist and, but that didn't stop me.  You know I, I mean, I, I had the thirst and I had the passion and the drive and determination, you know to, you know unlock the mystery and, and the magic going back to that, that my mother demonstrated to me herself.
Speaker 1: So, I mean, this is profound though at that times you really didn't know any information that could contradict what your mother was saying about there not being any black artists.
Speaker 2: Exactly, right, I had no role models and, and frankly except for there was George Barrack, you know, and I knew he was an artist and I knew he was a damn good artist, my, my junior high school art teacher.
Story_ID: 98215
Speaker 1: So, but beyond that I knew nothing about, you know, artists such as Charles White and whom I, when I start, first started looking at his work it was really strong, really strong drafts, which were very and very sculptural type imagery.
Speaker 2: Right, his, his images are, his drawings are three dimensional almost--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.
Speaker 2: --closes to sculpture--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --I think that anybody we have.
Speaker 1: And he was one of the greatest artists that ever lived as far as I was concerned.  Of course I, I mean as far as great artists I had my root influences with the renaissance masters even in high school 'cause I had began on, began to beyond, you know, practicing drawing and doing my sculptor, my two sculptors that I, I was studying on history, you know, and you know, you know really going into the masters.
Speaker 2: Who were your heroes in terms of those masters?
Speaker 1: Now naturally the first one that comes to mind is Michelangelo.  There's none--and of course second would be Leonardo da Vinci and I'm talking about the high renaissance artists.  And third would be Raphael and each one of the, for their own particular strength, and later would be [Auguste] Rodin who the derivative of Michelangelo in his own way, but going back to Michelangelo I'd say Rodin and Mayo.  There's another sculptor named Mayo I like and [Gian Lorenzo] Bernini, but with Michelangelo the, the, the real, one of my earliest experience is what an artist is, you know, sort of begin to, I began to relate to it through the expressions of Michelangelo.  It's not only powerful strong drawings, beautiful drawings, but it's also the power of expression and design in his work and the, the ability, as I said what he did to Sistine Ceiling to spend, the passion and ability to spend four years virtually on your back painting that ceiling, you know, which becomes one of the wonders of the world in terms of creative endeavor of an individual and all of it with very powerful expressive design, the total concept and execution and Michelangelo is a true giant, you know, with his creations of David and you know one, one piece called Notte Night which is, you know, is just beautiful and, and strong in design and so forth, the David sculptor, the figure of David.  I think really in history, no, no one touches him as an artist, as a profound artist internally and externally, you know with his, with his work.  Now, Leonardo on the other hand, he's profound in other ways in that mystery and poetry.  It's pure mystery and poetry in his work, the atmosphere in his work.  He painted--when he painted the, the Mona Lisa it's not just that beautiful smile and the look in her eyes, but it's the atmosphere and the distant, the aerial perspective, an atmosphere, I mean you just feel it, you bre, I mean is this, is this really happening in a to, the total canvas is really experienced, you know, atmospherically and poetically and with Raphael you have a combination of both and I think that's what Raphael, really good, really good drawing, really great drawing, nice poetry, and nice color, you know, nice color and nice drawing, beautiful painting.  Raphael was a really good combination of, of, of both of them.
Story_ID: 98216
Speaker 1: Okay, now when you were in high school now you spent a lot of time drawing, a lot of time on art did, I mean, did you have an active social life in high school?  Did you, did you go to high school things, dances, and, and football games and, and that kind of thing or did you play any sports yourself or did you, did you run for class office, or any of that kind of stuff?
Speaker 2: No I did not go (laughter) to--I didn't run for class office or anything.  I let others do that.  And I didn't, didn't have a--I had a social life, but really I didn't go to my prom.  I was really kind of, really very shy, you know, kind of thing.  I remember one time going down the street with this girl who really liked me named Claudia, and she wanted to hold my hands (laughter) and I wouldn't let her hold my hands.  I was a little shy, you know, with the whole idea and I wish to God I had held her hand and held onto her too (laughter), but you know--
Speaker 1: You did a lot of stuff by yourself, I guess, then as an artist.
Speaker 2: Yeah I was more, I was really, I wasn't nerdy, but I was really concentrated on my, my development.  Like developing my craft and as an artist and, and perfecting it.  I was very, very serious about that, so I was really pursuing it, you know, and not that I didn't notice these other things of being, wanting to be involved with these other things it's just that it was, it wasn't the priority.
Speaker 1: When you were a se--but your art teacher was, you, you had a good relationship with your art instructor--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--mentor and so forth.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So when you--was there, was there a lot of pressure on you being one of the only black students or one of the few black students in school at all?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, there wasn't a lot of pressure on me.
Speaker 1: Did that have anything with you not going to prom and that sort of them, was it the social element?
Speaker 2: That might have had something to do with it, I mean--
Speaker 1: Did the other black students go to prom?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they, they went the proms.
Speaker 1: That's why I ask 'cause you never know sometimes.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: 'Cause some schools have separate proms for black students in that era.
Speaker 2: No they didn't go that far, but you know, but I, I'm, I'm pretty sure that most of the black kids stuck to themselves.  You know that's really what I experienced in college too, the black kids stuck to themselves, even though I had white friends.
Story_ID: 98217
Speaker 1: Now, when did you decide--had you decided you were going to college when you were a senior in high school [Southern High School in Baltimore, Maryland]?  Did you know you were gonna go?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I won a scholarship to go to Maryland Institute College of Art and the reason I won the scholarship, you know, is that early, you know that spending three hours a day, five days a week, you know, drawing.  Like I said I leaped ahead of the pack and I was, I became the star of the, of the fine arts festival as far as visual arts is concerned.  We, Southern High School used to hold annual fine arts festivals and was basically a big music production, but I would have virtually a one-man show exhibiting the drawings that I had produced, you know, you know, and actually was assigned to do a mural.  And a lot of the drawings I had done were studies for the mural for Southern High School.  I don't believe, I don't recall it ever really being done.  Some of it was done.  I don't recall it actually ever being finished, but it was very--it was the history on, it was a mural on a history of jazz and I depicted the, you know, the New Orleans with the cotton, the fabric of the cotton and the New Orleans jazz players, Fats Waller, etc., and all the nice integral composition that really--I did do that mural.  I don't know what happened to it, but I did do it and that it, it was a composition adopted from Leonardo da Vinci's Last Supper, you know, of the overall composition.  You know, the, where, where basically in Leonardo's, Leonardo's Last Supper you had a 13 figure composition, but there are stage in groups of three, you know they, if you look at it closely they are stage in groups of three, so that's what I did.  I did a panoramic mural that was staged in groups of three and with bales of cotton on the side showing the river and the riverboat and etc., going on and all of the jazz musicians playing, you know, and the various musicians playing.
Speaker 1: Okay, who was the central figure where Jesus would have been in the Last Supper?  Who was the central figure in your mural?
Speaker 2: I don't recall.  I think it was either a horn player or, or Fats Waller sitting at the piano.  I'm not sure (laughter).  I--the important part the, my, you know taking from that composition was the three, the groups of three 'cause in that sense I was studying composition then.  You know 'cause you, you are taking it from a drawing state to the state of creating a picture, you know, and, and creating a picture that comes as, it comes in play the study of composition.  So, that I studied that last, Leonardo's Last Supper in terms of the composition and using the composition elements, the derivative of the compositional elements.  So, it didn't have to be the central figure as Christ was in there I know with arms raised,--the, the, the what you call the perspective radi outs, radiates out from that.  The, you know, it wasn't that kind of composition, though I used that.  I used some radiation, you know, patterns of radiation of large and small to show distance.
Speaker 1: Now that's a, that's a mural you did in high school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was it inside the school?
Speaker 2: It was inside the school.
Speaker 1: Inside, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and--
Speaker 1: Have you been back to see it since or have you ever--do you think it may, may still be there?
Speaker 2: I, I kind of doubt it, you know, I don't know to what extent I took it, but I knew I did it 'cause as a very--and I, I exhibited it.  I exhibited it during the fine arts festival.  I exhibited it with the, the cartoons, the drawings of studies and then the finished cartoon of it, you know, and, and, and it didn't evolve to a painting.  I did not paint it.  It was just a finished cartoon of the whole thing together, but I'd done these studies, you know, to it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, when, when you graduated you got this scholarship to--
Speaker 2: To, to Maryland Institute College of Art.
Speaker 1: Okay, is, is that in here in Baltimore [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 98218
Speaker 1: All right, so what was that like?  Were you, you surprised that you got a scholarship or were you pretty much expecting it now that you were really on the fast track or what, what, what was going through your mind?
Speaker 2: Well, I kind of, I knew I had found my niche.  I was in my niche.  I was in my groove, so the--it was a matter of it being, you know, a lot of what happens to you happens because of other people and so if I can go back a second to without answering your question outright--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --is that what [Allen] Kasmicki, you know, probably was instrumental in my getting a scholarship too.  He was also instrumental in my taking private, taking private lessons 'cause I, with him I demonstrated a willingness to go--see one of the things I did is I went through the yellow pages.  I wanted to know, you know, an artist, you know real live artist, a professional artist, so I got the yellow pages and I went, went through the yellow pages found an artist named John Bannon in the yellow pages, and I called him up, went to visit him at this studio and while I was visiting him at his studio there was another artist there called Joe Sheppard.  Now both of them ended up being my teachers, and they're part of a group called the Six Realists, and if you ask me about it, I'll tell you more about that later 'cause I was in my first show I was in a show called the New Perspectives of the Six Realists Gallery, and--
Speaker 1: These are black artists?
Speaker 2: These are white artists.
Speaker 1: White artists, okay.
Speaker 2: I was in--my first show as a show exhibiting with a group called the New Perspectives for the Six Realists Gallery and so--and John Bannon and Joe Sheppard were, and particularly Joe Sheppard they were the principals of the Six Realists Gallery and, and Kasmicki, Allen Kasmicki paid for private, studying with them privately.  This is on Saturday, so I was drawing five days a week, three hours a day, and on Saturdays I was studying with John Bannon first and then with Joe Sheppard.  And Joe Sheppard is--John Bannon he was good for rudimentary development and painting.  These Six Realists are important because they, they are exponents of a tradition of the old masters, painting, painting like the old, in a tradition of the old masters and John Bannon was at that time he was a still life painter and Joe Sheppard was a figurative painter, figurative art, figurative and portraits, and he paints everything really.  And so I studied early at first with John Bannon, but later I studied through the benefit of it being paid by John, by Kasmicki.
Story_ID: 98219
Speaker 1: We were talking about the Six Realists who and a couple were your teachers at the Maryland Institute of Art.
Speaker 2: Actually prior to Maryland Institute College of Art [Baltimore, Maryland] and one Joe Sheppard after I began attending the Maryland Institute College of Art.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The importance of the Six Realists is that in my career is that they were proponents of a, a medium called for oil, that facilitated oil painting called the Maroger medium and--
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: M-E-R-O-, that's French--G-E-R with some sort of accent to it.
Speaker 1: Okay, I-E, I-E-R.
Speaker 2: No, G-E-R, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I could show that to you later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Anyway, Jacques Maroger was a, he was more a chemist and researcher than artist, but he was, he was an artist too, and he developed the medium technique of the old masters and that he taught at the Maryland Institute College of Art where both John Bannon and Joe Sheppard attended, so they were extensions of him and I became extensions of them.  And later as, as we come forward to the very present interestingly enough I am going to be exhibiting in a, in this traveling exhibition called, a group show called, can't--Legacy, I'm sorry.  And it's an exhibition of 12 former students of Joe Sheppard.  That's to continue the legacy of the traditionalist representational art, which included both painting and sculpture, but primarily the, the evolution that it processes from painting in the Maroger technique of painting, which emulated the techniques of the old masters and supposedly the two mediums that he created for painting were exactly what the Italians and Flem, Flemish masters of the renaissance and on into 19th century French art used, you know, to produce their work, works of art.  And it's a lost medium and a lost tradition that was revitalized by Jacques Maroger.  So, it was, it's very important to my, to my formative period to be a part of that tradition and Joe Sheppard from--actually first started with, I started with him privately and I began working with him as his assistant once he began teaching at the Maryland Institute College of Art and also continued my studies directly under him.  He is a master artist, a master painter and turned out that he, because of me, he got it 'cause I switched from painting to sculpture.  He, because of me, he also does sculpture.  So, but initially I started out as a painter-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --under him.
Story_ID: 98220
Speaker 1: Now, about, about what year is this when you're painting at the Maryland Institute of the Arts [Maryland Institute College of Art in Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Studying, well stud, basically studying at the Maryland Institute Col, College of Art began in 1960 and again prior, prior to that I studied with Joe Sheppard and John Bannon privately.  First through the benefit of Allen Kasmicki, who was my high school art teacher and then through the benefit of Joe Sheppard who got me a scholarship with one of his clients who was also studying with him.  He got his cli, client who was a dentist to actually pay for the rest of my study with him privately.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so did you exhibit any works while you were at the Maryland Institute for the Arts?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in ninet, in 1962 I had my, well the first show and I with him called the New Perspectives, New Perspectives of the Six Realists Gallery.  We were being considered for becoming members of the Six Realists Gallery and I sold, I only exhibited drawings.  Joe Sheppard liked my drawings very much because I had, I naturally drew in the old masters tradition and, and in that show I sold seven out of nine drawings, the very first show.
Speaker 1: How did you feel about that?  Was that encouraging?  Did you get a pretty nice--
Speaker 2: It was very encouraging and you know it begins to dispel for me in a sense my mother's contention there was no such thing as a black artist that, you know that, that I had a perspective future as, as a professional artist, you know, beginning with that.  Also, I think an extension of that was I was featured in the Baltimore city magazine after that and, and I was quoted as a man to watch in the art world in the Baltimore city magazine.
Speaker 1: So you, you're now about 20 years old, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: And you're a man to watch on the Baltimore art--(unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's big stuff.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah it must have been exciting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had big plans from that (laughter).
Story_ID: 98221
Speaker 1: I was hoping that and this is digressing a little bit, but I was hoping from that kind of beginning that, that by a certain time I would really have a success level of let's say a Raphael or someone, an artist of that stature in that early, you know, 'cause their greatest success was early.  And, so, it's good to be able to break into the art world early, but unfortunately, my life didn't because certain kinds of oppositions that I encountered, you know, my life didn't take that fast track to successful, but I was on the way you know based on that.
Speaker 2: What kind of opposition did you face then?
Speaker 1: A number of kind of oppositions.  Well, first of all what I discovered basically like I'm a representation of artists.  I mean, I draw and create representationally.  I mean, I deal with the natural world and what I express comes out of it, comes forth out of it.  My experience with it and so forth.  So, but, you know around this time the primitive art world,--the, the primitive art expression being advanced by the art world was abstract expressionism and that's really for a reason for the Six Realists Gallery developing.  It, it came forth, you know, exhibiting the talent of these Six Realists artists, you know, in the face of the contemporary art scene, which you know, you know, focused on abstract expressionism, the, the so called modernism and, and what, what was in, in, in abstract expressionism and the modernism, contemporary modernism is a lack of interest and emphasis on the naturalistic world, in particular the human figure, which really dominated the, the art world prior to 19th century French art.  The human figure was, is, has always been the dominant subject matter for art and particularly the high renaissance and so forth coming up when all of the knowledge of, of the figure and expression of the figure really advancing through it, through Michelangelo, Leonardo, and Raphael, etc., advanced to its highest form, and so here we are in a period where the, you know, the abstract particularly the New York Art School, you know which dominated the art world, contemporary art world period, the abstract art world, you know, basically foreshadowed any representational art.  So, there's basically a discrimination there and frankly that discrimination carried on through, even though I had success in my graduate studies in college and you know in becoming an instructor at the Maryland Institute, not the Maryland Institute, but the University of Maryland, College Park later that dichotomy in the art world is one of the primary reasons why I did not achieve tenure at Uni, at the, at University of Maryland, College Park where I instructed.  That dichotomy because most of the art department, all of the art department except for myself they dealt more in abstract mode of expression and so that, that, that, that and basically institution like the University of Maryland Co, College art institutions they, they promoted the contemporary art scene and they advanced their professors based on the contemporary art scene and practices because New York, the New York contemporary art scene actually controlled the, the market so to speak.  And those who succeeded in that, you know, primarily due to the fact that they were successful at abstract art, abstract expressionism, whatever or contemporary art.  They were elevated.  That is the major art scene.
Story_ID: 98222
Speaker 1: And so the only person I know that ran counter to that was a representational artist named Andrew Wyeth who was very successful as a realists representational painter getting millions of dollars before he even executed a canvas, you know haven't, you know, more or less in waiting for him.  But, the, again the contemporary art world focused on abstract art and--
Speaker 2: I guess we could probably say the contemporary, I guess, fine arts or, or and all the realists seem to be in illustration or something, I guess in those days or, and that was starting to get thin because of photography right?
Speaker 1: Well, you, you know like that's, that's one of the put downs of representational art.  They're not necessarily involved with illustration because they do, re, representational art.  But, I mean as a genuine effort to, you know, get great content and expression representation and still using traditional modes of expression and traditional subjects such as a human figure or flowers if they chose to pain that, that subject, but that doesn't make it illustration by intent.  You know, it, and it's still a very fine art, a very high form of fine art and that's what the six realists represented.  Also, the six realists represented, they carried forth the tradition of the old masters, so--
Speaker 2: I just meant that a person like say I guess from that period maybe got a Maxfield Parrish or somebody or.  Even today the black artist, Thomas Blackshear he's more realistic, but his, usually most of his work is commercial stuff.  Now he does some fine stuff, but they, photography the way it is now they don't really use as much either representational art work in, in ads.  So, it's just, I understand it's tougher to--(unclear)--because it's not promoted that much--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --it's tougher to do, I think, than abstract art (laughter).  I mean, you know, I see a lot of stuff that I, I know could be done pretty easy, you know, with just--(unclear)--of you know, not to--people who do abstract art--(unclear)--not just want to paint on canvases--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but anybody who does realistic work know it takes a lot more time--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --to--
Speaker 1: Well, I just wanted to characterize it what I considered the difference and--for instance Andrew Wyeth, his father was an illustrator.
Speaker 2: N.C. Wyeth, yeah.
Speaker 1: N.C. Wyeth was a great illustrator and, and he was the principal influence of Andrew Wyeth and you know basically what he taught his son was to absorb the world that you see as much as possible and when you and like, like a, like a sponge and when you sit down to, you know, to do your artwork, you know to make your painting is that you wring it out dry.  You just, you know, so that means it's, you know, it's, it's, it's full of the, all emotion and intent and purposes of, of, of fine art, an expression of fine, that you find and the greatest of fine art that that's what made Andrew Wyeth great and actually far exceeded his father in terms of artistic, you know, creation.  I mean, he had the ability by wringing that emotion out by, of having a can of a painting actually fill, you know, not, not of a painting, a painting of a, of, of, of a can, a water bucket, you know have human qualities.  I mean, you really felt the, the, the humanity in that human, in, in, in that water bucket painting and, or the landscape that he painted.  You really felt the, the, the fabric of the landscape.  You really were present.  He created a strong sense of presence and believability beyond the superficiality of just mirror illustration, but he really communicated a more powerful deep, deeper insight into the subject and communicated a higher value system in terms of representing subject matter.
Story_ID: 98223
Speaker 1: Now, I, I just wondered what your thoughts on, as to why that, why abstract art has become more closely associated with fine artwork.  I mean, there, there have been--there is one other I guess realist, Norman Rockwell--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a super realist and he, he, his work is considered fine art, but people try to put it down and say it's like commercial art instead of illustration.  He was, his, his, artwork did appear, you know--(unclear)--and that sort of thing when he first got started.  It, it is fine art, but at the same time people, you know, why, why isn't representational art these days considered fine art or is it, I mean, I, I've off, often wondered if, if it's not, it's because it's so hard to do that people can't, who can't do it and don't do it in order to make money doing other things don't, kind of resent it being around or something, I don't know--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, in terms of Normal Rockwell, to me he really primarily he was an illustrator and mainly is that his artwork dealt with popular.  You know it was popular subject matter or popular, you know, even if he was doing work and representation.  But, his treatment is, is more of a popular vein rather than really going deep into the subject matter and trying to extract any profound, you know, artistry out of his, except for as in illustration out of his subject matter except for as illustration and that in general--but he, but he was a very high achiever in that and that in itself elevated his art to, you know, to fine art.  I mean, the long, on the long term scene a landscape of art in art history.  He's gonna be recognized as one of the great, you know, artists of the world and as a fine artist because of that.  But, his intent was more as a popular artist and as, and then as an illustrator and that's a difference, you know, when you sit down to work and do your work whether you intend to, I mean as far as representational art is concerned.  All, all matters of representational art has some illustrative quality, but I real fine artist is going for something that transcends, more or less like, in the vein of, of Andrew Wyeth, you know, that his artwork transcended the subject or the object; that's the difference.  I might even be more clear, it actually transcended the object.  And interestingly enough, you know, it, it transcended the object into the subject, the really profound subject where as you, what you find in a lot in the more contemporary art or modern art is that it is locked within the object.  If you look at a lot of abstract art, it's locked within the object.  I mean, the object being pure abstraction, but the pure abstraction has no emotive qualities, you know, not to me that, that transcends the, the object and becomes subject, you know, real subject of human experience and dealing with that.  You know, I'm trying to reach into really giving a sense of what that, I believe that is really all about, you know, which also it's, it's, it's taught me about my philosophy basically, like the way I see things you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 98224
Speaker 1: All right so, now you were at the Maryland Institute for the Arts [Maryland Institute College of Art, Baltimore, Maryland] until--how long were you there?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was there beyond my time.  I was there because I worked and sent to school too.  I went, I worked full time in the evenings beginning in I believe it was 1962, so and, and as well as going, went to school.  I didn't formally graduate from Maryland Institute of Art in 1967 and, so I basically hung around a little bit, not really directly in the school, but you know because I had to work as well as go to school.
Speaker 1: Okay, if you'd stayed there four years--(unclear)--, you'd come out in '64 [1964] I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you graduated in '67 [1967] and--
Speaker 2: It might have been, I'm sorry, it might have been 1966 that I graduated.  It was either '66 [1966] or '67 [1976], I'm not certain.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had like a bachelor's degree in art when you graduated?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And a bachelor's degree in fine art.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A bachelor's of fine art.
Story_ID: 98225
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you do next?  Did you continue with graduate school right away or did you?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't begin graduate school I believe until 1968 and I had sort of a break in between that.  I worked for an artist named, Pierre du Fayette as his chief assistant to, to create two large sculptures for the City of Columbia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And one was a people tree and one, the other was a family group.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The people tree became the emblem, initially the emblem of Columbia, of the development of Columbia.
Speaker 1: Now this is Columbia and, Columbia, Columbia where?
Speaker 2: Columb, Columbia in Maryland, Columbia in Maryland
Speaker 1: All right.  And, and how do you spell the name of the artist, Pierre?
Speaker 2: Pierre du Fayette.
Speaker 1: Du Fayette.
Speaker 2: P--
Speaker 1: Du Fayette, D-U--
Speaker 2: D-U-F-A-Y-E-T-T-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 98226
Speaker 1: And, so you went back to graduate school in '69 [1969]?
Speaker 2: It was actually '68 [1968].  I was in graduate school between '68 [1968] and '70 [1970] and I was awarded a teaching, when I got there, I mean, before I got there I actually was awarded teaching assistantship, fellowship to teach at, while, you know, doing my master's de, degree study at the, at the University of Maryland, College Park, in College Park [Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, question, oh.
Speaker 1: Okay, how was that experience and what was the University of Maryland at College Park like?  We've heard different--well I just, I've heard different stories about how black folks struggled to get into the University of Maryland in one department or the other, you know, law school, struggled with Pe, Perry Mitchell back in the days and other people trying to get in, in different departments there and not being traditionally friendly to black pe, people and how one time, this was maybe ten years before you went to school there, they pay you to go to another school if you wanted to go to graduate school--
Speaker 2: Precisely.
Speaker 1: --they'd, give you the money to go to Columbia or some place.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So now you gotta go there (laughter) and so how, how was it?  What was it like?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you're correct and, and actually I was a first, and I've been a first there into the art department in a number of ways.  I was the first, you know, black graduate student there, and ultimately I became the first black instructor there in the art department at the University of Maryland.
Speaker 1: That's, okay, that's I, I kind of, I don't know something told me that was the case--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but I wasn't sure, so I thought I'd raise that struggle aspect.
Speaker 2: I became, ultimately I became the first black assistant professor denied tenure (laughter), that's because it wouldn't, it couldn't go on any further.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who were the prominent pe, people on the faculty over there or was there anybody that you, you would consider a prominent person and?
Speaker 2: Well, you, you, well I mean there was a Herman Maril, the, one of the more prominent artist who was actually from Baltimore also that taught at the University of Maryland and I can't think of some of the others right now.  But, none of them was as, as prominent at that time as Herman Maril was and Herman Maril was in the books so to speak.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How were you treated as the first?  Did you have to, I mean how did you feel about being the only one there and, and?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all I was brought there solely on my talent, and, and what I promised to be able to do there, I mean as a graduate student, and--(unclear)--working representationally, working representationally in sculpture figuratively and you know and coming on as a graduate teaching assistant and having the background of knowledge of anatomy and study of anatomy.  While, so while I was a graduate teaching assistant I, I taught anatomy and drawing as well as these primary sculpture, we call sculpture 1 level whereby the student would learn modelling and casting and using the human figure as the primary subject and so I was able to really perform and do what I do, but I actually, able to bring them some, the benefit of my ability and experience and the--but interestingly enough to me that teacher that ran that department who actually brought me on as, as, as a graduate, you know, teaching assistant to, to help teach and so forth his, his name is Ralph (ph) Franey (ph) and he did, he was more into--and as most artists do and were doing at the time they, he was branching into abstract art and so his work was turning abstract itself, but he was also trying to teach casting, but he didn't understand it and know it and so, I mean, where as his students would have like five to ten percent success ratio in their casting, mines would have at least 95 percent success ratio on casting 'cause I spent a lot of time in making sure that the final product that the student create was properly cast and so, my, my instructions were clear.  I, I knew more about it, you know, than he did because he didn't actually practice it.
Story_ID: 98365
Speaker 1: We're talking about how the art critics and curators of galleries and stuff validate art and it's hours put forth--this is me talking, not you, but I'm saying that it seems to me that there's a lot of work that would not be considered very great if it were not for the, the cosigning or the endorsement of a critic or--(unclear)--curator or somebody and you were explaining maybe how some of that might work.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well what really has happened, what supposed to have happened according to Tom Wolfe and the Painted Word is that modern art evolved, contemporary art evolved out of a bunch of writers and critics, you know, getting together and by design, you know, you know, to perpetuate and dealers also to perpetuate contemporary art or modern art and what is out of that, you know, is what you have is a creation by a contemporary artist having being backed up by a lot of words and whom the critics of, you know, devise in terms of explaining the subject matter or explaining the content or explaining how great it is or you know becoming as esoteric as esoteric can be about the particular artwork, the painting or the sculptor and it's, you know, this need, this, necessity for great explanation to justify it or to validate it, you know, that has, you know, perpetuated, you know, this, you know, to the art world, you know, or to, to the public.  And generally--
Speaker 1: The consuming public, yeah.
Speaker 2: The consuming public and I, I think it's really an art that's contrived for, for the upper class because it goes beyond, actually goes beyond the middle class, but the middle class bought into it, and because the middle class wants validation also and in terms of this cultural achievement.
Speaker 1: Awareness.
Speaker 2: Awareness, awareness and so they become supporters and backers, backer up of the, of these literary theories or esoteric dissertations, you know, from these critics and so forth and so, I mean, those artworks, those modern contemporary art forms and works they move to the forefront of the art world, which again is initially and primarily is really desi, developed, or furthered for the purposes of the upper class to, which who the upper class desires to separate itself.  So, they're gonna be backing, they're gonna be sponsoring, they're gonna be buying these paintings and sculptors and putting them into museums, you know, from their collections, you know, making contributions to museums, which  further perpetuates the whole, whole scene and, and, and create a great value system whereby they get big tax right-offs for their contributions, etc., so it's a whole system of support that they created to further and perpetuate this modern art or contemporary art scene.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As opposed to traditional or representational art.
Story_ID: 98366
Speaker 1: So, well, we'll talk more about this I know as we get further into the discussion.  It seems as though most of the representational fine art is from the 19th cen, century.  These days people look, you know, at the, it's not as, as you were saying had become unpopular I guess.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And actually there's been a concerted effort in the contemporary art scene to kill the human figure as a motive expression, as a sub, as a primarily subject of art.  There's, you know, so anyone working figuratively, you know, as myself would have a hard time.  You would have a very hard time in the art market, and it's very, it, it, the, the art market, the success of that artist would be limited, you know, based on this subject matter, you know.
Speaker 1: There, there's another trend too even some representational art--take, take an artist like Robert Colescott.  Have you ever seen his work?  He's a black artist who lives in Arizona now.  I think he was in New York, but he basically does kind of a cartoonish kind of take on things.  The character are drawn, you know, are drawn, are outlined figures filled in with paint, you know, and they--for instance there's one of The Last Supper black people--(unclear)--are circles you know, basically with--(unclear)--sitting at the table and the theme is, is, is funny.  You know it looks like The last Supper, but the title of it is Eat Them Beans, you know--(unclear)--, but it's, it's, it, it's something that, I mean I saw it and it resonated, it tickled me to see it, but at the same time saying this is, you know, he's not that hard to do as a, as a piece of art.  I mean, the idea, it was an interesting idea and it causes you to think and reflect on a lot of things, you know, but the, the--(unclear)--religion, you know, a lot of different things.  Black folks place in this whole scheme of things, but you know, the work itself was not that hard.  It would not be that hard to replicate.  He didn't have the study of the human body to paint these figures--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --or a room or anything else, you know, just--
Speaker 2: He just had to assimilate the conceptual idea that he had in mind, which didn't have to be augmented by some real intense study or representation of the subject, but still representation I presume.  I don't know the work that you're speaking of.
Speaker 1: He, he might argue in ten years of study you wouldn't be able to do this, but, I don't know it looks very simple, you know, I mean execution of the actual work was very simple, using bright colors, you know, that sort of thing.  There were a couple of others that--he's one of a brother in a superman suit, big muscles, and got a white woman in one hand and a barbell in the other, you know, and he's flying, you know.  --(Unclear)--or something like that--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: It sounds like he has, he has really a lot of humor in his and, in, in, sort of a special kind of view (laughter) in terms of his subject matter, which it could be, you know, very valid in itself.  I mean I would find that interesting myself--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I--
Speaker 2: --from your description.
Speaker 1: --I do find them interesting--
Speaker 2: --Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I, I think they're very interesting works, but you know at the same time I'm not necessarily impressed with technique or anything or, or his, his knowledge of colors or things in space or, I mean, the fit of the spatial, I mean, and textures, and that, that doesn't, I mean, there are, there are those components there, but they're not, you know, it doesn't seem like it took a lot of study to put them together, you know it just seem like a happenstance of the idea rather than anything else.  And the draw are funny too--(unclear)--the way he emphasizes different parts of the body in a cartoon way.  There's another artist you might be familiar with that was--(unclear)--at Howard critiqued quite a bit.  There was a young man in New York by the name of Basquiat.  Are you familiar with him?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: He had dreadlocks and wore a tuxedo and bare feet.
Speaker 2: Yeah he--
Speaker 1: He was a friend of Andy Warhol.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah I'm familiar with him.
Speaker 1: He was on the streets at one time--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --and did graffiti on different appliances and things.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They were exuded in the museum.
Speaker 2: But he, he's one of the artists that was snatched up by the contemporary art scene and made a star. And I doubt if his star is shining.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you I think he of somewhat of an overdose--(unclear)--I think.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Something like that.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah but he's, I mean in terms of a contemporary, I mean, contemporary art to me from what I understand and know he was made, he was made a package as successful, I mean, as a successful artist so that the market would gravitate and the buyers would gravitate to his art and you know, and buy it and make it part of their collection and again part of that system of developing, you know, big dup, big bucks, big dollars, you know.
Story_ID: 98367
Speaker 1: Now, well we digressed again, but it's okay 'cause a lot of this is about the philosophy of art and what, what we think of, what, what you think about it and let's go back to the University of Maryland [College Park] and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --what you were describing was the scene where you basically a fish out of water in some respects 'cause you're, you're the first black, the only black in the, the department and you're, you're representation on artists you know classical training--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --nobody else is doing that, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  You know what happens, you know, I had besides you know demonstrating my own ability, you know, both in a, my graduate, you know, study and my graduate thesis exhibition, I exhibited a one-person show at the University of Maryland, College Park in 1972 called Portrait of the Artist as, as a Young Man, and that's of course taken from James Joyce.  But, that's also the title of one of the principal sculptures that I had there, which is a work I developed from the Lee Harvey Oswald's assassination, called Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man.  And, of course, the first man and it's also the sculpture of the first man Adam.  You know--if you know Lee Harvey Oswald when he went out, he went out when I, in my expression like crying like a baby.  He was clutched, you know, and drawn up and with his mouth and eyes wide and grabbing on, holding on for his dear life and this is, you know, this I created in the sculpture, in a particular sculpture, Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man.  And there's a--the, the first--I wanted my statement to be more universal and not just about Lee Harvey Oswald and so, you know, of course this is a male nude.  I turned it into a male nude instead of a clothed figure and--
Speaker 1: Did it look like Oswald?
Speaker 2: No, it was my portrait (laughter).  It was my self-portrait in the face.  Of course, it wasn't my body.  It was, it was--the figure itself was physically powerful and showing all of the tension of holding on to dear life, you know bef--
Speaker 1: You were inspired by that.
Speaker 2: I was inspired yeah.
Speaker 1: --that picture of Oswald. I understand that.(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was inspired by it yes.
Story_ID: 98368
Speaker 1: As I went into this more universal statement and going back to the fact that Adam was the first man so you might consider Adam when he was in the garden, you know, after he, you know committed the great sin and so there's some parallel to that and what I wanted to say overall about the artist, you know.  What the point of the art, about the artist is that the, is his consciousness and this is what I as Camus would say, Camus, Albert Camus was my hero philosophically, you know, it was that the artist must serve suffering as well as beauty and that has been the thread in my work, you know, and so and what Camus also says is that the, I mean he deals with consciousness, that, that he calls that the supreme moment and this moment just before death when you, when Oswald was grabbing hold onto dear life with every fiber in his body, you know, you know expressing the, the desire to hold onto that life it was what I called the supreme moment of consciousness.  Of course the, with Camus the supreme moment of consciousness was with and described in his Myth of Sisyphus and Sisyphus descends the mountain after the giant boulder he had just finished pushing up to the summit of the mountain plunges down to the bottom and the question is what does he do then.  Does he fold or does he surmount the, the, the, the, the pending futility of rolling that boul, giant boulder back up the hill, and that's what he does.  That's the supreme moment of consciousness.  He descends the hill consciously with a moment of consciousness where he grabs, consciously grabs the boulder and pushes it out the hill--(unclear)--the steep inclined hill.  So, with all his fiber and being, so I, I saw the death of Lee Harvey Oswald in a way it was conveyed to me.  I was watching TV at the time as that as a supreme moment of consciousness just before death, when you're holding on to life all you can and you know and trying to live another moment (laughter), you know.
Speaker 2: I think for those who saw that moment live is probably the first time they'd seen a real human being dying on television.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: In Roy Rogers' movies or in you know they you don't see a gunshot they just fall out.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: They, as soon as they get shot they fall down and their dead, they're asleep basically.  They don't talk a lot unless they're the lead villain and they might say--(unclear)--right, but that's the first time people actually saw somebody really, you know, with that kind of agony and desperation--(unclear)--in those days in the '60s [1960s]--(unclear)--not that we see it that much now.  You really don't see, you know, see a lot of tragic stuff on the news now, but you don't--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --necessarily see people in that kind of anguish.
Speaker 1: Right.  That and the, actually the Kennedy's that whole news about the [President John F. Kennedy] Kennedy's assassination sort of they were like first, I mean, like there's, there's this unfold in history right in front of your eyes and this human drama you know that, that really had major impact on the entire world.
Story_ID: 98369
Speaker 1: Now how did you, how were you impacted by the death of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in '68 [1968], now that would be a little bit before your exhibition, four years before?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'm glad you asked that because this is what I wanted to say and wanted the world to know is that when Martin Luther King was assassinated, of course, my experience I had seen Martin Luther King I went to one of his speeches and truly he was a great man.  He spoke at the Civic Center here in Baltimore and the, I don't recall the year, but I saw him speaking there, and there was a special light emanating from him as a leader and an importance of what he said, you know, and in terms of his content and in terms of his leadership and quality of leadership through--(unclear)--made through the speech that really, you know, really truly captivated me.  And, so here I was in the presence of this great man and so when, when King was assassinated, I mean, that was kind of like, it was like the final straw and I believe that's what happened with, with the, with the, the population, the black population at that time, but that was the final straw.  Here we had, you had hope before that with the Kennedys, and the Kennedys get, both, Jack Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] anyway gets assassinated, and you, you see, you, you, you see hope begins to diminish, but fortunately [President] Lyndon Johnson came on and did, did okay.  But, you know like you have lack of faith, I mean you have the promise of, of, of a, of a, of a good future evolving for, for black folks and then you had it sort of like threatened to be taken away, you know through the leadership of Kennedy.  But, when Martin Luther King was assassinated that was kind of really the last straw, the preeminent leader in the black community, you know who, you know who stressed nonviolence and what was right.  He took the position of right.  You know what he had to say was right.  It was right not only for black folks, but it was right for all folks.  I mean, as that nonviolent, nonviolence quest or tactic you know has been incorporated, you know, throughout the world.  But, I'm--well so my reaction to the whole thing from the what, what evolved was the burning of cities, I mean black folks demonstrating, the, the, you know they reached their limit and this, the sense of hope and hopelessness and so we had the burning of the cities.  But, what I, what happened with me is when Martin Luther King was assassinated is that I walked the street contemplating being, I mean, or doing the monument, the quintessential monument to Martin Luther King and then that's my purpose.  My purpose wasn't to, to, to, to, to destroy and burn cities and so forth, but my, my purpose is to create and to, to do the quintessential image of Martin, representative of Martin Luther King which to me is tantamount to our [President] Abraham Lincoln or to the Abraham Lincolns in terms of leadership to the world, I mean to the United States.
Story_ID: 98370
Speaker 1: Now did you ever, were you able to complete a work dedicated to Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: The only one I've been able to do is for the--outer aisle of Saints--at the National Cathedral in Washington D.C., and that's a, it's a small piece.  It's just 30 inches high, but Martin Luther King did his last sermon at the National Cathedral in 1968, in March, on March 31st 1968, and that is what the sculptor is actually conveying him preaching that last sermon that was pretty prophetic in itself just like his actually the last speech when he was in Memphis, Tennessee.  It's all very prophetic as to his future and so you know that is my one and only representation of Martin Luther King, though I desire to do more, just haven't had the opportunity via commission and so forth.  And actually one of the things I tried to do, that I actually did is that I ventured to, to Atlanta [Georgia].  I took a trip to Atlanta to try to talk to, to Coretta Scott King to let her know and the Martin Luther, Martin Luther King Center for Social Change that was just be, being built at that time that I'd like to do, you know, Martin Luther King for them, but it never transpired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm gonna ask that question.  Perhaps it will at some point, you know.  I've seen so many representations of Dr. King that did not, well they did not look like him, you know number one and if there's gonna be representation of people it should at least resemble the person that it's, you know-at least--and then go beyond I would think--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to embody a lot more than just looking like him.
Story_ID: 98371
Speaker 1: So at the University of Maryland you received a MFA there right, at College Park, or did you--
Speaker 2: I actually received technically it was a MA [Master of Art].  They didn't offer an MFA [Master of Fine Arts] at the time I was there and just a few years after I received my degree and actually was an instructor there that they brought the MFA program on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you, did you, did you--you earned a MFA at some point right?
Speaker 2: No, not technically, but I, you know, what I did was still tantamount to the MFA, but it was, they called it a MA.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, and you taught at the University of Maryland for a number of years and how, how long were you there?
Speaker 2: In all I was there 13 years.  Two years as a graduate teaching  assistant and I forget how many years, probably quite a bit of the years as an instructor and then probably a few years or so after that about three years or so after that as an, an assistant professor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know and in that experience the, as an instructor, you know, it's--there's a, there was a racial component to it that I'd like to bring into play is that I was the lowest--all of that time I was there I was the lowest paid person on their staff and on the teaching staff, and people would come behind me and still getting paid more.  And when they realized it, they moved me from instructor to assistant professor and I got a raise, but I still was, you know, one of the lowest paid persons there. And when they had the opportunity to take me on in terms of tenure, you know, I believe it both, it was both, I was both racially denied and denied also because I was a representational artist.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well when you look back on the University of Maryland, now you when you left I guess after two years of assistant professor?
Speaker 2: It was several years.  I'm not sure exactly how long.  I mean, I can't reach back in that, but I was--
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: I was at least, at least seven years as an instructor before they realized (laughter) this guy ought move on and then a few, few years of more as an assistant professor and, and then they--I came up for tenure, which would have meant I would have made associate professorship and, which mean, and at the same time having tenure which is, you know, in a sense, a permanent job.
Story_ID: 98372
Speaker 1: You taught at a number of schools, well--
Speaker 2: Yeah,
Speaker 1: --one, one Spelman College.  What, what came next after the University of Maryland?  Where, where did you go next?
Speaker 2: Well, actually before I even started teaching at the University of Maryland I, while I was still a graduate student at University of Maryland, College Park, I was offered a position.  I taught at Goucher [College, Baltimore, Maryland] my first semester.  I taught at Maryland Institute [College] of Art [Baltimore, Maryland].  That Maryland Institute of Art might have been a little later while I was teaching at the Maryland Institute, I mean, at the University of Maryland.  But, I also taught at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].  I actually was part of the Atlanta University system, but I was within Spelman College teaching, you know, from there.  But, I taught there for just really about a month and a half, month and two, month and a half and that's--see I took that position while I was still a graduate student, so and finishing my graduate degree, so I was, but that degree called for full time and my full time presence there in Atlanta and, but I thought I would deal with it and 'cause I was flying back and forth.  I used the salary to fly back and forth (laughter).  I spent two days a week in, in Atlanta and two days a week and, and, you know, teaching at the University of Maryland, College Park, on my graduate assistantship and I considered, I, you know, I said oh I can do it, I mean like, you know, you know, contemporary world I can fly back and forth and I did it except for one day I missed the flight.  I was, it was very hard, I mean to come home, go to bed, get up in the morning go to another school (laughter) and so that morning, one morning I missed the flight and I lost the position at Atlanta University because of that, but I was--an interestingly enough I was when, when I was, went on, was, was taking on at Atlanta University Spelman College I was an assistant professor.  This was while I was still a graduate student, graduate teaching assistant at the University of Maryland, yeah University of Maryland, Maryland, College Park.
Story_ID: 98235
Speaker 1: Tell us about the Billie Holiday commission in 1979.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah it's when I first received the Billie Holiday co, commission and I, I actually heard about it more or less through the grapevine, and what I did because of my interest in doing it, being, being selected to do that work, I visited Upton, the Upton community in Baltimore [Maryland] which is generally on the Pennsylvania Avenue where Billie Holiday spent a lot of time, you know, singing at the Royal Theatre and I guess more or less hanging out, and so I went to that Upton community and I talked with Ms. Lena Boone, who was the director of that community association and shared with her my interest in being selected as the sculptor to do it.  Got involved in the selection process and made, you know, through, through a competition of five different individuals, artists, who were trying to get the commission also.  I was chosen, you know, to do this and so--
Speaker 1: Did you know any of the other artists that they were considering?
Speaker 2: Yeah one was actually my teacher at the Maryland Institute College of Art [Baltimore, Maryland], Art, Tilden Street, and Reuben Cramer who is the representational sculptor, well historically he has been one of the most important sculptors here in Baltimore and James E. Lewis who was professor at the University, I mean, at Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland] at that time and head of the art gallery there.  Interestingly enough I had actually cast one of James Lewis' work for him prior to him sending it to the foundry, you know, some years before, but they were part of the competition and there were a few others under consideration as well, but they selected my work, selected me.
Speaker 1: Okay now, what, what was the nature of the commission?  It was a statue of Billie Holiday we know that, but what was the occasion and where was it to be placed?
Speaker 2: Well, it was to be placed in Upton and on a site in close proximity to where the Royal Theatre was and ultimately that was a site, the site where it is located now at Lafayette and Pennsylvania Avenue is the, you know, the ultimately site.
Speaker 1: So, the Royal The, Theatre is now gone, it's not there anymore?
Speaker 2: Royal Theatre--one of the worse things they did was destroy, destroyed the Royal Theatre.
Speaker 1: I know of the similar si, si, situation in Chicago [Illinois] where they destroyed the Regal Theater, which was, which was a venue, a black venue--
Speaker 2: Right, for entertainment.
Speaker 1: --through the heyday of the golden age of entertainment--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so--(unclear)--destroyed the, the classic theater.  It probably goes on and on--(unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Right, right, but see the Billie Holiday, what Billie Holiday statue represented was an atonement more or less of the city for having to tear the Royal down and so it was placed--its, its current site is right across the street diagonally from where the Royal Theatre was.  It's not right on their site, but it's right across the street from it.
Story_ID: 98236
Speaker 1: And I wanted to, you know, deep research and I drew upon my own experiences as a child and my mother, you know, saying to me the quotes from Billie Holiday song, God Bless The Child that's got his own and, and my hearing of the song from, you know, Billie Holiday and her song Strange Fruit, which became part of the fabric of my Billie Holiday memorial statue presentation.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now both of those songs were incorporated into the original design.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: We, we've shown--(unclear)--the schematic--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so tell us, now those two representations of those two songs plus the statue of Billie Holiday herself right singing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, along with a crow, a representation of a crow that's eating a gardenia that represents a spirit of black people, spirit of the artist Billie Holiday, and the spirit of this artist in terms of racism, gnawing away and that's a crow eating a gardenia gnawing away at the spirit of black people and, but, I mean, that--I saw the opportunity to do Billie Holiday as more than just doing a statue of a public figure.  I saw first of all as an opportunity to do a work of great content because Billie Holiday was an artist of great content.  She wasn't just a singer.  I believe that and as part of my betrayal that she was a substantive artist that, that was very courageous particularly to sing a song such as Strange Fruit at the time that she sang it when black people were still being lynched from poplar trees and to me that's a courageous political position and so she was more of a, you know, her art, her singing had social content and understanding and, and addressing the plight of black man in America as well as her being a great mi, melodic, you know, singer, deliver of, of ballads in her songs.  So, I dug deep, I went to the deep as, as Howard Thurman would do and to experience the depths of what I could bring forth and that what I ultimately brought forth was her song, Strange Fruit, and my rendition of her song Strange Fruit which takes her beyond a figure standing or statue standing singing and it shows the content of what she sang about, what she sang about, which was about the plight of black man in American and also this song God Bless The Child that's got his own, which I was raised up on; my mother quoted it to me all the time.  You know I did a correlation, my illustration of that song God Bless The Child that's got his own, which depicts a black, black male child with his fist clenched and balled up and crying with the umbilical cord still attached to the mother, but you don't see the mother, you see the umbilical cord as a correlation between that umbilical cord and the lynched rope of that's lynch, that's on the Strange Fruit, which is a black man, a black lynch, lynched black man.  So, that's the depiction of the alpha.  For me it's a depiction of the alpha and omega experience of black man in America, and the lynching philosophically for me lyn, the, the lynching is still going on.  But now it's going, it, it, it's not physical, it's more economic and which is really a primary, you know, issue, you know in terms of our economic development.  You know growing, you know, beyond just physical lynching and growing beyond now beyond the, the economic lynching or deprivation of not having the economic opportunity and resources that the other dominant society has.
Speaker 2: Okay so, in these two depictions, one is linked to life and one is linked to death basically--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Right, it's a side of black man's experience in America as alpha and omega.  You know, it's a rude awakening, the baby's clenched fist balled up and he's crying and this, this is the idea that's right after he was smacked on the behind to determine whether he has life or not.  It's a rude awakening from the beginning and a rude conclusion.
Story_ID: 98237
Speaker 1: Now, how did--the central figure is Billie Holiday and tell us a little bit about how you, how you depicted her?  I know I've seen the statue--(unclear)--her--it seems as though it's, it's recognizable repre, representation of not only her face, but of her actual body, how her body was made.  Her shoulders are square, the stance that seems so--  Did you study photos of Billie Holiday, and then how did you, you know, how did you want to present, how did you want to present here in, in your work?
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah I, I studied the photos of Billie Holiday and I had the opportunity to see a film from a TV.  I don't know if it is Ed Sullivan or what.  I don't know if Ed Sullivan was going on at that time, but I do recall it was a film with her in her classic gesture and pose singing.  And there'd also been a number of classic poses of her singing and pho, photographically.  The interesting thing about Billie Holiday for me is that the, it's hard to define Billie Holiday because she went from a very plump, you know, and in her classic heyday, you know, female vocalist, beautiful, always beautiful, to more in her latter day a more emaciated style, more, which demonstrated more physical, you know, pathos is prob, which is probably because of her drug use or whatever.  Well, I did not want to show Billie in her, in her pathos or pathology as a drug addict.  I wanted to show Billie Holiday and what I conveyed was at her classical peak whereby you know she's at her height and her glory as an artist and that you could image the melodic voice, you know, that she had and like coming forth that she was actually singing and creating the music that she, you know, that she sang or what she sang about.  And, so tonally I wanted to bring that forth out of the piece and so she seen in that classic gesture her mouth is open just to a certain degree where it's not extreme and, and ugly.  'Cause if you know if you do extreme gestures with your facial expressions it can become and on a permanent base as--(unclear)--it would be very ugly.  So, I just got it at that point where that tone is coming out of her and where that, that subtle pathos, but it's a classic pathos that you experience through her song and also the, the, the opening of her fingers, the way she held her hands, and the opening of her finger, fingers kind of echoed the tone that was coming out of her mouth like she's trying to sing, so she's opening, she's using her, lifting her, and she's singing through her diaphragm, and all of that is part of what the, the public sees.  I don't know if it particularly--(unclear)--it should be experiencing also, you know this tone coming out of her and the ideas that she's singing Strange Fruit.  She's singing God Bless The Child, and so she's communicating this experience in her life and her relationship to the black man.  If you listen to Billie Holiday song a lot or most of them is about her experience with the black man, if you really listen you know.  Now I don't--something--one of her songs is about her being, I won't tell any copper if I'm beat up by my papa, ain't nobody's business if I do.  You know, and so, you know like it's, it's, it's her, her pathos and languages contained in the black experience and that's really why I wanted to do Billie Holiday.  It's very symbolic of a black experience in America and from her, her music on through to her life.
Story_ID: 98238
Speaker 1: Now there's something else that happened here that in the course of doing this the symbolic of a black experience in America too, the, the full idea that you had to present this and your full plan was not carried out.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: So and that happens to a lot of people probably, but I know it happens a lot to black people, especially in the world of representational art and when monuments are created, I know are, are created.  I know there are a lot of people who are upset about how the way something was done or something being left out.  What happened to you?  Tell, tell us about it.
Speaker 2: Well, what happened is that the full expression of the artwork which to me was the basis of a truly great monument to Billie Holiday.  What the city did as soon as they, the City of Baltimore [Maryland] did through a city official, as soon as they got delivery of the statue prior to casting it into bronze, they just grabbed that and ran with it.  Contrary to my design concept, which involved the Strange Fruit and God Bless The Child and the crow and a few other things that was really important to the total context of the presentation of the sculpture--
Speaker 1: Hold on one second.
Speaker 2: So, the full context of the sculpture was not, you know, accepted.  They ran with the statue itself, and they put a pedestal up that was three and a half feet high and that would not accommodate those artistic elements--(unclear)--sculptures of God Bless The Child and Strange Fruit, etc., and so I boycotted the unveiling of the statue without those particular elements, artistic elements, and protested, you know, to the city and to and through media, which basically what that amounts to is censorship.  The, the eliminating of the Strange Fruit form in particular and, you know, the rest of the artwork that goes with it.
Speaker 1: So, you think they probably had a problem with the depiction of a lynching on a monument in the black community.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay--that's not a stretch--(laughter), you know, that's, that's, yeah that's, that's seems to be what's going on.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, so as to this day the panels have not been installed, but you say that there's been a resolution to the problem since that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what's, what's evolving now as to today yes, but what has, what is currently evolving is an effort by the city to rectify the matter and put the statue up correctly, and it's based on protests from outside the City of Baltimore of someone who actually came to view the statue and found the statue to be in its present presentation, you know, to be objectionable and so that brought about not only fixing up what they saw as being objective, which basically was the care of the monument, but opportunity to do, put the statue up correctly.  And it's really ha, happening in way in the manner that I want because initially I in 1985 I was really to throw down via my attorney on suing the city for misrepresenting the statue of Billie Holiday and the censorship that took place, but fortunate for the city I got committed and involved in another major work on a major undertaken which is my sculpture called Third World America, a contemporary nativity about the monument to the homeless.
Story_ID: 98239
Speaker 1: Now that [his art piece, Third World America] was commissioned by an organization that has done a lot to put forth the plight of the homeless and the--to politicians to, to try to gain public support to do something about them.
Speaker 2: Yeah, to do something about this, about the situation.  This is in 1985 when I think the homeless issue had been probably, you know, pushing towards the forefront as, as something of great concern within the national conscience of the American people and you know, so had been probably coming forth about two years prior to 1985 when I created this work, but in, right at the time when I was about to throw down as I said suing the City of Baltimore [Maryland] I got a call from Mitch Snyder who's the advocate for the homeless in, in Washington D.C., who had been fasting, etc., and you know to get rights for the poor and the homeless, and rights and benefits for the poor and the homeless, and so they had an issue which basically was a political issue that they wanted to assist in my assistance on help resolving and that is in creating this modern (unclear) or contemporary nativity scene that depicted a, openly depicted a black homeless family on a steam grate, which is a characteristic image of the homeless in Washington, D.C. 'cause they, they habitated on steam grates.  And because I had seen a scene of a, not only the homeless living in Baltimore, but also of a homeless, young homeless girl cohabitating with the homeless underneath the Jones Falls Expressway Bridge a half a block or so from my studio.  And she was walking around there with a baby in her arm and there were people--before I saw her there were people standing up above looking down below and pointing at this girl walking with this baby and of course I stepped up and looked at the scene and there it was I saw something, you know, with the power and interest in terms of subject matter that I basically as an artist just filed away for the future, not really thinking that I would be engaged to do a contemporary nativity scene that was derivative of the original, well the homeless family of, of Mary, Joseph, and the Christ child, you know, you know in their nativity scene and this would be viewed as contemporary nativity scene using the homeless, a black homeless family as the, as the primary subject matter.  So, this young black girl that I saw with a baby really was a, an authentic catalyst for, for this, for my saying yes, I mean like that is, that is what I'd like to do.  That's why, you know, so I agreed to doing this, to doing this homeless monument at cost, which was supposed to have cost about 15, estimated at 15,000 dollar, but ultimately cost 19,500 dollars, 4,500 dollars of it came out of my own pocket.  But, I created this work to highlight the plight of homelessness in America.
Speaker 1: Okay, and they, they paid you the money.  There was a certain, there was a schedule right of when to be finished with certain parts of it and they, and they paid you on schedule as per a verbal agreement I read.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 98240
Speaker 1: Right, okay, but after the monument was erected there were some issues around their--they announced some plans to sell photos of it right in other--
Speaker 2: Not just photos, but actually Mitch Snyder--in essence Mitch Snyder changed roles and changed character.  He became rather than an ally he became an adverse, adversary and he took an idea I gave them that could happen and he wanted to, I mean, what he wanted, what, what the issue that came about which was, you know, became a landmark decision in copyright law.  You know what they wanted was to exploit my copyright and actually exercise control and do what they wanted to do, and they, you know, they can't do that.  I know, knew that.  As soon as I created a work of art, the copyright, as soon as I put my signature on and put the copyright notice on, which is what I did, the artwork is mine, you know, and so I have all rights to the reproduction rights, you know, copyrights and in the work inherent within the work.  And so the idea I presented to them of making smaller copies of it and, and distr, you know selling them for, you know, for my purposes and also it could be them, for, for their benefit also, cause I didn't mind that it could be for their benefit also to help address some of the economic situa, plight of the homeless so to speak.
Story_ID: 98241
Speaker 1: And, so, you know, this got into, evolved in a very contested battle between them and I, which basically it affronted the good original of the original intent of our alliance in getting together.
Speaker 2: So they supposed that they should be able to just sell these representations of the work without giving you anything.
Speaker 1: Well, the iss--
Speaker 2: That they owned it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they, they owned it.  They had absolute power and control and, you know, I have, would have no say in it, and that's what they, ultimately that's what they strived for, but they didn't know what they were doing.  They were allying themselves with major corporations in a major corporation dispute that in terms of cop- copyright law and a work-for-hire and they tried to con- construct a case based on the Alden Decision in copyright law which said that the commission party was the author based on the fact that it was a work-for-hire.  Well, my case was not a work-for-hire.  I was not, I was an independent contractor, which was ultimately decided by the Supreme Court of the United States.
Speaker 2: They paid you no benefits, they didn't pay you any taxes or anything on your salary for that?  There was no salary it was just--you were paid straight up as a contractor?
Speaker 1: Right, and so they-the important fact is I was not their employee.  If I were their employee, if I could be construed, which they tried to fabricate that I was their employee, then they would own the copyright outright.  They wouldn't have to share with me or whatever at all or they would have full control of it.  And that, that kind of position as I said aligned them with major corporations who wanted to assume that same kind of position of authority over and control over independent contractors, and that, that issue just so happened was, you know, moving to the forefront by, by other decisions besides the Alden Decision as a matter to be decided before the Supreme Court of the United States and interestingly enough the case CCNV v. Reid and the gang I wanna point out they were the protagonist or antagonist, I was simply defending myself in carrying the issue forward all the way to the Supreme Court, defending myself, defending my rights in the work that I knew that I had, but somehow was arrested from me initially in the lower court who ruled that it was a work-for-hire, which is pure fictional, you know, again that was based on the fact that they used the Alden Decision and the Alden Decision argument, but ultimately I prevailed, prevailed through the Appellate Court and prevailed through the Supreme Court of the United States.  And what I wanna bring into play right here is that the fact is what I'm very proud of is that Thurgood Marshall wrote the opinion, you know, and that connects me with, you know, in depth with one of my great heroes and our, you know, great heroes in the black community.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it's also a landmark decision for artists and writers and other creative people all over the world.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Story_ID: 98242
Speaker 1: You know, I evolve, I mean just out of circumstance.  First with the, the politicism of my position and losing of my position in terms of tenure at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland], it became necessary for me to become politicized and to fight.  You know, basically I fought for my position and, but I, I lost.  But, it taught me the im, im, im, importance of, of politics in the situation because I lost tenure not because of my art, artistry or even my teaching ability.  The fact is, I had award-winning students.  I lost tenure because of the politics within the department that were against me, and I believe the politics were both racially motivated and biased in terms of the kind of art that I produced.  And, so that began my, what was considered my politici, politicalization, and when I involved into the Billie Holiday in doing the Billie Holiday Monument, my own artistic subject matter or reaching for the deep so to speak and my own subject in, in terms of researching the subject matter of Billie Holiday and portraying as I, her as I felt she should be portrayed and not just as a singer, but as a, a relevant black artist of importance and stature that had something substantive to say and communicate through her art, you know, relevant to the black experience in America.  In going deep, of course, the politics of my blackism, you know, you know, relevant to this white society, you know began, you know began to surface and to really, you know, come out in terms of my, you know, like, like reaching for the deep so to speak.  And, and then because each time, each time I was attacked--I was attacked in the, in the tenure situation, I was attacked in the Billie Holiday thing when they did not put the statue up as I, as I had designed it or as I intended it, which really was agreed to in the beginning because there was, there was a presentation made whereby all of the content, relevant content of the statue was approved, you know, approved by the city.  So, the effort on the city's part to exercise a form of censorship, you know, is like challenging my artistic voice and what I'm trying to do and what I'm, what I'm trying to state as an artist, which is real important not only to me, but to, to my audience and I went further with the situation with the homeless monument and my politicalization really became more, even more intense and more radical.
Story_ID: 98243
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you know, let's continue, we were talking about the Third World Monument--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Actually what we were talking about is, is, is really my politicalization and with the Third World America:  A Contemporary, Nativity Monument, I mean that's kind of like the, the ultimate you know push.  In fact, I'm still battling in terms, and fighting in terms of politically, in terms of the kinds of opposition that I've encountered, you know, in my, in my life and career and well-being that has entrenched me more and more and, and embattled and being an embattled artist more and more.  You know that is, you know, you know, still going on right now.  I don't know if you wanna make a count of that, but basically that's going on right now, but the, all of it is an example basically of myself, the spirit of the artist being attached, you know, on var, on various levels and has got me into becoming more of a political activist and, and fighter.  You know just not, just not for, for, for myself, you know, but for, you know, social cause, social cause and so forth that I believe in and, which is what I did with the CCNV [Community for Creative Non-Violence], V people by forming that alliance within the C, CCNV, you know to do this monument.  You know, I was trying to help them and help their cause and actually make my, make my kind of input into, to, you know, to their benefit and to, and to really the cause of the American people really.  This is my contribution what I can do.  But, each time, you know, I've been on, I've been attacked and not really taken the offensive whereas--(unclear)--think because I react, you know, to an attack as I, as I, you know, I become embattled, I take a battle, a fighter's position.  I just don't succumb, you know, to the offenses of the oppressors or whatever.
Story_ID: 98244
Speaker 1: Now that 1989 decision by the [U.S.] Supreme Court that you, that you cited was written by, opinion being written by Justice Thurgood Marshall is one that is a landmark decision for artists all over the country where you mentioned that at the end of the last reel that is really, really important that people know about it, you know, all over the United States.  It was discussed widely at the time and it is still significant.  I just wanted to emphasize that--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --significant it is--what are you--are you--what are the issues now that you struggle with as an artist?  You say you been fighting now for awhile--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well a, a, an attorney whom I hired, when I said who still works for me occasionally, I mean I tol--my description to her is that I'm, I've been boxing.  You know I've been so embattled and for some reason it's like I end up in this kind of position whereby I'm under attack and for one reason or another and but I called it boxing, you know, I've been boxing.  In fact, I've been boxing and boxing, I've been doing my own legal work.  I mean, I've been pseudo-practicing attorney.  This was before I hired this particular attorney that I had hired and fighting an issue, fighting a cause that is necessary to fight or you succumb to the opposition.  You know you let them do what they will, and I'm, I'm not about that.  I'm about you know taking a position and defending my rights and, and what I, what I do is when I take a position of right--in any dispute, I take a position of right, and I defend the position of right, not just me, I'm not just defending myself, but I'm defending the position of right and that the right should evolve.  The right of the correct should go forward for what it is as is the correct view or correct position or the correct way that we should be about what we're doing and so forth to whom we're doing it to and so forth.  So, unfortunately, and I say unfortunately because that takes a toll on my art, my artistic production.  The Third World America:  Contemporary, Nativity Scene fight took six years out of my life.  And I was really embattled for six years on the legal front, and this is beyond the Supreme Court date.
Story_ID: 98245
Speaker 1: We always ask this question and that is, what are some of you hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: I'm glad you asked that question, you know like--well I guess one of the main concerns is that we develop the kind of leadership we need to really propel us forward.  That leadership that we follow and in, incorporate into our future is not an egotistical leadership.  I think the great leadership that we have experienced has come from a non-egotistical perspective, you know a non eg, a non-egotistical involvement.  I think when a person, a perspective leader is centered within his own ego rather than the mission or the cause of helping uplift our back people, black brothers and sisters, that, that becomes our short-coming.  You know those leaders who are looking for self-aggrandizement and, and this expansion and perpetuation of their own ego rather than the particular mission at hand, you know, of uplifting our people I, I think is, you know is a failing and that, that there's very--there's usually on the landscape very few real leaders and so we have to wean out those with these, you know who, who do not understand the nature of real true purpose of any kind of like service to the community and towards uplifting it and so forth.  I could name names, but I'm not going to.  I don't think it's a good idea to name names, but if we could put aside the ego, you know, serve on the basis of, of a Malcolm X, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], Frederick Douglass, those who took a risk and took and stance and came right out with it and it had nothing to do with the ego, but had to do with right to those who taking a position of right and truly lead in the right direction in the right way and it's not a self-motivated or self-purpose, but a collective purpose and exercise a collective will and a collective judgment, you know, for the betterment of the people.
Story_ID: 98246
Speaker 1: Now in that regard, I mean, would you say kind of bounces back to your artwork 'cause you're one of the--there are a few black artist and a growing number that are called upon to depict heroic figures in our history.  Most of them are well known like Harriet Tubman or Frederick Douglass, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Malcolm X to some extent, but some are not as well known like Harvey Johnson of Union Baptist Church-who is a great leader there-Reverend [Vernon] Dobson [HM] always talks about as being the person who pu, who got the ball rolling that people like W.E.B Dubois jumped on it in a certain point in history.  He was able to organize people and bring them together around issues and causes in ways that, you know, had national impact even though most people don't even know who he is.  But, you're, you're working on right now you still have Buster Douglas in the works and you have another gentleman named Baxter L. Matthews another pastor from, from historic Union Baptist here in Baltimor [Maryland]e--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so, how--what is, what's your assessment of this trend around historian rep, you know, heroic art in the black community and you know and what we want versus what we actually need?
Speaker 2: Well, again I'm glad you're asking that question.  I don't like to just repeat that, but I'm repeating it here, but the fact is, it's because your question is very germane.  One thing that has been absent within our community is a collective will to celebrate ourselves, to celebrate our heroes, to, to, to, to raise them and communicate to the world our greatness.  Now, we do not take, we do not tend to take the responsibility to truly celebrate our heroes and we tend to look to the white man too much to take the initiate when we should, you know, get together on our own and build our monuments and celebrate our people, celebrate our culture, and celebrate our heroes and I believe God put me on this earth for this purpose to do these monuments because he gave me a profound gift and ability to do that and that's just what I want to do.  I am generally distracted from other life issues, such as being an embattled artist rather than a thriving and successful artist and economically.  But, frankly that wouldn't really matter to me, economic success wouldn't really matter though it is extremely important.  What really matters to me is that I fulfill and serve my purpose, is that I'm actualized through the opportunity to do my art.
Story_ID: 98247
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at what you've done thus far, I mean, would you do anything differently with your life?
Speaker 2: With my life?  I used to have a scheduled track for success; I'm far behind.  If I'd did anything--if I do anything differently--then again no I wouldn't do things differently.  But, you know, in hindsight, I probably could have done better by handling things a little slightly different.  For instance, for instance if--I was kind of forewarned that it wasn't just enough to come in to my classes at the University of Maryland that I taught and gave 'em my very best, having award-winning students and that sort of things, it wasn't just enough that I needed to be more political and ingratiated within the art department in terms of my future, perhaps I would have been a little bit more political.  But, I in, in that sense I would have been compromised, artistically I would have been compromised I believe, same thing as other things have evolved, my other life experiences have evolved.  In essence, I believe, this is my yoke.  But I'm doing what I, I do, however, believe philosophically you an individual is responsible for his life and should not blame it on anyone else, the outcome of your life on, on, on anyone else or anything else.  You know, your life, an individual's life is, is, is, is formed by the choices he make, or he, or he or she makes, not by some outside forces.  Outside forces have a play in it, they contribute to it, but it's ultimately your choices that construct your life.  And I've made the choices, I've made the choices.  I made the choices.  I have made the choices to fight, you know, to, to search for right and to try to do right and defend myself when, when something is, some outside force is trying to perpetrate on me a wrong, an injustice, and so forth.  To, you know, to take away my rights and freedoms and privileges, you know, as an artist, as a human being, as a lover of life and a desire to create, it embellishes this world with my public--what, what my daughter told me once, my public good, my good, you know, to bring forth my public good and so forth.
Story_ID: 98248
Speaker 1: Now, how many children do you have?
Speaker 2: I have three.  One, one practically adopted, not formally adopted, and the other two my natural children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Are they all grown?
Speaker 2: They all, they all are grown now and, and, and I know the question might be there, but one of them is an artist, and that's my daughter, Robin, she's an artist.  And she's very sensitive and, and, and very beautiful in her own way in terms of, you know, you know, her understanding of art.  I'm very happy for her.
Speaker 1: Well, obviously it matters if one of them is an artist. I was going to ask you if it matters.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it kind of helps, it kind of helps because you can see in some respect, though it's not precisely that way, that the torch is being passed on, but in other worse Robin isn't doing exactly what I do.  She's her own person.  She has her own little spirit and a great spirit, I won't say little spirit, it's a great spirit.
Speaker 1: Well, I took it as a term of endearment.
Speaker 2: Right (laughter), right and I have another daughter that's more, somewhat adopted and I have my own, my son.
Story_ID: 98249
Speaker 1: When you look back on the things that you have done, you know, as an artist, as a fighter, and as a man, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, of course the foremost legacy that might be advanced in the public mind at this time would be the fact that I took the fight on the homeless monument Third World America: A Contemporary Nativity all the way to the [U.S.] Supreme Court and that I prevailed in that decision, which is the benefit of other independent contracts and creators, that was reportedly at the time was a billion dollar fight because of what it meant to independent contractors in terms of the control over their artwork and rights to their work, the ability to earn money continuously off of their creation through reproduction rights, rather than to go into major corporations that, who claim that, that they were giving a contract under work-for-hire conditions, therefore they were converted into employ, employee, which they were not and so that comes to a lot of money and a lot of benefit and to lots of individuals now and sometime in the future.  So, but, I'd like to be remembered for as far as my legacy is, is the content of my work.  See it's not enough--when you get into these fights, not enough attention is given to the content of my work and the depths that I try to go in terms of relating substantively to my audience or to the public who would ultimately view my artwork.  So, my purpose is to enrich their lives, enrich our lives, and advance it to the highest level with the highest standard of art I can create, not to give them some superficial shallow work, but to give them something that will truly elevate their lives and their consciousness and understanding about the world we live in and make it better.
Story_ID: 98250
Speaker 1: Just one last question.  Have you regained ability to fly?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know when I created that work once I could fly I was trying to reestablish myself in that sense as, as one who was able to fly and in a sense I, in a sense I am flying, but unfortunately I recognize that I'm still bound to the earth.  In a sense, with the recognition that I have received and the kind of reward that I received as an artist, you know, for the work that I've done and that I hope to do, I am flying, I am soaring in a special place where it's the same as it was when I had that vision once I could fly where I could see the world from a different perspective, from you know really looking at it from soaring above and looking down and just checking it out and, you know, trying to participate and give it my best and, and only through the minds and consciousness of my audience those who view my work will I truly fly.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Story_ID: 98251
Speaker 1: Myself and I forget exactly when it was.  It's either very early '60s [1960s] or late, but I was still in high school [Southern High School in Baltimore, Maryland] or after I got into college the first year.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Should I say anything about the technique or that's irrelevant.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know.  No, yeah I don't think you have to get into the techniques of it--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION:
Speaker 1: This is a drawing of a study of Lionel, one of the two when I first begun studying from the figure from--(unclear)--the natural way to draw.  It's a back study.  But, also what it shows is the, that I had a feeling for, a natural feeling for the old master style, which--
Speaker 2: This is high school, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You should say that on mic--(unclear)--.
Speaker 1: Well, this is, this is from high school, my high school period.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 1: Okay this is another study of Lionel during the same period using mixed media or pencil and chalk.
Speaker 2: This is a nude study and of course this is much further along.  I can't tell you when that was.  It might have been during the as far up forward as the '80s [1980s].  I can't tell when exactly when it was, but it's a female nude study in action.
Speaker 1: Another female nude study.  It's a combination of gesture and rendering, more of a gesture study in com, in combination with rendering of the figure.  What it shows is my, my--I was described once as having a deaf hand, I mean, when I draw.  I mean like it's, I'm, I'm operating more like a deaf mute, I mean, I'm, I'm just searching and you know trying to bring out the expression and the form and you know what the body is saying rather than what it is.  And it is very important in, in, in representing the figure.
Speaker 2: Are you a sketchy kind of artist or do you just, you just, you just--
Speaker 1: I do, I do, I do both.
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I do both.  Mostly I, I try to be more of a sketch artist as you, as you call it.
Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 1: I, I resist finishing things.
Speaker 2: This is probably from the '80s [1980s] also.  It might be a little later, I don't know.  But what I, one thing I try to do in my drawing is to, as you saw in the preceding drawings it's really to just have a sense of calligraphy.  After, after you understand the rudiments of drawing in the form, drawing the human figure, you know once you learn your ABC's, you begin to write in script.  So, basically I've mastered the ABCs and of the figure and the knowledge and understanding of the figures, so what--(unclear)--in language and a communication in drawing is the calligraphy or the expression, you know, bringing the line to life, make it really express something about the character and figure, of the character and expression of the figure beyond the ABCs.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 2: This is my concept for the grand vision and that's really is my trademark statement called La Grande Vision, and I like French titles and the, and I like the implication of this, but what the subject is doing is reaching for the heights and reaching for in all his, with all his body and physical expression for the heights of achievement and aspiration and what he hopes--he's grounded though, he's grounded on the  boulder of a rock and which is the earth and what he holds in his hand with open fingers is substance, which is like water would do if it falls through the finger, the open hand or the open fingers, but at the same time is trying to hold on, hold on to the substance that's within him and that is within life.  He's reaching for the grand vision.
Speaker 1: This is a study of for the Billie Holiday statue, and this is a lighter figure and more open and airy, the natural portrayal in the statue, but, so this wasn't used as simply a study from a model.
Speaker 2: This is a 1979.
Speaker 1: Well, somewhere between 1979 and probably 1981, '80' [1980], '81 [1981].
Speaker 2: These are two other studies with the same model for the Billie Holiday statue.  It shows different gestures, different attitudes and a certain consideration for pathos, the pathos expressed through the figure during, it's done during the same period.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 2: This is figure study for, for a proposed sculpture, primarily a figurative and a figurative artist and our work with a human form, the dynamics of the human form expression, and this is, it was a study it's called Turtle.  I call it Turtle, and the particular model was just 16 years old at the time and she envisioned herself as a turtle and this is what I got out of it.  This is the kind of pose she naturally took and so I, I grabbed it.  You know, it was a moment, you know, identifying with her own in, individual expression along with my artistic purposes, the Turtle.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 2: This is an early port, photographic portrait of me.  Inside of that portrait is a photograph of the montage of the sculpture portrait of the artist as a young man, a, photo montage of me with glasses on.  Actually, I actually wear glasses.  I haven't put 'em on in quite a few years because I have a stigmatism and it helps with drawing and so.
Speaker 1: About what year was this?
Speaker 2: About--that is two, I'm sorry probably around, portrait of the artist as a young man probably in the early, early '80s [1980s], about '79 [1979], about in that time period.
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Portrait of the artist as a young man--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh yes--
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--exhibit.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it's--portrait of the artist--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's 1972, so it was be, before that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Around that time.
Story_ID: 98252
Speaker 1: This is me and I believe what it was then the Phoenix Chase Gallery that I used to belong to years ago and it's really the only gallery I ever belonged to since I've made my own attempt to market my work, but in--now I got, you know, pretty, pretty good exposure there at that gallery.  It shut, it, it closed down and I forget what year that was, but it--
Speaker 2: That looks like it's in the '70s [1970s]--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah it's the '70's [1970s], that style of dress, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 2: Now this is a more finished drawing and I, I, I wanted you to see that that I do more finished drawings.  In general I like to--I'm just after the calligraphy of expression of the, you know, of the dynamics of the figure.  But, on occasion my line where it becomes very intimate and very tactile whereby I really as though I'm actually touching the figure, so you know having more personal and more intimate relationship with a form.  So, you know, that is the reason for this and you know the following through to actually finish rather than just suggest the figure as I normally do.
Speaker 1: This is again it's a combination--it's, it's a combination of a finished ex, expressive gesture and a finished drawing evolving towards a finished, you know, drawing of the figure.  Note where I kind of deemphasize the head 'cause I'm really am not, I don't have a problem with the head, but I'm not so concerned--I'm more concerned--I'm not, I'm not concerned with the portraiture, but more of expression and dynamics of the figure.  So, the particular face of the model doesn't really interest me.  It's really the dynamics of that gesture and pose in the figure and that's why it has been done in this particular way.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 1: Okay this is the actual design concept for the Billie Holiday monument which incorporates all of the artistic elements including the crow eating the gardenia on the back of her skirt or dress and Strange Fruit on the back panel along with God Bless the Child on the front panel.  And below that God Bless the Child is a quote from Billie Holiday's book "Mom and pop were just a couple of kids when they got married."  She was 13, he was 15, and I was three or something along that line and that's a quote from Billie Holiday's book.
Speaker 2: This is another one.  These are the side views of the Billie Hol, Billie Holiday monument.  And showing t from the side, the other artistic elements that belong in there and there's an emphasis on the Bronze Medallion Maltese that goes with the statue of gardenias as well as a bouquet of gardenias in her hair.
Speaker 1: This is Farewell to--(unclear)--a contemporary nativity and on the--(unclear)--Washington D.C. during the or right after the installation during the national Pageant of Peace of 1985.  As you can see a very important part of the presentation is the caption on the pedestal "And Still There Is No Room At The Inn" which points to the fact that homeless, the homeless persons in America you know being disenfranchised without a place to live, without a place to stay just as Mary, Joseph, and the baby Jesus were when the sought refuge at the, at the inn.
Speaker 2: This is the actual photo representation of the Billie Holiday as it stands now, Billie Holiday monument for the City of Baltimore [Maryland] and what is hoped, what you can see is the three and half foot high pedestal whereby the relief panels that you are about to see, which are two feet high and three feet high, respectively, would not be able to go on this pedestal, but as what is evolving now is that it will be corrected.
Speaker 1: The correct view of this is from the top, the top portion.  This is God bless the child that has his own, and the correct position of the baby is being held by the ankles, being held upside down by the ankles with the boy, the male, black male child balled, with his fist balled up and crying after being spanked.
Speaker 2: This is the rendition of Strange Fruit and there's a correlation between again, between the umbilical cord of the black male child at birth and the rope from the lynching as well as all of the elements of the poem by Lewis Allen, I believe, Strange Fruit, that Billie Holiday sang with the sun rotting the body in the summer breeze, the black body hanging from the popular tree and it grows, I mean, sorry the crows are coming to feast and it's illustrated.
Speaker 1: This is a portrait of my good friend, Charles, Charles Lawder (ph.) and it's an effort on my part to sort of give a heroic image of a black man.
Speaker 2: About what year is that?
Speaker 1: This is during that same period 1972.  In fact, it was 1972, yeah.
Speaker 2: This is--(unclear)--the black dancer.  You know, again I like French titles and this is somewhat derivative of--(unclear)--black dancer in the cabaret style, if you can recall one of his posters as a black dancer, black dancer on it clothed.  This is clothed in leotards, more classic ballet dancer.
Speaker 1: This work is entitled Eve and was meant as a complimentary to a rendition of Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, which you will not see 'cause I don't have a picture of it.
Speaker 2: About what year is this?
Speaker 1: This is--
Speaker 2: '72' [1972] as well?
Speaker 1: Yes, all in that same period.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.] for the Martin Luther King Center in New York.
Speaker 2: This is Whitney Young a relief portrait of Whitney Young for the Baltimore Urban League.  Both the Martin Luther King piece and the Whitney Young piece are converted, are to be converted into medallions and that's something I want to show you.
Speaker 1: This is an article published in the, an art publication in 1991 and I can't remember or recall at the moment the publication.  If I looked at the bottom I could tell you, but I can't tell you know, but it shows me in my studio with the sculpture, Eve, in the background.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah say that one more time.
Speaker 1: Art Cellar Exchange.
Speaker 2: This is the cover of that publication, Art Cellar Exchange in 1991.
Speaker 1: This is my current work in production right now, which is a publication of--(unclear)--development of medallions as a fund raising tool and you, you see on the left the Whitney Young, on the right is M.P. Martin of the Great Blacks In Wax Museum.
