Story_ID: 19152
Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton and I'm the interviewer.  [Edgar] Carey Lane is the videographer and there is no observer today.  And, sister, if you will, just for the record please, tell us your name and spell it, please.
Speaker 2: Sister Patricia Ralph, Sister of St. Joseph. P-A-T-R-I-C-I-A, R-A-L-P-H.
Speaker 1: And your middle name, sister?
Speaker 2: A-N-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your date of birth and the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: August 15, 1960, Jersey City, New Jersey, Margaret Hayes Hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And today is May 17, 2004 and this interview is taking place at Holy Name School, which is located at 1217 West Virginia Avenue, Northeast, Washington, D.C.  Okay. Sister, if you will, please state your occupation.
Speaker 2: Principal.
Story_ID: 19153
Speaker 1: Could you please tell me your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is hamburger (laughs).
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: The fall.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Periwinkle.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't really go on vacation, but if I had a choice, probably Hawaii.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, lastly, your favorite phrase or saying, if you have one.
Speaker 2: It's not appropriate for this camera.  With my babies, calling them little rug rats or boo (laughs).
Story_ID: 19154
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your mother.  What was her name, where was she born, where did she grow up and whatever you know about her background?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know a whole lot, but my mother is from Bayonne, New Jersey and she is one of eight children and, I forgot what line she falls--what number she falls in on.  Eight though.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Lila Mae [Fleming] Ralph.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when did she pass away?
Speaker 2: She passed away in July 10th, 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she ever share any stories with you about her background or her growing up?
Speaker 2: She always encouraged us to do our best and I guess that came from her growing up--her mother [Georgiana Fleming] telling her to do her best and she always told us, "Show 'em what you got," and that was a result of her being a strong woman and being able to take and deal with anything, and she wanted to instill that in all of her children.
Speaker 1: How would you describe her?
Speaker 2: Feisty, lovable, caring, very outspoken and determined to do what needs to be done.
Speaker 1: Now, did she ever share any stories with you about growing up, about her siblings, or anything like that that comes to mind?
Speaker 2: No, I can't think of--can't remember in the past if she shared any stories.  Because we lived in a three-family house in Newark, New Jersey--so we had the top floor, middle floor and the bottom floor.  So, my grandmother and uncle lived on the top floor, we lived on the second floor and my aunt and uncle and their kids lived on the bottom floor.  So it was always that family atmosphere that we shared together.
Story_ID: 19155
Speaker 1: What about your father?  Would you please tell me his name, where he was born and where he grew up?
Speaker 2: His name is John Clinton Ralph.  He grew up in Rahway [New Jersey], and he used to tell us stories about he and his brother on the train tracks--just riding the trains back and forth.  I never knew his mother [Clara Ralph] or father [John C. Ralph, Sr.].  They passed away when--I think before I was born, and my older sister probably will have a better understanding of that.  But he shared stories on--he used to tell us when we complained about going to school--he'd say "I've walked five miles to school.  I don't see why you can't walk a block to school." (Laughing)  I'm like "Okay, Daddy."
Speaker 1: Are there any other stories about his--any particular stories about riding the trains--that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: No, they used to just get on a train and get up and get on another train and just do a whole lot of walking around.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: Very quiet.  Basically very quiet and caring and keeps to himself.  So, it's kind of hard--we get a laugh out of him every once in awhile, or, whatever, but he's just that quiet-type person.  He likes to experiment new things.  He's excellent at making carpen--carpenter.  He's not a carpenter either, but he's excellent at doing those different types of things.
Story_ID: 19156
Speaker 1: What about your background, your ancestors?  How far back can you trace your ancestors?  Do you have any stories about your background and your ancestors?
Speaker 2: The only, I can only go as far as my grandmother [Georgiana Fleming] and grandfather [David Fleming], and the one thing that really struck me since the second grade, when I made my first communion, and I always remember her smile.  She had a silver coat on with a white--it was white.  What do you call those hats?  They're round.  Cup hats?  Something like that.  And, after making first communion, I could see her just doing this cause I knew she was so proud that we made our first communion.  With my grandfather, every time we went upstairs he used to say, "There are those little shorties."  He used to call my sister [Lynn Marie Ralph] and I 'Little Shorties'.  He was always sitting in that one particular chair.  And then, he passed away--I think we were in second grade.  But the twins were always the shorties to him.  And with my grandmother, when you came home from school, we could never (laughs) play around because at three o'clock, that was her story time.  'General Hospital' [television program]--we could not move until it was over (laughs).
Speaker 1: And were these your maternal or your paternal--?
Speaker 2: My maternal--maternal grandparents.
Speaker 1: And what do you remember more about your paternal grandparents [John C. Ralph, Sr. and Clara Ralph]?
Speaker 2: I don't know anything--I've never met them.
Story_ID: 19157
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Growing up with five brothers and sisters--no eight--it's eight of us.  I have five brothers.  One, God rest his soul, passed away [Anthony Ralph], and then there's Brian, who's the baby and it's three girls and five boys in the family.  And we used to have a lot of fun--fun time together clowning around and had a lot of family barbecues.  And, I used to hate it because we had to do all the work that my mother [Lila Mae Fleming Ralph] enjoyed having family barbecues together and we had to get all the work done and she would fuss at us and but then afterwards when everyone came and everyone began to enjoy themselves--but, of course, we were left with the dishes to clean (laughs).
Speaker 1: And what are some other (unclear) and can you like describe your family life for us and any special events and holidays or just what it was like growing up in your house.
Speaker 2: Christmas was always my favorite growing up in the house.  The one story I'll never forget, we all went to mass at Blessed Sacrament in Newark [New Jersey], and I remember--I think I was in tenth grade, and I always wanted a ten-speed bike.  So we came home that Christmas day and I'm looking.  I'm like, "There's no bike, ah man."  So I sat down on the couch and my sister, Michele, she said, "Patty, can you go get me some juice?"  And I'm fussing, I'm like, "She's always bossing us around."  So I finally got up and got the juice but when I went into the dining room there were the ten-speed bikes.  That was my most favorite Christmas ever that--that day and I'm hollering, "Lynn, Lynn, we have some bikes, we have the bikes."  And then, we used to, as a family, my younger brother, Brian, Lynn, myself and my father [John Clinton Ralph] and friends in the neighborhood, we used to always go bike riding together in Weequahic Park and we used to go on the bike trail and we used to be called the dirty dozen because we came back looking awful (laughs).  Wherever Daddy took us, that where he led the neighborhood kids.  So we had a real good time doing that.
Speaker 1: What about other special events?  Do any come to mind, any special memories?
Speaker 2: Let me see.  Christmas, Thanksgiving time was always nice and, what else, Mother's Day and Father's Day.  And just basically being together.  It's hard now that everyone's far apart trying to get together. It's difficult at this time.
Speaker 1: And what was daily life like?  What was it like?  You got up in the morning--.
Speaker 2: Mommy used to always, when we were younger, she used to always come into the girls' room, flick on the light, and I used to hate that.  "Patty and Lynn, try to get up."  So she used to always tell us to get up, get ready for school.  And then she used to always line us up for cod liver oil and a peppermint.  I used to hate those mornings because right before we went to school, we had to get cod liver oil and a peppermint.  And I'll never forget my brother Tony [Anthony], one day, God rest his soul--he took it and he ran into the girls' room and threw up behind the bed.  And I was like, "Why did he have to come into our room and couldn't go to his own room?" (laughs)  So I never forgot Tony when he did that.  But he had to get back in line and take the cod liver oil.  But to this day I think my younger brother, Brian, is the only one that takes cod liver oil.  The rest of us-no--nothing to do with it.
Speaker 1: Could you give us your sibling's names and their birth order, including yourself.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Michele is the oldest, she was born May 4th, I can't remember the year, and Michael, May 11th. Kevin--now his name is John Kevin but we always grew up calling him Kevin--he was born April 9th.  Patrick was born August 9th--Patrick.  Tony was born September 4th.  I was born and Lynn were born--we were born August 15th [1960] and Brian was born February 22nd.
Story_ID: 19158
Speaker 1: Do you remember what street you lived on?
Speaker 2: 701 South 11th Street, Newark, New Jersey (laughs).
Speaker 1: Can you describe your block, your neighbors, your community?
Speaker 2: Like I said, it was a three family house where people lived on the first, second and third floor.  We had close neighbors, but I remember this one lady that lived next door to us--older woman, Nanna.  And, we used to play in the alley way and she used to always chase us out of the alley way because--she'd say, "Get out of that alley way."  We couldn't ever play in there.  Then I also remember with my friends, there was a lot and there was this thing where you rolled boxes down, but I don't know how it got there, but we played--we used it as a roller coaster and we used to get cardboard boxes and ride down there (laughs).  But, of course, we were told not to get caught in there so, when the parents came home we had to get out of the lot real fast (laughs).
Speaker 1: What are some other things you remember about your community?
Speaker 2: My--at home?
Speaker 1: Your community outside your street and your community at large.
Speaker 2: When I was little, there was a place I used to always hate passing because there were trucks with the lift--the lift things.  But they always reminded me of big monsters and I used to hate going past that to get to the corner store until I grew up and realized I can't believe that's what I was afraid of (laughs).  And, then walking to the store with my father [John Clinton Ralph] and my sister and brother and I remember him buying us boxes of Cracker Jacks (laughs) and then we'd walk back home.  And then around the neighborhood, there was a playground on Woodland Avenue and my father played basketball with the young guys, whatever, and, of course, he showed them a thing or two.  And we used to always have a good time playing in the playground.  And one day while playing in the playground, my sister, Lynn, was riding her bike and she got her leg caught in the bike spokes.  We couldn't figure out what was going on.  I'm like "What is wrong with you?"  So they had to stop their basketball game and come over and tend to her.  But also at the Woodland Avenue--I guess it was a recreation center--and during the summer, we used to attend there and I remember that we used to sing the song 'Me and My Shadow'.  And I thought, "Oh my God, that's what we learned." (laughs)  Just reflecting back on it.  It was interesting.
Speaker 1: Tell me the sights, sounds and smells that remind you of growing up.
Speaker 2: Sights, sounds and smells.  I remember the street.  I remember the laundromat across the street from our house.  I remember the bakery around the corner.  I also remember the corner store where Sid--his name was Sid--used to work.  It was a candy store.  And, sights and sounds--we lived near the airport.  No, that was before we moved--that was after we moved--we lived near the airport.
Speaker 1: Any particular smells that when you smell that smell just reminds you of--it takes you back to your house or your street, or something like that?
Speaker 2: Not--no, not really.  No particular smell, but at Thanksgiving time when we used to gather at Thanksgiving--Thanksgiving, my mother--we'd always have the cranberry sauce from the can--and when my mother [Lila Mae Fleming Ralph] passed away, my sister took over with the Thanksgiving dinner.  So, we were having Thanksgiving one day and she came out with this gourmet cranberry sauce, and we were like, "Where's the sauce from the can?" That's what we grew up with.  And she was so upset with us because she thought she was trying to teach us something (laughs).  "We're like, naw, get the can."  So, it's like, "Let's mail Michele the can of cranberry sauce."
Story_ID: 19159
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about what it was like growing up with so many siblings, and even more particularly with a twin [Lynn Marie Ralph].
Speaker 2: Well, I liked growing up with my siblings.  I liked a big family.  I wouldn't know what it would be like to be in a small family atmosphere.  We lived in a small--where we lived at 701--it was small.  We had the three girls in one room, four boys in another room, and then Brian, the baby, he had a chair bed for his room.  And then we used--we had a pool table--but then my father [John Clinton Ralph] made a top--and that became the dinner table.  And then after a while we moved to 48 Weequahic Avenue in Newark [New Jersey], a nice section.  I think I was in sixth grade at the time.  But, with my sister [Lynn Marie Ralph]--growing up with my sister--no one could tell us apart.  I remember the nuns telling my mother [Lila Mae Fleming Ralph], "Could you please put different bows in their hair, one red and one blue."  And, I think that stuck with my mother because when she would buy us something, something would be red or something would be blue and they--even though they would be the same outfits--but they had such a hard time telling us apart.  My sister and I, we were on the cheerleading team at Blessed Sacrament [School, Newark, New Jersey], and, of course we loved hanging out because you know it's like, "I wanna be a part of this," and--and we did--became a part of it and--but they gave us nicknames like 'Twin'--they wouldn't say our name--we'd just respond by Twin because they couldn't tell us apart (laughs).
Story_ID: 19160
Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Attended Blessed Sacrament School [Newark, New Jersey] from kindergarten to eighth grade, and I loved that school.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers there and did anybody there influence you particularly?
Speaker 2: Actually, the Sisters of St. Joseph were the ones that influenced me, and also Catherine Jackson.  She was my eighth grade teacher, and you did not mess with Catherine Jackson (laughs).  Everyone was afraid of her.  But, even growing up with the Sisters of St. Joseph, there was something about that community that I really, really liked, and, I thought, I want to be a part of this group.  And, but, so I went on through school--eighth grade--.  Sister Robert Almer (ph.) was my kindergarten teacher.  My first grade teacher was Sister Peter Bernadette.  Second grade--I don't remember second or third.  The fourth grade was Sister Mary Herbert.  And I'll never forget, when my grandmother [Georgiana Fleming] passed away, and, she came--we came to school--my mother [Lila Mae Fleming Ralph] still sent us to school, and, I told her--I remember being in the class with my twin [Lynn Marie Ralph], and Lynn was like "You tell her."  I said, "No, you tell her, you tell her."  So I finally went to Sister Mary Herbert and I said to her that grandma passed away, and I'll never forget how she wrapped her arms around me and held me tight and I just started crying and everything.  So I really never forgot that.  That's always been a part of me.  And, fifth grade--I want to say Sister Mary Elizabeth--but I don't remember.  Sixth grade--I really don't remember.  Seventh grade, Mrs. Gaunt, and eighth grade, Mrs. Jackson--Catherine Jackson.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Average--I wasn't a brainy (laughs).  I struggled a lot trying to keep up with things, but I got by.  Now, my sister and I did repeat first grade because my mother knew, and the sister knew, that we were not ready.  And, I remember my mother asking, "Did you ever regret doing that?"  And I said that, "Mom, that was the best thing that could have happened to me," because I look at the experiences as a principal and a teacher trying to help parents if their child needs to repeat.  And it's not the parents' fault, it's just that the child is not ready at that particular time.  And that's what they felt for us in terms of our maturity, that we were not ready to move on, and that was the best thing that they could have done for us.
Speaker 1: And, during elementary school--school time--and those years--what type of child were you?
Speaker 2: Quiet, and my sister was the wild one (laughs).  But she'll say that I'm the wild one or whatever.  But, I was the quiet--I always took things in and didn't say too much to anyone, or, maybe I had--I think I remember having one best friend--but, just staying to myself.
Story_ID: 19161
Speaker 1: And at this time in your life--elementary school time--those years--did you have dreams and aspirations yet?
Speaker 2: I would say when I became--was in eighth grade [Blessed Sacrament School, Newark, New Jersey]--that's when I knew I wanted to become a Sister of St. Joseph, and I was determined to do that.
Speaker 1: How did you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  You just--there was something in me that I just knew I wanted to do and this is what I want to pursue in my life.  I mean, here I am, an eighth grade student, who already wants to know-who already knows what she wants to do.  I mean that's not pretty normal, whatever, but, that's what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Did you share that with anyone?
Speaker 2: I did, and that was a mistake, because I was teased and brutalized.  Even my cousins--they used to call me 'Sister Sanctified'. (laughs)  And, I just took the abuse and I really didn't care, but I knew what God wanted me to do.
Speaker 1: What did your parents [John Clinton Ralph and Lila Mae Fleming Ralph] think about you--you know, making such a--making that type of decision at such an early age?
Speaker 2: They really didn't know at that particular age.  I would say when I got to college [Jersey City State College, later New Jersey City University, Jersey City, New Jersey] I finally shared that with them and my father just said, you know, just as long as you are happy.  And that was more important to him.  Any my mother was very happy for me.  And then while in college, I started pursuing--looking at--going back and forth to Chestnut Hill [College, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for weekends, weekend retreats as a candidate, and, she wanted to make sure that I was happy.  She wasn't crazy, because it was an all-white community, and she didn't want to see me get hurt.  And I kept saying to her "But Mom, I have to do what God wants me to do."
Speaker 1: Did you and your family--I know you talked a little bit about going to mass at Christmas time and that kind of thing.  Did you attend church regularly--your family?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I remember growing up--my father used to  have us go to the eight o'clock [A.M.] mass.  Well, those days are over, cause now I go to the eleven o'clock [A.M.] mass so I can sleep in (laughs).  But he used to always take us to the eight o'clock mass.  My brothers were altar servers and, of course, they had funny stories.  I can't remember them right hand, but my older brother, especially.  And I--and I don't even remember them being altar servers at--at such a young--young age.
Story_ID: 19162
Speaker 1: Moving on to junior high school [Blessed Sacrament School, Newark, New Jersey].  Now, who were some of your friends at this time and who was also influencing you and can you describe some of your experiences around the junior high school--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The junior high school?  I had a lot of friends at that particular time.  Let's see, I can remember Sheila Washington, Gail Parker--the strong group--the guys, Kyle Bennett and Matthew Reddick (ph.).  I'll never forget Matthew Reddick.  One--he used to always bother the girls in eighth grade, and his desk was next to my desk, and one day he did something to me (laughs).  Now, as quiet as I am, I just got up and slapped him so hard and sat back down.  Well, Mrs. Jackson looked up, and she looked at Matthew and she says, "You know next time I'm going to do it harder on you."  So, I didn't get in trouble for it because she knew what he did was wrong, but I'll never forget that day.  They were like, "Oh." (laughs)  But we--we had a good class growing up--we had a lot of fun together.
Speaker 1: And who was influencing you at this time?  Were you still being influenced heavily by the Sisters of St. Joseph?
Speaker 2: The Sisters of St. Joseph, my mom [Lila Mae Fleming Ralph]  and dad [John Clinton Ralph], and just making sure that I'm doing what needs to be done in order to survive, I guess.  And, thinking about my mom and dad in this day and age, growing up with five brothers, not one time did they have to visit a jailhouse, or have any incidents and, you know, they're an endangered species these days, right.  So, to me that was good parenting skills.  They did something right in order not to visit jailhouses and made sure that we succeeded in whatever we wanted to do.
Story_ID: 19163
Speaker 1: And what about high school?  Where did you go to high school and what were your experiences like there?
Speaker 2: I went to Benedictine Academy in Elizabeth, New Jersey.  It was an all-girl's high school, a small high school, white high school.  I was scared to death and I remember meeting my first white friend and going home excited, saying, "Mom, her name is Laurie Sharp (ph.), that's my first white friend I know."  And, we had a real good time together.  We didn't have many African Americans in our school at that particular time.  But, we became--my sister [Lynn Marie Ralph] and I--became involved in cheerleading, batons and going to basketball games and being in plays, and, just having a great time.  And, one teacher that was there--actually two--Sister Mary Feen (ph.), and they're Benedictine sisters that taught me.  There was always something special about her and Mr. LaTrent (ph.) He was the art teacher and it was so neat being around him and how he encourages you that this is what you can do and showing the art skills and being able to do it, and I got into a little art and he was the one that taught me to do calligraphy.  And, to this day, I tried to keep it up, and people ask me at different times to do some calligraphy.  But, with Sister Mary Feen, there was always something--a gentleness to her--that I always liked about her.  And when they found out that I was interested in becoming a religious, of course, they wanted me to go into their order.  I said, "Naw, Naw, I want to be a Sister of St. Joseph."  But, being able to be free and to say that and still visit their motherhouse at different times--which is really across the street from the high school.
Speaker 1: And who was influencing you at this time in your life?
Speaker 2: In high school?
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: A lot of the teachers--they had very good teachers there--and the only one I was afraid of was Sister Mary Elise.  And she was a little thing, and she was the English teacher.  But she always wanted the best for you, even though we were scared to go into the classroom.  We were like do you have your homework done yet?  But, strong, older woman, but always wanting the best for you.  And then my typing teacher--I still type slow--a little bit.  And then, Sister Mary Patrick, she was the Latin teacher at that time.  So, just having that friendly atmosphere in the school.
Story_ID: 19164
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Benedictine Academy, Elizabeth, New Jersey], that particular age, how did you spend your time? What were some of the things that interested you and the things that you liked doing?
Speaker 2: In high school, I liked going to the basketball games, volleyball games, and being a cheerleader, a baton twirler and just enjoying myself with all my friends, going to parties, and, let's see, what else did we do--class trips, and just basically hanging out a lot with good friends.
Speaker 1: And, did--how did you spend your time at home?  Did you spend a lot of time reading, or, how did you spend your time at home?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't spend a lot of time reading, I will be honest with that (laughs).  But, at home, I used to always go out with friends, and there was a dance group that I became a part of--I can't--The Young Leaguers Association [UNABLE TO VERIFY].  So I spent a lot of time over there and did a lot of bike riding at home with friends.  And, well basically, sitting outside on the stoops, as we would call it today, and just talking with friends.  We didn't do a whole lot of activity, the main activity was the bike riding.  When everyone came up with the suggestion, everyone would run in the house and get their bikes and we were on our way to go out.  It was about twelve of us, I think, that used to go bike riding.
Story_ID: 19165
Speaker 1: We didn't talk at all about your parents' occupations.  What did your parents do?
Speaker 2: My mother [Lila Mae Fleming Ralph] worked at 'The Star-Ledger' [Newark, New Jersey] newspaper--and--for advertisement, and my father was a supervisor at Colgate Company. So, he used to come home with a lot of tooth--toothpaste, so, and God forbid if we went and switched over to Crest (laughs).  Because that was a no-no and you have to use Colgate.
Speaker 1: Do you still use Colgate to this day?
Speaker 2: To this day I still use Colgate--anything from Colgate.
Story_ID: 19166
Speaker 1: Going back to around the high school years [at Benedictine Academy, Elizabeth, New Jersey], were you still pretty much determined what you wanted to do--that you still wanted to become a nun--and, what were some things you were thinking about that you wanted to do professionally, as well?
Speaker 2: I was still determined that that was it.  I knew I wanted to be a nun.  I also--I wanted to be a teacher.  And that's one of the things that I've learned from the sisters growing up that I wanted to be able to teach other students.  And, I also wanted to work with the deaf and learn the sign language, so I kind of had a little bit on that, but I never really pursued that career and I regret it to this day that I never did do it.
Speaker 1: And, did you know that you wanted to go to college?
Speaker 2: I've always wanted to go to college, right after high school.  So, I went to Jersey City State College [later New Jersey City University, Jersey City, New Jersey]--and, yes, Jersey City State College.  Now my sister [Lynn Marie Ralph], she didn't know what she wanted to do at that time, but for me, I was going to go.  And it was hard trying to get the money, to raise it--and--from my parents [John Clinton Ralph and Lila Mae Fleming Ralph].  I didn't stay on campus, I traveled back and forth, took the train and three buses to college every day and I loved my classes and had a lot of nice friends I met in college.  But once classes were over, I went straight to Blessed Sacrament [School, Newark, New Jersey], if I had time, and I helped out in the first grade classroom.  And that's where I really learned a lot of how to deal with first grade students, because you have to have patience, and you assume nothing with the little people (laughs).
Speaker 1: And, what were your experiences like at Jersey City College?  Do you have any particular memories about any professors there who may have influenced you, or any particular classes?
Speaker 2: No, not really any classes.  But I do remember I liked going to the student union building to hang out with friends and some of the classes I had were hard and I thought, "I can't do that."  One was statistics, and I thought, "I dread this class."  And the other classes--I can't remember them too much--I liked to play a lot, so--(laughs).
Speaker 1: What was it like for your friends knowing that, "Now, here's this friend, seems like so much fun and she's great, but she wants to be a nun."  Was there ever that reaction?
Speaker 2: They finally adjusted to it and once I got older, the teasing stopped and it became a normal thing that--"Well, that's what Patty's going to do, so that's what she's going to do," and, it was just accepted--as I was--as I got older.
Story_ID: 19167
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about what you did after you graduated from college [Jersey City State College, later New Jersey City University, Jersey City, New Jersey].
Speaker 2: After college was, I entered the Sisters of St. Joseph, and that was in 1985, and I remember my family driving me to St. Michael's [Parish], in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], because that's where the postulants lived at that particular time.  And, during the night, father [John Clinton Ralph] pulled me aside telling me, "Now behave yourself,"  because it was really my first time being away from home and it was a whole new experience for me, living with a group of women, and not with my siblings, and living in that community, because there are things you can get away with at home, but then you have to be responsible within community.  So, it was a different experience for me.
Speaker 1: And what was it like for your parents [John Clinton Ralph and Lila Mae Fleming Ralph] when--when they took you there.  I mean were there any particular concerns because, as you had mentioned before, this was an all-white community.
Speaker 2: With my parents, I guess they saw that I was still determined and accepted it and, once they dropped me off at St. Michael's and they stayed a while--we had a prayer service and everything--and my sister, Michele was with me, and, they--they were okay.  They knew I was in safe hands.
Speaker 1: And, what was your sister, Lynn [Marie Ralph], thinking at this point?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, believe it or not, my sister, Lynn, entered the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament before I entered the Sisters of St. Joseph.  And, now she was the one that loved to go out and party.  They used to drop me off at home and then they would go on about their business to a party.  But then one day she went on a retreat at the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament Motherhouse and she came home and she said to me, "Patty, I finally know what I want to do with my life."  Now, I can't repeat what I said to her, but I told her but I told her, "I am not going to believe that you want to be a Sister of the Blessed Sacrament until the day I see us take you there."  So, she entered in 1983, before I entered in 1985.  And, I was kinda upset with God at the time because this is what I wanted to do, and here she's going in at 1983--but still hanging in on this dream that this is what I want to do.
Speaker 1: Why did she enter before you did?
Speaker 2: Because I was in a longer program, in the candidacy program, so it took a while for them to make the decision for me to enter.  Now, with her community, there, basically African Americans and Native Americans, and that's their goal to work with that particular group.  And that's where she wanted to be.  And, while I was on a retreat one day at the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament, it was there that I really knew that this is where God wants me to be.  So, the director of the retreat was asking us questions at the end of it, and, she was asking us about entering and what you want to do, and I said, "Mary, I finally know what God wants me to do."  And, she looked at me.  She was so excited.  And I said, "I am sorry, but I have to go with the Sisters of St. Joseph."  And I could see her face, like I can't believe it.  And I said, "I'm sorry, but this is where God wants--."  It was there, at that motherhouse, is where I made my final decision of where I needed to be.
Story_ID: 19168
Speaker 1: When you joined the Sisters of St. Joseph, what was that like for you as an African American?  And tell us a little bit about the order.
Speaker 2: Well, the order--they're from--our founders, they were from France, LePuy [France] and Jean Pierre Medaille, and then you have Mother John Fontbonne, the founders.  The sisters came from France to establish the Sisters of St. Joseph in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And, when I entered, I knew it was going to be a challenge.  Yes, I had to deal with the racism and I'll never forget one day while at St. Michael's--someone--the doorbell rang and someone asked me if I was the cook.  I was like, "No, I hate cooking." (laughs)  But, I also had a lot of support from other sisters.  But also listening to their stories with the Irish sisters, the Italian sisters, how they struggled also, and I thought, "Oh, well, I guess this is an ongoing process that takes place."  And at that particular time when I entered, there were two other African American sisters.  One, I think she was in for fifteen years and she left the community, and then one, who was up for final vows, she left before final vows.  And I'm thinking, "Okay, so y'all gonna leave sista girl hangin' here, so--." (laughs)  But that was okay.  But the one thing that I have to give my community credit for was encouraging me to be a part of the National Black Sisters' Conference, and the first time I went, I never knew there were so many African American nuns and just coming together and sharing our stories and being revitalized and then being able to go back and say, "Yes, I can do this."  And, listening to the elders, the sisters, listening to their stories and letting them give me the strength, saying, "Yeah, we can do this, look where they are and look what they had to go through in their younger ages."  And, you go in, and it's okay.
Speaker 1: Do you think that often times it's a misconception that, a lot of people may be under the impression that, you know, racism really doesn't exist in the church, and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: I don't think--I think people think that, yes, it does exist in the church.  That's--that's a reality.  You can't get away from it, but you still need to do what needs to be done for the Lord and you can't--can't forget that.  But, yes, it definitely exists within the church.
Speaker 1: Were there ever times when you said to yourself this is just too hard, it's not worth it?
Speaker 2: Yes, there are many times I have said that and, actually, during prayer time when I've come to those situations, I've always put myself in the battlefield with--with a sword and I find Jesus coming to me and say, "Okay, it's time to pick up the sword."  I'm like, "I'm not picking up that sword, I don't want to go to battle."  But, having the Lord renew that sword and getting up from the battlefield and going back in for it.
Story_ID: 19169
Speaker 1: When did you go to Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: I went to Xavier University in 1987 and I was studying there for the Institute for Black Catholic Studies and I absolutely loved the program.  It was a three-week program--intense program.  And the classes--I enjoyed the community atmosphere, working together and working together as study groups and trying to support everyone, saying look, you can do this, you can do this.  So, I still have to finish my practicum, and I was hoping to finish it this year, but that fell through.  But, the experience was very powerful.  Listening to the elders--we had excellent teachers there--Sister Jamie Phelps, Sister Thea Bowman, at the time, and Reverend Webster and--I had to take a preaching class and he said, "Ooh girl, you missed your calling."  I said, "No, this is not me," because we had to practice preaching in the classes.  And then there was Father Joseph Brown, and he taught slave narratives and I could sit and listen to him all day.  I love him telling stories.  So there was a lot of positive influence there.
Story_ID: 19170
Speaker 1: We had started talking a little bit about when--in 1985--when you entered the community of [Sisters of] St. Joseph [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], what happened next?  So after--so tell us a little bit about what that process is like.
Speaker 2: Well once I entered, I was a postulant, and that's the beginning stages.  And we attended classes with our director, learning more about the community and doing community services.  One of my services was working at a shelter, getting on the el train and going, going there.  I think we did that once a week.  But we also took the responsibilities of leading the community in prayer and I think there were about seventeen of us that lived in the house with professed sisters and the postulant sisters.  And, once again, some of the sisters were older sisters and you listening to their stories also that were an influence on me and they would say, "Oh Patty, you just don't know." (laughs)  And I'd say "Okay, Sister Elizabeth."  You know, and just--just their gentleness, that was their present.
Speaker 1: And, tell me what it was like when you made your final vows.  When did that happen?
Speaker 2: Well, before final vows, then we--I became a novice, and so I moved from St. Michael's to the motherhouse, and--as I call the corporate headquarters.  And, again, we had a novice directress.  We had classes with her and we also went out to a place called Marian [Convent, Scranton, Pennsylvania], and we met other people who were novices from different communities and we had classes together with the different groups, and that was, like, once a week, every Thursday.  And, being at the motherhouse, we had to lead morning prayer or evening prayer and had to get on the altar into the mic, and I'm looking out, "Oh, my God," (laughs) the first time I did it.  But I remember one sister saying to me, she said, "I always like it when you do prayer, cause I can always hear you."  And she sits in the back--an older sister.  So, I guess it was the way I was projecting my voice, or something, I don't know.  But, we used to do fun things with the older sisters--cause there were a lot of sisters that lived at the motherhouse. So I was there for one year and then we were missioned--we were still novices but we were missioned.  So I was missioned to St. Martin de Porres [School], in Philadelphia, and I taught--no, I interned there first, with first grade--first grade, fifth grade and kindergarten.  And kindergarten was my best experience.  I mean the teacher, Joanne, she was excellent.  And, that was for September to December, and then I had to decide--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Of what year?
Speaker 2: Of what year?  I would say late '80s [1980s]--I wanna say '88 [1988]--between '87 [1987] and '88 [1988] of that year.
Story_ID: 19171
Speaker 1: From January to June [1988], I had to decide what particular grade I wanted to be in, so I decided to stay with the kindergarten kids [at St. Martin De Porres School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And I didn't think I'd want to be with the little people.  So I was there, and then that following year, I guess '89 [1989], I became the first grade teacher--thirty-five kids--I thought, "Oh my God! (laughs)  But they were a good group of kids, and see I already knew them from kindergarten so that made a big difference there.  And then, I was only there for two years, and then--
Speaker 2: What were your experiences like there, being the actual teacher and your first class being so large?  What were your experiences like?
Speaker 1: My experience was very good.  I had positive experiences with the parents and the kids and my thing is--was to enjoy life and have fun with the kids and I never had any problems with the kids and we used to do--one thing I always did--and I brought it here--we used to have birthdays.  So if a child had a birthday, I'd have a little tasty cake and we would sing 'Happy Birthday', take their picture in front of the birthday board and, that's something that I brought with me, but I learned that from the kindergarten teacher to do something nice like that.  And, with the kids--even the older kids, I got along well with them and tried to do different things with the kids, so--.
Speaker 2: And what did you do next?
Speaker 1: After that, I was missioned to Holy Family [Parish Elementary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for two years and I taught first grade.  So I went from thirty-five students to fourteen.  So, the first day, I was bringing them in, and I was like, "Okay, where's the rest of them?" (laughs)  But they were, they were a good group, I loved that group, and when they moved on to second grade, I moved on with them and I really enjoyed it.  And I remember seeing one of my former students six feet something.  I'm like [looks up] oh my God, I can't believe how tall you are.  Well, all of them are taller than me now anyway.  So I was there for two years and then I knew I wanted to move out of the suburban area, I wanted to be more in the inner city, so I was missioned here at Holy Name [School, Washington, D.C.] for five years.  I taught first grade and the music and art room next door to me was my first classroom.  And, I enjoyed it, we had a lot of fun activities.  Sister Owen was the principal at the time, and we did so much with the kids.  Between the sports and putting on plays, and having dance classes--liturgical dance classes--with the kids, and making sure that the mass was extra special for them, it just became a family atmosphere.  And then after five years I thought, "Okay, I need to move on, I want something different to do."  So, I was missioned back to my home parish, and--Blessed Sacrament [Parish], in Newark [New Jersey]--and that wasn't a very good experience for me working with the principal because I just felt that the kids deserved more than what was given, and I became frustrated and I said, well, after my first year there, I said, "I know it takes me a year to adjust, let me give it another year."  Well, I gave it another year and it still wasn't a positive experience for me, so I knew I had to leave the place.  Now the community of sisters that I lived with at Blessed Sacrament, that was a positive experience, but it was the work experience, workplace that I wasn't crazy about.  And with Blessed Sacrament, all I had to do was come out the convent and go across the street, but with Holy Name, I had to get in the car and drive to school.  So that's the difference there.  So after that experience, I called Sister Owen and I said, "Can I please come home?"  So, I came back to Holy Name and I taught second grade for four years.  And the class that's in seventh grade now was my first class.  And my last class, they're in fifth grade right now.  So, between those groups, fifth to seventh, I've taught them.
Story_ID: 19172
Speaker 1: Now when did you do your final vows [with the Sisters of St. Joseph]?  What year was that?
Speaker 2: I made final vows in 1994, and it was a wonderful celebration.
Speaker 1: Could you share that?  Let's talk a little bit about that, and what did it mean to you and what exactly are final vows?
Speaker 2: Final vows, you make the vows of poverty, chastity and obedience, and on the altar, you're signing a book.  And I felt like, oh my God--I'm signing my life away to God.  And, it's a special--special mass.  And I had the choir from Blessed Sacrament [Parish, Newark, New Jersey] come in, and basically they wanted to represent the African American community, so everyone had on the African garb, and my sister [Lynn Marie Ralph], she made my outfit, in white, and it was an upbeat celebration for us, and I'll never forget it--so.  And I was glad that my parents [John Clinton Ralph and Lila Mae Fleming Ralph] could be there--because of the journey I wasn't sure--okay-if he's gonna pass away, or not, but God allowed them to be present for that celebration.
Story_ID: 19173
Speaker 1: And just in terms of you and your sister [Lynn Marie Ralph], what kind of reaction do you all get when people find out that both of you are nuns and both of you have made this commitment as twins?
Speaker 2: Some people are shocked by it because one, they haven't seen African American sisters; two, twins; three, and you're in different communities, and that's unusual.  Now there are a set of twins before us--the Holy Family Sisters--and I think they're in their seventies--and--but they're in the same community.  The difference with us is that we're in different communities.  And sometimes I feel as though because of that we've brought two different communities together because relationships have developed as a result of that from those two communities.
Story_ID: 19174
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about the professional organization that you all belong to that includes other black nuns.
Speaker 2: The National--The National Black Sisters' Conference started in 1968 and someone had the idea that we need to come together as a support team for one another.  And it started out as a small group, but then it grew throughout the years, and last year they celebrated thirty-five years, and I missed that conference--I was so disappointed.  But, it's good where we have the joint conference because we also have the National Black Clergy Caucus.  And what happens, you have the African American priests and bishops that come together with the sisters to just to be with one another.  We have a banquet night, and, where one of the sisters will receive the Harriet Tubman Award, one who has been a Moses to her people.  And, we have workshops--health workshops--and, prayer--prayer together, and, just a thing of coming together.  And, from the National Black Sisters' Conference--came--and this is the second year--The National Gathering of Black Catholic Women.  And, last year was the first time that the sisters sponsored it, and it was absolutely beautiful.  I mean, to see so many African American Catholic women in one place.  I mean, it--it--it was wonderful.  So now we're getting ready for it again this year in Houston, Texas.  So, it should be exciting.
Speaker 1: And how many sisters belong to the organization?
Speaker 2: I don't know off hand, but if I had to take a guess, I would say, maybe two hundred or something like that.
Speaker 1: So about how many African American nuns do we have in the country--about how many?
Speaker 2: I would guess maybe five hundred or more.  I mean I don't know all of them at this time, but not--not too many.
Speaker 1: Is it enough, you think?
Speaker 2: No, it's definitely not enough.  Especially when you're in the inner-city schools and kids don't see that positive image that can represent them, you know, this is what I can be when I grow up, and they think about it.
Speaker 1: And, just tell me a little bit more about when you all get together for your conferences, and that kinda thing.  You said that it's a, you know, revitalization, and how is it revitalizing?
Speaker 2: The prayer that strengthens us and the gifts that comes out of each sisters and some sisters who are professors, doctors, or whatever, and they share their stories with us, words of encouragement and different--the speeches that they give.  What else,the prayer, the praying, the playing together, going on the different tours together and learning more about our history.  And, it's really powerful and I think that, my best experience at the conference was in Birmingham, Alabama.  And, that--that was the best one because of what I've learned and the tours that we have gone on and the hotel was very nice that we stayed in (laughs).  They really made it special, and it's a committee that comes together to work it--work it out for the groups.  It's within our own selves, not the outsiders that do this.  You have a committee that works on environment, a prayer committee, a tour committee, people getting the whole conference together--the committee.  So, it's a lot that takes place in order for it to work well for the other sisters that come in.  And you volunteer your services as to what committee you would like to be on.
Speaker 1: And are there times, as an African American nun, where you feel like you're the only one out there?  But in your case it's a little different because you know that your sister's [Lynn Marie Ralph] out there as well.  But, are there times when you may feel a little isolated, or lonely?
Speaker 2: Yes, there are times, even being a principal among the Center City Consortium [Washington, D.C.] schools, and there are thirteen schools in the consortium, and I'm the only religious in that group.  So, yes, I do feel that isolation, because, I'm one who, "Let's focus on the religion piece, let's focus on that, let's not lose that."  And all the other principals are lay principals, so, it's just little old me. (laughs)
Story_ID: 19175
Speaker 1: How did you become principal of Holy Name [School, Washington, D.C.] and when did that happen?
Speaker 2: That happened three years ago.  Sister Owen was the principal for seventeen years, and she knew it was time for her to move on and she wanted to pass the torch.  And, she asked me if I would consider it, and my first response was "No, I do not want that job."  But she wanted to keep a religious in the school and I finally said, "Yes."  And I keep telling her it must have been a weak moment when I said yes.  So, actually, I'm the first African American principal at Holy Name School.
Speaker 1: Are you the--and, assumingly, the first African American religious, as well?
Speaker 2: In--?
Speaker 1: At Holy Name School.
Speaker 2: At Holy Name, yes.  And we--the school was established in 1924, so I'm the first one.
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about your students, your kids and your families here.
Speaker 2: I love my kids and I love my families.  My families are very supportive.  Anything I need, I can always call--call them up.  The kids I love, and with Pre-K and Kindergarten, I call 'em--"I'm not going down there--I'm not going down there." (Laughs).  But my Pre-K, Kindergarten--she's excellent with them and I give her a lot of credit.  I say, "You are going to heaven--that--that's an automatic--you are going to heaven."  But the kids, they come from Maryland, Virginia--one comes from Baltimore [Maryland], and, a lot from [Washington] D.C.--the D.C. area, and, they bring a lot to school.  And you can tell from their family  whatever it is that they're going through that they're carrying a heavy burden on us, but they know that they're safe here in this environment no matter what surrounds them.  And they also know that the teachers care about them, also, and they can feel free to come to anyone and speak with anyone about anything that's going on.  And just being--being there for our kids is so important.
Story_ID: 19176
Speaker 1: And what's it like running a school [Holy Name School, Washington, D.C.] located smack dab in the inner city where there are so many things around you that you really can't control, and the environment, right outside the doors of the school.  Tell me a little bit about what the community is like around the school.
Speaker 2: Well, it--it's a lot of negativity around the school and that's why we try to keep it a positive atmosphere within the school building, or even outside, 'cause we have to deal with the drug issues, the prostitution issues.  Many times we've been in contact with the police officers about what's going on.  Also, kids--we wonder about the safety of the kids going home, where one time kids ran back to school because someone pulled a knife out on somebody, but they knew where to come and knew that they were going to be safe here.  So, we're very cautious about where our kids are going and making sure that they get home in a safe place, because once they leave this building they're out there, and it's so important for them to know that they're safe here and that we will protect them in any which way.  But, even in terms of the neighborhood kids, who, like this year, parents donated two basketball courts.  Well, we no longer have the basketball courts because the neighborhood kids destroyed them for our kids.  So, we're trying to make things nice for our kids that are here, but when we're surrounded by the other issues, it becomes a difficult problem.  And, you know I have to tell neighborhood kids, "You can't come on the property because you destroyed such and such a thing"--and, yes, I've been cussed out by kids.  That really doesn't bother me, you just move on and do what you have to do, so--it's hard.
Speaker 1: Sister Patty, why would you--sometimes do you ever feel like it's more than what you bargained for?  That, really, you know your job is just to run the school, and teach.  Do you ever feel like it's a little more than you bargained for?
Speaker 2: The reality is and I knew what I was coming into.  My job is not just to come in and run the school because of all the issues that's around me, so I'm very aware of such issues that are going on.  So, if you come into a school as a brand new principal and you're thinking that you're just going to run the school, then you're coming into the wrong place, because you're dealing with so many issues between the neighborhoods and plus the children in the school, and then the parents, who have their own issues or concerns about what's going on, so--that, that would be the reality.
Speaker 1: But, why ask to come back to such a reality when, you know, there are some other realities that are kinda nice--a nice, you know, air-conditioned office somewhere in the suburbs.  So, why come back to this particular reality?
Speaker 2: I came back here because I love the place.  I love the family atmosphere that's here.  It's a small environment.  Sure, I would love to have air-conditioning in the whole school, but that's not a reality.  But, it's just so homey being here and being able to know all the children's names, and keeping them out of trouble, or, whatever.  But, also believing in the city--there's more out there for you and you don't have to stay here--you just think outside the box--there's more--let's not just think of one particular high school that you want to go to--let's think about the top high schools and you have the grades for.  And I try to find the support or the money--"Look, look at this scholarship form, make sure you fill this out, let's see what we can do for your child," so--just so that they can just think beyond the box and see that there's more out there.  And the interesting thing with our kids, when they go on to high school, it is an eye-opening for them because they're so used to being in such a small environment in that family atmosphere. And I've had comments from former students, "When are you going to build a high school so we can just stay here?"  I felt, "You must be out of your mind, you are going out of your head." (laughs).  So they recognize that--the safe environment when they leave Holy Name School and how different it is out there for them.
Story_ID: 19177
Speaker 1: And what do you think it's like for your kids [at Holy Name School, Washington, D.C.] to get the experience of interacting and seeing an African American nun everyday?  Because there are many kids, right here in Washington, D.C. and in the metropolitan area who have never come in contact with an African American nun, and their perception of a nun is very different than what I see in front of me.
Speaker 2: Well, with my kids, they keep telling me, "You're not a nun." (laughs)  And, but, they recognize that, and as a respect for me, this is what I am.  What they expect to see is me in a veil and a habit and that's not what's happening these days.  What's happening is that basically, we are dressed in the times of our people, so, in the past when the nuns came into the veils and the habits--well that's how the people were dressed back then.  So we moved away from this and we need to be dressed in the times of our people.
Speaker 1: And, what is it, Sister Patty, that you hope kids learn from you, as an African American nun?  Not necessarily as the principal, nor an educator, but as an African American nun?
Speaker 2: To keep the faith.  No matter what struggles that you may encounter, there's always the faith in God. And that's what I try to instill in my children--that you're always going to be faced with difficulties, but as long as you have God on your side, you can face anything you want.
Story_ID: 19178
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way that you've lived your life, and what's most important to you?
Speaker 2: What's most important to me are my kids here, wanting them to succeed.  And, my family, they're important to me.  And, that's basically it.
Speaker 1: And how do you feel about the way that you've lived your life?
Speaker 2: I feel that it's been a very challenging situation, but because of the support that I had of others, it worked out well.  There are times when a group of us would get together and say, "I can't do this anymore."  But then, having that encouragement from each other, we're able to move on to the next day and say, "Okay, I'll do it one more day, whatever."  But, since entering the community, I have had no regrets.  I don't believe that I made a mistake in my life.  I knew that God had plans for me and each day something different is revealed to me.  Now how I respond to it is a different story, because, I fuss with God and say, "I don't wanna do this, I don't wanna do this."  But, God pushes me to go beyond myself.  Because I'm a quiet person, I don't want to see a whole lot of things happening and I process a lot of information.  So, that's difficult for me, and that's where God is challenging me to come out of myself more.  And I think that way as a leader, that's where it's happening--slowly, but it's still happening.
Speaker 1: And what's next for you?  What would you like to do next?
Speaker 2: What would I like to do next?  I haven't thought about it, because right now, even though there are struggles, I'm happy here at Holy Name [School, Washington, D.C.].  I don't know what I want to do next.
Story_ID: 19179
Speaker 1: What is it that you hope people will learn from your story, more particularly, young people?
Speaker 2: That it's okay to be themselves and you can do what you want to do, despite obstacles, but you have to be willing to take the challenges and move on.  But, be strong in your faith because that's what's going to get you over.
Speaker 1: And there are a lot of challenges within the vocation, just in terms of getting people into this particular vocation.  What are some of those challenges like?
Speaker 2: A lot of people are not coming into community anymore because they want to get married, have kids and choose to be single--just choose a different lifestyle.  And, of course, at Mothers' Day, we were honoring our mothers and people were saying, "Sister Patty, you stand up too."  And I'm like, "Why?"  "You're a mother of 197 kids--yes, you are a mother (laughs)."  But, that's the challenge.  But the other challenge is I've been hearing through the grapevine how young people are looking to live community.  So, you have some that don't want to go that way, all right, but then, on the other hand, you have young people that are looking into living in community.
Speaker 1: What does that mean, live community?
Speaker 2: Living in community with a group of sisters, taking responsibility of what goes on in the house, gathering together for prayer, for meetings, and making sure you're up to date in terms of what's going on in the congregation, and being there for one another.  Right now I live with four other sisters and I like the size of the house at St. Frances de Sales [Parish, Washington, D.C.]  It's a nice, small group.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the sisters you live with.
Speaker 2: Well, I live with Sister Danna, who works with the elderly, at St. Frances de Sales Parish.  Sister Leanissa (ph.) is the receptionist at St. Frances de Sales. Sister Elaine works for some, she's a counselor who works with people who have addictions.  And then there's Sister Consalata (ph.), who's a Sister at Blessed Sacrament [Newark, New Jersey] and she teaches at St. Ambrose School.
Speaker 1: So, another educator in the house, as well.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And just give us an idea of what daily life is like at the house.
Speaker 2: The alarm goes off at five o'clock in the morning and I hit the snooze button (laughs) about ten times and then I finally get up.  And, the sisters have mass in the morning--now I don't go to the mass because I have to get here early in the morning.  Everyone's basically getting ready.  Sister Leanissa, she's the one--I don't know how she does it.  She gets up at 4:30 [A.M.]--strong woman--I couldn't do it.  And, basically, once everyone leaves for their job, they're doing what they need to do and then--we come home and we have meals together, and meetings together, and try to catch up on different work that needs to be caught up on.
Story_ID: 19180
Speaker 1: Have you ever had any regrets about not getting married and having a family of your own--that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Sometimes yes, sometimes no, because the greatest glory is saying goodbye to my students [at Holy Name School, Washington, D.C.] at the end of the day (laughs) and going home to a peaceful, calm house, so there are many days I have no regrets about that.  And then, usually after school, I have students that are left over and haven't been picked up yet, and I'm like, "Why are you all still here, doesn't anyone love you?"  "We love you, Sister Patty."  "You're going home--you are not coming home with me (laughs)."  But, no regrets.
Story_ID: 19181
Speaker 1: What would you like to see happen to encourage more young people to--or, how do you think we can encourage more young people to become involved in this particular vocation?
Speaker 2: Basically, it would be the process of invitation.  Have you ever thought about this, or have you ever thought about that?  And with me working with--I work with high school students with liturgical dance, and I remember one saying that she wanted to be a nun, and I'm like, "You?!" (laughs)  Everybody was shocked about that, so I can imagine the shock of everybody else when I was younger and they thought the same thing about my sister [Lynn Marie Ralph] and myself.  And, just being there for them and answering questions for them and letting them know the reality of religious life--"This is what you're giving up in order to serve God.  I mean, there are other ways you can serve God, but, this piece, you have to give up."
Speaker 1: Is it a concern of yours that we aren't doing enough, fast enough?
Speaker 2: We're not doing enough fast enough, but it's a process, and you can't put the cart before the horse.  And, you have to work slowly at it and offer different things for the young people and let them know that this is open.  Like, for my particular school [Holy Name School, Washington, D.C.], we're 80 percent non-Catholic and twenty percent Catholic.  But, within that because of what they experience each year, some of the children want to become Catholic and experience the Catholic faith.  So, something is happening in here.  It's slow, not as fast as it used to be.
Speaker 1: And, would you like to see that change, as well?  And why do you think that we moved from that shift--from predominantly Catholic student body to non-Catholic student body?
Speaker 2: I know a lot of parents, non-Catholics, like bringing their children to Catholic school because they believe in the discipline and the education piece.  Now with our Catholic students, basically, they just can't afford it and we try to find ways where they can afford it and to bring them into the environment, because we have a church environment and we have kids, but we don't have a whole lot of our kids at Holy Name School.  Now, right now, we do have quite a few in Catholic high schools at this particular time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--I guess I'm just curious about--so, sister, but are you somewhat disappointed that there aren't more young women--you know--choosing this vocation?
Speaker 2: Not so much disappointed, but because of what society is offering them now--I mean they have a lot of opportunities to do a lot of different things and with my community, if one says they want to be a doctor, and I say "Well, you can be a sister, also," because we have sisters that are doctors, or physician assistants.  You wanna be a lawyer?  Yes, you can do that.  A social worker?  Yes, you can do that, also as a religious.  And they're kind of surprised that that's even offered to them also.  And then with people entering in community, you don't find a lot of young people entering, you find a lot of older people that are entering, because they're set in their lives and this is something that they want to do at this time.
Speaker 1: Do you think you would have chosen a different career path, and if so, why?
Speaker 2: I'll probably have still been teaching because I love to teach kids.  I don't know if I could do office work or sit there all day.
Story_ID: 19182
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your twin sister [Lynn Marie Ralph].  You've shared with us that she--her order--but can you tell us a little bit more about her?
Speaker 2: Well, she always tells a story that--we're five minutes apart--and she always tells a story that she pushed me of the womb because she needed five minutes to herself.  So, we did that, and--but growing up, we were always close--very close.  And, there used to be a time when I would eat a strawberry but she would break out from it.  So, if I got mad at her, I would eat a strawberry. (laughs)  But if she got mad at me, she would wear this particular perfume that--Carolina something--and she knows I can't stand that perfume, so--but we always were close and it's kinda hard because she's at a distance right now, but I've kinda gotten used to that since we've been away so often.  And, at times we do come together--she comes over to visit St. Frances de Sales [Parish, Washington, D.C.] and last year she came and gave the graduation speech from Alabama.  So, people were like, "Two Sister Patricias?"  No, that's a bit too much.  I think they couldn't handle that.  So, it was fun--funny doing that.  And, she's more outspoken.  She could get up to a microphone and preach, where me, I wasn't doing that.  She's very artistic when it comes to crafts.  She can sew, make dresses, anything.  Me?  I can't do any of that stuff. (laughs)  That's the difference between us.
Speaker 1: And, where is she missioned right now?
Speaker 2: Right now she's at Our Mother [sic, Lady] of Fatima [School] in Birmingham, Alabama, and she teaches third grade there.
Speaker 1: And she'll be moving to Memphis, Tennessee--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Memphis, Tennessee, mm-hmm.  And I think she'll be teaching second grade.
Story_ID: 19183
Speaker 1: What do you still want to do that you haven't already done in your life?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  I don't think I ever really thought about that.  You know just getting up every day.  I'm not sure what else I want to do.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you've already done that you wish that you wouldn't have done?  That kind of thing--any regrets?  And maybe that you would've liked to have done differently?
Speaker 2: Not that I can think off hand.  Probably, becoming an administrator.  I also had to study at the same time, so that was kind of hard, and I wouldn't want to do that again.  Because running a school and then going to school, that was difficult--trying to keep up with the homework and assignments and--that's something I wouldn't recommend (laughs).
Story_ID: 19184
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: That we would stop killing each other--put the guns down.  And, I guess learn to be more of a family instead of attacking each other, because we're supposed to be there for one another, and I don't see that a whole lot as I did in the past where we all came together and did what was necessary.  But now it's, "My child can do no wrong," or, "Don't touch my child," "Don't correct my child."  And you don't see that support anymore.  And, it's basically where African Americans need to learn that we're not out for one another, because of the struggles we've had in the past, our ancestors, I'm sure, are very disappointed with us because of what's going on, how we're killing one another.  And it's just not right.
Speaker 1: How about would you like to see more African Americans join the priesthood or become nuns or change some things--or become more religious--that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: I would within the African American Catholic community because I know they are out there.  But it's a matter of having someone invite them to come into the community and not be shy about it.  This is what I wanna do.
Story_ID: 19185
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you?
Speaker 2: What stands out the most?  The day I entered the Sisters of St. Joseph and the sisters from Blessed Sacrament convent [Newark, New Jersey] coming to the house before I left, seeing me off.  I remember that a lot.
Speaker 1: And, how do you want to be remembered and what do you want people to say about you when you're no longer here?
Speaker 2: When I'm no longer here, "She survived." (laughs)  She survived and she was--she had a gentle boldness about herself.  That's what I want to be remembered.
Speaker 1: And, what message or lesson do you have for your children [at Holy Name School, Washington, D.C.]--the children that you teach and the children that you influence?  What message or lesson do you have for them in life?
Speaker 2: Don't give up.  No matter who puts obstacles in your way, don't give up.  Go around the obstacles, or get the help or support that you need, because there is someone out there that can help you, and you don't have to go on your journey by yourself.
Story_ID: 19186
Speaker 1: Have you been active in civil rights issues?
Speaker 2: I'm not that old (laughs).
Speaker 1: Or any civil rights issues?
Speaker 2: No, I haven't.
Speaker 1: Why do you think you haven't been active in that particular arena?
Speaker 2: I've been aware of it, but I haven't had enough time to be involved in it.  Even just being a principal [Holy Name School, Washington, D.C.], it's like, if I have to go to one more meeting--.  So, it's kind of difficult to get--to put--add more things to my plate of what I have to do.
Speaker 1: And, why do you think history is important, and why do you think it's important for us as African Americans to share stories of our history and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: History is important because we learn from our past.  We learn the mistakes we've made and we try to fix them.  And we also learn a lot from our ancestors in terms of their own struggle, because, looking at the kids today, what you have now did not just happen.  It happened because someone stuck their life out for you in order for you to have this particular thing.  And it's hard trying to instill that into the children, because even when they watch videotapes of the past, they look "Oh, well, that happened."  But they really don't understand that this is life, this really did happen in the past, and even when [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was shot, I shared with the kids, "I remember I was eight years old and sitting at the dining room table and I turned my head to watch the TV, and that's where I heard the news, and then my mother [Lila Mae Fleming Ralph] going upset, Martin Luther King."  I remember very little about the riots in Newark [New Jersey] at that particular time because our parents [John Clinton Ralph and Lila Mae Fleming Ralph] had us in the house protecting us, making sure everyone was home when it was all going on.  But, I have a vivid image of what happened.  I seen on TV, and I think, "That's what happened outside?  Oh my God."  So, it was different.
Speaker 1: And what do you think our children, our young people can learn from that and learn from history?
Speaker 2: If they really want--they have to have the desire to want to learn the history and learn from it and then be able to move on with it, but, "This happened in the past, how can I change this to make sure that this isn't happening, or, my ancestor did this for me, what can I do to give back to my own community for someone who has helped me in the past?"
Story_ID: 19187
Speaker 1: What would you like for your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: My legacy?  Ooh, I never thought about that one.  I don't know.  Something I never thought about.  Just being an ordinary person, doing ordinary things.
Speaker 1: But I'm sure you'd want, somehow, your influences on children, that kind of thing.  I think that that's part of your legacy.  Do you think that's part of your legacy?
Speaker 2: Yes, and always having the kids to know that I was positive with them and believed in them and what they can do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And lastly, what do you think about this project and how this information will be used and how valuable it'll be to young people?
Speaker 2: Well, first I didn't know about the project and then I had my sister [Lynn Marie Ralph] go online and she called me up and she said, "Girl, you know who you gonna be with?" (laughs)  I became excited about it and I thought, "Oh my God, HistoryMakers--."  Just looking at the title of a HistoryMaker, and I hope that young people who read about my story will know that, yes, I can become a religious, I can do this or that and, yes, there are going to be obstacles, but here is a person that went around the obstacles and accomplished what she set out to do when she was in the eighth grade.
Story_ID: 19188
Speaker 1: And what do you think has been your biggest obstacle?
Speaker 2: My biggest obstacle?  Living in a white community was the biggest obstacle, but working through that obstacle.  And, right now my obstacle is trying to be the best principal that I can be for my kids [at Holy Name School, Washington, D.C.] because it is not an easy job to do, so, that's an obstacle.
Speaker 1: So, have you felt like as life went on the obstacles got better, or worse?
Speaker 2: I think better.  Because I didn't become bitter, or I didn't feel sorry for myself, and I set out what I wanted to do.  And, I thought if I became bitter and felt sorry for myself, I would have never accomplished what God wanted me to accomplish.
Story_ID: 19189
Speaker 1: This photo is my other half and to be honest with you, I don't know who's who. I think the one on the right is me and I think the one on the left in Lynn Marie.
Speaker 2: About what year do you think that was taken.
Speaker 1: Probably around 1961, maybe.
Speaker 2: [Patricia Ralph and her twin sister, Lynn Marie Ralph, as infants, ca. 1961.  From the collection of Patricia Ralph.]
Story_ID: 19190
Speaker 1: And this photo is the picture of my mother with her brothers and sister. So starting from the left to the right is my Uncle Warren, then Uncle Jeff,  Auntie Lily, Uncle Walter, then my mother Lila Mae [Fleming Ralph], and Uncle Leon. And she came from a family of eight, so Aunt Daisy [Fleming] and Uncle Floyd [Fleming], they're missing, they passed away.
Speaker 2: About what year do you think this one was taken?
Speaker 1: This was at one of my mother's famous barbeques, so I would say around 1980--1980 something, I think.
Speaker 2: [Patricia Ralph's mother, aunts and uncles, 1980s; (L. to R.): Uncles Warren and Jeff Fleming, Aunt Lily Fleming, Uncle Walter Fleming, mother Lila Mae Fleming Ralph and Uncle Leon Fleming.  From the collection of Patricia Ralph.]
Story_ID: 19191
Speaker 1: This picture is a picture of my grandmother and my grandfather.  My grandmother's name is Georgiana and my grandfather is David, and their first born, my uncle Floyd.
Speaker 2: And, last name Ralph?
Speaker 1: Fleming.  Last name is Fleming.
Speaker 2: Could you spell that?
Speaker 1: F-L-E-M-I-N-G.
Speaker 2: This is your maternal grandparents?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: [Patricia Ralph's grandparents, Georgiana and David Fleming, and uncle, Floyd Fleming, 1920s.  From the collection of Patricia Ralph.]
Story_ID: 19192
Speaker 1: This picture is my Aunt Daisy [Fleming] at her eighth grade graduation.
Speaker 2: About what year do you think that was?
Speaker 1: Wow, I'm not sure.  Probably in the '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s], somewhere around there.
Speaker 2: [Patricia Ralph's aunt, Daisy Fleming's eighth grade graduation portrait, ca. 1940-1959.  From the collection of Patricia Ralph.]
Story_ID: 19193
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my grandmother and grandfather.
Speaker 2: Could you say their names.
Speaker 1: Georgiana Fleming and David Fleming.
Speaker 2: About what year?
Speaker 1: Probably in the '60s[1960s] or the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: [Patricia Ralph's grandparents, Georgiana and David Fleming, ca. 1960-1979.  From the collection of Patricia Ralph.]
Story_ID: 19194
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother on her wedding day, and she's at the age of twenty-two.  And my parents were married January 29th [1954], fifty years ago.
Speaker 2: [Patricia Ralph's mother, Lila Mae Fleming Ralph, on her wedding day, January 29, 1954.  From the collection of Patricia Ralph.]
Story_ID: 19195
Speaker 1: And this is a picture of my Aunt Daisy [Fleming].  And when we first found the picture, I thought it was a picture of me, but we finally realized that it was my aunt Daisy.
Speaker 2: About what year do you think that was taken?
Speaker 1: There's writing on the picture--I don't remember.
Speaker 2: She looks like she's maybe about five or six, so how old do you think that photo is? So maybe around--.
Speaker 1: Somewhere around in the '20s [1920s].
Speaker 2: [Patricia Ralph's aunt, Daisy Fleming as a child, ca. 1920s.  From the collection of Patricia Ralph.]
Story_ID: 19196
Speaker 1: And this is a picture of my favorite [great] aunt, God rest her soul, Auntie Lila Mae.  My mother [Lila Mae Fleming Ralph] was named after her.
Speaker 2: What's her full name?
Speaker 1: Lila Mae--I can't remember the last name.
Speaker 2: What year do you think this photo was taken?
Speaker 1: That had to be taken--probably in the forties [1940s].
Speaker 2: [Patricia Ralph's great aunt Lila Mae, ca. 1940s.  From the collection of Patricia Ralph.]
Story_ID: 19197
Speaker 1: And this is a picture from my mother's [Lila Mae Fleming Ralph] side, her sister, Auntie Lily and uncle--I can't remember.
Speaker 2: When do you think that one was taken?
Speaker 1: That probably was taken in the '40s [1940s] also.
Speaker 2: [Patricia Ralph's Aunt Lily and her husband, ca. 1940s.  From the collection of Patricia Ralph.]
Story_ID: 19198
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me with Congressman John Boehner.  We had a synergy consortium dinner and the table I sat at, the guys asked me if I wanted a picture, and I said, "Sure," so they brought me up and they took a picture of me and they were able to get it signed.  He's from Ohio.
Speaker 2: About what year was that taken?
Speaker 1: This was last year.
Speaker 2: Was that 2003?
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: [Patricia Ralph and U.S. Congressman John Boehner of Ohio at an event dinner, Washington, D.C., 2003.  From the collection of Patricia Ralph.]
Story_ID: 19199
Speaker 1: And this is also at the same dinner that I attended and they were able to get me a picture with [U.S. Senator] Ted Kennedy, and that same dinner took place the same year--at the--I wanna say the Hilton Hotel.
Speaker 2: In Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 1: Washington, D.C., and Bill Cosby was the guest speaker for the dinner.
Speaker 2: [Patricia Ralph and U.S. Senator Ted Kennedy at an event dinner, Washington, D.C., 2003.  From the collection of Patricia Ralph.]
Story_ID: 19200
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my sister and I the day I made final vows.  Lynn Marie is on the right and I'm on the left.
Speaker 2: What year?
Speaker 1: 1994.
Speaker 2: [Patricia Ralph (left) with her twin sister, Lynn Marie Ralph, on the day of her final vows, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 1994.  From the collection of Patricia Ralph.]
Story_ID: 19201
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Father Charles and Chester Smith, myself and my sister at one of the joint conferences in 1996.  Father Charles is on the right and Father Chester Smith is on the left.
Speaker 2: And where are you?
Speaker 1: I'm on the right and Lynn Marie is on the left.
Speaker 2: And that's Lynn Marie Ralph?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: [Patricia Ralph (right) with her twin sister and two priests at a conference, 1996; (L. to R.): Father Chester Smith, Lynn Marie Ralph, Patricia Ralph and Father Charles Smith.  From the collection of Patricia Ralph.]
Story_ID: 19202
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me with my superior general, Sister Margaret Fleming, putting my ring on my finger at final vows.
Speaker 2: What year?
Speaker 1: 1994.  And this is at the motherhouse chapel.
Speaker 2: In Chestnut Hill [College, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 1: In Chestnut Hill.
Speaker 2: [Patricia Ralph (right) with her superior general, Sister Margaret Fleming (left), at her final vows ceremony, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 1994.  From the collection of Patricia Ralph.]
Story_ID: 19203
Speaker 1: And this is a picture of the two other women that I made final vows with.  In the middle, Kate Vondora (ph.) and Margie Johnston, and next to me on my left is Sister Irene Marnian (ph.), who was my temporary profess directress.  And on the right is Sister Margaret Fleming, who was our superior general at the time.
Speaker 2: This is again--was 19--?
Speaker 1: '94 [1994].
Speaker 2: [Patricia Ralph celebrates with other sisters after making final vows, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 1994. From left to right: Sister Irene Marnian, Sister Patricia Ralph, Sister Kate Vondora, Sister Margie Johnston and Sister Margaret Fleming.  From the collection of Patricia Ralph.]
Story_ID: 19204
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the celebration afterwards.  My mom [Lila Mae Fleming Ralph] and dad [John Clinton Ralph] in the middle and my baby brother, Brian, standing behind my parents.
Speaker 2: And that's you on the left?
Speaker 1: I'm on the left and Lynn Marie's on the right.
Speaker 2: [Patricia Ralph celebrates with family members after making final vows, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 1994; (L. to R.): Patricia Ralph, John Clinton Ralph, Brian Ralph, Lila Mae Fleming Ralph, Lynn Marie Ralph.  From the collection of Patricia Ralph.]
Story_ID: 19205
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my grandfather that I found.  I guess this picture was taken in probably 1967, '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Okay.  And your grandfather's name?
Speaker 1: David Fleming.
Speaker 2: [Patricia Ralph's grandfather, David Fleming, ca. 1967-1968. From the collection of Patricia Ralph.]
Story_ID: 19206
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother [Lila Mae Fleming Ralph] in the middle and I'm on the right and Lynn Marie is on the left, and that's standing outside one of the restaurants that my mother liked to attend, Kless Diner.
Speaker 2: [Patricia Ralph (right) with her mother Lila Mae Fleming Ralph (center) and twin sister Lynn Marie Ralph (left) outside of Kless Diner, Irvington, New Jersey, n.d.  From the collection of Patricia Ralph.]
