Story_ID: 485719
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name, and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Sure, that's Wayne Joseph Riley, W-A-Y-N-E, J-O-S-E-P-H, last name Riley, spelled R-I-L-E-Y [HistoryMaker Wayne Riley].
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Sure, that date of birth is May 3, 1959, Flint-Goodridge Hospital, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a physician, and my current position is president and chief executive officer of Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee], and professor of medicine.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is March 16th.
Speaker 1: All right, two thousand--
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at--in the Frank S. Royal conference room at Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee.
Story_ID: 485720
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  Boy, that's--I guess having lived in Texas for the past twelve years I, I like Mexican food.  I've grown to, to really like Mexican food quite a bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Got a couple of those.  The one that I always say I always wanna go back to more than once in my life would probably be the [U.S.] Virgin Islands--Caneel Bay in the Virgin Islands.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have a couple, according to my wife [Charlene M. Dewey], but I guess the one that, that I've been saying around here is, one should always try to live their life and try to avoid saying, I wish I coulda shoulda.
Story_ID: 485721
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Emile Riley, Jr.] side of the family, but we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, my mother's full name is Jacqueline Cerf Riley, and that's spelled J-A-C-Q-U-E-L-I-N-E, middle--maiden name is Cerf, C-E-R-F, and Riley, R-I-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there a story behind the name Cerf?  That's one I've never heard.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Cerf is a, a French, French-Creole, or southwestern Louisiana surname, and we don't know much more than that, other than we do know that when we did a little bit of digging around, we were able to find that there were African American Cerfs, and then there were white Cerfs in, in or around Jeanerette, Louisiana, which is a small southwestern Louisiana town, probably about twenty-five miles outside of Lafayette, Louisiana.  That's my mother's sort of--her, her family kind of grew out of southwestern Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what's your mother's date of birth and--?
Speaker 2: My mother's date of birth is May--excuse me, March 6, 1934, she just had a birthday last week.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Ancestors on my mother's side were a mixture of African American, and white and French and Cajun and Creole folks who inhabited southwestern Louisiana.  The lineage is, is, is, is quite diverse but not a, not atypical for African Americans who live or reside in or around New Orleans or southwestern Louisiana in terms of the lineage in the family line. We're pretty sure there was a heavy French influence.  In fact, my mother related that some of her relatives spoke French, that she--as a girl, she--her--many of her relatives speaking French, Patois, or a version of--vernacular of French that was very common in southwestern Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories about the family that have passed down, with all these different groups of people in the--should be some good stories.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm sure there are, and I probably--my, my memory fails me, but I think most of the, the stories centered around the sort of co-existence that occurred in southwestern Louisiana between the black and the white members of the family, that the white members of the family lived on one side of the tracks in Jeanerette, Louisiana, and the black part of the family lived on the other side of the tracks, so I recall my mother and my grandparents [Dorothy Cerf and Raymond Cerf] telling me about those stories.  And, and just in terms of, of the physicality of my mother's relatives, many of 'em looked as if they could have been white, they were very fair-skinned, and if you did not know right away that they were African American, they could easily be mistaken for, for, for someone Caucasian.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now but you say that both sides of the family--did both sides acknowledge each other as family, even though they lived in two separate areas (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In, in, in, in selective circumstances they did.  This was back in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] where there wasn't, I guess, an open acknowledgement, but there was a, a, an acknowledgement, nonetheless, that contributed to at least folks knowing that they had relatives on the other side of the tracks.  In terms of social interaction, probably very little, this was, you know, during the time of, of segregation and--but there was a knowledge, on both sides, that, that we did have relatives on, on the other side of the tracks.
Story_ID: 485722
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Jacqueline Cerf Riley] talk about growing up and going to school, and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she, she spent a lot of summers in Jeanerette [Louisiana]. After she was bor- Right before she was born, my [maternal] grandparents [Dorothy Cerf and Raymond Cerf] moved into New Orleans [Louisiana], and in fact, I always was aware that my, my--both of my parents lived in public housing early in their life, and public housing back in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] was, was sort of synonymous with apartment-living now, it didn't have the connotation in New Orleans that--or many cities that public housing later became in terms of folks who were sort of locked in the cycle of, of low income status of poverty, but I always remember my parents telling me that they were proud of the fact that they both lived in public housing but that public housing back in, in their era was looked upon more as a transitional phase--that you lived in public housing until you, you were able to get enough money to get a home, or to rent homes, or whatever.  And so I was always cognizant of the fact both my parents had some part of their childhood, early part of their life in public housing.  It wasn't very long--about a year or two years at the most, but they were very proud of the fact that they had both passed through public housing and then their families, all the working class families, were able to, to rent homes in New Orleans and so forth.
Speaker 1: Now which, which--
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you which projects they lived in.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Lafitte housing project [Lafitte Projects, New Orleans, Louisiana], which is just very close to the world famous Basin Street, the Treme part of New Orleans, the part where, at that time, Louis Armstrong, a lot of the famous jazz musicians, played their music.  It's, it was an area of working class black and Creole people that really formed, I guess, the, the spiritual sort of anchor for both sides of the family.  Inner-city New Orleans, just south of downtown, I guess--well, actually west of downtown, but sort of the, the black cultural center of New Orleans, they were very close to that and--when they were residing in the Lafitte housing project.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did your, what did your mother's people do in southwest Louisiana?  Were they farmers at that time?  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, right, they--pretty much farmers.  In fact, some members of the family still live in Jeanerette, Louisiana, they've had their sugarcane.  I remember sugarcane farming was a very important means of subsistence to my family at various points in, in--on my mother's side, and we still have relatives who live in Jeanerette, Louisiana who live, who live on land that's been passed down for at least two generations.  They've now expanded into a trucking company and, and some other businesses, but it, it all began with agriculture and sugarcane and, and taking care of land, and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was your mother able to go to college?
Speaker 2: No, my mother--when my grandparents moved to New Orleans when she was younger, she was educated in public schools initially--the Valena C. Jones Elementary School [New Orleans, Louisiana], which is one of the, the older elementary schools serving a lot of black families in New Orleans.  Then, she went on to St. Mary's Academy, which was one of three--one of two all-black Catholic high schools in New Orleans.  My mother went to St. Mary's Academy, which was all-girls.  And then she, she and my father [Emile Riley, Jr.] married very soon after she finished high school and she didn't go to college, she became a, a wife and a mother very quickly after, after they began their married life.
Story_ID: 485723
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name, and spell it for us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, Emile Edward, E-M-I-L-E, Edward, E-D-W-A-R-D, Riley, R-I-L-E-Y, Jr., M.D. [Emile Riley, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth was 7/30/34 [July 30, 1934], New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: My grandfather, Emile Edward Riley, Sr. [Emile Riley, Sr.], was a truck driver for the forerunner of Winn-Dixie food stores [H.G. Hill Stores, Inc.; Winn-Dixie Stores, Inc.], and I've forgotten the name of, of that particular company, but he drove a truck delivering groceries or food, or foodstuff or produce or whatever, for this grocery chain, which later morphed into Winn-Dixie, and in the evening he played jazz, he was a jazz musician.  And one of my earliest memories of my grandfather when I spent a summer with him while he was still alive, was he, he played the guitar and banjo, and my dad tells me he played with a number of, of New Orleans jazz greats along the way, as a way to earn extra money for, for, for my, my dad and his, his--and my grandmother.  My grandmother--my father was the result of the second marriage of my grandfather, and he--neither one, I should say neither one of my grandparents on my dad's side made it past the third grade, and the only high school graduates of my grandparents were probably my maternal grandparents [Dorothy Cerf and Raymond Cerf].  But neither one of my, my paternal grandparents went beyond third or fourth grade.  So my grandmother was a domestic, she worked in some of the homes in New Orleans as a domestic servant, very common occupation for folks with limited educational attainment back then, but was something that--again, I was always made aware of coming up by my father that, that his parents had done fairly well and they were, they were real passionate about him getting educated because they themselves were not educated, so I, I, I think that--when I think about my grandparents, they were, they were clearly unlettered, but they really understood intrinsically the value of education because they really sort of focused my dad into education quite early.
Story_ID: 485724
Speaker 1: He [Riley's father, Emile Riley, Jr.] did quite well in high school and, and then went off to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]--this was in the early '50s [1950s]--left Louisiana and went off to University of Michigan for his undergraduate degree which, again, was a very radical notion for a African American kid from inner-city New Orleans [Louisiana] to go to college, but most kids in those days went to Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] or Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] or Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana], but he, he chose to go to the University of Michigan. He had a high school counselor who--at public high school who really encouraged him, based upon his educational attainment, to broaden his horizons, and it was probably the thing that he credited for his entire life as a seminal educational experience.  Getting out of Louisiana, getting out of segregated New Orleans, and getting into a major research-intensive university was very--I think a key turning point in his life.
Speaker 2: Now, what, what grade school or high school did he go to?
Speaker 1: He went to--let's see, I think he went to Valena C. Jones [Valena C. Jones Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana] for a while, and then he went to St. Peter Claver [St. Peter Claver Catholic School, New Orleans, Louisiana], which was the African American parish right in the Treme area [New Orleans, Louisiana]. He went there for elementary school, and then went on to Joseph S. Clark High School [Joseph S. Clark Preparatory High School, New Orleans, Louisiana]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --which is a public high school--then a public school in, in--right off Claiborne Avenue.
Speaker 2: Now, did he go to grade school with [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young and his brother (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He--oh, I, I forgot about this, he actually had started at Gilbert Academy [New Orleans, Louisiana].  Andrew Young and his brothers went to Gilbert Academy, which was an all-male private high school.  Gilbert Academy closed after his first year at Gilbert Academy, but he knew Andrew Young, he knew Walter Young [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young], they were both the students there.  He knew Ellis Marsalis [HistoryMaker Ellis Marsalis, Jr.], who was a student there at Gilbert Academy, so he was--those were his contemporaries at Gilbert Academy, and then Gilbert Academy closed and then he went on to Joseph S. Clark High School for--to finish up his, his high school.  But Gilbert Academy is one of those other storied private schools in New Orleans 'cause it was, it was a place where a lot of well-known New Orleanians went through, including Andy Young, his brother, and some of the other people that, that you mentioned.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That is unusual, for him to go to the University of Michigan.  Did he go on scholarship?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he, he went on a partial scholarship, and he--I get the sense, he--and he never really talked about it in detail, but I do get the sense finances were an issue, but my, my [paternal] grandparents did support him and, and they were determined, I think, to get him out of the University of Michigan with his bachelor's degree, so they did contribute, you know, financially.  I'm sure he had some scholarships as well, yeah, I think he finished third or fourth in his class at Joseph S. Clark, so he was pretty good student--played football at Joseph S. Clark, was all-city fullback and linebacker, so he, he, he excelled both academically and athletically at Clark.
Speaker 2: Did he play ball at Michigan (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He attempted to, he, he, he tried to walk onto the University of Michigan football team and, and broke his leg (laughter), and that ended his, his football career and he then focused his, his, his efforts on, on zoology and pre-medicine.
Story_ID: 485725
Speaker 1: Nowadays, you know, they--there's a lot of attention paid to an athlete that would be all-city athlete (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --in a city like New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's a person that the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] or Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] would be trying to get--
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: --or Tulane [Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana], or whoever else you know.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But he just went unnoticed (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he just, he just--
Speaker 1: --athletically.
Speaker 2: --he just--he got there more on his athletic prowess, but once he got there, I think he, he became known to the, the Michigan--University of Michigan coaching staff, and so he, he did go for tryouts and broke his leg in one of the tryout practices, and that sort of ended his athletic career.
Speaker 1: So you mean he was known for his academ- or he got there based on his academics (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right--his academics, right--
Speaker 1: --then later--
Speaker 2: --and then they became aware that he had been an all-city fullback and linebacker. In those days he said they played both, both sides of the downs and, and I've seen pictures of him, he looked like he was a very, very fit, very muscular guy, so--and, you know, guys I've run into over the years who told me they played my dad [Emile Riley, Jr.], said he was a pretty good fullback.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Fullback, you have to be a big strong--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: --fellow for that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, were you--now this is in the, this is before you were born, right, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, correct.
Speaker 1: This is the early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Right, early '50s [1950s], he finished high school [Joseph S. Clark High School; Joseph S. Clark Preparatory High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] in 1952, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  There weren't many black players playing for the major colleges those days either (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, there weren't, no, there weren't.  And University of Michigan had--probably had two or three before that, and I think, I'm trying to--the, the coach of the, the Wolverines [Michigan Wolverines] at that time was Bennie Oosterhouse or Osterhouse [sic. Bennie Oosterbaan], or somebody like that, and--but Michigan was a, a Big Ten [Big Ten Conference] football powerhouse even back in the, the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], so it was, you know, pretty prestigious team to play for.  But again, there weren't a whole lot of African Americans playing for the University of Michigan.  And I think one of his friends at the University of Michigan did play for the University of Michigan and then went on to the pros is Lowell Perry [Lowell Perry, Sr.].  Lowell Perry later became very prominent Detroit [Michigan] attorney, very prominent black Republican, and served as chair of the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] under President Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.], and he and Lowell Perry, Sr. were very good friends and pledged fraternity together, both Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] members.  But he was always proud of the fact that he had gone to University of Michigan with Lowell Perry, who played on the Wolverines team and then played professional football for a short time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is Lowell Perry still in Detroit (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, he's deceased--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --he's deceased.  Now, his son quite incidentally, is living here in Nashville [Tennessee]--Lowell Perry, Jr.  He's the president and CEO of the local Big Brothers organization here [Big Brothers Big Sisters of Middle Tennessee, Nashville, Tennessee].  And another life's irony, when I got to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] in the fall of 1977, Lowell Perry, Jr. was a senior at Yale (laughter), so it was kind of full circle when I called my dad.  I said, "Guess who's at Yale?"  He said he couldn't believe it, so--he had gone to school with Lowell's dad at Michigan, and here I was a freshman at Yale when Lowell's son, oldest son, was a senior.
Story_ID: 485726
Speaker 1: So he--his experience was, you said, an eye-opening experience, it opened a world for him?
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.  I, I think to the day my dad [Emile Riley, Jr.] died, the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] was very important part of his life, so much so that--my dad passed away last January 31st in 2006.  We knew--my siblings and I knew how much he loved University of Michigan, so last thing we did before we closed casket for the last time was we put a University of Michigan baseball cap on his chest 'cause I think Michigan was the foundation for all of his success that occurred later on, as a physician and as a--and I think it also shaped the way he raised us in terms of his passion for education.  Having come from two parents that didn't have any education he, he definitely passed on the, the education bug to us in terms of how he raised us, and my dad was, I guess, my--you know--my first hero, but he was, he was, he was--he d- he made a impact just by the things he exposed us to.  He wasn't an overbearing father at all, but he was always wanting to expose us to things and he'd always refer back to things he had learned at the University of Michigan, whether it was philosophy or music, or how to dress in terms of--and he told me he bought his first Brooks Brothers suit when he was a student at the University of Michigan, so he, he always did like Brooks Brothers clothes the rest of his life.  So, Michigan was and, and, and my siblings and I knew, you know, when he died, that Michigan was a, a key part of his life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he have a particular mentor there that he talked about?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  I, I don't recall him saying specific names, but I do recall him saying that there were, there were a couple of professors who really kind of looked after him and encouraged him to pursue medicine as a career.  He had initially gone to University of Michigan thinking he wanted to be an engineer and he, he encountered some of the early engineering courses and, and, and didn't do too well in 'em and secondly didn't like 'em as much as he thought, and so he shifted from engineering to zoology and put together a pretty good record and was able to, to get accepted to Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee].  So, his mentors--yeah, I remember he, he referred to a couple professors, but I don't know--I don't recall their names.
Story_ID: 485727
Speaker 1: We're joined by Stacey Nickens as an observer, but--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: We were talking about your father's [Emile Riley, Jr.] mentors at University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], and some of his ex- experiences that really shaped his--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the way he viewed his life.
Speaker 2: Like I said, I don't recall his faculty mentors, but I just recall, I guess, my dad always referred to the, the milieu that he was in at University of Michigan in terms of the, the folks he, he encountered and the experiences that I think informed him--or that shaped his, his professional career.  I mean he, he told me about Lowell Perry, Sr., he told me how [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones was a couple of years ahead of them at the University of Michigan--very famous, world famous actor.
Speaker 1: Oh yes.
Speaker 2: His roommate was Judge, Judge Myron Wahls, who was a black justice of the Michigan Court of Appeal [sic. Michigan Court of Appeals], and so the Michigan experience was, was--like I said, we knew it meant so much to him during his life that we sent him to the great beyond with his University of Michigan baseball cap because he, he was a devoted alumnus of Michigan his entire life as a result of that experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he, he went from University of Michigan to Meharry (unclear) medical school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.  He came here to Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee] in--let's see, he finished University of Michigan in zoology in the spring of 1956, and entered Meharry Medical College in August of f- '56 [1956].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he earned his medical degree here--
Speaker 2: Right, he was--finished his medical degree in 1960.  During the time when he was here, he and my mother [Jacqueline Cerf Riley] were married, and he went home every--he said he went home every exam period, after every exam period.  He and his roommate, who was also from New Orleans [Louisiana], Leonard Tureaud of, of--who's deceased now, formerly of Los Angeles [California]--he and Leonard and Virgil Hardin, another New Orleanian, would drive back to New Orleans to see their families.  It's quite likely I came about on one of his trips home (laughter) 'cause I was born (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were born--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, I was, I was probably a study break baby, and--
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-nine [1959] (unclear).
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-nine [1959].  When he was in his j- end of his junior, year I was--my dad was in exam period when I was born.  I was born on May 3rd, which is right in the smack in the middle of exams, I was a month early, was premature, four pounds, five ounces, and I was born at Flint-Goodridge Hospital [New Orleans, Louisiana], which was one of the storied black hospitals.  I was delivered by a Meharry graduate and a Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] graduate.  The Meharry graduate was Dr. Teddy Darensbourg, Theodore Darensbourg [sic. Arnold E. Darensbourg], who practiced OB/GYN [obstetrics and gynecology] for many years.  The Howard graduate was Dr. C.C. Haydel, Sr. [C.C. Haydel], who was the--was one of the leading black entrepreneurs and physicians in New Orleans, and he happens to be the [maternal] grandfather of Marc Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial], the president of the National Urban League.  And again, it's funny how we always say black world--the, you know, circles are sort of intersecting, but I later worked for Dr. Haydel's son-in-law, the first black mayor of New Orleans, Ernest Nathan Morial [Ernest Morial], and Sybil Morial [Sybil Haydel Morial] is his daughter and the mayor's widow, and so we, we still get kicks out of the fact that Dr. Haydel attended my delivery and I later worked for his, his son and have been close to his grandchildren just about all my adult life.
Story_ID: 485728
Speaker 1: Is there a story as to how your parents [Jacqueline Cerf Riley and Emile Riley, Jr.] met?
Speaker 2: I've heard many versions.  My parents met--I had a cousin, his name was Gilmore [ph.], who introduced my parents at some sort of dance or social function.  As my mother relates it, she was not immediately impressed with my father. My father was maybe a little cocky in his teenage years, and being an athlete and very, very muscular, very handsome, and she, she was not too smitten with him, but he, he won her over by being--she told--in fact, we just had this discussion with my wife [Charlene M. Dewey].  My wife was like, "What attracted you to Dad?"  She said, "Well, you know, after a while, he just was just the nicest guy I'd ever met," and so that began a courtship.  They secretly married, they had a civil ceremony in Gretna, Louisiana, right before he left for Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Now is there a reason why they got married secretly?
Speaker 2: I, I have never fully gotten the, the precise story, and as I say, I pieced it together.  I suspect that there was--that there were some, some issues with regard to perceived status of my father versus my mother's family.  It's very interesting 'cause both of 'em were--both sides were working class.  But I've always suspected there was a little bit of color stuff going on.  My mother was very fair-skinned, my father was darker, his parents were darker, and all of my mother's relatives were very fair-skinned, and New Orleans [Louisiana] was not immune to, to that type of, of, of color stuff.
Story_ID: 485732
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just mentioned off-camera that New Orleans [Louisiana] has a culture around color, which is different from, you know, maybe some other par- part of the country where you may have different colors of African Americans but not necessarily a culture is attached to the color--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --whereas in New Orleans, the Creole culture--
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) is attached to color quite often--
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: --I mean not in every case, but in most cases.
Speaker 2: Right.  Ex- I, I suspect that that was at the root of, of why my parents [Jacqueline Cerf Riley and Emile Riley, Jr.] secretly married, although I've never, I've never--I've gotten inklings through the years of little, little things that there may have been some level of disapprovement by my maternal grandparents [Dorothy Cerf and Raymond Cerf] of my dad, given the fact that he was not a, a light-skinned young man, and that most of my relatives on my maternal side were very fair-skinned, including my mother, and that may have played a role in their secret, their secret marriage.  They later had a--so I, I think this, this ruse kept up through at least the first year that my dad was at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], and I think it was towards the end of his first year that they finally told the family that they had been secretly married.  Now, it was interesting, my mother did have an accomplice in doing this, and her maternal--her paternal aunt, my grandfather's sister, approved of my father apparently and, and co-signed the, the marriage certificate, but she was sworn to secrecy and, and then my parents were married and my dad went off to Meharry and, and at some point, I think it was towards the end of the first year, they finally said that they had gotten married secretly and, and of course there was probably a little bit of consternation, but I think after a little bit of, of shock, they accepted my dad, and then they did the right thing, which Catholic families did, they had their marriage blessed.  So they went to Corpus Christi Catholic Church [Corpus Christi-Epiphany Catholic Church, New Orleans, Louisiana] and had their, their union blessed some months later, I guess about a year later.  And, in fact, Corpus Christi was the church where I was baptized, which was right there off of St. Bernard Avenue, near Claiborne [Avenue].  And both, both sides of my family were Catholic, at least, yeah, on my mother's side, fully Catholic, my grandmother on the paternal s- no, I'm sorry, maternal--yeah, paternal side, my grandfather, Emile Edward Riley, Sr. [Emile Riley, Sr.], was Lutheran, but my grandmother was Catholic, so it's interesting.  But, you know, to go back to the color thing, that has been an impulse in New Orleans within the black community, and it's something I even became aware of as I became a young man and, and, and began to date, that there, there was even in the '70s [1970s], early '70s [1970s], a little bit of color consciousness among even teenagers who were raised by folks who had come up through that.  So it was sort of interesting later on to think about that in the context of my parents' relationship.  And later on, you know, my parents, my paternal grandparents and, and my dad had a great relationship, so it was just that sort of initial phase during the late '50s [1950s]--early '50s [1950s], rather--late '40s [1940s]--when this was really prominent.
Story_ID: 485733
Speaker 1: Do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) yes, I'm oldest of five.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Let's see, my sister Debra, D-E-B-R-A, Debra Lynn Riley [Debra Riley], was born in San Francisco, California during my dad's [Emile Riley, Jr.] first year of surgery residency.  So, if you just--giving you the chronology, I was born in New Orleans [Louisiana] his--end of his junior year [at Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], we went off to Rochester, New York, where he did his internship, then San Francisco, California to begin surgery residency, and so my first sibling, Debra Lynn Riley, was born at Mount Zion Hospital [UCSF Medical Center at Mount Zion] in San Francisco.  We then went on to Heidelberg, Germany, where my dad joined the [U.S.] Army under the Berry Plan, and became a captain in the Army--Medical Corps, and was stationed at Heidelberg, Germany, the Army hospital there, where my brother Steven Edward Riley, S-T-E-V-E-N [Steven Riley], was born, he was born at the Army hospital in Heidelberg, 1963.  We then returned to the United States and returned to Buffalo, New York, where my number two sister, Monique Marie Riley, M-O-N-I-Q-U-E [Monique Riley], was born in Buffalo, New York, 1966.  And then the last is Michelle Marie Riley, M-I-C-H-E-L-L-E [Michelle Riley Brown], the baby, was born back in New Orleans when my dad returned to New Orleans to begin practice [at Flint-Goodridge Hospital, New Orleans, Louisiana] in 1969.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, the first and the last were born in New Orleans, and the other three were in between.
Story_ID: 485734
Speaker 1: So you grew up in San Francisco [California]; Heidelberg, Germany; Buffalo, New York; and New- and New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the bulk of the time in New Orleans, but I do have memories of Buffalo, I do have memories of Germany, definitely have memories of San Francisco, and so it was, it was kind of nice growing up in New Orleans to tell people I lived in, in a few different places where most of the kids I encountered in New Orleans had been born in New Orleans and never left New Orleans.  New Orleans is a, a very interesting town that--and in fact, the whole State of Louisiana, there was an article in The New York Times that said New Or- Louisiana has the most residents who've never left the state than any other state in the country.  It's an interesting dynamic, which probably con- contributes to a little bit of insularity and myopia, but that's--New Orleans is, is, is--it's, it's a city that when you leave it, you always wanna go back to it, and it sort of gets in your skin, it's, it's part of you.  And I guess you may have heard that from other people who grew up there, like [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young and, and folks who have New Orleans roots.  It's, it's, it's a very special city to have grown up in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you, I guess, reach, I guess, the heart of your childhood--you're back in New Orleans--
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --in 1960s.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 485735
Speaker 1: When you think about your, your parents [Jacqueline Cerf Riley and Emile Riley, Jr.], who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Good question.  I think that I have, I have my father's passion for education, I have my father's mannerisms to a large degree, I modeled myself after my father because he really was a tremendous role model and, and my first hero, and so I guess subconsciously or consciously I've, I've modeled my--a lot of my behavior and, and attitudes, and the way I interact with folks after my dad, who was loved by everybody.  I think there's few people in, in, in, in New Orleans [Louisiana] who said--ever said a, an ill word about my father, and those that did usually were because they were jealous of him or something he accomplished.  My mother is very, very loving woman, I mean she devoted herself to, to hearth and home and husband, and I think that this, this was a course she set out even in high school [St. Mary's Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana].  I remember seeing her high school yearbook where they used to put, you know, little things about the graduates, and there was some line about destined for hearth, so my mom was probably, very early on, of the type that said I'm going to high school, but I wanna be a mother and a wife, and that's my calling in life, and she did it superbly, she is a wonderful mom and still is, still is a wonderful mom, and wonderful wife to my dad.  She's a little--I guess a little more spunkier in personality than my dad, so I--sometimes I think I get a little bit of my mother's--I wouldn't say temper, but spice, in a sense, and my mother's never been shy about certain things, and so I think sometimes I take a little bit of that from her as well.  But two terrific parents, I couldn't have been, you know, blessed any better than having two fantastic parents.
Story_ID: 485736
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Whew, let me think.  (Pause) I'll tell you one that, that folks have memory of me that's relevant to my time at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], and then one that I have later on as, as I--I guess I became more aware of things.  But in 1960--June 6, 1960, my dad [Emile Riley, Jr.] graduated from Meharry.  In those days, Meharry had their graduation outside, not too far from here, on the lawn, and I was about one year old and, as my mother [Jacqueline Cerf Riley] and my aunts tell me, I was very restless and my mother got up to walk away from the, the chairs that were assembled and, you know, then when I saw my dad come in in academic regalia, I kind of squirmed, and she put me down and I took off after my dad in the processional, which got a, a good laugh from, from his classmates.  But that's a story I've used here since I was appointed to say that, you know, forty-six years later, that restless little boy is now president of Meharry and restless, you know, for progress of the institution, so I--that story has been told about me enough times that I've weaved it into my Meharry existence.  I think my earliest memory of my father though, is, is when he--during his internship at Rochester General [Rochester General Hospital, Rochester, New York].  In those days, medical interns wore those white--everything is white--the white smock, the white pants and the white shoes.  And I can distinctly remember him coming home with bloodstained shoes, and I just--for some reason that's always been in my mind, just seeing those blood- bloodstained white shoes that the young doctors used to wear back then.  So I guess that's probably my earliest memory of him.  I remember he was always reading, I remember when we were at home, he would always have a textbook out, you know, underlining.  Even as a child, I remember him reading constantly medical textbooks while he was at home relaxing.  And in fact, my mother tells the story to this day that she had put me in a playpen, and my dad was sitting not too far from me reading his medical textbook, and some kind of way I got out of the playpen and my dad just kept on reading, he didn't know I had gotten out 'til she walked in the door and I was somewhere else (laughter), so it was a kind of funny story she keeps telling, and more so to poke fun at my dad, how inattentive he was babysitting, but--so, other fond memories of Buffalo, New York, I really have fond memories of Buffalo, New York in terms of the snow.  One not-so-good memory about Buffalo is, my sister [Debra Riley] and I integrated a Catholic school in, in Buffalo, I think it was either Buffalo or Cheektowaga, New York, which was a Buffalo suburb, and this had to be 1964.  But we were the first African American kids at this Catholic school, and I remember being picked on by an older student, and I, I just remember, you know, the feelings of being picked on because I, I--and I think some racial epithets were used at some points, but I do remember that, even to this day, that that was an issue, and I know my parents had to go to the school, and it was eve- eventually worked out.  I stayed at that school, but my mom later told me, she said, "Well, you know, you were the first black kid at that Catholic school," and so I didn't know that till, till many years later, but I do remember just the hubbub around that.  But other than that, my memories of Buffalo were pretty, pretty good--snow--lots of snow, and very cold.
Story_ID: 485737
Speaker 1: You remember the falls [Niagara Falls]?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Remember the falls, falls were beautiful in Buffalo [New York].  I still remember my address, I think my mother [Jacqueline Cerf Riley] must have drilled it into my head--399 Eggert Road, Buffalo, New York, and I hadn't said that in years but still, still, she must have hammered into me pretty good.  The other thing I remember about Buffalo, we lived in a apartment complex where I think we were the only African Americans, but we had--I had white playmates who were Italian, and my best friend was a young Italian guy named Chris [ph.], and I, I can just remember, you know, the things we used to--typical things that, you know, boys do at that age, you know, pick on girls and, and spitballs, and playing cops and robbers and all, but he, he was a fantastic playmate.  And he had a sister who was also, I think, a year younger than, than, than we were, but she was always hovering around, too, and I think she was the first girl that ever kissed me, this Italian young woman, but--so I have fond memories of Buffalo that, you know, I hadn't even thought about 'til you probed the question there.
Speaker 1: You're only about five, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was only about five, yeah.  She, she laid one on me (laughter).  But, but no, Buffalo was very--and my, my parents loved Buffalo, too, except for the winters, of course.  But, but we, we really enjoyed Buffalo.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you went from Buffalo to, to (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We went back to--we flew back to New Orleans [Louisiana] on July 4th, 1968 when my f- my dad [Emile Riley, Jr.] finished his surgery training, and he joined us a month later, he had to wrap up, but my mother and four siblings went back to New Orleans, and that's where I lived with my grand- my paternal grandparents for, for the summer because my dad thought it was a good idea that I lived with my paternal grandparents for at least a summer.  I think he bribed me with a pool table.  He says, "If you live with--if you live with Grandpa Riley [Emile Riley, Sr.] and Grandma Riley, I'll get you a pool table," I think.  And I took up the--I took the bet, so I lived with my grandparents and it was, it was fun that summer, and my mother and my sisters and my younger brother [Steven Riley] lived at my maternal grandparents' [Dorothy Cerf and Raymond Cerf] during that summer, but we saw each other very frequently.  They weren't that far away, you know--about maybe two miles away.  But it was a fun summer.  I got to ride around with my grandfather.  My grandfather was into cars, and I remember he had a, he had a Chrysler with the shift thing on the dashboard.  I remember, you know, the old--I can't remember what it was but I just remember I was always fascinated by the shifter, it was here instead of on the steering wheel, I remember, and a very nice man.  He had bad asthma, and his health was declining probably then, and really bad asthma, and he smoked like everybody did back then--smoked like a train, but a very nice man and, and, you know, I really enjoyed my summer with my grandparents that--when we got back.  When my father arrived, we moved into Pontchartrain Park, which I'm sure you've probably heard from other New Orleanians, was the first black middle class--master plan, middle class black neighborhood in New Orleans, which was the home for a lot of New Orleanians.  Mayor Morial [Ernest Morial] and his family lived at Pontchartrain Park, we lived there for, for two years in a, in a rented home, and went to St. Gabriel the Archangel elementary school [St. Gabriel the Archangel School, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Story_ID: 485738
Speaker 1: Now this is a question we always ask be- before I get you to elementary school--and that is, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, in New Orleans [Louisiana].  Gosh, let me think, there're so many.  (Pause) One thing that I never fully appreciated about New Orleans until I went away to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], is that New Orleans to external folks has a reputation as a party town--Bourbon Street, you know, Mardi Gras, and so forth which, which--that's a more external perception.  But I didn't know how much New Orleans had a party reputation 'til I went off to Yale and, and the people said, "Where are you from?"  I said, "I'm from New Orleans."  "Oh, New Orleans," you know.  And, and then I would say, well, you know, the New Orleans that I know is a very family-oriented town, it is a great place to raise kids because of the family connectedness and the way the families stay connected, and generations upon generations stay connected.  So, that's one of the, the things that I cherish about New Orleans is that outside of the veneer of the French Quarter and Bourbon Street and, and the glitz and stuff, it is a very, very, very family-oriented city.  And I didn't fully appreciate it until I went off to college and then came back, and realized that, but as part of that, I remember lots of family gatherings.  I remember Saturday night, every Saturday night, my grandmother [Dorothy Cerf] and my aunts and my mom [Jacqueline Cerf Riley] would play cards, and they would move between our house, my grandmother's house, my aunt's house, and they would play Pitty Pat, and they would play Pitty Pat for hours and hours, but they would have--you know, they would have cooked Sunday dinner and, you know, played Pitty Pat, and they would feed the kids in between rounds of Pitty Pat.  So I still remember that as a very fun time, Sunday night Pitty Pat gatherings.  And this went on, you know, past when I was in high school, even 'til I was in college when my aunts were still alive, even though they had outlived my grandparents, so that's a fond memory.  So, a lot of family gatherings.  My paternal [sic. maternal] grandfather, Raymond Cerf was--again, I don't think my grandfather finished high school but he, he was a very fair-skinned guy with wavy hair, very debonair, wore blue suits, red tie, white shirt--that was his sort of standard uniform.  He was a barber and he would cut hair in the afternoons but worked at the Rudderex clothing factory [Rudderex Manufacturing Company, New Orleans, Louisiana] where he was a--I forgot what you call it, but he cut out--they made khaki pants for the [U.S.] military, and he was the guy that cut the cloth into the shape for the pants, and he did this for--gosh, thirty-five years or something like that.  But in the evening, he would go to the barbershop and he was a barber right on Dumaine Street, right off Claiborne [Avenue].  And so I got to know my grandfather--my paternal grandfather because my maternal grandf- no, I'm sorry, I got to know my maternal grandfather better than I knew my paternal [Emile Riley, Jr.] 'cause my paternal died when I was younger, but all through high school and so forth, I got to know my paternal grandfather [sic.] better.  He was an interesting character--somewhat of a ladies' man (laughter) after, after my grandfa- my grandmother passed away, but a very colorful character in our family, and so I have good memories of my paternal grandfather.
Speaker 1: So, colorful--are there any stories that you remember?
Speaker 2: Probably, there are probably some I probably won't--I, I probably wouldn't relate in--into, into eternity on tape, but one that (laughter) that I remember very distinctly.  My grandfather did drink too much at times, and I was with--I was co-editor of the Brother Martin High School [New Orleans, Louisiana] yearbook, and we were, we were coming back in a van, in a school van from a, a yearbook seminar, and it's daytime, probably a Saturday afternoon, and we were proceeding down Elysian Fields Avenue back toward school, and a car just whizzed past us on the left, and then cut in front of us, and I remember, whoever was driving said, "God, that guy's driving like crazy," and I, I looked at--I just happened to look, and it was my grandfather (laughter).  I never said a word, but I said, yeah, I think Grandpa has been to the bar.  And, you know, New Orleans has its tradition of corner bars and, and I'm sure he had two or three that he frequented, but he was, he was a character, my grandfather was, was indeed a character and he, he liked his scotch, and he drove fast (laughter).  It could have been a very embarrassing moment had he caused an accident with his grandson in the van, but I was always thankful that he g- he got home safely that day.
Story_ID: 485739
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any, any vivid memories, memories of Mardi Gras and that sort of thing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, absolutely.  Mardi Gras was huge in New Orleans [Louisiana], needless to say, but every Mardi Gras, we would--it was always--you know, schools are out on Mardi Gras, so it's, it's a New Orleans holiday, but we would go to parades, we'd go to our relatives' house, we'd try to find the Mardi Gras Indians [Native Americans].  Remember, there was a great tradition (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah different--
Speaker 2: --of the black Mardi Gras--
Speaker 1: --there was groups of--
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: I know, the Wild Tchoupitoulas--
Speaker 2: Wild Tchoupitoulas--
Speaker 1: --and there were some others I know--
Speaker 2: --and, and the others--
Speaker 1: --Zulu and--
Speaker 2: --Zulu, and so forth.
Speaker 1: They're so different from the Indians.
Speaker 2: They're different, but the Indians would work all year in these elaborate Indian costumes and they'd parade Mardi Gras morning, so my mom [Jacqueline Cerf Riley] and my dad [Emile Riley, Jr.], having grown up in Treme [New Orleans, Louisiana], you know, always said, "We're gonna go see the Indians before we go to the parade," and so that was very special to me, seeing the Mardi Gras Indians, and then the music was very important.  So, Mardi Gras was very, very important family celebration, so much so, that most Mardi Gras, even to this day, I try to get home.  And I proposed to my wife [Charlene M. Dewey] at Mardi Gras time in New Orleans, so it's always been a, a big family celebration, and sort of a home- later became more of a homecoming for me after being away.
Speaker 1: Are there family members involved in the Indian tribes, or the Zulus, or--
Speaker 2: Not, not directly, no, mostly as spectator.  I, I, I think at some point, my uncle had been, but he, he had died many years ago, but we just like going down for the, for the spectating part of it.  I don't, I don't recall anybody directly participating in it, but it was just a tradition that we always went to see the Mardi Gras Indians parade on Mardi Gras morning.  And there's lots of little things like that about New Orleans that, that, you know, keep you connected to it, even many years after I've left.  But even to this day, I--even my own kids [Erin Riley and Alexis Riley], who didn't grow up in New Orleans, still like going to New Orleans for Mardi Gras time because it was--it later became, after we'd moved away and, and, and before Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] hit, that was sort of our homecoming every year, we'd always try to get home for Mardi Gras.
Story_ID: 485740
Speaker 1: What were some of the things you liked to do growing up?
Speaker 2: Growing up, I was--well, in hi- in, I guess I went from St. Gabriel the Archangel elementary school [St. Gabriel the Archangel School, New Orleans, Louisiana], which had, had, had just become integrated, mid-'60s [1960s], so I had white and black classmates there and, you know, typical things like baseball at Pontchartrain Park [New Orleans, Louisiana], football, neighborhood games.  I remember I used to like to play marbles in the street, and marbles was a big thing in, in Pontchartrain Park, so marbles were important to me.  Later on as, as I got a little older, I, I used to build models and--you know, model cars, model boats, model planes.  And my parents [Jacqueline Cerf Riley and Emile Riley, Jr.] joke now--or used to joke that--and my daddy--my dad fed this.  He, he--anything we wanted to do, he always fed it, I mean he--models, he'd take me to the hobby shop and we'd buy six models, and by the end of the weekend, I'd have 'em all done (laughter), and he'd take me next weekend and (unclear).  So, my dad was terrific about feeding any, any avocation that we, we showed any interest in, so model building was one that I really enjoyed when I was--earlier, and I've often thought about returning to building models because it was, it was sort of very relaxing, but I loved doing that.  I, I, I read a lot.  I was not--I would say I was--my parents say I was a better than mediocre athlete, I, I can't say that I was as good as my brother [Steven Riley] but I, I did play baseball, I did play football, did play basketball but it, it, it became evident to me at my early teens that my talent did not lie on a basketball court or a baseball diamond, it, it lay in academics, so I kind of more focused on academic pursuits (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, were you always a good student in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my parents said I was always a good student.  The only thing I did have trouble with, and my mother told me early on, was with the multiplication tables, that was about it, but everything else--I always loved school.  Matter of fact, I never missed a day of high school [Brother Martin High School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  So, school was always something I enjoyed and, and maybe that's why I ended up in academia, is that I, I like academia.  I have four degrees, so my friends tease me, I got more degrees than a thermometer.  But I, I think I just determined early on that athletics wasn't where I was gonna make a mark in the world, that it was really gonna be school and, and organizations, and leadership things that really, really attracted me.
Story_ID: 485741
Speaker 1: Were you drawn to music in any, I mean when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: I had a feeble attempt at learning to play the trumpet, which my poor father [Emile Riley, Jr.] went out and bought a trumpet, and I think I--it lasted all of seven months--trumpet lessons.  And so I, I, I, I regret that I didn't stick with music 'cause I, I'm a great jazz aficionado right now, I love jazz, it's what I listen to most of the time, and I, I really enjoy jazz and very proud of the fact that my [paternal] grandfather [Emile Riley, Sr.] was a jazz musician.  But unfortunately, I never picked up any skills, can't sing, can't play anything, but can listen well, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then you know, child of the '70s [1970s], you know, fond memories of the Commodores, The Isley Brothers and O'Jays [The O'Jays] and, you know, all the, the great '70s [1970s] music--Maze--I still listen to Maze now, and it drives my, my two daughters [Erin Riley and Alexis Riley] nuts 'cause I listen to it over and over again.  But, yeah, the '70s [1970s] music was very im- very impactful for those of us who are approaching fifties, you know.
Story_ID: 485742
Speaker 1: Yeah, let's--we were talking off camera about the great musicians in New Orleans [Louisiana] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Just kind of give us a run down.
Speaker 2: Right, it was, it was--you know, growing up in New Orleans, you became--even though I was not very musical in talent, music is a, is a big part of New Orleans, so some of my earliest memories of New Orleans, the music scene, is the Neville Brothers, and the forerunner of the Neville Brothers, which was the Meters.  Now, the Meters was--
Speaker 1: Right, right, the Meters, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, remember the Meters, right--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --which was the forerunner, and of course, Aaron Neville has gone on to international fame, but it all started with the Meters, and then with the Neville Brothers. But the other folks that I--you know, we knew about in New Orleans--my mother [Jacqueline Cerf Riley] used to talk about [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Price, remember--
Speaker 1: Right, that's right, Lloyd Price, right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and that goes back to the '50s [1950s], and then later on, Allen Toussaint, Fats Domino, Dr. John--just a number of New Orleans musicians that you grow up.  You know, the thing about, you know, New Orleans musicians is that they're, they're part of the community and, and, you know, you would see Fats Domino, you know, at the grocery store, or you'd see you know other you know the Neville Brothers all over town, you know, doing various things, so they were very much part of the fabric of the community, and so it was always, always special.  But the New Orleans music scene is, is, is, is still, you know, something that, that I treasure, and particularly on the jazz side, Ellis Marsalis [HistoryMaker Ellis Marsalis, Jr.] and, and the Marsalis brothers are, are terrific.  And, you know, and then you got the Jordan family now--Stephanie Jordan, Marlon Jordan, I grew up with all these, these, these kids now who are now major jazz--I knew Marlon from living not too far from him, and then his dad [Edward "Kidd" Jordan] taught jazz studies at Southern University at New Orleans [New Orleans, Louisiana], he was an accomplished kid, Jordan, who had grown up with my dad [Emile Riley, Jr.], probably gone to Gilbert Academy [New Orleans, Louisiana] if we dig deep enough.  So, it's funny how again these intersecting circles of, of New Orleans culture always intersected, but the music was--music was, was a great part of the '70s [1970s], and then the '70s [1970s] era we're talking The Isley Brothers and the Commodores and, and Maze, you know, Frankie Beverly and Maze were huge back in the '70s [1970s] and, and you know, Frankie still packs 'em in wherever he goes, you know, almost thirty years later, so I have very fond memories of the New Orleans, and the music of my time in terms of, of growing up in the late '70s [1970s], the music scene there.
Speaker 1: Right, it's in the era of--well, the funk and (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, P-Funk [Parliament-Funkadelic] and all that, and still listen to that, although it--people--you know, and I, I, I--whenever I see these '70s [1970s] albums--'70s [1970s] Commod- remember War was big?  Remember War was big.  And then, and then, you know one of my friends had the radical notion one time, and we thought he was crazy, he started playing Peter Frampton.  Remember that (laughter)?  You know, so four black kids listening to Peter Frampton but, you know.  But it was interesting.  So, yeah, I have fond memories of, of, of the music as part of our, our life, even though I was not a musician per se.
Story_ID: 485743
Speaker 1: Did you have any, any special teachers or mentors growing up?
Speaker 2: You know, when I think about it, in terms of, of science, I had--prob- when I think back upon it, the best science teacher I had was a guy named Lloyd Brinker at Brother Martin High School [New Orleans, Louisiana] who taught physical science or second year science, and this teacher I think really, you know--so many years later I still think back upon him as one of the best teachers I, I had in, in, in maybe my entire career, but definitely for high school, in terms of kindling my interest in science.  He, he was, he was actually terrific, and the other ones that I recall are a woman by the name of Mrs. Abramson [ph.], who taught me at St. Frances Cabrini [St. Frances Xavier Cabrini School, New Orleans, Louisiana]--very tall, gray-haired white woman who--again, this was the early phases of, of black middle class folks sending their kids to Catholic schools that had been recently desegregated, so we--again, my siblings and I were trailblazers a couple of places, we were among the first black families to send kids to St. Frances Cabrini School on Paris Avenue, and--
Speaker 1: So, did, did you start at Brother Martin, or (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, Brother Martin was my high school, that's where I finished up, right.
Speaker 1: Oh, your high school, so St. Frances Cabrini's a elementary--
Speaker 2: So I went--right, so I went from St. Gabriel the Archangel [St. Gabriel the Archangel School, New Orleans, Louisiana] to St. Frances Cabrini to Brother Martin, then on to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].  Oh, but I, I did have a short period of time I forgot, you may have heard this from other New Orleanians.  There was a black daycare center called Martinez [Martinez Kindergarten School, New Orleans, Louisiana], and I attended there for a little while.  Martinez is sort of a, a famous black daycare center in New Orleans [Louisiana] where I--my mom [Jacqueline Cerf Riley] said I went for, for a little while.
Speaker 1: That's before the family started to--travelling (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Before they, before they started traveling, right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Martinez, okay.  So, so were you basically focused on becoming some sort of a scientist when you--
Speaker 2: No, I can't say I was focused, although what happened by the time I got to high school is--now, even leading up to high school, I used to go on rounds with my father [Emile Riley, Jr.], Flint-Goodridge Hospital [New Orleans, Louisiana].  And Flint-Goodridge Hospital was the only black hosp- private hospital in New Orleans, it had been, you know, a terrific black hospital that was owned by Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana] up until the mid-'70s [1970s], but it had been the place where all, you know, the major black phys- all the black physicians practiced in New Orleans 'cause they couldn't practice anywhere else.  And so he used to take me on rounds on Saturdays and Sundays with him, and you know, one of the cherished memories of that is, you know, we'd pull into the doctors' parking lot, and of course you'd see all the cars.  I remember Dr. Charlie Bowers [Charles Houma Dixon Bowers] had a Jaguar, Dr. Haydel [C.C. Haydel] had his Cadillac, seemed like he had a Cadillac every year, and then Dr. Seagray [ph.] had a--I think he had a Saab.  So, just seeing the cars in the physicians' parking lot was, was very impactful to me, and then, you know, they, they'd come into the hospital and you see the way they were dressed, they were dressed very nice and, and so I think, in terms of a professional role modeling, that had a big impact on me being around those physicians.  Of course, my dad would always introduce me, you know, as the future Dr. Riley [HistoryMaker Wayne Riley], and even before I knew I wanted to pursue medicine, he would always introduce me as the future Dr. Riley, so I guess my father knew what he was doing, he was planting the seed in me that I didn't know that was growing and--but it was, it was fun going on rounds, and going around the hospital and meeting up with the other doctors, and just seeing how they interacted with folks was, was, was fun.
Story_ID: 485744
Speaker 1: So, by the time I got to high school, you know, when, if--one of the funny things that happens if you're offspring of a physician is people automatically think you're gonna be a doctor, even if you have no interest in medicine at all, and needless to say, when I got to high school, a predominantly white high school, but a good number of black students who, who were there, they gave me a nickname Doc, and whether I wanted to go to medical school or not, that was what I was known by my friends who were black at Brother Martin High School [New Orleans, Louisiana], was Doc. And matter of fact, they still call me Doc to this day.  Even though I really am a doctor, they don't call me Wayne [HistoryMaker Wayne Riley], they call me Doc.  (Laughter) Sort of funny, but--so those expectations are, are set in.  And, quite frankly, I thought I wanted to be a physician, but I wasn't real sure, so I did very well in high school, I was an honors graduate, most outstanding member of the senior class, I was voted by the faculty, and first time an African American ever gotten this at, at Brother Martin which was 95 percent white.  I was awarded the Golden Crusader, the school's other highest award for service and so forth, newspaper--I was copy editor of the f- newspaper, copy editor of the yearbook staff, on the student council, I was very active in a number of organizations, and a good student as well, so--on National Honor Society and, and so forth.  So, the Brother Martin experience was very seminal because I could--I saw that I could compete, first of all, although I, I, I, I competed quite favorably with, you know, my white counterparts, and, and so--even amongst my, my black friends who were at Brother Martin--we all did very well, and four of us are physicians.  One of us is a, a marketing executive with a major Fortune 500 company, so we all, we all did very well.  But those of us who came from professional backgrounds tended to have a little bit more expectations laid on us than, than others, so when that--that happened with me that, you know, from day one, they called me Doc, which, in retrospect, was bad, but they did it and I survived it.
Story_ID: 485745
Speaker 1: But by the time I got to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], I was not sure. I frankly was not sure that I wanted to pursue medicine, and--because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So how did you choose--well--not that Yale's a bad place to go (laughter), but, but what were the choices?
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: What were the choices that you had?
Speaker 1: Well, again, this is part of my dad's [Emile Riley, Jr.] genius, you know.  All throughout high school, he would, you know, expose me to Ivy League schools, you know.  He, he gave me John Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] 'Profiles In Courage,' which Kennedy wrote, you know, back--and he said, "Hey, you should read this," and I read it, and he said Kennedy went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  So he was always telling me where people went, you know.  This one went to Harvard, this one went to Yale, this one went to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], and, you know, so it was--even to this day, I kind of know where people go to school 'cause it--that's the way my dad kind of sort of did with me.  And again, no pressure from him, but I decided very early on in high school, like maybe sophomore year, that I wanted to go to an Ivy League school. I didn't know which one, but I knew I wanted to go Ivy League, and so I talked to him about it and he said, "Hey, that's great," and, you know, "Just keep your, keep up the good work, and when you get to that point, we'll see."  And so I applied to Harvard, Yale, Princeton, Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island]. I got in every one, except Harvard, so I had a choice.  And there had not been a black student to go to Yale from Brother Martin [Brother Martin High School, New Orleans, Louisiana], and so--I think there had only been one to go to H- go to Harvard.  And again, Brother Martin was--I would, I would say that it was a good high school, it wasn't the most academically rigorous of the Catholic high schools in New Orleans [Louisiana] 'cause it was very sports-oriented, but it was, it was, it was a great, great experience for me, and I did well, but I remember the guidance counselors kind of saying, "Why do you wanna go to an Ivy League school?  Why don't you wanna go to Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana]?" which is the black--the Catholic Harvard.  I said, "No, I don't wanna go to Notre Dame, I wanna go to an Ivy League school."  And so I persisted and, and, you know, they kind of got it after a while, but they weren't used to the notion of even any of their students wanting to go Ivy League 'cause most students from Brother Martin went to LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], Tulane [Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana] or, or God-forbid, didn't go north of the Mason-Dixon Line to school, it was very rare, even in late '70s [1970s].  But I decided early on that my goal was an Ivy League school, and so when I applied, I got into every one of 'em except Harvard, and then I eliminated Princeton and Penn--oh, no, Princeton and Brown, and so my decision came down to Yale or Brown.  No, I eliminated Princeton and Penn, and then it came down to be Yale or Brown.  And there were several New Orleanians at Brown, and there were several New Orleanians at Yale, and I chose to go to Yale--a couple of reasons.  I thought Yale had quote unquote a bigger name, and I liked the liberal arts education within a large major university setting that Yale--Yale really, even to this day, emphasizes Yale College over the graduate schools at Yale.  Yale College is the intellectual center of Yale.  And so I chose to go to Yale, I had never seen Yale 'til I got there on freshman orientation, I made my decision without even visiting any campuses.  It was, it was, it was one of those things where I was just too busy with my extracurricular activities to take a trip and my dad was too busy with his practice to take me on a trip, so I, I made the decision pretty much, you know, on my own.  My parents were very supportive.
Story_ID: 485746
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you went there without, without the advantage of knowing anybody--
Speaker 2: No, I knew, I knew some kids that had gone there previously, but I didn't know anybody there at the time when I went.
Speaker 1: So, none of the faculty or staff, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no. None of the faculty at Brother Martin [Brother Martin High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] had gone to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: It's interesting.  Now, we've interviewed some other people that went to Yale, and when they finally get there, everybody else at Yale knows somebody (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that's what happened to me, and when I got there, you know, fall of 1977, I run into Lowell Perry, Jr., and soon as I met him I said, "Well, your dad [Lowell Perry, Sr.] and my dad [Emile Riley, Jr.] were at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] together, your dad and my dad pledged Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] together," you know?  So it was sort of, sort of interesting that, you know, it came full circle, but I got to Yale and I loved it, I absolutely love Yale, I developed close contact with a group of four, four black male friends of mine that are still my--probably my best friends in the world, I've been in their weddings, they've been in mine, and so forth.  But we, we formed a little, I guess, support network at Yale that supported each of us through, through Yale.  But I got the political bug at Yale. I was vice president of black student alliance, I was on the university committee, I did lots of things, we were, we were very conscious about black culture at Yale, in terms of making sure the black cultural center at Yale [Afro-American Cultural Center] was adequately funded.  The apartheid movement was hot and heavy in the late '70s [1970s], I marched on Washington [D.C.]--that large march on Washington against apartheid in, in the spring of '79 [1979] that had been the largest demonstration to that point prior, or up--since the Vietnam War demonstrations.  When we marched on Washington against apartheid, we were hammering the university at, about divesting its stock in companies that had any holdings in South Africa.  So we were engaged in all of that, which was very fun and very broadening.  And I kept going and then, like I said, I had this approach, avoidance about medicine all throughout my career at Yale, and I didn't--I chose not to major in science, I majored in anthropology, but my concentration was, was in health and disease and medical anthropology 'cause I wasn't quite sure, so, by that by junior year, I started to swing back towards medicine.
Speaker 1: Now, why anthropology (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Anthropology was something I had never heard of before, 'til I got to Yale, and I had a friend who was anthropology pre-med major who happened to have been from New Orleans [Louisiana], who happened to have been the daughter of the mayor of New Orleans.  Dutch Morial's [Ernest Morial] daughter was two years ahead of me at Yale. When I got to Yale, we became friends and she kind of became like a mentor to me.  And Julie [Julie Morial] was pre-med and Julie said, "You know, you don't have to major in biology to go to medical school."  And I said, "Well, you know--" 'cause I was thinking you had to major in biology and chemistry.  She said, "No, you can major in anything."  So I thought about English 'cause I loved English, I thought about African American studies--Afro-American studies, and then anthropology struck me as a nice cross between the social disciplines and biology, and so I majored in anthropology, and didn't know what I was gonna do with it if I didn't go to medical school, but it was just something that, that I really enjoyed, and I liked studying Mumford [Lewis Mumford] and Zolo [ph.] and, you know, we had some tremendous anthropology faculty at Yale.  Alison Richard, who's now the chancellor [sic. vice chancellor] of Cambridge [University of Cambridge] in London [sic. Cambridge, England] was my thesis advisor.  David Pilbeam, who later became chair of anthropology at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was chairman of the department, and we di- anthropology was just fascinating because, like I said, it just struck me as a perfect marriage between the more biological sciences and the more social sciences.  So I, I, I chose to major in anthropology with a concentration on health and disease.
Story_ID: 485747
Speaker 1: And then, by the time I was close to finishing Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], I was still, still didn't know what I wanted to do with my life, I really did not, and I thought I wanted to go to medical school, but now the law bug had bit me, too, by then, because I've always liked the law.  And I finally decided, you know, I, I, I hadn't even finished all the coursework for medicine yet, so let me go home, work for a year, and then figure out what I'm gonna do.  So, I went home the summer of '81 [1981]--
Speaker 2: So that's when you graduated (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, finished--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --finished May of '81 [1981], and I went home that summer and just took it easy, my parents [Jacqueline Cerf Riley and Emile Riley, Jr.] said, "Just finish Yale, take it easy, don't--you don't have to kill yourself, you don't have to work, just take it easy."  And I ran into the mayor of New Orleans [Louisiana] at some social function--Ernest "Dutch" Morial [Ernest Morial], who was the first black mayor of New Orleans.
Speaker 2: Now he just--he was elected in '77 [1977]?
Speaker 1: He was elected in '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I--one of the last things I did before going off to Yale was, I campaigned in his first campaign, you know, they had this group, Youth for Morial group, and I was in that group.  We, you know, went out and put up la- lawn signs for the mayor and, and bumper stickers.  But it was a historic movement because this was the first chance that, that New Orleans had in electing an African American male who was well-qualified as mayor, or an African American at all, rather, who was well-qualified.  And so I worked on his campaign before going off to Yale. Went off to Yale and struck up a friendship with his daughter [Julie Morial] and she, she and I became friends, still friends to this day, and--but then I went home that summer after graduating and I ran into the mayor at a social function--I don't know where I was, it was a social function.  But I distinctly remember him saying, "What are you gonna do?"  I said, "I don't know, Mr. Mayor."  I said, "I think I wanna work for a year, and then I wanna go back to school."  So, he said, "Send me a resume, maybe we got a little job for you down at city hall."  So, I sent him a resume, didn't think much of it, and got a call two weeks later, this was August of 'o, of '81 [1981].  Got a call two weeks later from his secretary saying, "The mayor has a job he'd like you to--that he'd like to consider you for in the mayor's office in the division that handles federal job training programs--," would I be interested?  I said, "Absolutely."  Went down and had the interview with the mayor's assistant who (unclear) job training programs and started, started in the office of the mayor on September 3rd, 1981, as administrative assistant in the mayor's Office of Employment, Training and Development, this was the part of the mayor's office that handled the federal job training programs.  It was CETA at that time, the Comprehensive Employment Training Act [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act].  And so I joined the staff of the CETA group within the mayor's office.  I was a mayoral appointee, unclassified--served at the pleasure of the mayor.  And remember, his first term was winding down.  He had been elected before I went off--just after I got to Yale, in spring of '78 [1978], and when I got back, he was just about ready to kick off the re-election campaign.
Speaker 2: Four years term (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, four-year terms, right, and then you get one more term.  So, he hired me right as the re-election campaign was getting off, in employment development, so I was there three months.  Let's see, I started in September, I was there three months when I got a call, another call, from his secretary saying, "Mayor needs to see you."  I said, "Oh, God, what did I do now?"  So I went to see him, and I said--and he said, "Wayne [HistoryMaker Wayne Riley], I want you to leave the payroll--the city payroll."  I said, "To do what?"  He said, "I need you to go to the campaign staff full-time, for re-election. We're gonna have a tough re-election fight, and I'm putting together the re-election team, and we want you to take a leave from your city job and go on the campaign payroll and to run the campaign headquarters on a daily basis."  So here I was, twenty-one years old, four months out of Yale, making my first (unclear) just got my first job making $21,000 a year, and then they ask me to leave the payroll to go help run the campaign, which I did.
Story_ID: 485748
Speaker 1: And I left my job at Employment and Training [Office of Employment, Training and Development] to go on the s- the campaign payroll, and I worked very closely with the mayor's campaign manager, Michael Bagneris, who's the bro- cousin of Vernel Bagneris--you may have heard of Vernel Bagneris who's a playwright and a very well-known performer in New Orleans [Louisiana].   And Michael had gone to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] himself, so I think that's where it all started, the Yale connection kind of worked in my favor, but he was the mayor's executive counsel, his chief lawyer, and then left the--he, himself, left payroll to run the campaign and, and then I was his administrative assistant, and campaign headquarters manager.  So I managed that, heavily involved in the campaign, it was a tough re-election fight.  We spent $1.5 million in 1981, which was unheard of for a mayoral campaign. The black community mobilized to re-elect the mayor.  We got less than 5 percent of the white vote, so it was a very polarizing election, but, but, but we beat a white candidate [Ron Faucheux], a state senator [sic. state representative].  And I went back--so we won re-election, I was happy I did that, it was very, very formative experience, it was, it was, it was probably the hardest thing I've ever done--that was a hard campaign 'cause we were getting pummeled by, by the newspaper, pummeled by everybody.
Speaker 2: You had to really get almost--you had to get a high percentage of black turnout to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Exactly.
Speaker 2: --to win that.
Speaker 1: We, we--it was the highest percentage of black turnout, I think, that's ever been accomplished in New Orleans.  We, we--I think we got it up to, to 89 or 90 percent, which was historic.
Speaker 2: How did you manage a voter registration campaign?
Speaker 1: We did voter registration, we did black churches, we mobilized the ministers. That was--part of my job was getting the ministers all lined up.  We did all the black political organizations, I mean it was, it was hard work.  I mean I, I--outside of medical school [Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia], I think that was the hardest I'd ever worked in, in my then young adult life, but it, it really was a lot of work but we, we won, and I was happy to have served in that. S- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is there any one single factor that you can point to that made the difference in--
Speaker 1: In terms of that campaign?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think that the African American community in New Orleans basically said, look, we elected our first--he's an excellent mayor, he's done a good job for this city, there's still a strong racist element in the business community--because Dutch [Ernest Morial] had fought the business community his whole first term, in terms of opening access to city contracts to minority firms, and so forth--the same thing that Maynard Jackson was doing in Atlanta [Georgia], Dick Arrington [Richard Arrington, Jr.] was doing it in Birmingham [Alabama], Tom Bradley was doing it in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]--all the big-city mayors, whenever we got together, they would always trade stories about how they were butting heads with their business leaders in their cities, but Dutch had been a very strong mayor.  He was not liked in the white community because he was not gonna take too much off, you know, them.  And, and, and the New Orleans white community is very patronizing--the Uptown crowd, we used to call 'em--the rex crowd, you know, the white blue bloods, several generations live Uptown, New Orleans in those big fancy houses.  They, they hated the idea--first of all, there was a black mayor, and then secondly, they hated the fact that it was a black mayor who didn't take their stuff.  So, Dutch was a very in-your-face mayor to these guys, so he was--he, he--his first term was, was very rocky, I remember the police struck on him at Mardi Gras and he, he broke the police union [Police Association of New Orleans] over that.  So a lot happened during that four years when I was away.  Remember, I was away at Yale when all this major stuff was going on, but when I came back, went right into that re-election mode, which then re-played some of that stuff in campaign mode, but that was a, that was a great experience for me in terms of working a campaign and, and, and working closely with him because I did then get to work closer with him.
Story_ID: 485749
Speaker 1: So I went back to my CETA [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act] job, I was very happy to do that, and then I decided after the campaign, you know, I think I really do wanna go to medical school.  So I started taking courses at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] to fill in for the courses I hadn't finished at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], so I was taking courses, working for the mayor--taking pre-med courses.  I was taking--they gave me permission to take a couple of courses during the week in the morning, and I would show up at ten o'clock at the office and they had no problem, and they were very supportive, but I went back to my job at the mayor's office full-time, and started taking pre-med courses.  So I went back to my CETA job in May of '82 [1982].  Then I got another call from the mayor in September of '82 [1982] and he said, "I want you to come work directly for me in the mayor's office" because I was in the division [Office of Employment, Training and Development] the next building over.  He said, "No, I want you to come work for me--directly for me. I want you to travel with me, I want you to be my administrative assistant for public liaison," which meant that I was the guy that they sent when--for example, the mayor gets a zillion invitations a year to cut ribbons or, you know, pass out proclamations at civic functions, and he said, "I can't be everywhere, you know, and I want you to be one of those people I send to deliver greetings on behalf of the mayor."  He said, "You did a terrific job during the campaign, and I think you have a bright future."  So I then went into city hall, an office right outside his, or down the hall from him, and I was, I was his key aid for public liaison. I then started to travel with him.  At that point, he was president of the U.S. Conference of Mayors, and so we traveled all over the country, I sort of was his traveling aid.  He was on the board of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], so we went to two or three NAACP board meetings, got to met--meet Ben Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] and [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond and William F. Gibson, and, you know, all the, the giants of the Civil Rights Movement that I met going to the NAACP meetings.  Gloster Current--I remember Gloster B. Current and Nathaniel Jones [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Jones]--Judge Jones, a black appeals court justice, Damon, Damon Keith [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith], Wiley Branton, who had worked with Thurgood Marshall.  I just remember meeting all these, these guys and luminaries--Constance Baker Motley.  Dutch [Ernest Morial] knew all these guys 'cause he had been general counsel for the NAACP before he became a judge.
Story_ID: 485750
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was just recounting some of the people I met as I traveled around the country with Mayor Morial [Ernest Morial], you know, just a number of, of the civil rights giants and, and, and major black lawyers in the country.  Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.]--I met Vernon Jordan with Dutch, met, of course, all the other big city mayors: Maynard Jackson, [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young, of course who, who was a fellow New Orleanian, and it was just a--it was, it was, it was a fascinating time in my life where I, I got to rub shoulders with people that I had read about or who had worked with people I read about, you know.  For example, you know, one of my heroes is Thurgood Marshall, and I even keep a picture of Thurgood Marshall in my office here at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], but Thurgood was a fascinating character, and Dutch had worked for A.P. Tureaud who was a major civil rights lawyer in Louisiana and who, who Thurgood worked on many of the Louisiana desegregation cases, and Dutch was a young lawyer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is that the father of the Tureaud that you were in--
Speaker 1: Right, no, their cousin--
Speaker 2: --cousin--
Speaker 1: --they were related, right.  But A.P. Tureaud was sort of the dean of civil rights lawyers in New Orleans [Louisiana] that Dutch worked for, that was Dutch's mentor.  And, you know, Dutch used to tell us these stories about when Thurgood would come to town to argue cases and, and, you know, they--people who worked with Thurgood still think he was the hardest working, smartest lawyer that they had ever worked with, and Thurgood was a--those folks who know Marshall and (unclear) read two books--I read [HistoryMaker] Juan Williams' book on him ['Thurgood Marshall: American Revolutionary'] and then I read another biography.  Marshall was a interesting, colorful guy, he was the type of guy who could stay up all night playing cards and drinking bourbon, and then he would go into court the next day and just argue flawlessly, and he--Thurgood loved a good time.  Those people who know Thurgood knew that he loved a good time, liked his, his bourbon and liked to play poker and he gambled and, you know, he cussed and he--you know--but he was a very colorful character.  But, but Dutch would always tell these stories about how, how just a supremely well-prepared lawyer Thurgood always was.  And so that's why the law thing really kind of came back at me because I was around Dutch all the time, he'd been judge, and the first black graduate of the law center [Louisiana State University Law School; Paul M. Hebert Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and so again, I was struggling with the law and medicine thing, and then when I started traveling with him, meeting all these famous folks and intersecting, I then kind of wavered a little bit in, in medicine.
Story_ID: 485751
Speaker 1: So I, I loved that job, and my relationship with Dutch [Ernest Morial] was, was, was excellent, I mean he's--if I had to list my major life mentors, they would have been my dad [Emile Riley, Jr.], and Dutch Morial second.  I mean he had a tremendous influence on my life and, and just the way he, he worked, the man worked hard. And I was with him, you know, as a young single aid, I was with him seven days a week sometimes.  This man worked and, you know, he--when he believed in something, he just--you know, you weren't gonna stop him, and he and I became, you know, very close, I think.  And even Sybil [Sybil Haydel Morial], his widow, still refers to me as one of their, their sons, which I think is quite an honor, given the fact that they have two great kids, and Marc Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial], the president of the National Urban League, is their oldest son.  But Dutch was a tremendous influence on me.  And I did that job as administrative assistant 'til the late--'85 [1985], and remember we were now into the waning year of the second term--in your term limit in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And in the fall of '85 [1985], Dutch walked in to see me one day and he tapped me on the shoulder--I'll never forget it, he tapped me on the shoulder and he said, "Son, I'm gonna make you deputy mayor."  And I looked at him and said, "What are you talking about?" (Laughter) He said--the--in our system, we have three executive assistants to the mayor, then I was the rung below, administrative assistant to the mayor, and then--there were three, but there was one that was considered the first among equals, that was executive assistant to the mayor for intergovernmental relations. That position was held by a very fine white gentleman named Jim Chubbuck [James Chubbuck], who'd been with Dutch through the first term, and had been a former newspaper reporter and had formerly worked for Senator Johnston [J. Bennett Johnston] in the U.S. Senate.  But Chubbuck had decided he wanted to go over and become head of the airport--New Orleans Airport [New Orleans International Airport; Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport, New Orleans, Louisiana]--so there was a need to replace him.  And so, like I said, I--you know, one fall day in 1985, Dutch came in and he tapped me on the shoulder, "Son, I'm gonna make you deputy mayor."  So I became executive assistant to the mayor for intergovernmental relations, the highest ranking appointed mayoral staffer at the age of twenty-six, I think, I think it was a few months--yeah, made twenty-seven May of, of '86 [1986], but it was in the last year of the mayor's term.  But he--we still had a lot going on, we were heavily involved in the mayoral campaign of who would succeed Dutch.  It was a bitter race, and Sidney Barthelemy, who became mayor after Dutch, beat out [HistoryMaker] William Jefferson.  William Jefferson is now the congressman that is under a little bit of cloud in New Orleans, but Bill Jefferson--Dutch was supporting Bill Jefferson to replace him because Sidney and--and Sidney Barthelemy and Dutch had been political enemies throughout his whole mayoralty.  So, I joined--I became executive assistant to the mayor, overseeing international affairs, governmental affairs--basically the inter-office workings of the office of the mayor.  My office was directly adjoining the mayor's. He, he could walk into my office as if that door--that's how close I could walk into his office, he can walk in mine, and so I thought that was--I took that as the ultimate compliment from Dutch for--to ask me to serve out the term as the executive assistant to the mayor and he, he, he later told me that he considered me one of his most loyal and trusted staffers that he'd ever appointed in his administration, he told me this many years later.  And so I've always cherished that seven months as executive assistant to the mayor.
Story_ID: 485752
Speaker 1: And in fact, we left office in May of '86 [1986].  By this time, I knew I had to go back to school, and Dutch [Ernest Morial] had even come to me right before we left and said, "Look," he said, "what do you want?"  I said, "I don't want anything, I'm gonna go back to school."  He said, "You know, you could run for state representative," and I said, "Dutch, I don't wanna be a state representative."  And at that point, a new state treasurer had been elected in Louisiana and we had supported Mary Landrieu, who is now the U.S. senator.  And he said, "Mary owes us a job, she wants to talk to you about becoming deputy treasurer of state Louisiana."  I said, "Dutch, I don't wanna do it," (laughter) "I wanna go back to school."  I had firmly decided in my mind that I wanted to go back to school.  And I said, "I love working for you but I, I, I, I'm, I'm just convinced at this age I gotta go back to school, Dutch."  And he said, "Okay, I respect that."  And so we left office on May, May of '86 [1986], and he asked me to stay with him as his transition aide.  He joined a major law firm in New Orleans [Louisiana], and he needed someone to assist him in his transition, so I, I agreed to, to work with him during his first six months of his transition in his private life, and so I became his transition aid and--but then, also, began working on a master's degree at Tulane [Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana] in public health.  So, I was going to class in the morning, and then working for Dutch in the afternoon at his law office.  Dutch had a very difficult transition to public--private life. He--in retrospect, he was a superbly gifted politician who, if he had been white, would have easily been elected to the United States Senate, or other positions.  The mayoralty was, was unfortunately, the, the--as far as he could go.  He had thought about running for [U.S.] Congress but Congress wasn't attractive after being mayor, being one of, one of 435 isn't very attractive after running a major American city, so he, he had a difficult transition into private life, and so I spent a lot of time with him.  Dutch hadn't really driven a car in eight years, he went out and bought a brand new Jaguar, and so I got to drive his brand new Jaguar in towns by taking him to meetings.  But, again, I, I, I look back upon my time in, in the Morial administration as a very formative experience for me.  I, I loved every minute working for Dutch Morial and it, it has kind of--it's kind of served as a platform for what I've done administratively since then because I, I, I saw up close and personal a very strong manager, and how to get things done and articulating a vision and, and so even to this day, some of the things I learned working side by side with Dutch, and for Dutch for five and a-half years, stays with me as I'm president of a, of a major American medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].
Story_ID: 485753
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's quite an experience to have at that age you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to be, you know, involved in that kind of decision making and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --level of government at that age.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And we stayed close until, 'til his death. I'll tell you the story, few people know this, but I, I--so I went on to Tulane public school--public health school [Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana] and got my master's [degree].  I started in summer of '86 [1986], finished the master's degree in public health in '88 [1988] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) now why did you choose public health (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew I wasn't ready to go right into medical school. I had been out of school--
Speaker 1: I mean you still had that as a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was quote my backup plan in case I didn't get into medical school, I had already had a master's degree in public health, and then I could do public policy stuff, or whatever, but I was, I was very strategic about this, given the fact that, that I knew I had had this seven-year sabbatical from anything academic and--but public health was something I was always interested in anyway, and I concentrated in health, healthcare management, that was my concentration within public health.  So, at a minimum, I said, look, if I decide not to go to medical school, I can do administration.  After having worked for the mayor of New Orleans [Louisiana] and--you know, it probably wouldn't be that bad of a transition.  But I did get into medical school, and I was accepted at Morehouse School of Medicine in Atlanta [Georgia], Tulane medical school [Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana], and LSU medical school [Louisiana State University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: I didn't wanna distract you, but you were finishing the story about Dutch Morial [Ernest Morial], I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh, yeah, right, I'm sorry.  So, I had gone off to medical school, and came home Christmas break of 1990, and as--whenever I was in town, I'd call Dutch at his law office and we'd get together, so he said, "Come down, I wanna see you, let's talk about medical school, how it's going."  So I went down and saw him and he said--this was December 23, I know the date exactly--December 23, 1991.  So I went down to his law office, and then New Orleans had this cold snap.  God, it was so cold, it was like two degrees, one of those unusual cold snaps that hit the Gulf Coast.  And so I went down to his law office and he said, "Hey, I'm hungry, let's get to Dooky's."  Dooky Chase [Dooky Chase's Restaurant, New Orleans, Louisiana], and--one of my favorite restaurants in the world that's, I think, still closed now, but we went to Dooky, Dooky Chase and--just he and I, and we had dinner, and it was cold as hell outside and, and I remember we got outside and it was sleeting (laughter).  And he said, "Why don't you come over to the house," you know.  And I said, "No, Dutch, the weather's kind of bad."  I said, "I'll see you tomorrow."  Went on home to my parents' [Jacqueline Cerf Riley and Emile Riley, Jr.] home, and then he had gone to--no, it was he had a, a good friend named Jerome Glozer--Glazer [Jerome S. Glazer], that's what he said, "Why don't you come over Jerome's?  We're gonna watch sports or something."  I said, "No, you go on, I'm going on home."  So, he went on to Jerome Glazer's home on the lakefront of New Orleans, this was late, so this was about 9:00 on December 23.  I went to bed and I was awakened at 3:30 in the morning by another former aide to the mayor who called me and said that the mayor had, had died.  I said, "What do you mean he died?  I just had dinner with him."  Apparently, he had gone to Jerome Glazer's house and--he had bad asthma, and he must have been stricken either with a severe asthma attack as he was trying to get out of his car 'cause they found his nebulizer on the floor, and he laid there for about two hours before anybody knew he was out there--so he was dead.  And so I literally was the last person to have dinner with Dutch at Dooky Chase, and walked out with him for the last time and told him, you know, "No, I'll see you tomorrow, you go ahead."  So I often thought, had I gone with him to Jerome's, would he still be alive today, but, you know, it's just one of those things in life where you, you just--you never know what can happen, but I, I was devastated by his death, I really was.  He, he was a major life mentor, and particularly in the way it happened, that he and I were just together at Dooky Chase, just he and I, just, you know, reminiscing about old days and so forth, so (unclear).  So I have good memories of Dutch, he was a wonderful man and a good manager.  He's tough as nails, though, tough as nails.  But I--the Dutch Morial I saw, I didn't see the other people--the other people thought he was arrogant and dictatorial and, and, you know, all the, the adjectives that one can ascribe to a strong manager, and I acknowledge he could be tough at times and he was demanding, but he--that's what people don't realizes, he didn't demand anything more of us than he did of himself.  I mean he worked eight days a week to the detriment of his family life, his health probably.  So, so, I understood the man, he was complex man, but, but I loved the man.  He was a good man, good mentor--really was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's quite a story.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We haven't heard that one.
Story_ID: 485754
Speaker 1: So you went back to--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) after--yeah--
Speaker 2: --so--let's see.  So, fast forward again to when I finally got in medical school, I got in Tulane [Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana], LSU [Louisiana State University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana], and Morehouse School of Medicine in Atlanta [Georgia], and because I had had such a high profile in New Orleans [Louisiana], I made the decision that I could not study medicine in New Orleans where I had been executive assistant to the mayor [Ernest Morial] with all the distractions of, of family and so forth.  I said, look, it's time for me to leave New Orleans, I can always come back to practice.  So I chose to go to Morehouse School of Medicine which, again, one of the best decisions I ever made in my life--small medical school at that point, they only had thirty-five students each entering class, it was only ten years old, you know, it was birthed out of the black Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], co-ed, and it was--and by this time I had also, you know, made a conscious decision that I wanted to go to a, a, a black school for once.  And this is sort of interesting history in terms of where I am now.  I had wanted dearly to go to Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee], and I had applied two times to Meharry and didn't even get an interview which, again, was a source of great irritation to my father [Emile Riley, Jr.], having been an alumnus of Meharry.  And--but if I had written my own life script, I would have gone from the mayor's office to Meharry Medical College for medical school and then--but I didn't get an interview at Meharry Medical College.  So, when I did get into medical school, I got in Tulane, LSU, and Morehouse School of Medicine, so I decided, well, you know, I didn't get in Meharry, Morehouse is accepting me, I'm going to Morehouse, and I wanna get out of New Orleans.  So, I went to Morehouse School of Medicine, and it was small, had just gone to four-year status from two-year status, and it was excellent educational experience, it--fantastic.  I had--I was in my first HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] experience.  Remember this--I was a middle class kid who'd gone to all-white schools my whole life, and I was finally in an HBCU, and I, I, I loved every minute of it.  Medical school is hard, I would never do it again (laughter).  I tell people I love being a doctor, but if you had to go to medical school, (unclear) you shoot me.  But Morehouse was a very supportive academic environment, and as part of my leadership development along the way, I was class president twice--sophomore year and senior year, I was vice president SGA [student government association], president SGA, president of a lot of organizations.  Now, remember, I had come into medical school after being in graduate school [Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana] for two years, after working for the mayor of New Orleans five, so I was a little bit older than my other classmates, and so, whether I wanted to or not, I guess, they ascribed certain leadership attributes or characteristics to me that, even if I didn't acknowledge, they were gonna insist that I had, based upon my life experience.  But it, it did match up, I did feel the impulse to be a leader at Morehouse School of Medicine, so it wasn't done reluctantly at all, but it was, it was, it was, it was very formative.
Story_ID: 485755
Speaker 1: I then--
Speaker 2: Well, who were some of the--before we get, get you out of there.  Now, [HistoryMaker] Dr. Louis Sullivan was--
Speaker 1: That's right, I was just about to say, Dr. Sullivan was the president, and I fell under Dr. Sullivan's spell right away.  Dr. Sullivan is, is--again, if I had to rank order of my life's mentors, it's my father [Emile Riley, Jr.], Dutch Morial [Ernest Morial], and Louis Wade Sullivan.  I was just with him yesterday in Atlanta [Georgia], by the way.  So, I fell under Dr. Sullivan's spell.  He is a fantastic professional, I loved the way he interacted, I loved the way he, he dressed, I loved the way he talked and how he, how he moved between white circles in Atlanta and African American circles with ease.  I mean I just remember admiring Dr. Sullivan from afar, just as a student, I didn't really know him, but just observing him around the campus was, was pretty impactful.  I mean--I'll never forget one night I was out late at the medical studying, and, you know, I was at the vending machine getting a Coke [Coca-Cola] and, and this was 11:00 on a Saturday night, and Dr. Sullivan's walking through, picking up paper off the floor (laughter), and I was just so impressed by that and--because he was very much into the physicality of the campus and, and, and in fact, something I do here since coming to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  I, I, I like to walk around and, and I, I, I remember that, you know, saying, you know, gosh, if the president of Morehouse School of Medicine [Atlanta, Georgia] could walk around picking up paper, you know, and checking out the surroundings, I wanna do that at Meharry, and I've done that at Meharry, and just in three months I've been doing that same thing.  But Sullivan is tremendous role model, and I think that's how he found me is, is--I think he recommended that you talk with me, but he--major, major life mentor number three, absolutely.  And, you know, I can't say enough about--if you just step back and say what did, you know, what did Lou do?  He took the idea of a medical school from paper to reality.  I mean that's pretty amazing and, and, and at a time when there weren't any new medical schools, it was the first new medical school founded in the last century, you know, I mean so it was pretty impressive what he did.  I mean take the idea and, you know, Lou to his credit (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And for it to be--
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: --yeah, a black medical school--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --founded at a time--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --when there's pressure to close Meharry.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's pressure to close Meharry--
Speaker 2: --or merge it, or something.
Speaker 1: --merge it with Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee].  And remember, all this was going on at the same time when he was talking about building a new medical school, and Drew [Charles R. Drew University of Medicine and Science, Los Angeles, California] was in its infancy, Howard [Howard University College of Medicine] was--you know, Howard was in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], but, you know, firmly sort of protected within the D.C. cocoon but, you know, it was a radical notion starting medical school in the late '70s [1970s], particularly in an undergraduate institution.  And I don't know if Lou told you, but the initial idea was that medical school would be part of Clark Atlanta University, or Cl- or Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia], at that time it was still separate because they had a--they were doing all graduate programs in Atlanta.  Their board looked at it, decided they couldn't do it, and needless to say, four years later, Atlanta University and Clark Atlanta--and Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] merged because they just didn't have the financial resources to do it, but when the trustees of Atlanta University turned it down, Hugh Gloster said, "Well, let me pick it up."  And so Dr. Sullivan gives Hugh Gloster a lot of credit, I mean he, he refers to him as the founder of the Morehouse School of Medicine 'cause Dr. Gloster was the one who said, "Look, if A you won't do it, let's--would you object if Morehouse took a look at it?"  So that's how Morehouse School of Medicine started, it was actually the School of Medicine at Morehouse College in its infancy, and then became separate independent institution in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: And Gloster's the president that followed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was--I'm sorry, he was the president--
Speaker 2: --followed Benjamin Mays.
Speaker 1: --but he followed Benjamin Mays, that's correct, he followed Dr. Mays, a legendary president himself.  So--but Dr. Sullivan always gives Dr. Gloster a lot of credit for, for recruiting him because Gloster recruited him from Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], and, and Dr. Sullivan said, look, I was very happy at Boston U, I had a lab and I was--you know, we were very happy in Boston, Mrs. Sullivan [Ginger Sullivan] is from the Boston area.  They had the house on the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts], I mean they were very happy, and Gloster, you know, convinced Sullivan to come down and take this idea of a medical school from paper to, to reality is today, so I have a tremendous respect for Dr. Sullivan in terms of what he did.
Story_ID: 485756
Speaker 1: So did you major in any specific branch of medicine I mean or what specific (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I became--after graduating from, from Morehouse School of Medicine [Atlanta, Georgia], I went on to Texas and trained in internal medicine at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston [Texas].  Internal medicine is the adult care of adults, excuse me, the care of adult patients--and was asked to remain on the faculty at Baylor, joined as an instructor of medicine, and then proceeded up as assistant professor of medicine, and then, then became assistant dean for medical education.  And then in the year 2000, I was asked to become the first black vice president at Baylor in its hundred-year history, where I was vice president and vice dean for health affairs and governmental relations, which was Baylor's external affairs function.  Again, I--we had a new president arrive at Baylor in fall of '01 [2001].  Peter Traber came from GlaxoSmithKline, he had been previously the dean at University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and when he got there, he, he appointed a couple of task forces to look at the strategic planning process for Baylor, and my dean, who had appointed me assistant dean, recommended that I would be a good junior faculty member to lead the education and strategic plan, and so Dr. Traber asked me to do that, and we gave an excellent report, and he called--his secretary called one day after--about a month after we had submitted the report, said, "Dr. Sullivan [sic.] would like to have breakfast with you."  I said, "Uh oh, what did I do now?"  And so we had breakfast and he said, "Look, you did a terrific job with the strategic plan, and I've done some investigating.  I understand your background is in public health and you worked for the mayor of New Orleans [Louisiana]."  I said, "I sure did."  He said, "I don't know, you know, what we call this, but I need someone like you on the senior management team who is both a well-respected clinician, a good teacher, you have administrative experience and you understand external relations, particularly the government piece."  He said, "I'd you to consider becoming a part of my senior management team."  And he said, "What I need from you is you give me a proposal on what your title should be and your portfolio of duties and, you know, let's sit down and talk about it."  So it was a pretty open-ended conversation, other than the fact he said, "I need you."  He said, "You basically come back to me with some sort of proposal about what you can do."  So, the first person I called for advice was Louis Sullivan [HistoryMaker Dr. Louis Sullivan].  I said, "Dr. Sullivan, Dr. Traber has asked me to consider joining the senior staff, this is what I'm thinking."  So I bounced the whole idea off Dr. Sullivan, he thought it was a terrific idea and, you know, came back with a proposal that I would be a member of the senior management team, vice president overseeing all the external affairs for Baylor: federal, state, local, government relations, international affairs, community organizations, national organizations--sort of similar to what I had done for Mayor Morial [Ernest Morial] in terms of the liaison work, but in a medical context.
Story_ID: 485757
Speaker 1: And so he [Peter Traber] loved it and so I got appointed to the senior management team.  So the senior management team at Baylor [Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas] had eight members, so there were only three physicians--I was one of three, and I was the first African American vice president ever in Baylor's history, and Baylor's been around for about 110 years, formerly attached to Baylor University [Waco, Texas], a Baptist institution, but we--Baylor College of Medicine broke off in 1969 as free-standing, independent of Baylor University although still shares the Baylor surname.  But--
Speaker 2: It's one of the top ten--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's top ten, we, we made it into top ten in 2005, of U.S. News World Report [U.S. News and World Report].  A $950 million budget, huge operation, great place, I, I trained there and was attracted to Baylor in Texas because of, of, of the superb quality of the teaching, of the training program.  And again, that was one of those points of opportunity in life where your preparation and the opportunity intersect to make something happen.  I can't say that I ever envisioned myself rising to such a high level at Baylor, I knew at some point in my career I would hopefully have the opportunity to do something, you know, like what ultimately resulted, but again, I think when people ask me, "Well, how did you do it?"  I think there's a certain amount of paying your dues that you have to do, and I always tell younger physicians and medical students that if you wanna do what I do, meaning be a leader or an administrator, you gotta earn your--you gotta earn your dues as a ph- as a clinician first because, I said, the first thing is I always remember, is I'm a physician, this, this president stuff came later, you know.  At the end of the day, I'm still a doctor and I still--I'm still proud to be a physician, and I tell young medical students that from the moment I put my feet on the floor in the morning I am off and running, I, I am honored to be a physician, it's a (unclear) privilege, and that you should cherish that privilege.
Story_ID: 485758
Speaker 1: We left you at Baylor [Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas] as vice president.  Now at the--this is a position that you basically formulated yourself.
Speaker 2: Correct, right.  And I, I, I designed it to do a couple of things, one was to, to be Baylor's ambassador to the world because there was a great need for someone in the senior management team who understood government and understand working with other organizations to, to really look after Baylor's business, whether it be in the state capitol [Texas State Capitol] in Austin [Texas], or down at the city council, or in Washington [D.C.], and so I supervised a staff of five in Houston [Texas], plus two contracts--major contracts.  We had a contract lobbyist in Washington who reported to me, and then another one in Austin who reported to me as well, for our state affairs.  The state relationship that Baylor had is very important because the State of Texas provides about $85 million every two years to Baylor for--to support medical education, so that was--my number one job was to protect and, if possible, enhance our state appropriation, which we were successful in doing during my time at Baylor.  So we were very pleased that the members of the Texas legislature recognized the value that having a top ten medical school in Texas was, and they continued to support it during my time there, so I was very pleased that I, as part of many others, including our CEO, really worked hard on having good relationship with the State of Texas.
Story_ID: 485759
Speaker 1: You got married, I guess, in the time that--between the time that you left medical school and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually, I--I'll tell you the story.  I met my wife, Charlene Maria Dewey Riley, M.D., M.Ed. [Charlene M. Dewey], the first two weeks I was at Morehouse School of Medicine [Atlanta, Georgia], she had been at Morehouse School of Medicine for two years, so she was a, a third year student--third year medical student when I was a first year medical student.  She had come to Morehouse School of Medicine from Bradley University in Illinois [Peoria, Illinois], where she was an all-American track star, my wife was an all-American heptathlete and held, at one time, five Bradley records in, in track and field, and I think three, three, three records still remain to this day, and she was inducted into the Bradley Athletic Hall of Fame [Bradley Athletics Hall of Fame] in--shortly after we were married in 1994, so she was a very accomplished student athlete at Bradley, and I met her at Morehouse, and she went off to New York to train at Montefiore Albert Einstein Medical Center [Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, New York], internal medicine, and we got married right before I graduated from Morehouse School of Medicine, we were married on May 1, 1993, which was three weeks before my graduation from medical school, and so we began our married life in Texas, in Houston [Texas], when we moved there in July of '93 [1993] for my residency training, and we remained in Houston until I accepted appointment in January of 2007 to become president of Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].
Story_ID: 485760
Speaker 1: You were appointed in 2004, was it '04 [2004]?
Speaker 2: To the vice presidency?
Speaker 1: Yeah, vice (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Correct--Baylor [Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas], correct.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.  Now, 2005 we had this devastating hurricane in--Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] in New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us your story in terms of Katrina?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  I, I--having grown up in New Orleans, the Katrina saga continues for me, and in fact, I just wrote an article ['Hurricanes Katrina and Rita: Professionally Fulfilling, Personally Painful,' Wayne J. Riley] that will appear in the Meharry's [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] Journal of the Health Care of the Poor and Underserved [sic. Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved] later this spring, which is more of a personal piece about my personal and professional interactions with, with Katrina.  But from a personal point of view, in--on or around August 24 or 25, it became apparent to me that New Orleans was definitely in the bull's eye of this huge hurricane that was--just had taken over the gulf.  I remember looking at the satellite photos, and all the cloud cover just obscured the Gulf of Mexico, and so I called my mother [Jacqueline Cerf Riley] and I said, "Mom, I think you guys just need to get in the car and come to Houston [Texas] because I'm worried where this storm is gonna go and, you know, it's better for you to ride it out here in Houston without--as opposed to trying to stay there and, and ride it out."  So she agreed, and my dad [Emile Riley, Jr.] had been in poor health for about two years, and that was the other reason it was in the back of my mind, I didn't want him to sort of be marooned without any access to medical care, so they got in the car the next morning and a drive that normally takes five and a half hours from Houston to New Orleans took eighteen hours because everybody else in the region was trying to get out of New Orleans to get out of harm's way.
Speaker 1: Now, did you give them the message?  Was that before Ray Nagin's message to the city to (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, this was before, I--and this was partially informed by my experience in the mayor's office [of Ernest Morial's administration].  Whenever there's a hurricane that's in the gulf--when I was on the mayor's staff, we would go into a, a heightened sense of alert, you know, just from the governmental point of view, so it was apparent to me that I thought I needed to get a sooner word, and in fact, I wish I had gotten it sooner because if they--if I had really, you know, been more aware, I think I would have gotten 'em out a day or two earlier, and maybe they wouldn't have had as long a trip as they did, but nonetheless, it was informed by my experience, you know, dealing with hurricanes as a mayoral staffer that if New Orleans were to ever sustain a direct hit that it would be, it would be devastating.  And we had, we had known this since the early, early '80s [1980s] and late '70s [1970s], we had multiple briefings from the Corps of Engineers [U.S. Army Corps of Engineers], even twenty years ago that New Orleans could not sustain a direct hit by a category three or above hurricane.  So, a little bit of my evacuation strategy--my family was just informed by my prior service in the mayor's office that, that New Orleans' topography and, and the unique nature of the way it's situated at their gulf outlet to the Mississippi River was gonna be a challenge from a flood control point of view.
Story_ID: 485761
Speaker 1: We often hear people say that the city knew this, you know, that it couldn't sustain a category three hurricane, and--.  Did--but there seems to be a--when you hear everybody talk about it, it's--in the days prior to Katrina [Hurricane Katrina]--I mean in the years prior to Katrina, did, did people really believe that, believe it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no, that's--I think a couple things, you're right, people did not--let's put it this way, New Orleans [Louisiana] had dodged so many bullets that people just got lulled into a sense of complacency that anytime there's a hurricane that was veering towards New Orleans, it would either go towards Florida or go towards, you know, Texas that--to a certain extent, there was a complacency that set in among the populace, I think that's, that's clear because they've been through the drill so many times, you know.  Getting ready to evacuate, evacuate, stocking up on water, stocking up on batteries and candles and, you know, so forth.  So, folks had been in this, you know, preparatory phase before and nothing's happened, so part of it was that.  The other thing that, from my perspective, having served in government and, and served New Orleans for five years [in Ernest Morial's administration], it is clear that the levies were a federal responsibility.  I mean we have known that for a long period of time 'cause we had dialogue with the Corps of Engineers [U.S. Army Corps of Engineers] twenty years ago about the preparedness of New Orleans to sustain massive flooding, so this has been a, a, a federal issue for a whole lot longer than what it appears on the surface.  And, again, people have to understand that the levies and the control levies, the construction, design, and engineer of the levies is a federal responsibility, entrusted to the Corps of--Army Corps of Engineers.  And so it's painful to me to have watched this whole drama play out over the past twenty months when we, we knew that at one time New Orleans was not gonna be able to dodge the bullet yet again.  And so, you know, people are more interested in assigning blame, I'm not so much interested in assigning blame as I am in making sure that, that, you know, this never happens again.  And even this week, there was some data that came out, or a story that came out in the AP [Associated Press] that suggested that even the newer flood pumps that the Corps of Engineer put in just last summer are deficient which, again, sort of adds insult to injury.  So I couldn't believe that when I read it earlier this week but, again, it highlights the fact that if Dutch Morial [Ernest Morial] had been mayor, if Marc Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial] had been mayor, if Ray Nagin had been mayor--there were things beyond the control of the mayor of New Orleans with regard to flood control that the people have to understand is a federal responsibility, and I know Mayor Nagin has come in for some criticism, some of it well-deserved, but I, I would insist that people really take a look at the fact that Mayor Nagin had no control over flood control outside of, you know, the levee board which he, he nominally controls as mayor--the New Orleans Levee Board [Orleans Levee Board].  The, the whole region is protected, or should be protected by the Corps of Engineers.
Story_ID: 485762
Speaker 1: So, you got your, your parents [Jacqueline Cerf Riley and Emile Riley, Jr.] out.  I know that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I remember Saturday morning--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when they announced on CNN--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --everybody should get out of there.
Speaker 2: Right.  And I had gotten them out, I called them--it was a Saturday morning when the mayor [Ray Nagin] issued a blanket order to get people out of New Orleans [Louisiana].  I had called them Thursday, Thursday evening, and--no, I'm sorry, Wednesday evening, and they got on the road that Thursday, and then that Satur- no, I'm sorry, that Friday, and then that Saturday is when the official order got out.  But again, a journey that normally takes five and a half hours by car took eighteen hours, and so they arrived at, at, in the wee hours of the morning on the day before the hurricane hit, and they were, you know, quite, quite fatigued by their, by their ordeal.  But it--and I wrote in the article ['Hurricanes Katrina and Rita: Professionally Fulfilling, Personally Painful,' Wayne J. Riley] that it's, it's an interesting situation to go from a household of four, two adults and two small children, to instantly having eight, eight new inhabitants of your home, all of whom you love dearly.  Needless to say, I love my parents and siblings dearly, but it did sort of upset the feng shui in our family and--but it was--that's what family's for, and we still talk about it today, that my wife [Charlene M. Dewey] and are grateful for the fact that we were in the position to take in family who were displaced by Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].  My sister, her husband and her two kids lost their home and all their possessions, they lived on the east--near the lakefront in New Orleans, and so they sustained heavy damage and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Lake Pontchartrain?
Speaker 2: Lake Pontchartrain, correct.  They were two blocks away from Lake Pontchartrain, so they lost everything.  And then my parents' house was heavily damaged on the West Bank of the region in Jefferson Parish [Louisiana], they sustained loss of a total roof, and then (cough)--excuse me--(cough) (unclear)--excuse me--proliferation, and so their house was rendered uninhabitable for up until--I just was able to complete the renovations just two months ago.  So, from a family point of view, it was, it was quite disruptive, and yet from another point of family view, it allowed us, you know, sort of to be all together, sort of one last time before my dad has his stroke.  He had a massive stroke the, the week after Hurricane Rita threatened the region.  Remember we went through Katrina, and then like two weeks later there was a second hurricane that was bearing down on the gulf [Gulf of Mexico], and that one swerved more towards Texas, and so I evacuated them from our home into a hotel in Houston [Texas] to get 'em out of harm's way, 'cause again, I was concerned about my dad's health and not having a situation where he were marooned for any long period of time without access to medical care.  And he went into the hospital for, for an unrelated problem to the problem that, that led to his demise, which was a stroke, but he went in because of severe pain, back pain, which required some therapy and, and analgesia, and then suffered the stroke the Monday after--one week after Hurricane Rita had come through.  So, when I look back on the Katrina period, it was--you know, we're--my wife and I are both grateful for the fact that we could open up our home to our, our family, which we did, and that we could, you know, sort of serve as a life preserver in a sense, until they got their lives back together.  And it did allow us, you know, even for a brief little while, to have my dad closer by as his, his final days came.
Story_ID: 485763
Speaker 1: The other part of Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] is that it, it, it heavily damaged a great American city, a city that I devoted five years of my life to, it's a great city, a place I grew up.  Even when I go back nowadays--Dooky Chase [Dooky Chase's Restaurant, New Orleans, Louisiana] isn't there anymore, I can't go in there and, and give Leah Chase [HistoryMaker Leah "Dookie" Chase] a hug and, and reminisce about old times, I can't go get my favorite place to get gumbo which is Dooky, places I grew up going to are, are no longer, so it's, it's, it's disruptive from a, a personal and, and sort of existential sense because we all know we, we always place--call something home, whether you leave a certain place, but you always know that when you go back to a certain community that that's your home, and so to a certain extent, that has, has altered the, the fabric of New Orleans [Louisiana] for a lot of us who, who have family there, who have traditions there, who go back there and, and who still love the place.  So, Katrina is a--it's something we, we still live with on a daily basis, those of us who grew up in New Orleans or love New Orleans, it's, it's, it's, it's painful.  The New Orleans that I knew, that my kids [Erin Riley and Alexis Riley] got to know a little bit, will probably never be the same, to a certain extent, that's probably good.  New Orleans did have a lot of problems.  We had a resistant underclass in a city that, that unfortunately was generation upon generation of lack of economic and educational opportunity, and (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a tough city in a lot of ways (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yes, it's, it's a tough city to live in, it's a tough city to govern having, you know, tried to govern it for five years [in Ernest Morial's administration], but yet and still, in spite of all its warts, it's, it's still a great city in terms of its culture, its ambiance, its--the people, I've always said that the best part about people is--the best part about New Orleans is its people, and sometimes I wish we had the resources that the people richly deserve because of just how, how good they are as, as, as folks.  And--but Katrina--as I've said in the article ['Hurricanes Katrina and Rita: Professionally Fulfilling, Personally Painful,' Wayne J. Riley], it's a, it's a region that's worth rebuilding, that in my small little way, our institution wants to play a role in rebuilding the healthcare infrastructure of the region--the whole Gulf Coast region, and Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] graduates have practiced in the Gulf Coast, in New Orleans, in Mississippi, and Alabama for, for hundreds of years, and so Meharry will be a part of the solution to building up the infra- healthcare infrastructure of the region, and I'm very grateful that I can play a role from this perch in, in stimulating that by sending graduates down there to train and to practice and to teach, that's what Meharry has done so well for so long.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, I guess--well, places like Dooky Chase are just--are--well, you said they're not coming back, I mean not in that form anymore, anyway.
Speaker 1: Right.  They're not gonna probably come back in that form and, and, you know, it, it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is she rebuilding? Is Leah Chase rebuilding?
Speaker 1: I heard she's rebuilding.  It's not rebuilt yet, but I, I sure hope she does, (laughter) those of us who, who, who miss, you know, that kind of social center.  And you gotta remember, places like Dooky Chase and some of the other restaurants in New Orleans were sort of the glue that held the social fabric of the African American community together 'cause in the days of segregation, they couldn't go to Antoine's [New Orleans, Louisiana], they couldn't go to Galatoire's [New Orleans, Louisiana] or Commander's Palace [New Orleans, Louisiana], and now we can go there, and those are great places and I've been to 'em all, but there's still something special about going to Dooky Chase, or to any of the other small neighborhood restaurants in New Orleans that New Orleans is so famous for.  It's hard to get a bad meal in New Orleans, but it's part of the culture, it's part of the, you know, the, the je ne sais quoi of New Orleans, that certain something, as they say in French, that you can't--it's hard to articulate, but you know it's there when you experience it.
Story_ID: 485764
Speaker 1: Now when did you get the call from Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]?  And when did you find out about this position being open, and how did you go about--?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I was first--my dad [Emile Riley, Jr.] died on January 31, '06 [2006], and it was about, I think, three months later I had just returned from a--from the American College Physicians [American College of Physicians] meeting, and I had a call from Heidrick and Struggles [Heidrick and Struggles International Inc.], which was a search firm leading the search for the Meharry presidency.  Dr. Maupin [John E. Maupin, Jr.], my predecessor, announced he was leaving in January of '06 [2006].  And so it was May of '06 [2006]--ei- late April, early May of '06 [2006] when I got the first call and, quite frankly I, I told the search consultant that I was very flattered, but that I, I didn't feel like I would enter the search for the presidency.  I cited a number of things I was dealing with, Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] issues, you know, (unclear) with my family, my dad had just died, so we were still, still grieving his loss.  So I kind of said, hey, look, I'm very flattered, Meharry's a great place--my dad went there but, you know, here are five names of other people around the country I think you really should look at who I think are top notch, and so they--it was about a half hour conversation and they thanked me and they said, you know, "We'll be in touch."  So, I went on about my business at Baylor [Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas], and they called back about--this was April, they called back in June and I said, "Well, again, I'm very flattered but, you know, I just don't think I can enter the search."  And that one was a very short conversation and they informed me then that they had gotten my name from several people around the country who had recommended that I be considered for the position, they wouldn't tell me who those names were but I, I, I, I think I know who the usual suspects are, but I'll (laughter), I haven't quite thanked them for, for what they did because it did turn out to be a wonderful opportunity I couldn't resist.  But, again, I told 'em no.  They called back the Friday before the 4th of July, 2006 and they said, "Dr. Riley [HistoryMaker Wayne Riley], we really want you to be a candidate for the presidency, we've gotten information from multiple sources around the country that you're the type of person that Meharry should consider for this very important job."  And again, I told 'em I was very flattered, and I said, "Well--." They said, "Look, we really need to know your answer," you know, "by tomorrow," or "by Monday."  This was the Friday before the 4th of July, so I was kind of in wind down mode to, you know, just take it easy over the 4th of July weekend.  So, it was about 7:00 that night, I went home, and I pulled my wife [Charlene M. Dewey] and my mother [Jacqueline Cerf Riley] into my mother's room that she was occupying at our house and I said, "Look, Heidrick and Struggles is calling me about the Meharry job, what do you all think?  I don't think I can go through a search right now, I just, you know, don't think I'm ready for it,"  and they said, "No," they said, "if you're not ready, you know, don't do it, you know, your future's bright and we support you." Very supportive conversation.  Whatever I decided, they were gonna support me, so, both my wife and my mother.  So, I went back to the office about nine p.m. and typed up a letter to the search committee saying, "I'm honored beyond belief that you you know want me to enter the search, but I just can't do it, and I wish Meharry the best."  So, I faxed the letter to Heidrick and Struggles that night, I guess it was about 11:30 that night when I finally finished the letter and faxed it.  I faxed it and went home and just forgot about it, thought I'd have a great 4th of July weekend, which I did, with my family and my, my two kids [Erin Riley and Alexis Riley].  And Monday morning, I get a call from Heidrick--oh, (unclear), Tuesday morning, the 4th of July was on a Monday that year, so Tuesday morning I get a call from Heidrick and, and I was, I was shocked.  I said, "Well, did you get my letter?"  And they said, "What letter?"  (Laughter) And I said, "You know damn well I sent a letter in saying I'm not entering the search," (laughter).  And they said, "Well, lucky for you we didn't see your letter until after the search committee had already issued you an invitation to interview for the presidency" (laughter).
Story_ID: 485765
Speaker 1: The search consultant--the, the senior executive at Heidrick and Struggles [Heidrick and Struggles International Inc.] who led the search, is Veronica Biggins [HistoryMaker J. Veronica Biggins], who is a former director, Office of Presidential Personnel under President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]--African American woman who, who has had a superb career at NationsBank [NationsBank Corporation] and Bank of America, and then President Clinton appointed her as his chief personnel executive on the White House staff, so she would not take no for an answer, Veronica was persistent, and she told me that, "We went from a hundred resumes, or CVs, to twenty-two, and the committee met this morning and they went from twenty-two to eight, and you're one of the eight, and they want you to come to Atlanta [Georgia] for a secret interview with the search committee."  So I said, "Okay, let me get back to you."  And I called a couple people around the country that I respected, I called Dr. Sullivan [HistoryMaker Dr. Louis Sullivan] and I told him what had transpired, I called Risa Lavizzo-Mourey [HistoryMaker Dr. Risa Lavizzo-Mourey], who is the president of Robert Wood Johnson Foundation [Princeton, New Jersey]--black woman, runs the largest healthcare philanthropy in the world, a very good friend of mine--admired her career for a long time, and I asked 'em both.  You know, they, they really are persistent, and both Dr. Sullivan and Risa said, "Wayne [HistoryMaker Wayne Riley], you gotta do it, you gotta go interview.  You'll regret it--if you don't get it, you'll regret it, Meharry needs someone like you at this point in its history."  So, based on that, and a couple other conversations, I accepted the invitation.
Story_ID: 485766
Speaker 1: I had my interview on Au- August 18, 2006, the reason why I remember the date, it happened to be my parents' [Jacqueline Cerf Riley and Emile Riley, Jr.] anniversary, and it would have been my parents' forty-ninth anniversary had my dad still been living, so it was a special day for my mother--very emotional day for her, and so I was in Atlanta [Georgia] meeting with the search committee, and we had a good two and a half hour conversation and I gave them my candid assessment of, of what I thought I could bring to the job if, if they wanted, but also a candid assessment of, of, of Meharry's [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] situation from my due diligence--that I had done a lot of work to see where Meharry was from a financial point of view, from a programmatic point of view, education point of view, and so forth.  So, I thought it was a good two-hour conversation and I, I made it very clear to 'em that if, if you're looking for a president who's just gonna come to Nashville [Tennessee] and, you know, look nice and go to cocktail parties, I'm not it, I'm not gonna leave a great job in a great city to go into a job where I can't make it.  If I feel that I can't make a difference, and I won't be given the support to make a difference to build programs and to advance the institution, then I don't--you know, I wouldn't do myself a favor--I wouldn't be doing myself a favor, nor would I be doing good for the institution.  So, we had a very good two-hour conversation, and this was August 18, and then on September 28, my wife [Charlene M. Dewey] and I were in Colorado--first vacation we had taken alone in two years, we were at The Broadmoor resort [Colorado Springs, Colorado], and I got the call at six a.m., I guess they forgot that Colorado was earlier time zone, but they, they awakened me with the news that I was a finalist, that we had gone from eight down to two, and that my wife and I would be invited to come to Nashville for an official visit, and we did on October--I think 26 and 27, we had a two-day visit, as a couple, to Nashville and to Meharry, and, and then my announcement was announced on November 3, my appointment as president designate was November 3, 2006.
Story_ID: 485767
Speaker 1: Give us a sense of some of your goals and objectives here, and what you've done so far, and what you envision doing in the future.
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, it's a tremendous honor for me to be the tenth president of Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], it, it is an awesome responsibility that I don't take very lightly at all.  This institution, founded in 1876, has produced more African American physicians and dentists in biomedical science than just about any institution in the country, so it's, it's, it's a national treasure, and that's the way I treat--and I talk about Meharry as a national treasure.
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask this question--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --'cause I was asked the other day, and I didn't have a--and not the perfect answer to it, but who was Meharry?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, the story.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, that's--it's called the salt wagon story.  The story has it, and it's been probably hyperbolized a lot over the years, but there was a young Samuel Meharry, who was a young man as a teenager who--in southern Kentucky--who was in the 18- I think it was 1820s or 1830s--was hauling a salt wagon of salt, remember, salt was used for lots of things back then, for food preservatives and so forth.  So, he was hauling a load of salt, and he had a wheel that broke down, it was near dark, and out in the boonies of southern Kentucky, and not too far was a slave, little slave cabin, and the slave owners came out and helped him, you know, tried to help him get his wagon out of the ditch.  The wagon had gone into a ditch, and the wheel was broken and all sorts of, you know, problems had ensued, so it was dark and they said, "Look, why don't you just come, you know, just come, you know, sleep it off and stay at our place 'til tomorrow morning daylight, then we'll help you get outta the ditch and fix your wheel."  So, this slave family took in young Samuel Meharry who was, I think, only fifteen or sixteen at the time.
Speaker 1: So, this is a slave family, not, not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --the owners but the slaves.
Speaker 2: No, no, not the owner.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, Samuel Meharry was a white guy--white, white kid, white teenager who's trying to do his family's business moving the salt wagon, and the story told that the slave family took him in and fed him, next morning they got his wagon out of the ditch, fixed the wheel and he went on his way.  And apparently he, he never forgot that generosity, that simple act of kindness on the part of these, these slaves, and through the years, he and his brother became very successful merchants and entrepreneurs, and at some point in his life, later in his life, he said, look, I wanna repay that kind deed of, of rescuing me from that ditch by providing some seed funding for an institution that would educate black nurses and doctors that take care of former slaves.  So, that's the salt wagon story, or the salt wagon legend.  And so Samuel Meharry--the Meharry brothers gave the first $30,000 for the establishment of a medical school, or a school for training of physicians, dentists and nurses, to Walden University [Nashville, Tennessee], which then morphed into what we now know, a short time later, as Meharry Medical College.  So, the founding is 1876, so Meharry is a 130 year-old institution that has excelled at training African American physicians, dentists, and biomedical scientists, and for a time we did have a nursing school, the nursing school unfortunately closed in 1960.  But it has a fabled history based on that, that simple act of, of kindness on the part of slaves and the philanthropy of, of a very successful young man who never forgot that simple act of generosity.  So, Meharry also has roots deep in the United Methodist church, we're one of--we're related to the United Methodist church.  Although we're private, we do have a relationship with the UMC based on the fact that the United Methodist church was the founder of, of Walden University and, and so forth.  So, although we're private and independent, we do have a affiliation with the United Methodist church, and we do receive some funding.
Story_ID: 485768
Speaker 1: But Meharry's [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] (pause) attraction to me was, one, that I had a strong emotional connection to Meharry, my dad [Emile Riley, Jr.] went here, it was the foundation for his medical career, it has been, you know, the citadel of learning for a whole--for generations of healthcare professionals in the United States.  It is terribly important today, just as it was twenty years ago or thirty years ago, forty years ago when African Americans didn't have a choice of where they could go, Meharry is still an attractive option for young men and women who wanna be physicians, dentists or biomedical scientists.  Meharry excels by doing a lot with little.  When you look at the history of Meharry, Meharry has been on the brink of collapse four or five times over its 130-year history, and the thing that always gets it over the, the hump is that the people really passionately believe about this institution, and even to this day our faculty are superb, they can go any--they can work anywhere in the world, but they choose to work at Meharry because they believe in the mission--the mission of taking young men and women who may have slightly lower test scores than other medical students or other schools, but Meharry excels at finding diamonds in the rough, and then we polish 'em off and, and educate 'em and treat 'em, and then they go out into the world and they do fantastically well in terms of serving the nation, their communities and the world, you know, by providing health services and dental services, and conducting cutting edge research.  So, that's the Meharry story, is that it's embodied in the motto, which is, the worship of God through service to man, and it's something we take very seriously here at Meharry, that we're, we're a, a special institution that--it imbues our graduates with a special sense of responsibility to take care of society, and particularly those of us who are considered the least of us among, among us in the society.
Story_ID: 485769
Speaker 1: What are some of the imminent projects that you're working on here to--?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, I am honored to have succeeded Dr. John Maupin [John E. Maupin, Jr.], who led Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] for twelve and a half years, he did a superb job of stabilizing Meharry.  When he got here in 1994, Meharry was $42 million in debt, it was, it was on the brink of losing its accreditation with the LCME [Liaison Committee on Medical Education], its credit rating was, was very low, morale was low, faculty were leaving, student achievement was down, I mean he, he came into a time period where Meharry was really going through a significant period of malaise and, and struggle, and he did a terrific job stabilizing Meharry, getting us out of the red, concluding a first ever, or the largest capital campaign of the school's history--about $125 million raised.  Test scores are up, and the Meharry pride is back, and so I, I am honored to succeed Dr. Maupin.  Now with that comes a responsibility to keep the momentum going, and that's where I've been spending a lot of my time, is telling our faculty, our students, our alumni, our trustees that Meharry's in good shape, it's poils- poised for better things to come, and that I'm here to be the catalyst for the growth and development of this institution as, as, as one of the nation's premier academic health science centers.  The other thing I've consistently preached since being announced as president is that I don't want Meharry to be larger for largeness sake, I'd rather be small and excellent than larger and mediocre, and so that's where the challenges are from an administrative point of view of--is aligning the expectations of our faculty, our students and our alumni with the modern day realities of where academic health and science centers are.  This is a tough environment for all academic health sciences, not just Meharry. We've got declining research support at the federal level; we've got a difficult practice environment in terms of the practice of medicine; we've got the largest number of uninsured at any time in our nation's history.  Meharry always has taken care of the uninsured and under-insured, and we have to deal with the challenges of taking care of patients who don't always have money to pay for their medical care.  We have the challenge of continuing to convince the policy makers in Washington [D.C.] and downtown in Nashville [Tennessee] that Meharry is worthy of, of, of additional federal, state, local monetary support to conduct its missions.  We have to be relevant to today's generations of healthcare students who could go anywhere.  This isn't the time when, when my dad [Emile Riley, Jr.] came out of college, when you only had two or three choices, if you were an African American, to study medicine.  Young African American women and others have lots of choices to study medicine, so why is Meharry still relevant today in 2007 that it was in t- in 1957 when my father entered?  And so we have to be able to articulate that a Meharry education is, is a little different than other health sciences educations, and it's because of the faculty, it's 'cause of the, the sense of shared victory that the faculty and the students have.  When we see one of those students who marches across the stage at commencement who may have had MCAT scores a little lower, or maybe didn't get in medical school until their third or fourth try, but they've succeeded, they've gotten through a very tough curriculum, they've passed their licensure exams, they're going on to residency training in great places around the country.  That's, that's the Meharry story on a daily basis, of what we do and, and to prepare people for, for the nation and the world.  So, my job is a tough job, I understand it, and I didn't take it with the intent to, to revel in the, in the, the trappings of being a president, which I'm very wary of, because I, I, I, I'm a doer by nature, and it's my, my administrative style and, and leadership attributes have been informed by career in government working for, for very strong manager in Mayor Morial [Ernest Morial], and coming under the spell of Louis Sullivan [HistoryMaker Dr. Louis Sullivan], and many other people along the way that have mentored me and supported m- my career.  So, this is a great place, very honored to, to lead it.
Story_ID: 485770
Speaker 1: What's the biggest challenge that you face?
Speaker 2: Well, any, any college or university president will tell you that raising money is always the, the toughest thing, and I, I would agree with that, that my toughest job on a daily basis is worrying about having enough resources to do all the great things we want to do, and then having enough resources to do the things we must do, because there're sort of two things--what you need to do and what you must do, and then, you know, fundraising is always a challenge, people, you know, they wanna know, "Why should we support Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] over this institution?" or "Why should Meharry even exist now, now that black students can go to any school in the country?"  So I have to continually get out there and tell that story that Meharry is just as relevant today as it was, you know, forty years ago, that there are students who (unclear) be attracted to our model of education that--not that they couldn't be doctors, but we think can be more effective doctors, dentists, physicians, biomedical scientists, by virtue of the fact that they've come through our educational experience.  I think those are--that's my biggest challenge on a daily basis, just resources, we worry about resources a lot.  But, I do tell our students and our faculty is that--one thing that I've observed about Meharry is that we don't celebrate our successes enough as an institution, we have a lot of successes.  Just yesterday, we had our Match Day program, where young soon to be graduating medical students find out where they matched, to continue their post-graduate training, and over 89 percent of 'em got their first, second, or third choice-of-residency slot, which is a very strong indication that people know the Meharry product out there--the hospitals around the country, they know what kind of doctors and dentists and biomedical scientists we put out, and they want our folks to be a part of their program.  So, those are the kind of successes I want, I want, I want Meharrians to feel good about their Meharry experience and to leave here, you know, connected to the institution for life.  And so those are the types of things I, I've been working on as, as sort of--you know, anytime there's leadership transitions, there's always a period of uncertainty and, and a certain amount of paralysis that sets in, so getting the institution moving again and, as I keep telling the faculty and the deans and the vice presidents, you know, I want us to get back to our knitting.  We know who the president is and, you know, all that speculation and handicapping is over, let's get back to the, the day to day work of teaching, learning, patient care, research, public health and, and service that Meharry has always excelled at.
Story_ID: 485771
Speaker 1: Does Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] focus on specific diseases that, that are associated with the African American pop- population (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, we do, we have a strong focus from a research and clinical point of view for diseases that, that we know affect African Americans, or people of color, who are disadvantaged disproportionately.  For example, we have a--one of the leading experts in (unclear) HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] care and AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], Dr. James Hildreth [James E.K. Hildreth], who came here from Johns Hopkins [Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland].  He has put together a center for AIDS disparities and AIDS [Center for AIDS Health Disparities Research] that is, is gonna do some cutting edge research in therapeutics and modalities to treat or prevent HIV infection transmission.  We have a, a new women's health research center [Center for Women's Health Research].  Again, looking at the disparities of women who come from low-income backgrounds or are African American women, how they compare to other demographic groups in terms of incidents and disease, whether it's breast cancer, or any other disease that we know tends to befall folks of color or, or low socioeconomic status more often.  So we're trying to tease out what are these exact mechanisms?  Is it all environment?  Is it genetic?  Is it, you know, lack of access to care?  Or is it a little bit of all three?  So, that's the kind of research that we're doing.  We're also very interested in public health, we have an active relationship with State Farm insurance company to encourage African American communities to embrace the seatbelt use.  We know that, that in some black or Hispanic cultures seatbelt use has not been as well-embraced as it should, and here again, public health is not only about the typical things we think about in public health, but public health is also about preventing situations from happening in, in--to the degree to which we can work with State Farm and others to spread the word about a basic thing that everybody can do when they drive a car--buckle up their seat belt, that it prevents death and disability and, and morbidity significantly, so, we're working very hard on that.  So, the number of things that Meharry has going on is, is quite broad, but I think those give you the kind of flavor of the things that we, we value as an institution.  The other thing we value is the fact, again, educationally, you know, our model is that we, we could fill up the whole class with students who have 4.0 grade point averages, but we know people who have 4.0 grade point average don't make the best doctors all the time, don't make the best dentists, don't make the most effective biomedical scientists.  So, if we take a kid with a 3.4 GPA who's had life experience--maybe they had to work, or they had to raise kids while they were working and going to school, I mean so we look at that as a proxy for achievement that other institutions may not really be aware of or, or understand because that's the nature of, of what we've been able to do is to find those diamonds in the rough and then, you know, they go out and perform just as well as anybody else.
Speaker 1: Well what about--I guess I attempted to ask about sickle cell anemia--
Speaker 2: Yeah sickle cell--
Speaker 1: --high blood pressure--
Speaker 2: Oh, right, and we're--
Speaker 1: --smoking (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) smoking, yeah.  Actually, sickle cell is a big focus area, we have a Sickle Cell Center.  Our cardiovascular disease is a huge issue--
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a, there's a--
Speaker 2: --in the African American community--stroke.
Speaker 1: Yeah, African American treatments now being developed for--
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: --specifically for heart disease.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Well, one of 'em, BiDil was--we were one of the sites for the clinical trial of BiDil, which was a new drug combination that was particularly found to be most beneficial in a sub-group of patients, predominantly African American, so that--part of that clinical trial was done right here in our department of medicine, along with other cooperating centers around the country.  So, absolutely, the typical things that we are concerned about in terms of the health (unclear) and health statistics of African American and other people of color, we are strongly focused on those efforts.  We've begun to look at Hispanics, this is a browning America, and to the extent that we always preach cultural competency to our white colleagues at the same time we, as African American physicians, have to be equally as culturally competent for our brown brothers and sisters that are increasing in population.  And so we have Hispanic outreach programs, we have--we actively recruit Hispanic students.  Our student body is quite diverse, by the way, 85 percent of our student body is, is African American, about 10 percent, or 8 to 10 percent are white, and another 5 percent or so are Asian or other.  So, again, Meharry has since, you know, the '60s [1960s], late '50s [1950s], tried to be as inclusive as possible in terms of its student body.  Our faculty is very diverse.  Sixty percent of our faculty are African American, the other are--20 percent are, are Caucasian and Asian, and so forth, so I'm very proud of the, the Meharry brand of diversity that we do have.  We are clearly historically African American because that's the roots, but we have not been exclusionary.
Story_ID: 485772
Speaker 1: Is there a single source of funding that's, that is much stronger than any, any other for--?
Speaker 2: Well, on the federal side, the Office of Minority Health funding, through the [U.S.] Department of Health and Human Services, is very important.  We've received a lot of research support from the Office of Minority Health at NIH, National Institutes of Health.  From the state perspective, we very much treasure and cherish the $10 to 12 million a year we get from the State of Tennessee in recognition of what we contribute to our state and to our region.  Our alumni giving's very important, our alumni giving's about at the national average, which is about 15, 16 percent for a school our size.  The good news is--well, the bad news is I want that to be higher, the good news is that when our graduates do give, they tend to give at a higher average gift than other institutions so, you know, again, part of my job as I move around the country is to really encourage more alumni giving on a consistent basis over the course of an alumnus' career, as opposed to just episodically, which tends to always occur around reunion activities.  So, I hope I can stimulate a culture of consistent giving during my presidency that will be sustainable.  We are looking at a number of, of other things to, to do.  We're, we're likely gonna initiate a new capital campaign sometime in early 2009 where we go back out to raise money in a big way for enhancing our programs.  We've gotten good reports from our accrediting bodies, Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] is fully accredited, just had our Southern Association College and Schools [Southern Association of Colleges and Schools] site visit last week, and we did fine.  Our medical school accreditation is a full ten years, so we've got lots of good things going on here at Meharry that really tie into our mission and why we exist and, and what we can do going forward.
Story_ID: 485773
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community here in Nashville [Tennessee] and in the nation?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I think my concern about my neighbors here in Nashville is, is pretty much aligned with the national thrust.  We, we--although we've made strides in terms of some of the diseases that affect African Americans, we're still dying too early, we're still having delayed diagnoses, we're still having more aggressive disease when we do find disease, we're not taking advantage of, of the preventive health measures such as prostate cancer screening and blood pressure monitoring like we should.  The obesity epidemic is, is not insignificant in the African American community, nutrition issues, childbirth issues, psychiatric issues, substance abuse, HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] is a big problem in the African American community, particularly among women.  We know that many of our African American women have been exposed to HIV from having sex with men who have had relationships with other men that have then transmitted the disease into, into women--that's a problem, so we have to engender frank, open discussions about black sexual health in, in the black community, so we have a number of issues that we need to look at from a macro point of view, not just Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], but all of healthcare should be looking at these issues, but we think that Meharry, because of its unique history, can lead the discussion around those issues and really be a key player in coming up with, with good solutions.
Story_ID: 485774
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and it's been quite a bit, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could do it again?
Speaker 2: In terms of Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], or--?
Speaker 1: In terms of your own (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my own career?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, like I told you at the beginning, one thing that I've always tried to do is to try not to say, when I look back upon my life, if I wish I coulda, shoulda.  Lou Rawls used to have a song by that name ['If I Coulda, Woulda, Shoulda'], by the way, it was a great song, and the song really ties into, to the extent possible, you should try not to put yourself in the position where you say, you know, I shoulda worked for the mayor of New Orleans [Louisiana], or I coulda worked for the mayor of New Orleans, or I coulda gone to medical school, or I shoulda answered the call from Meharry search committee because, you know, in the end of your life, as you think about what legacy you leave for the future, to the extent that you can model that you always took advantage of the opportunities that God laid before you, will hopefully help others to, to adopt that same posture.  So, I can't say I'd do, you know, anything differently, but I, I can honestly say that, that there are very few things I can think of where I would say, I wish I coulda, shoulda, which, again, I think is, is, is good advice for anybody, and I just gave this advice to a room full of future doctors the other day, and it, it kind of resonated with 'em.
Story_ID: 485775
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look at everything you've done to this point, what today would you say is your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I joke with my wife [Charlene M. Dewey] that I want two words on my, my tombstone, and it's something that others have put on their tombstone too, is I tried, you know.  I tried to be a good doctor, I tried to be a, a good servant of Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], I tried to be a good husband, a good father, and a, and a good mayoral aide and, and, you know, tried to take care of my family in their time of need, and so, you know, you know, when I'm gone, I think that's the thing that I would like, you know, to be said, that I tried, I tried to do all of the things that I set out to do, and tried to help people and help my family, and build Meharry and, and contribute to Baylor [Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas], and contribute to the city of my birth [New Orleans, Louisiana] and, you know, so forth.  So, it's gratifying to me that I can look back and say that I, you know, really did try to contribute, and that I may not have gotten it all 100 percent right, but I, I sure did try at it.
Story_ID: 485776
Speaker 1: We didn't mention your family in detail, but you have a wife [Charlene M. Dewey], two children, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, I have a wife, who is a physician, a fellow physician who I met at Morehouse School of Medicine [Atlanta, Georgia].  She's a national expert in medical education, she currently is associate professor of medicine at Baylor College of Medicine [Houston, Texas], and she'll be joining the Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee] faculty when she gets here in June.  My wife and daughters are still back in Houston [Texas] of as of today, but they'll be joining me in June of 2007.  I have two daughters, my oldest is eight, Erin Elizabeth Riley [Erin Riley], and my four year old is Alexis Camille Riley [Alexis Riley], and I'm a very, very family-oriented guy, we spend a lot of time with our daughters and we very much enjoy the, the ability to, to do our work as physicians and yet still have a very good and fulfilling family life as a couple.  So, I have tremendous respect for my wife, she stands on her own, well-accomplished and, you know, I'm very blessed to have her, her love and support in this new role.  And we've, we've, we've always tried to be a couple that have, have supported each other in each of our professional activities, and you know, that's the way it is from the beginning with us, we--I wouldn't say we're competitive, but we're very supportive of each other's aspirations.  And it's funny, you know, people ask me, "You guys talk about medicine all the time?"  I say, absolutely not, we talk about the same things any other married couple talk about--the weather, and what we want for dinner, and where should we go on vacation, and what movie we should go to and, you know, who's gonna read the book to our daughter tonight, I mean--so we have a very normal family life, which I think most people are surprised to hear.  But that's--and it keeps you rooted in, in, in both your profession and your personal life by, by, by what we call is our new normalcy.
Story_ID: 485788
Speaker 1: This photo I refer to as two old blues, or two old Yalies together.  This is me with the forty-first president of the United States, George H.W. Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush], who I had the honor of meeting at the invitation of [HistoryMaker] Dr. Louis Sullivan.  This picture came about--I got a call from Dr. Sullivan saying that he was coming through Houston [Texas] about three years ago, and he wanted to take me to see 41, and at first I didn't catch who 41 was, but then he reminded me that 41 was former President Bush.  Of course, he served President Bush as secretary of health and human services, so this was--I was very, very excited to meet former President Bush, very nice man, and we reminisced about our Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] days a little bit, but very nice man.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, tell us about this one.
Speaker 1: All right, this picture is me and my girls, the girls being my wife, Charlene Dewey [Charlene M. Dewey], my eight year old daughter Erin Elizabeth Riley [Erin Riley] and my four year old daughter Elizabeth--excuse me, Alexis Camille Riley [Alexis Riley].  This picture was taken in November, late November of 2006, just before I c- arrived here in January as president, and we're wearing our Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] regalia that the board of trustees had sent to me as a welcome gift to Meharry.  This picture was the picture that was used in the first month of the January, 2007 Meharry calendar that went out to all of our alumni.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This picture is of my investiture with the M.B.A. degree from the Jones Graduate School of Management [Jesse H. Jones Graduate School of Management; Jesse H. Jones Graduate School of Business] at Rice University [Houston, Texas] in May of 2002, I'm being hooded by the dean of the Jones Graduate School of Management, Dr. Gil Whitaker [Gilbert Whitaker].  My M.B.A. came about, as I refer to, as part of my mid-life crisis, and I completed my fourth, and my wife said final, degree with this investiture.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: Okay, this picture is a picture taken on the day of my graduation from the Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, May, 1993, and on the left is the Honorable Louis W. Sullivan, M.D., who was then president of Morehouse School of Medicine and one of my life mentors, and I'm helping the mortarboard presentation on the head of Nobel Peace Prize winner Desmond Tutu, who was our commencement speaker.  I was functioning in my role as president of the fourth-year class to assist Bishop Tutu with his mortarboard.  It was a very special day in my life to realize my dream of being a physician, but also to have in my presence a Nobel Peace Prize winner and champion of social justice and anti-apartheid as Desmond Tutu as our commencement speaker.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, all right, I'm ready.
Speaker 1: This picture was taken on May 1st, 1993, the day Charlene and I were married at St. Patrick's church [The Parish of St. Patrick] in Bay Shore, Long Island [New York].  It was a beautiful May Day on Long Island, and is a beautiful picture of our wedding day that we have shared with many friends and family.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of--one of my favorite pictures of my wife, Dr. Charlene Maria Dewey Riley, and it was taken at Bradley University in Peoria, Illinois on the occasion of her delivering the Robert H. Lawrence memorial lecture [Lawrence Lectureship].  She's standing next to Colonel Robert H. Lawrence [Robert H. Lawrence, Jr.], who was the first African American astronaut and a Bradley graduate who unfortunately died in a test flight prior to him being fully--or before being assigned to a space flight.  Robert Lawrence was a distinguished graduate of Bradley, and Charlene was honored to be the speaker one year at a lecture in his honor.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Tell us about that.
Speaker 1: This is Emile Edward Riley, Jr. [Emile Riley, Jr.], M.D., my father.  This was his graduation picture that appeared in the 1960 Meharry yearbook.
Speaker 2: This is me, Wayne Joseph Riley [HistoryMaker Wayne Riley], circa 1960, this was a picture that appeared in the back of the 1960 Meharry yearbook.  At that time, it was quite normal for the members of the class to put pictures of their children in the future Meharrian section of the yearbook and, needless to say, countless, many children have had their picture, but I'm told that I'm the first that had their picture and also became president of Meharry, so it's a very special picture to, to my mother [Jacqueline Cerf Riley], and my wife in particular (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of myself at the podium at the announcement of my election to the presidency of Meharry Medical College on November 3rd, 2006.  I had just been introduced to the Meharry community by the chairman of the board, Milton H. Jones, Jr.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is a very prized possession that was given to me by my brother-in-law, Mr. James Brown [ph.], on Christmas Eve, excuse me, New Year's Eve 2006, in honor of my father, who had passed away earlier that year.  This was my father's favorite prayer that he used to recite very frequently, with a picture of him up in the left corner.  My dad was a, a very quietly spiritual man, but this was one of his favorite prayers that he had written down in a notebook and--at various places that we discovered after his death.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, I'm ready.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me and Nobel pr- Peace Prize winner Desmond Tutu at my graduation from Morehouse School of Medicine.  I was the fourth-year class president, and was honored to welcome Bishop Tutu to Morehouse School of Medicine on behalf of my classmates and members of the class of 2007.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: This is a picture, one of my most prized pictures in my office here at Meharry, of my graduation from the Morehouse School of Medicine at the MLK International Cha- International Chapel [Martin Luther King Jr. International Chapel] on the Morehouse College campus [Atlanta, Georgia] of my father putting the doctoral hood on me for the first time.  It was a very special moment for me, and I remember how emotional he was after he put the hood on me to signify receipt of the M.D. degree.  In the background, you can see Bishop Tutu in the lower left-hand corner observing the presentation of the hood, so a very, very special picture to me because of my dad capturing in, in film forever him hooding me, and then Bishop Tutu looking on.
