Story_ID: 543956
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Yes, Michael Victor Roberts, Sr., M-I-C-H-A-E-L, V-I-C-T-O-R, R-O-B-E-R-T-S [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.].
Speaker 1: And sir what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 24th, 1948, which means I have a birthday next Wednesday in case you guys wanna say happy birthday, St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well I am a businessman.  I hold the title of chairman and CEO of The Roberts Companies [St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is November 18th--
Speaker 1: October right?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry you're right it's October.  I just said it's my birth- all right today is October 18th, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You are currently in the conference room of The Roberts Companies, 1408 North Kingshighway [Boulevard], the Victor Roberts Building [St. Louis, Missouri], and we are on the third floor.
Story_ID: 543957
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: The answer is I do have a favorite food and I try to stay away from it as much as I can, it's called fried chicken and specifically the, the thighs (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Because those thighs end up in my thighs and therefore I try to back off, but I, but if I were to hit a city and I would ask friends, "Take me to the soul food restaurant."  I would look for their fried chicken and that's how I would make my judgment as to the quality of that restaurant.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I, I have a couple actually.  You know a color that pops up is my fraternity colors which are sort of a red and white, crimson cream.  I--
Speaker 1: Is that Kappa?
Speaker 2: Kappas yes, Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, and I enjoy in terms of attire more muted tones, earth tones in some cases.  Green works well because my eyes are green.  That's a, that's what, that's what my wife [Jeanne Gore Roberts] tells me and the girls, so we (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I like, no, I, I enjoy earth, earth tone suits, browns and, and grays and blacks for the most part, exactly earth tone.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Well I enjoy, I enjoy the spring in St. Louis [Missouri] just as it's breaking out.  We're seeing the emerging new plants and, and the trees.  I enjoy walking in the park.  I live across the street from a very large park here in St. Louis, Forest Park, and my home faces it, so I get every morning, every evening I have the opportunity to experience actually four seasons and it's quite interesting because literally my office at home, my desk faces a park and I can see grass growing and trees and flowers and just sort of watch that, that annual change.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I do, my favorite destination at this point is the Bahamas.  I'm a developer there and I own a very nice home.  Actually it's on the beach.  It's called Roberts Castle On The Beach [Nassau, Bahamas].  It's a pretty large property, 150 feet of, of deck, pool, Jacuzzi, ten bedrooms, eight baths.  So, it's, and it's a compound.  So, it's very easy to access from St. Louis, and it's very nice.  However, I did just return from Johannesburg [South Africa], Cape Town [South Africa], and Dubai [United Arab Emirates], and I do believe that Cape Town is probably one of the most beautiful cities I've seen in, in terms of its location and proximity to the water, et cetera.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I do.  It's fake it 'til you make it.  It is a phrase that was published when Forbes did a story on my brother [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] and I when we took public our wireless phone company [Roberts Wireless Communications].  We were the first and only African Americans who built and owned a phone company in this country.  We became affiliated with Sprint [Sprint PCS Group].  It required us to find a way to borrow up to $53 million to, to build it.  We built it and then we went public it ended up, the $53 million was taken into the public company, and we needed up with nearly four hundred million in stock value and no, no debt.  And so when Forbes came to us to asked questions well how did, you know, a couple of black kids whose daddy [Victor Roberts] worked at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], and mother [Delores Talley Roberts] was a teacher, got there?  I said, "Well sometimes you gotta fake it 'til you make it," (laughter).
Story_ID: 543958
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  But we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Her name is Delores del Rio Talley was her maiden name, Roberts [Delores Talley Roberts].  She does not hyphenate it that way, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so it's, and my father is Victor Roberts.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is Delores del Rio was she named for the actress, Dolores del Rio (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know, I think so, but it's Delores, D-L-O-R-E-S [sic.].  I think it's--she's never used it.  I've never ever, ever seen her use that, that--
Speaker 1: The del Rio?
Speaker 2: --middle, middle name.  Yeah.  And I think it's, it's a hyphenated two words actually (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's an actress named Dolores del Rio I think, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably back in the day.  And Talley is T-A-L-L-E-Y, Roberts of course.  And my dad is Victor Roberts.
Speaker 1: Now what is your mother's place of birth and date of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't have her date of birth.  I'll have to give that to you, but she was born in St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, I think it's 1931, I believe, yeah.
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-one [1931].
Speaker 1: Tell me what do you know about your, the ancestors on your mother's side.  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well, what I've learned from family discussions is that on my mother's mother's side, it's the most known individual, the family name was the Bell, B-E-L-L, Bells.  Tony Bell [ph.] was a, was the great-grandfather, and they came out of some areas in the South around Tennessee.  The interesting side of this story is that, that Tony Bell was a farmer and on many occasions Klan, Ku Klux Klan [KKK] like individuals would harass the family, and he was not one to accept that, and at some point he and family members pulled guns and started shooting and reportedly shot and maybe even killed some night raiders that were coming to the house.  The reality of that led them to have to leave and move to St. Louis and bring the family at that point.  So, my mother's mother, Selma Talley was Selma Bell [Selma Bell Talley], and she had a twin brother, William Bell [ph.], and there were several other members of, of their family there.  But, an interesting story or side bar is that my grandmother was, had a twin brother, and I have a twin boy, girl, son [Michael Roberts, Jr.] and daughter [Jeanne Roberts Johnson].  Now that's not a genetic thing, fraternal twins, identical twins are.  But, it's just interesting coincidence how that happened that I have twin boy, girl and my grandmother was a twin boy, girl.  So, on my mother's mother's side, then we had this, this level of history that, that was shared with us that helped us understand better.  The, her father was an engineer and he died at a fairly young age.
Speaker 1: Now he was in, your, your mother's father was an engineer?
Speaker 2: I believe he was an engineer.
Speaker 1: Do you mean a--
Speaker 2: Or some type.
Speaker 1: --scientific engineer or a training (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no.  It was--I don't know exactly what type.  I did at one point, but I think it was construction related engineer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But an educated man.
Speaker 1: Where did he go to school is there a--?
Speaker 2: I don't have that information.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On my father's side, I can give you a little bit more in depth on that.  His--
Speaker 1: Well let's stay with your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: Yeah, stay with my mother for a minute?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and so your mother's father was an engineer and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay and--
Speaker 2: But there's very little record.  We don't remember much of him.  I think he would have died when I was eight or nine probably, and so there was a lot of history for us to recall.  But, he had a fairly large group of siblings as well, and on the Talley side we--it's interesting because even now from time to time we'll have people address us and let us know that they're distant cousins.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And sure enough you know they, they tell us how and they track it back and there they are.
Speaker 1: Now, what's your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: His name was W- was Talley, William Talley [William Talley, Sr.].
Speaker 1: William Talley, okay.
Story_ID: 543959
Speaker 1: Now your mother [Delores Talley Roberts] grew up here in St. Louis [Missouri], did she grow up in The Ville, in?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.  Actually she--it was a few properties.  It wasn't The Ville at the ti- no it was not The Ville.  She was in the 3700 block of Finney [Avenue], which is not exactly The Ville, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, what do they call it?
Speaker 2: You know I don't know that there was a specific name for that area.  And I'll tell you why because I was elected to the Board of Aldermen and without knowing it in advance I ended up living around the corner from where my mother was, 3800 Cook [Avenue] where all ten of my kid--four of my children were born.  I lived there for ten years.  Not to digress, but you know after law school [Saint Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] I, when my friends were moving to the county, I moved into the hood if you will (laughter).  But, it just so happen it was right around the corner from where my mother, where she lived next door to the Atkins funeral home [Hosea E. Gales-Atkins Home For Funerals, St. Louis, Missouri], which was a famous black funeral home back in the day.
Speaker 1: Okay, so The Ville's a real specific neighborhood and that's the one you hear the most about in St. Louis (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you hear The Ville, but then probably even before The Ville there was the Mill Creek area [Mill Creek Valley, St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mill Creek area was where you had black businesses and you had--it's down where near Union Station [St. Louis Union Station, St. Louis, Missouri] and where Harris-Stowe college [Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri] is at this point.  And it was completely wiped out.  They came and they literally bulldozed and pushed African Americans out.  They called it urban renewal, but it was really to remove them.  My in-laws had a church there, Reverend Herman Gore, Sr. [Herman W. Gore, Sr.], and it's Christ's Southern Mission Baptist Church [St. Louis, Missouri], he, well even when he was just a small, he was a preacher as a small boy and that church was one of the last ones to, to be taken out and torn down.  The Ville is, is important.  My dad [Victor Roberts] spent quite a bit of time and my mother because in The Ville is Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], which is where they went to high school.  It is, it, it was sort of only one or two high schools that were really available to, to African Americans in that, during that time.  And The Ville and Sumner was one, and that was sort of the core.
Story_ID: 543960
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Delores Talley Roberts] grow up in fairly comfortable circumstances, or?
Speaker 2: You know I, I don't, I don't know that they were anything other than, than you know comfortable circumstances.  You know what I know is at the time when I was born everything was, you know, we had, we had a nice home.  My father [Victor Roberts] met my mother at a dance.  In fact, I think it was, might have been even a Kappa dance (laughter).  My dad is the chapter member of Beta Nu, Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] in St. Louis [Missouri].  He's the last remaining living member of that, and he would be an interesting guy for you to interview as he could, he could drop all of the, every one of these points in our history can be dropped right into, into place from him.  He's, he's good at that.  But, they met, I, I wanna say a coat was stolen, my mom's coat or something, and he sort of came to her rescue and about six months later they were married.  And it wasn't long after that he was off to war at World War II [WWII].  He was, had a number of places for African Americans to go, but he became a staff sergeant and I, I do know that you know he was shipped to Italy.  He spent some time in Germany as well and toured several places in Europe during that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, just wanted to--now your mother let's, let's go back to your mother for a minute and now she, she went to Sumner right?
Speaker 2: She graduated from Sumner.
Speaker 1: Went to Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And now did she have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: She did, but interestingly enough my mother went to college [Harris-Stowe College; Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri].  She started, but the same spring term that I graduated from law school [Saint Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] was the same time my brother [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] graduated from college [Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts].  He went on to law school [Washington University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri].  And in that same, roughly the same week or two, my mom graduated from college.
Speaker 1: Okay so she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All three of us within that--
Speaker 1: She put her education on hold to raise her family.
Speaker 2: To raise us, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she was, I mean she was always in school it seemed like on the one hand.  She was always a teacher, but she even without the degree she was a, she would serve as a substitute teacher or provisional teacher, and, and she had apparently the certification to do that.
Story_ID: 543961
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: It's Victor Roberts, V-I-C-T-O-R, Roberts.  My middle name, of course is Victor and, and his father was Squire Victor Roberts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was an M.D., medical doctor.
Speaker 1: Now, now what was your father's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in Helena, Arkansas [West Helena, Arkansas], and it was October, I believe it's 1923, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He just turned eighty-five this month in October in '07 [2007].
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell us about what you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My father's father was born in West Point, Mississippi, right in the late 1800s, in the 1890s.  He was a, one of probably three, end of three children, but at a certain age as a young man he left West Point, Mississippi.  He served for a while as a Pullman porter and he worked his way through college and through the Meharry medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Now, now what college did he go to?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  I think it was part of the Meharry program where you could actually have a--
Speaker 1: Okay, so he--
Speaker 2: --college and then straight on into the medical school program.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, okay so could, could have been Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], or, or, but you think it was just Meharry, that he went all the way through?
Speaker 2: It may have been, yeah I know my grandmother [Edna Locke Roberts (ph.)] went to Lane [Lane College, Jackson, Tennessee].  And, and they met while he we was a Pullman porter on, and, and going through Jackson, Tennessee.  And, and so his, his, his, his college I thought was a part of, and again I'm not sure, but we can confirm this, was a part of a program that brought you on through medical school.  But, he never went back to West Point, Mississippi, never, and even my dad didn't know of any of the history of his father in terms of brothers or sisters.  Until I went to West Point, Mississippi, back in the '70s [1970s] and did some research on my own t- and ultimately found him as a little boy in school.  They would have--I was going back, I had just finished law school [Saint Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri], and that was after 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Haley] and everybody was trying to see if we have any farms or land that we can go back and reclaim as either former freed slaves or, or people who owned property.  I couldn't find anything on that order.  But, I did find that there was school records, census, school census records, and they kept them bifurcated with white students and colored students.  And so what I did was I sort of extracted what I knew and determined that I could maybe look back to the turn of the century, and sure enough I opened a book and I looked down and I saw Squire Roberts, Squire Victor Roberts.  I also saw a Viola Roberts [Viola Roberts Lathon] as well and, and another Roberts, and, and it, what we found was he had, there were about six different Roberts and, and if you looked at it in 1902 it had one group, and then if you, and every two years they took the census, and if you weren't there on the day of the census you didn't get counted at, at the school.  And, and then I found some missing in, in one or two, now those could have been cousins.  But, I later found that there was some relationships within the Roberts group that family members shared.
Story_ID: 543962
Speaker 1: Later on I found through a cousin that we'd never met in our life.  I, I need to share this story with you because it'll back up to the other.  Steve [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] and I were, were going after a project in Jackson, Mississippi.  We had built, we were building our, a TV station there [WRBJ-TV] that we owned and--from ground up and in the process of meeting various individuals we, Steve flew in with one of our real estate guys and was sitting in a conference room to meet a gentleman who was sort of the shaker and mover of Jackson, so we wanted to come in and pay our respects, if you will.  Well the fellow who was sitting next to him had worked as this economic development guy.  So, Steve to develop some familiarity with the folks in Mississippi said, "Hey listen, I, we have links here in West Point [Mississippi]."  Well, this gentleman next to him said, "Well interesting, I'm from West Point," and his name was Harold Lathon.  So, so Steve said, "Really?"  He says, "Well my grandfather was Squire Victor Roberts."  Lathon looked at him and said, "My grandmother is Viola Roberts [Viola Roberts Lathon]."  Steve was sitting next to his cousin, next to his cousin, and as a result we, we, we've learned more about him and his father [Robert Lathon], of course would be my dad's [Victor Roberts] first cousin.  Never knew of each other, never heard of each other and then we started to reveal that, that the father of Squire Victor Roberts would have been my great-grandfather whose name was Wright Roberts, and, and he was married, I believe, to I wanna say Robin [sic. Rose Roberts].  I'm not sure, I have to check her name, but the two of them had a farm in West Point, Mississippi, and it happens to be forty acres.  I said, "Well did they have a mule as well?"  But, they farmed it.  It was part of the family estate for years, and that they were, he started to give us a little more in depth as to some other cousins and, and his father.  Viola's, Viola's daughter [Rosetta Lathon Allen], my, my great aunt's daughter, if you will, has a, has a, a daughter who's in her, well she would be in her late eighties now who lives in Detroit [Michigan] today, which would be my father's first cousin, or Harold's sister, Harold's father's sister, you see.  So, we, we pulled up some data now to, to just sort of track Wright Roberts and it was, it was quite revealing to, to have that expression.  For, for me almost thirty years ahead of that to go into West Point and find my grandfather, if you will, only thirty, thirty-five year--about thirty years later to find a cousin and a whole li- lineage on the Roberts side, very exciting.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 543963
Speaker 1: Now your grandfather [Squire Victor Roberts], after he became a M.D. he set up practice from what I understand in West Helena, Arkansas?
Speaker 2: He did, and that's where my father [Victor Roberts] was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father was one of two children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Marion [Marion Roberts] is his, was his older sister.
Speaker 1: Now I was telling your brother earlier that there's a big riot in West Helena, Arkansas, this was kind of, and, have you ever heard that that was the reason why your grandfather left there?
Speaker 2: No, I don't, well, I, I don't know why he left exactly, but he was a medical doctor and there was a need for a practice and he did practice in The Ville [St. Louis, Missouri], and there was just a need for black doctors.  But understand---
Speaker 1: Here in St. Louis [Missouri] you're saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But he went to Me- he went--most of the black doctors graduating from Marry--Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] came, came to St. Louis to train at Homer G. Phillips Hospital [St. Louis, Missouri], so there was a presumption that he had already been up here unless he trained totally in Meharry.  He, he graduated in, in 1907 (laughter) out from, from Meharry's medical school, and it's interesting because they have little box of names and there was a gentleman whose last name was Joyner [Oscar Albert Joyner] who was in his class and, and Tom Joyner, who's a friend of mine, is a radio guy, we found out that that was his grandfather.  (Laughter) So, Tom's grandfather and my grandfather graduated from, from medical school at Meharry in the same class.
Speaker 1: Okay, that is interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean Tom and I--met with Tom and met with his dad and we had dinner, Steve [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] and I both, and I handed him copies of a page that showed the graduating class and, and it showed both Joyner and Roberts graduating together, and then he of course knew that he graduated, dah, dah, dah and we just, and, and it was sort of interesting because they might have been friends in '07 [1907], and we're in '07 [2007] now, a hundred years later, and the grandsons have found themselves, you know, both surviving and doing very well from our mutual business and completely different--.  Both of us being offsprings of guys who must have had obviously a level of ambition to have, to have achieved that back a hundred years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now your, so your grandfather moved to St. Louis about 1923 or so or was it?
Speaker 2: It was a little after that.  My father was born about that time, so I, I, you know probably 1925-ish or--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --something along that line.  And then you know he sort of practiced here and was supposedly a guy who was, was a jovial fella.  He, he drove a nice car and back in those days you made house calls, but because there were so few doctors and still such a great need--.  We have an area in St. Louis known as Webster Groves [Missouri], which was a, a large black area back in the day.  Interestingly enough, many of the areas that are really exclusive high end wealthy properties were actually settled by free slaves out of the South, and, and now you know those properties aren't there.  In fact, there is a cemetery or two that reflects that in, in a couple of the communities, very affluent communities.  They were black, you know for black people they had the segregated cemeteries.
Story_ID: 543964
Speaker 1: Now your father [Victor Roberts] went to Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] as well right?
Speaker 2: That's right, yes.
Speaker 1: And what did he do after he graduated?
Speaker 2: Well he, he went into the [U.S.] military and then he served during both War World II [WWII] and the Korean conflict [Korean War].  That's about the time I was born in '48 [1948], so World War II was over, but the Korean conflict was still brewing, and my mother [Delores Talley Roberts] was creative, if you will, in convincing them not to send him off to Korea because you know he has this young son and maybe at that point one on the way, but ultimately he, he was able to avoid going to Korea, but he, you know, he was stationed at Fort Bragg [North Carolina] as I recall is one of a couple of places that I remember him sharing.  And I was there as, obviously as a baby.  I don't have recollection.
Story_ID: 543965
Speaker 1: Let me go--backtrack a little bit, your, your grandfather who was a doctor--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Dr. Squire--
Speaker 2: Roberts, uh-huh Victor--
Speaker 1: Roberts.
Speaker 2: --Squire Victor Roberts (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Squire Victor Roberts, yeah, passed away in 1937 when your father [Victor Roberts] was about fifteen years old right?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so that's--
Speaker 2: He did and with my father losing his father he had to grow up real fast.  He had--his mother [Edna Locke Roberts (ph.)] and his sister [Marion Roberts], and he, he was a working type man.  I mean he, he had a newspaper route.  He worked at a cleaners as a tailor and for them a little bit here and there.  He ultimately secured one of the better jobs for black folks in that day working at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], and then he was going to Stowe College [Stowe Teachers College; Harris-Stowe State University] at that time, Stowe College was our black college [HBCU] in St. Louis [Missouri], and he was, and that's when he pledged and became the first, the charter member if you will, of the Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, Beta Nu chapter here.  He and his guys, he's the last living representative of that, of that group.
Story_ID: 543966
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities and their talents, their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well it, it, I probably, the disposition would probably be my father [Victor Roberts].  He's a pretty laid back guy, and he thinks before he responds.  I find myself following in that behavioral pattern, you know, slow to, to overly react, but thinking through it all at the same time.  On my mother's [Delores Talley Roberts] side, she's more of a, you know, of a no-nonsense person, and I love to watch her in action when she's shopping because people go, "Where do you get your negotiation skills?"  I get that from my mother.  So that I don't care if I'm negotiating, you know, $100 million contract or acquisition, it's very similar to when my mother goes in and wants to buy retail.  (Laughter) I mean she, she, she'll make sure that she's gonna get the best deal and she's gonna, I don't care what store it is.  You know she'll go in and she'll find ways to get a price, her price.  So, to that extent, that, that's, that's a balance of timing of the, of, of, of releasing an emotional position that may not actually be a real position, but it's more of an act, if you will.  But it served her well, and it has served me well.  So, it's a blend of those two if I want to sort of personify you know in summary of the way they are.  My dad is very, very smart too, I mean he's--everybody has to go to him to learn how to spell a word.  (Laughter) I mean he could, he could give you, and he reads every newspaper literally word for word.  I know we were flying on my plane to the Bahamas and he had, had a stack of newspapers and I kept looking over there, I mean he was reading everything from the classifieds to the cartoons, notwithstanding all the news.  He just, and I, I, I'm a fast reader, I like to read, get it and move on, but I, I could see that he's a detail guy and he really, you know, scrubs it and learns it.  And you know watching that I probably have a lot of that in me as well.
Story_ID: 543967
Speaker 1: Do you have an, an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: The, you know interestingly enough I have a couple.  Some are vague, but one of them that always sticks out in my mind because it was a moment for me was when I helped my brother, Steven [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.].  There was a, he was on a rocking horse and it was inside of a bedroom, I don't know if he referred to this, but I looked up and I saw remnants of dust coming from the ceiling, and my instinct was to grab him, pull him out of the room to safety.  And how I did it, why I did it, but I think, I know when I wrote my book ['Action Has No Season: Strategies and Secrets to Gaining Wealth and Authority,' Michael V. Roberts] I, I talk a lot about empirical knowledge and following instinct, and this was an example of that.  I looked up, I saw what appeared to be a cracking plaster, and I just, I told him to, "Come, on get out," and he wouldn't.  I just snatched him out, and within moments it fell and just completely engulfed his rocking horse.  I remember that.  I remember Christmases.  I remember Christmases where we would have a variety of toys, and we would have toy soldiers, and we'd have fights of--between my toy soldiers and his toy soldiers, if you will.  I, I do remember learning bicycle riding on the street.  Now this is before the age of ten.  I do remember that because, you know, my, my folks [Delores Talley Roberts and Victor Roberts] would put me on training wheels.  I do recall that.  And I recall one unfortunate scenario and that was I was jumping off of the steps of a porch about half a block down from, from where my parents are.  Now understand, you know, in my neighborhood [in St. Louis, Missouri] then everybody on that street looked out for the kids, and they did whatever was necessary to straighten you out if you weren't, you know, doing the right thing and then they would call your parents and they would straighten you out again.  But this was an unfortunate situation, I was jumping, I was little, I was jumping on the step and somebody had a popsicle stick and I landed, my eye landed right on it. And I remember my folks, you know, rushing me to my cousin who was a doctor, Dr. Leslie Bond [Leslie F. Bond, Sr.], and you know apparently you know there was enough concern--as I was walking down the street I wasn't crying I just had my hand over my eye, apparently was bleeding, and people were saying (laughter), rushing me, continued walking up the street; I remember that so clearly.  And then it's a little vague.  I do remember coming, getting out of the car afterwards with a patch over my eye and every day after my dad came home from work he would hold his hand up to my one good eye and ask me did I see light, if you will, out of it.  And long story short of course everything worked out and I recovered, but that was a very I'm sure very traumatic for my parents.  For me, you know I was sort of just, so what?
Speaker 1: So, so is there any residual damage now to your left eye (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: So you can see perfectly fine out of it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, it never--and I, I don't know if it actually slid up and over my eyeball, if you will, or if it actually did in fact, but I mean there was, I don't know what surgery was required or anything like that.  I don't remember stitches or anything.  It's just, you know, maybe a detachment of tissue of some kind.  But (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  And you handled it real calm (laughter) (unclear).
Speaker 2: I, I always, I've always been, that was calm, you know.
Story_ID: 543968
Speaker 1: I remember sandlot baseball.  Now this is when we lived on Vernon, Vernon Avenue [St. Louis, Missouri] where we were born basically, and it's only about four blacks from where we're sitting today [in the Victor Roberts Building, St. Louis, Missouri].  We have not left our community, and, I know later we will talk about that, but you know we're still driving up and down there.  The, actually the home we're in is one of the last ones standing, and it's, and we were back in the day we grew up.  We lived on the first floor, and my father's sister [Marion Roberts] and her children and my [paternal] grandmother [Edna Locke Roberts (ph.)] lived on the second floor, and so we had a blend of family connection for many years up until 1958 in the spring when we moved to a ranch home that my parents [Delores Talley Roberts and Victor Roberts] bought as a part of the build of fourteen homes [San Francisco Court, St. Louis, Missouri] in a predominantly white neighborhood.  And it was quite interesting because you know we were the first to move in.  It was a brand new home.  It was great.  And what I notice now I, I know what it was, was that I transferred into an elementary school [Scullin Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri] that was 99 percent white at the age of ten.  By the time I graduated from the elementary school maybe within three years it was about 99 percent black in that short window, and ma- maybe a little, little smaller number than that, maybe 80.  But, the point--at 80 percent, but the point is I recall watching for sale property signs going up all around our neighborhood.  You see the developers, O'Donnells [ph.], built these fourteen homes on a track of land right in the middle of the white neighborhood, and they would only sell to blacks.  And then someone went around the neighborhood saying, "You know there's black people moving in your neighborhood."  Now our homes were a hundred times nicer, big yards, ranch homes in the day, 1958, and, and yet these little nothing homes and these people took off and that's what you call blockbusting.  So, we actually lived and experienced blockbusting.
Story_ID: 543969
Speaker 1: It's also the first time when I was riding down a street [in St. Louis, Missouri] that a little boy looked up at me, was smaller than me, I mean I must have been fourteen at the time, and yet he looked up at me he s- he asked me, was I a nigger, and I unfortunately shouldn't have responded.  I said, "No, but your mama is."  I mean but at that age my mouth was pretty, you know, I mean I was quick to respond like that.  It was the first time I really had that type of confrontation as well.  So, these are still some of the childhood memories and--
Speaker 2: Now did you personally have, did, I can see why somebody, a kid would ask you 'cause it's not apparent you know in what people think black people look like.  They look at you and they would have to say wait a minute what's--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know, he might be and he might not, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --got, your eyes are bluish-green, you know and--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: --light color.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  Yeah.  Well I mean all that's true, but--
Speaker 2: Did that happen a lot?
Speaker 1: It, it didn't happen to the extent that, I mean until I went to places like Brazil and they assumed, you know, I was--.  But, no I think, I think the, the conflict of, of a light complected brother like me falls more in, in our own community than in the white community.  They still pretty much, you know, define us as black.  They might ask the question are you, you know what's the level white mixture, et cetera, and you even hear that today.  But, I mean, you know my mother's parents [Selma Bell Talley and William Talley, Sr.] were black.  My father's parents [Edna Locke Roberts (ph.) and Squire Victor Roberts] were black, the, the, and their parents were black.  But, then there's you know obviously some, some slave issues that, that does exist.  I do know of a, of another story.  I believe this is on my mother's side of the family where there, there was would be, you know, a great-great-grand-great-grandmother who was a slave who did try to escape, I think this might be on the Tony Bell [ph.] side, who did try to escape, did get pretty far with her, her young son, and the night raiders found her.  She surrendered herself, but hid him.  This is one of our family stories.  And he observed them raping her, and then taking her off, and somehow this young boy was able to continue to free himself and you know and then, and somewhere along the line he became the great-great-grandfather, or great-great-great-grandfather of, of ours, yeah.  So, there's--on the issue, you know, of racial divisiveness, we, we find black folks still back when we were children you know would be more the curious side of a person who looked like me than whites.  Whites generally kind of knew, they accepted it, they really didn't want to ask too many questions 'cause you're either or you're not (laughter).  Black folks on the other hand, you know, had a tendency to know well, want to know, you know, how, you know, where are the white people in your family?  As if it matters.  And that was, that was some of the childhood memories.  My mother [Delores Talley Roberts] is very fair and short straight hair, and I do have a recollection of, of a girl I was interested in and we're dating.  And we went to the bottom of our driveway and she looked up to, to the ranch home we were in at the time, saw my mother in the carport, and said, "What?  What is that white woman doing here?"  (Laughter) I said, "She's not white, that's my mother, and she's not white," you know.  But, it was, I remember that story.  That's, that's one that stuck out--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) as well.
Story_ID: 543970
Speaker 1: The white people pretty much know you're either black or you're not in terms of how they--
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: --they treat you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and black people know, but then there's the other sides of that discussion.  It's sort of like you know I, I was listening to Minster Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] recently on the twelfth anniversary of the Million Man March, and he was, he was doing some statistics and one of the statistics was that, that light complected blacks have a 50 percent higher success rate at getting jobs than darker complected.  It's a statistic he, he read publicly out of a speech he gave in Atlanta [Georgia] just very recently.  And so, I mean that's, that's a whole long line of debate, discussion in its own quite foolishness as far as I am concerned at the end of the day because we know that there are examples that fall on both sides.  I mean I can take you to prisons and I can show you folks, and we can take you to corporate offices and I can show you folks and you know, you know the, our rainbow is, is pretty diverse and broad.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it is what it is.  One of the things a guy like me, I mean I have to get past you know the comments that would, would ask the question, are you black enough?  It's interesting I was listening to Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] who is currently running for president of the United States, and there was a comment made that you know was he really black enough.  Well, I, I was running for mayor St. Louis [Missouri] and I heard a radio guy on, on talk commentary, and he was an elected official who was probably more jealous of where I was going than anything else, and he said, "Well Mike Roberts [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] is a good guy, but you know is, is he really black enough?"  Well what did that mean?  I mean, I'm the only guy that's investing in the black neighborhood and employing black folks.  I'm the only guy who lived in the hood who was elected, you know, to, to, two terms as alderman, et cetera.  So, it was like why do you say that?  What, what good comes from that?  And so I remember asking a good friend of mine who came in for a fundraiser, he was mayor of Atlanta, Maynard Jackson, who has similar look as I do, green eyes, you know light, light complected, complexion, and I said, "Maynard, you are the mayor of Atlanta, you look a lot like me, and what do you say when people say to you you're not black enough?"  And he says, "And they have."  And I said, "Well how do you handle that?"  And he made a very profound statement.  He said, "Mike, just remember one important thing, there's not a welfare mother in this town that wouldn't like for their kids to be just like you some day."  Notwithstanding, it had nothing to do with color, it's, it's the progress of the success that you achieve that will, will be judged by the poorest voter out here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I thought that was fairly profound.
Story_ID: 543971
Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question.  Now you grew up in two different locales, one place until you were ten years old I guess or so then you moved--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to this other, other neighborhood--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --where it, it started out as integrated, but changed.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of both?  The, the duplex unit that we lived in, we lived on the first floor and our relatives lived on the second floor.  Allowed for my cousins and, and I to, to blend a little better 'cause they lived upstairs and we lived downstairs.  It, it, I could sit on the, we sat on the porch and with my [paternal] grandmother [Edna Locke Roberts (ph.)] or my aunt [Marion Roberts] or my mother [Delores Talley Roberts] and we would sit on the porch and I would hear them talk, and I would, you know would be comforted by the security of that rather homogenous environment.  We would see people walk up and down the street that we knew, neighbors knew us, and then I'm still amazed at even today I have people who will say, "You know my mother lived on Vernon [Avenue] three or four doors from you guys."  I mean I don't have that level of detail, but I think because of our local celebrity, you know folks say well you know they used to live right here et cetera.  Then, you know we played sports, we played in the alley.  I remember when we were trying to plant our grass and you know they would tell us not to walk on the grass and we would step in the mud and we'd end up on the sidewalk 'cause we always would hose down our sidewalks, clean our sidewalks, sweep the porch, clean the streets.  I mean there was this immaculate street.  All the blacks folks trying to you know do well.  There wasn't poverty.  We weren't in the poverty position.  I, I often say we weren't rich, we weren't poor, we just never had any money; another popular phrase of mine.  And, and, and, and so we don't, we didn't know, but my mother made it a point to try to get us in things like Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.].  Most of the Jack and Jillers were children of physicians, some lawyers, et cetera.  But we didn't quite fit that, but my mother wanted us to be a part of that.  I remember when we changed environments and moved to the home on San Francisco Court [St. Louis, Missouri].  It was all black folks on that street, so notwithstanding going outside of the court you were, you were already there with black folks, but these homes had big yards and you walk down a driveway and you walked on the street there were no sidewalks per se, so you didn't have the, the tight homogenous feel that you did when we were on Vernon when you just walk up and down the street and you know you have a brownstone home after, one after another and all you had was a gangway in between the homes and you'd run up and down the gangway and this, going back to the story I remember, I stepped in some mud, walked on the, on the sidewalk and took off running 'cause I knew I was wrong and, and my cousin, Donald [ph.], ended up getting spanked for it 'cause they assumed he did it (laughter).  But, that's the kind of stuff you could get away with when you're right there, but, but when you're in a more of a ranch home environment, even though there are you know next door there is separation.  Although the kids, we, we did know each other, ended up going to the same high schools.  We went through public schools all of our life, so we were never on the other side of that.  I mean, it was always a public school.
Story_ID: 543972
Speaker 1: Our first school was Cupples Elementary School [St. Louis, Missouri] at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How do you spell that?
Speaker 1: C-U-P-P-L-E-S.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And Cupples is only two blocks from where we are right now [at the Victor Roberts Building, St. Louis, Missouri].  It's still there.  Then we moved, then Scullin following that, and Scullin School [Scullin Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri] was where we ultimately graduated.  And then in our first semester of high school for me, for me, I went to Beaumont [Beaumont High School, St. Louis, Missouri], which was an interesting scenario.  Beaumont was about 80, 85 percent black and about 15 percent white.  Then, they built a new high school, Northwest High School [St. Louis, Missouri], and I was right at the cutoff to go to North- Northwest High School.  Well, those numbers switched again for me.  Now much like what I went through in elementary school I'm about to experience in high school.  That experience being that there was, you know we're about 5 to 6 percent of the population at that school.  But, I had gone through segregation issues and race hatred issues.  When I was at Scullin Elementary School to go to manual arts we had to walk about, about twelve blocks, ten or twelve blocks or less to another school, which was all white and we would have encounters with white folks, and, and really it was a highway separating us and, and, and we'd cross over the bridge and we had to go there because that school had manual arts. And we, we actually encountered racial slurs and attacks.  Then I go to the high school that's all black, so I'm sort of in a different environment again, and we're all freshmen and we're starting, then halfway through that year the school opens, so my second semester of my freshman year I'm now reversed back again because my elementary school had turned black, my high school is now black, now I'm going back to another environment that's, that's predominantly white and we did have race riots.  We did have fights.  This is another--I remember a couple (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This would be like in the, in the midst, from '65 [1965] to--
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah graduated in '67 [1967], so--
Speaker 2: And you were, you came in sixty-
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964], '65 [1965]--
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966] right?
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967].
Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967], okay.
Speaker 1: Out of high school in '67 [1967] and it was, this was the interesting thing.  There's some early Vietnam [Vietnam War] military stories.  There was one guy who was back in high school with me who'd already been in the [U.S. military] service, and I remember his face and, and he was in high school and would, would have to be one of the guys who would, you know, sort of step up if the fighting were to start, you know--
Speaker 2: He had been to the service?
Speaker 1: He had been in the service--
Speaker 2: To--
Speaker 1: --and got back and he was still in high s- and they put him in high school.
Speaker 2: He had been to, had he been to Vietnam?
Speaker 1: And it was, I believe he had been to Vietnam in, early, early, early stage, in like '64 [1964], '65 [1965].  I mean it was, it was something as dramatic and dynamic as that.  We didn't know any different, but it was like well okay, and we knew he was older and just left it at that.  But you know we, we would play sports, if you played spor- we were bused.  By the way this is, we were, this is early busing and we were bused from, we would catch the bus from our house.  I'd walk through my neighborhood, get on the bus next door to my elementary school, I walked there every day no problem, get, get off the bus, they would drop us right in front of the school, but if you did anything like me I was involved in all kinds of student activities, so I'd have to stick around at night and I might have to catch the pri- the public bus.  Well in that case you gotta walk down about four or five blocks through their neighborhood, and you know these were more, I don't wanna call them poor white trash, but they were you know, they were not wealthy individual whites, so they were always intimidated by blacks.  And they probably were part of the ones who used to live in my old neighborhood, now they were concerned (laughter) I guess about what might happen.  But, these are young people.  These, I mean these aren't their parents.  These are, you know, high school age-ish type white kids who, who already you know programmed to, to respond to, to African Americans the way they were responding to them.  It's--I mean they weren't born like that.  They, they were programmed like that.
Story_ID: 543973
Speaker 1: And I remember as a, in, in elementary school going, my mom [Delores Talley Roberts] would take us to political rallies and I'll never forget that [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory was speaking.  He was still a comedian at the time, but he was an activist comedian, and we went to a placed called the Riviera [Club Riviera].  The Riviera was the hip nightclub of the, of north St. Louis [Missouri].  This is where, I mean Count Basie and people like that would come and play where my parents would dance and party as, as children.  The Riviera club, you know, located on Delmar [Boulevard] and Taylor [Avenue], approximately at the time.  It would also be a center point for rallies and political activities and I remember I was basically stuffing envelopes and Dick Gregory stood up and spoke.  I later became very good friends, even today.
Speaker 2: What year would this be?  Like how old were you?
Speaker 1: I, I had to be, you know, eleven or twelve.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean it was a very young (unclear).  And not very far from the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is that when Dick Gregory was still fat?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was, he was--
Speaker 2: Smoked cigarettes.
Speaker 1: Smoked cigarettes.  He was, he was heavyset and--you know he's from St. Louis you know, and Dick Gregory, we have a Dick Gregory street named after him [Dick Gregory Place].
Speaker 2: He was a track star (unclear)--
Speaker 1: He was a track star.  His brother Ron actually went to, you know they, they went to some, some high level college.  I think went to Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] and ran track, Ron Gregory who's here in St. Louis.  And, yeah they were--that was back in high school [Northwest High School, St. Louis, Missouri].  By the time I saw him, he was of course a grown man and like I said he had become a comedian and a satirist I guess.  I didn't know what he was saying 'cause I was too young, but I do remember looking up and there he was, my mother point- .  But my mother was like that.  She'd make sure we get to museums.  She got us in Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.].  She would make sure--.  And one of the things we did is we left the, the Baptist church where we were first involved, Central Baptist [Central Baptist Church, St. Louis, Missouri], and became Episcopalian.  We went to All Saints Episcopal Church [St. Louis, Missouri], which was close to the new house [on San Francisco Court].  I became an acolyte.  We would, of course we were confirmed as, as they call it, and being, being at that church it was interesting because our church, All Saints Episcopal, had the highest level of academic completion of any Episcopal church in the State of Missouri.  Now, the Episcopalians do have a very high level of success in terms of lifestyle, and yet at our church we had all the doctors and lawyers and, and, businesspeople; they were all there.  They all had migrated into that particular location of that church.
Story_ID: 543974
Speaker 1: On [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory you, you had a story about a photo that you received.
Speaker 2: You know Dick Gregory is, has become a fast friend over the years.  I think he respects my business acumen and what I'm doing and we've talked about a number of things plus you know we're, we're both St. Louisans.  He gave, he entrusted me with a very interesting picture that's, that's out on the net [Internet], but I have the original.  It's a picture of he and Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and it's, it's just a few days before Dr. Martin Luther King was assassinated.  And as you look at the picture, you could see the, the eyes of Dr. Martin Luther King was glossy and glazed over, if you will, like he was crying 'cause he was expressing to Dick Gregory at the time, according to Dick, that, that he knew that, that he was going to be assassinated.  He didn't know when, but he knew it was imminent, and he actually was shedding a tear with Dick at that moment.  Very interesting story and, and one that you know I'm glad to share with others 'cause we, it's just, you know history has to be captured and congratulations on doing that here.  This is, this is a great thing.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 543975
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you're twelve or thirteen you're getting exposure to a lot of different stimuli, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're saying that your church [All Saints Episcopal Church, St. Louis, Missouri] is filled with black achievers, your mother [Delores Talley Roberts] is taking you to the various events, and--
Speaker 2: And giving us exposure to cultural activities.  Jack--she was one of the founders of Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] in St. Louis [Missouri], charter member, and, and, I mean although this is technically a mother's organization, it's really set up where mothers would take the children of a given age group, two to four, four to six, et cetera, and every month you know a couple of mothers would be assigned to taking that age group some place.  I mean they would end up going to, to, we'd do a museum, but we might also have an activity at home.  (Laughter) I'll tell you what was cute for me, I really liked it, and I thought it was pretty cool.  They would take eggshells and we would crack them into small pieces, and then we would glue them in a design of say a dolphin or a house and you actually would glue the eggshell and then you paint over it.  That was pretty cool.  I don't see it anymore (laughter), but it's interesting because part of the process of that is it felt good, it's an artistic thing that's inside of a little kid that you never know.  I remember the old iron, iron wood burning where you would actually have these heated iron tips and you would, you know, write name or draw pictures and it would steam up the wood (laughter).  That would be very dangerous when you stop and think about it with kids that age to be that close to something that hot, but, but nobody ever got hurt (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now--
Story_ID: 543976
Speaker 1: Did you have a job or anything when you were a little kid coming up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--in fact you know people ask me the question well here you are, you know you've, you've made hundreds of millions of dollars, but really what was that first entrepreneurial you know point, and it is really true.  When we had moved to--I mean we had chores at home and, and we would receive a small amount of allowance every month.  I mean it seemed like a lot at the time, but when we moved to the house on San Francisco Court [St. Louis, Missouri] we had a yard and at a certain age about twelve or so, thirteen my dad [Victor Roberts] felt that I was old enough to handle the lawnmower, the gas lawnmower.  So, my job was to cut the grass, which is what I did, and for that I received one dollar and I said man that's pretty good.  Then, Mr. Atcheson [ph.] next door and Dr. Haven [ph.] on the other side said, "Would you--you do a pretty good job, would you cut our grass?"  And I said, "Yeah sure."  "Would you do it every week?"  I said, "Fine."  Well, I would cut their grass and they gave me five dollars.  I said, ha (laughter) I think--
Speaker 1: Yeah I was gonna remark that, that a dollar is a little low for grass cutting in those days.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: I used to do it myself.  We are the same age, but so they gave you five, that's more like it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, but I mean you know you, you got your allowance and it was what we could afford, right, but I mean but the point is and you know I realized that there's something cool about this idea.  And then when I became about fifteen just before sixteen, I secured a job as a bag boy at an IGA store [Independent Grocers Alliance].  And within six months I became the lead bag boy and actually brought in friends and got them jobs.  I remember Ray Basie [ph.] who now lives in, in Dallas [Texas] says to me all the time: "Michael [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] is responsible for my first job, and my dad is so appreciative of him even today."  But interestingly enough I'm still, I have still within the last fifteen years helped him get some--he's a very successful businessman, but I'm still helping, he still calls and I still help him get some work in airports through political relationships as well.  And so I've always had a proclivity to work and find and then bring people in and broaden, you know, the base amongst those who maybe didn't have the same exposure that I had.  It was pretty cool because at the time we were learning to play tennis, and that wasn't a sport that, you know, black folks really understood, even though when I got there, there was a lot of black folks playing or teaching and this kind of thing.  And you know from that sport ultimately I ended up with a job when I was in college [Lindenwood College for Men; Lindenwood University, St. Charles, Missouri] as a so- as a second year college student one of my summer jobs was being a tennis pro at Dwight Davis courts [Dwight Davis Tennis Center] at Forest Park [St. Louis, Missouri], but I was basically the manager and I would teach little kids how to play.  So, there's, there's always a little pattern, and the pattern is taking what I've learned and expanding it to economic opportunity.  That's why we have seventy-two companies today [under The Roberts Companies, St. Louis, Missouri], because we diversify our companies so much that inside of one deal that might even sell off, we might get a transaction that we would ke- we would decide well part of it we're gonna keep and, and grow it while we may take the company public, or something like that.  So, as a child, you know, when I realized that I could wash my dad's car for, you know, a part, as part of my allowance for a little bit and wash the neighbors', then you know I had a car spa back when I was a kid because I cut grass and, and washed cars and I made, you know, I made money.  It was a business.  I was a, I was a young entrepreneur even at, at that state.
Story_ID: 543977
Speaker 1: But I was active in, in elementary and high school [Northwest High School, St. Louis, Missouri], especially high school in you know student government and, and international relations and we recreated a black Jewish dialogue.  Back then we had an exchange program between our high school and a all-Jewish, pretty much all-Jewish public high school [Clayton High School] in Clayton [Missouri], which by the way my kids ended up going to as part of the deseg [desegregation] program, our four kids graduated from the same school that I used to as a kid go, and just to learn about the Jewish community and their differences.  You know we were invited into their homes and we got, you know, just a complete broad perspective on, on what that, you know, subculture group is about and they learned about our subculture group.  So it's, it was--
Speaker 2: Was that a result of your mother's urging to get involved in the international (unclear)?
Speaker 1: No, I, I think that you know was a result of our mother [Delores Talley Roberts] continuing to expose us to new and different things it did create an appetite to continue to get exposed to different things.  I mean that even goes into today.  We just go back from South Africa and Dubai [United Arab Emirates] just a few weeks ago, I mean it still such a wonderful learning experience for us, but I think you'll see we continue to tap into that interest that was planted by my mother and our father [Victor Roberts], you know, who, who did it.  As a child, we would go on vacations for example, speaking of traveling, and we would go to places like Kentucky Lake.  We could not afford--.  I, the first time I ever got on an airplane was when I was a second year college student [at Lindenwood College for Men; Lindenwood University, St. Charles, Missouri] I had won state championship in tennis, and the school flew the team to Ocala, Florida.  The first time I'd ever been on a plane and I was, you know, I, I had to be twenty, twenty-one I guess by that time, first time.  But, because we would drive, we could only drive, we'd drive.  My dad always kept Fords.  That was the car of choice.  You know we, we had, I remember, I think I learned on his 1954 stick shift Ford.  That's how I learned to drive, to, to my high school, when, when he would take me.  When I wasn't on the bus, he would drive me, but he would let me drive at the point that I turned sixteen (laughter).
Speaker 2: It had the shift on the column.
Speaker 1: Shift on the column you know, clutch, and--
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: --it was pretty cool.
Story_ID: 543978
Speaker 1: I just wanted to ask you about mentors or teachers in, in, in school.  Were there any special mentors or teachers outside of the family?
Speaker 2: I felt, let me, let me jump to a college level right quick.  I have a degree in communication arts and English literature and I went to three colleges in four years, which meant that my summers, and I worked my way through school and pretty much paid for it.  So, my summers were in school, but I would hold down three jobs in a given summer.  There was a professor who, who taught renaissance, or Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], and, and another one who taught existentialism; two things that I didn't understand really the importance of reading until I got into it.  And as a result, I be, I was able to study one January semesters in Europe under Jim Feely [James Feely] who was, I would consider one of the, one of my mentor, or professors that helped me to get a better philosophical understanding of life.  And, and what I was able to do at Lindenwood College [Lindenwood University, St. Charles, Missouri], it was Lindenwood College for Men that became a men's component of the Lindenwood College for Women, which was a school for affluent white women from the South.  And instead of just blending it, they started off by separating it.  So, there was about eight hundred students.
Speaker 1: Let me just for the sake of chronology now what--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what was the first college you attended?
Speaker 2: Yes, Central Missouri State [Central Missouri State College; University of Central Missouri] in Warrensburg, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Now did you graduate with honors from high school [Northwest High School, St. Louis, Missouri] or did you have a scholarship or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Not really no, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was a state college.
Speaker 1: Okay, Central Missouri State.
Speaker 2: And then--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --then my second year was Forest Park Community College [St. Louis Community College - Forest Park].
Speaker 1: Now where is, is that here in the city?
Speaker 2: St. Louis [Missouri], um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what happened, now how did you, why didn't you, you know stay at one.
Speaker 2: Stay there.
Speaker 1: Well yeah, why the shift?
Speaker 2: Well Warrensburg, Missouri is a rural Missouri community that was not homogeneous.  I mean it was at a time with racial tensions and, and, and it was just not a pleasant experience.  I also over, I was an overachiever in my opinion.  I was, I was in the marching band.  I played trombone from high school.  I was a pretty good trombonist I think, you know played at the level of, of talent shows if you will.  But I was also taking, I was thinking about being a dentist or a doctor, more dentist, and so I started taking, as a freshman, courses like zoology, and I still hadn't taken a good course in biology (laughter).  And I was, I was taking German 'cause my dad [Victor Roberts] spoke some German from World War II [WWII] and I thought well maybe I can learn German.  And it was just, it was more than I could--I handled it, but I wasn't comfortable in it, and so I, I said you know to myself, I'm gonna come back.  And I learned of this school and then at the community college I was able to blossom more.  I became vice president of the student body in the first year.  I became the state tennis champion in, in that second year of college.  My grades skyrocketed.  I took courses that I, I could get my arms around, and I wasn't, at, then--then I realized that, that defining a major is not as important as getting an academic training.  At that point then I went to a place called Camp Miniwanca [Shelby, Michigan].  I met Jack Danforth [John Danforth] who later became a United States senator, and was introduced to something called the American Youth Foundation.  The American Youth Foundation was a Christian organization that had camps in Michigan, Camp Miniwanca specifically.  They also had one, have one in New Hampshire [Camp Merrowvista, Tuftonboro, New Hampshire].
Speaker 1: Now Camp Miniwanca is in, in, in Michigan.
Speaker 2: In Stony Lake, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Stony Lake, okay.
Speaker 2: And this was all a part of the Danforth family, which was all backed up by the company they founded, Ralston Purina [Ralston Purina Company, St. Louis, Missouri].  So, I would go to, to--I, I started, won a scholarship to Camp Miniwanca right there at the community college.
Story_ID: 543979
Speaker 1: I learned about Lindenwood College [Lindenwood College for Men; Lindenwood University] as they were deseg- desegregating from a, integrating rather from, from an all-women's college [Lindenwood College for Women] and forming this men's college.
Speaker 2: Now where is Linden- Lindenwood College (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's, it's near St. Louis [Missouri], it's in St. Charles, Missouri.
Speaker 2: St. Charles, Missouri.  Okay.  That's where--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's now a university, and it was (unclear)--
Speaker 2: That's where du Sable [Jean Baptiste Point du Sable] is buried, yeah, St. Charles, Missouri, okay.
Speaker 1: St., St. Charles, Missouri, right.  And, and so the, by the way Louisiana Purchase was signed there and some things like that in that city.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  So it's an old, yeah, it's an old city here in the Midwest.
Speaker 1: It was really I think our first capital city in Missouri, I mean it goes back.  So, that was an interesting experience because now I'm going to a school that's eight hundred women and about seventy men (laughter).  I mean we blend our classes together, but you know it was dark and lonely work, but somebody had to do it.  I went there with my best friend at the time, Christopher Smith [Christopher Smith, Sr.], who was, who, we were acolytes together [at All Saints Episcopal Church, St. Louis, Missouri].  We went to high school together [at Northwest High School, St. Louis, Missouri].  And now he too had gone off to a different school a couple of years and was not happy, so we both ended up at, at Lindenwood College.
Speaker 2: How many African American students on campus then?
Speaker 1: Very few.  I mean there might have been--first of all those, there was probably only about forty or fifty men who lived on, lived in dorms on the campus and they put us, they had one men's dorm and then there was one that I lived in that was at the bottom of a ladies dorm.  It was a big warehouse room that we converted into a bedroom, but it was quite convenient.
Speaker 2: About how many black men in that group?
Speaker 1: There were only about seven of us.
Speaker 2: Seven.
Speaker 1: And there was probably only about ten or eleven black women, twelve black women--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --at that, in that year at that time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was there, of course, for two years and again you know got involved with, with, you know all the organizations.  I was the advisor to the dean of the men's school.  It helped me with the scholarship.  I took a job as a dishwasher in the dish- in the cafeteria and there to I then surfaced from you know just being a dishwasher.  By the way, I'm putting myself through college at this point, continuing to do that because I'm the oldest of four and I knew my parents [Delores Talley Roberts and Victor Roberts] needed to be freed up. Steve [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] was going to be starting to go to college [Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts] pretty soon, was about to enter at the time actually, and then we had two more, had Mark [Mark Roberts] and Lori [Lori Roberts] who were behind me and behind Steve, so it, it, I just felt it incumbent upon myself to find a way.  So, I ended up with, with a scholarship in part that required me to work and, and by establishing myself with the, with the university as an advisor to the dean it was nice, but it really wasn't making as much money as, as washing dishes.  And so I became then head of the cafeteria before it was over.  And I began to book students to do that and then eventually worked my way out of that.  But, it was continuing, start at this level, get to, and move to the top.  Start at this level, move to the top.  I mean that's been sort of what's happen to me in my life historically.  But, I, I had a lot of fun there.  I mean it was, it was great.  I mean, I was you know was involved with the yearbook.  I mean it was just everything was a wonderful experience.
Story_ID: 543980
Speaker 1: And which brings me to, you know, the mentor, advisor type people at that time in my life were, were a couple of professors [at Lindenwood College for Men; Lindenwood University, St. Charles, Missouri].  I became an existentialist and somewhat of a futurist as a result of, of understanding that you live every moment to its fullest extent.  I give speeches today, and I remind people that you basically have 86,400 seconds when you wake up every morning, that's twenty-four hours for anyone doing the math, and that you need to live every moment to its fullest extent.  I wrote a book, 'Action Has No Season' ['Action Has No Season: Strategies and Secrets to Gaining Wealth and Authority,' Michael V. Roberts], and I coined a word, the Actionaire.  The Actionaire is one who takes their dreams and their ideas and they pursue them with courage and confidence and bravado, and so in the idea, the concept of 'Action Has No Season' came from you know this, this, this existential mindset and thinking.  I mean it, it basically says you know please compartmentalize your life.  Don't, you know don't let stress come into your life.  Don't mix issues in your mind at the same time because you won't be able to fully explore the things that you need to explore that's relevant at the moment that you're thinking and functioning.  In fact, the moment that you think of the moment it's already gone.  So, yeah let's look forward, think forward and live, live, live the moment to its fullest extent.  Well, I learned that at--through these guys.  And I remember writing a paper because I was comparing Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] with Soren Kierkegaard and, and Nietzsche [Friedrich Nietzsche] and, and these guys are saying you know live the now essentially and Shakespeare was saying, "To be or not to be," "To be or not to be."  "Not to be," meaning, you're in the past and then therefore you're not a part of the being in the existence and, and you know I kind of became a philosopher as a result of these mentors.
Story_ID: 543981
Speaker 1: Another mentor was a guy, when I finished law school [Saint Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri]--his name was Sam Lapp.  He was Jewish, he was retired, he owned a printing company [Lapp Printing Company, St. Louis, Missouri] (laughter), and I don't know how we connected, but I remember we connected and I used to drive him around.  I would just listen to him and, and he taught me some Yiddish and what the meaning the Yiddish and (laughter), and we would go by, he'd buy pictures and frames, but he'd always go find people that are out of business, going out of bu- and, and I just instinctively said I gotta listen to this man and follow him and--
Speaker 2: So he'd go around and find people that are going out of business and see what, if he could acquire what they--?
Speaker 1: And, and then he would negotiate hard on top of you know whatever nee- .  I mean if someone had an abundance of something and needed to get rid of it, you know, he was, he was good to buy the volume, and, and make the negotiation that way.  And I found that frequently if we're buying real estate I will reduce my price, but I'll offer you cash and no contingencies.  And, and it becomes a compelling position.  Do I take more money, maybe, or do I take less money for sure.  And, and over and over and over in, in transactions I have, I have been able to get my price, which has always been substantially lower than the next guy because I could write the check.  And, and I pretty much picked that up from this fella that, you know, money talks and everything else walks.  And when you, when you have it, then that's the best way to, to use it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay now where did you meet Sam Lapp?
Speaker 1: I can't, I, I, I think was introduced to him informally over breakfast, and I believe it was at, at, at a little hotel on Lindell [Lindell Boulevard, St. Louis, Missouri], down the street from where I now live in a building that I currently own (laughter) because he would do, it, it was one of those things he would do breakfast every morning and someone that I was associated with, a guy, I don't remember any of the details it's been, that long ago, this would--we're talking you know '74 [1974], '75 [1975].
Speaker 2: This was after you were out of law school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was right after law school.
Story_ID: 543982
Speaker 1: Now one of the things before law school [Saint Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] that I think played an important role was an organization, an activist organization that I got involved with, it was called HOME Incorporated [HOME, Inc., St. Louis, Missouri], H-O-M-E, which stood for Helping Other Minds Emerge [ph.].  Originally it was Helping Other Men Emerge, but I told them we had to go sex neutral on that.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you're at the ground floor of this organization (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was one of the founders back, yes that's exactly right, and we, we became huge.  I mean we were I guess the equivalent of Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition] in Chicago [Illinois] with Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson].  We had our own Reverend Horace Jones, and I was a law student, but I was an activist.  I mean big Afro kind of activist and we, we would go into the community and begin to affect change.  We'd have boycotts.
Speaker 2: Now this at, is it in law school or after law school?
Speaker 1: It was in law school.
Speaker 2: In law school you were doing--okay.
Speaker 1: I mean if you go to the beginning of my law school as a freshman I went to law school based on the fact that--two things, one I was because of that philosophical activity in my mind and I was then considering and applied to the divinity school.  I had ideas of maybe becoming an Episcopal priest.  At the same time, I had this interest in law and politics.  Why?  Because it was a guy, Jack Danforth [John Danforth], that I told you about who became a senator, had gone to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and got his divinity and his law degree, and I thought oh that would be interesting, maybe I could do that.  So, I applied to both and also the Vietnam [Vietnam War] draft was taking place at that time, and it wasn't really a draft it was a--
Speaker 2: A lottery, yeah.
Speaker 1: --lottery and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, now I just wanna ask you now when you were growing up--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --let's say when you were thirteen when Dr. King was killed [sic.] and then you know--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --you're in college when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed I mean--you know the Civil Rights Movement was on television and--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --did you, were you following--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --did, did your fa- did your family follow--
Speaker 1: We watched it.
Speaker 2: --politics and civil rights and--?
Speaker 1: In St. Louis [Missouri], we, we watched it.  I don't think that we were, I mean we were all moved by it.  I was too young to really probably get, realize that it was, it was, it was a seed being planted that later found its, its way to fruition.  But--
Speaker 2: Do, do you remember where you were when Dr. King was killed?
Speaker 1: I was, I was at home--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in St. Louis, and I, I remember the Kennedys too for that matter.  I mean it was all sort of a blur, but it was, you know it was a little separation in time between J.F.K. [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], but we do remember, we do remember that.
Speaker 2: Do you--
Speaker 1: Very vaguely, I mean I remember the processions, et cetera.
Speaker 2: What about the riots?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but we didn't riot in St. Louis--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --so it wasn't as--I mean we were marching as I remember you know we--there was a Parkmoor restaurant that was, or was it a Howard Johnson, that was within a stone's throw of my, my now house, the ranch home, and, and we couldn't, we couldn't eat there.  So--
Speaker 2: This was in, when you were a teenager?
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh yeah.  I mean I remember whe- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So St. Louis still had some se-
Speaker 1: --I remember the picket lines.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean like I said I mean it was within, within three blocks of my house.
Story_ID: 543983
Speaker 1: So when you graduated from college [Lindenwood College for Men; Lindenwood University, St. Charles, Missouri] now you had, your degree was in you said English (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Communication arts and English literature, a combined degree.
Speaker 1: Communication arts and English literature.
Speaker 2: Yeah kind of a combined degree.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  So you were telling us how you could, you were considering going to law school.  You, you wanted, you had thought about becoming a priest, Episcopalian priest.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, then----I, I had been accepted to a couple of divinity schools and my friend Chris Smith [Christopher Smith, Sr.] who I mentioned earlier, his brother was a lawyer, and so he was an influence on me, and so he was one of my great influences.  And his father, Wayman Smith and--Wayman Smith, Jr., Wayman Smith, III [HistoryMaker Wayman Smith] is the one who's like a brother to me and is the brother to Chris Smith, they, we belong to the same church [All Saints Episcopal Church, St. Louis, Missouri], et cetera.  Well his, his father who would drive Chris and I around to parties and stuff was an alderman, and as a result I became an alderman and Wayman became an alderman and my brother became an alderman largely because of that series of exposure.  Because you see, they have a sister, Robin [Robin Smith Patel], who became, who is now and was a newscaster here in town and does very well, she and Steve [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.], my brother were the same age, and then so Chris and I were the same age, and then Wayman was the older brother of all of us and even today he's, you know, our best friend and has created, I mean that's a true mentor for me.  I mean he's been there all the time.  He became an Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] executive, and I became a consultant under him.  When I came out of law school [Saint Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri], I worked with he and his firm and then I de- designed my own business and went on from there.  But, to go back to you know that thirteen, fourteen and fifteen year old timeline, we were, again these seeds are being planted as I said, there was Wayman and a neighbor of mine was an alderman whose name was Joe Clark [Joseph W.B. Clark, Sr.] who had moved into one of those homes [on San Francisco Court].  So, there were these two adult figures that, that were politicians.  I really didn't know what that meant per se at the time and certainly I wouldn't focus on it, but again another seed was planted (laughter), which later you know came, came to fruition as well.  So, I mean as you look at you know my mother [Delores Talley Roberts] you know negotiating in stores, and then Sam Lapp buy- buying wholesale large volumes, and you know Alderman Clark and Alderman Smith being aldermen and then my really good big brother Wayman becoming an alderman, he was a lawyer.  He was one really the only exposure to lawyers per se, so you know I ended up deciding betw- between the two.
Story_ID: 543984
Speaker 1: Now, again I'd rece- I'd gone to Camp Miniwanca [Shelby, Michigan] as, as a college student, and I became a teacher or a counselor there and I also organized their first black scholarship program and, and created over sixty scholarships--and I'm just still in school--for blacks from around the country and a lot of them from Michigan to go to this Camp Miniwanca, which had historically been, you know, for wealthy, very wealthy white people, Christian boys and girls.
Speaker 2: So you establish a schol- a, a fund for--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --to help other black students go?
Speaker 1: Absolutely, and it's still going on today.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I started that and I, I met Donald Danforth who was this, this Jack Danforth [John Danforth] and William Dan- his father, he was, he was president, chairman and CEO of Ralston Purina [Ralston Purina Company, St. Louis, Missouri].  First time I ever flew on a private plane was then they liked me so much that they flew me up to,  what I'm a counselor, but I got to know this, this multimillion, you know, dollar family, family that owned this company called Ralston Purina, and I'm, I'm sitting there with, with the heads of these companies I'm j- listening and I, I'm just there because I had a very specific request and they liked it, that is to create more opportunities for blacks at your, your, your program which you love so much and I love too, now let's diversify it because it will be better than to, to have it sit idly by and those experiences not be seen by all.
Story_ID: 543985
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, you are Michael Roberts [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] and this is the second session we've conducted with you.  We, we were here a month ago I guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the December the 6th, I believe, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at my offices [of The Roberts Companies] in St. Louis, Missouri, at the Victor Roberts Building on North Kingshighway [Boulevard].
Story_ID: 543986
Speaker 1: Let's start talking about, we were talking about graduating from law school and what that was like.  And I think that something unique happened in your family around the time you graduated from law school right?
Speaker 2: At the time that I graduated from law school it was an interesting experience.  I went to Saint Louis University School of Law [St. Louis, Missouri], graduated in 1974, and a good friend of mine who convinced us to go to law school in the first place, [HistoryMaker] Wayman Smith, was practicing law and said, "Listen, why don't you come and work with me, we'll, we'll do some things together and we have a lot of corporate clients."  At the time, the Anheuser-Busches [Anheuser-Busch Companies] of the world and, and (Unclear) and (Unclear), (Unclear) Foods, et cetera.  These companies as many other companies were experiencing real challenges with racial discrimination cases, and one of the things that I studied in law school was Title VII [Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title VII] work, which is really the core of the, of the business of writing affirmative action programs, et cetera.  So, we got into doing that and I made a business out of it for a while.  In fact, we created Roberts-Roberts and Associates [Roberts-Roberts and Associates, LLC] in 1974 to serve as a consultant company to very large corporations.  I had a dual path taking place at that time, Larry [Larry Crowe].  Not only was I developing my consulting business, I was also involved in moving into a home that a lady needed when I--right after I graduated she, this woman owned the Argus newspaper [St. Louis Argus], but she lived in New York [New York] and she had this beautiful little mansion on, on Lewis Place [St. Louis, Missouri], which was a mansion by black folks' standards at least, and she needed a housekeeper.  So, I actually moved in and lived there for a few months and then found my first house on Lewis Place and I bought it, but I didn't have any money.  And so my, my, I asked my dad [Victor Roberts] could he please help me borrow some money I needed $5,000 to buy the house and $2500 to renovate it, first transaction.  So, what he did, which was sort of cute, was, he's a bureaucrat, or a postal employee.  He didn't quite understand loaning money even to his own kids.  So I said, "Dad, do what you can."  So, he ended up, he was very clever, he ended up taking me to his boys at the postal credit union, and they made a proposal to me, which I had to accept, but I liked it.  They called me in one day and they said, "Young Roberts [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.], come in, we want to talk to you.  We're gonna loan you $7500."  I'm thinking, wow, that's great.  I, I can buy this inner city house, and I have enough money to renovate it.  I'm a do the work myself along with the experts who could show me how to do this, that, and the other.  But, then here came the, the, the, the hit.  They said, "Now you have to understand we're gonna loan you this money, but the collateral for this loan will be your parents' furniture."  I said, "What?"  (Laughter) Of course, I immediately got to work using that money, then I used the leverage, I paid it off very quickly because I wouldn't want my parents to lose their furniture because of a failure to perform on my part.
Story_ID: 543987
Speaker 1: After I did a little work there, I was getting more involved in local politics in St. Louis [Missouri].  As I said I was just out of law school [Saint Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri], so I was earning about twenty-six [$26,000], and I, I got active in the 19th Ward [Ward 19, St. Louis, Missouri], and I moved in the 19th Ward.  So when many of my friends were heading off and, and to live in the suburbs after law school I moved two blocks from the projects.  Within a couple of years in 1977, I was elected to the Board of Aldermen.  But, prior to that, I became active with the Jimmy Carter [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] campaign.  Now when I met him in early '75 [1975], it was still Jimmy Who to everyone.  I remember Jimmy saying to some friends at one of our first events that "Michael [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.] was my first friend in Missouri," (laughter) but he said it with a lot of more southern accent than I could develop just now.  But, it was a great experience for me, because indeed I was able to surface nationally with a man who ultimately became president.  I remember going to the Democratic Convention [1976 Democratic National Convention] for the first time in New York [New York].  In 1975, I was the first African American with his own private business to be accepted into the Missouri Athletic Club [St. Louis, Missouri], and this was a club that was a network of old boys, very successful whites, no men--I mean no women, only men.  And as the first member, I had reciprocal memberships in clubs all over the country.  And this is just a side story, I remember taking my brother, Steve [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.], with me.  We went to, we went to New York.  I think he was still in law--he was still in law school [Washington University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] at the time, but in order f- we didn't have a place to stay, so we stayed at the New York Athletic Club [New York, New York] and at the time the New York Athletic Club had not admitted any African Americans, but they--
Speaker 2: This is in nineteen seventy--?
Speaker 1: Yes, this is 1976.
Speaker 2: Six [1976].
Speaker 1: And so it was quite interesting because they had to accept our reciprocal membership.  And we ended up going there, and I remember two great stories.  I had one of my cousins, who was at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], undergraduate.  I said, "You gotta come on up here and, and see this and be a part of this."  His name was Les Bon, Jr. [ph.].  Steve and I were in a room, and three things of interest happened.  The first one was when we were getting our shirts laundered and, and they, we were running out of time and so I asked Steve would he pop down to pick up our, our laundry for us, and he did.  But, he told me a story while he was down there someone said to him, "Oh, when did you start working here?"  Steve said, "I'm a member here, I'm not working."  You know, he's a guest.  The second one was when we were on the elevator and this very prominent New York lawyer looked at us and found it extraordinary, we struck a conversation, and by the time we got off the elevator he was handing us his card saying that if there's any trouble or any problems with you guys while you're in New York, here's my card, you know, you can call upon us.  It's like, you know, we're, we're here as professionals why would we need your card?  You see, but it's like his mentality was, he thought he could be helpful to us by, by providing us with legal protection in the event that (laughter)--.  And the third one was when my, my young cousin who, who was at Princeton mind you, now here I am, I've finished law school, my brother is in law school, and my cousin is in Princeton.  We're at the New York Athletic Club and, and they tell him as he comes in the front, "Applications are in the rear, you must go around to the back."  And he said, "I'm actually here as a guest," and he made his way from there up.  But this was a very interesting club.  They, they, you could not walk through the lobby unless you had a tie on and full mask.  I mean it's very high end, and yeah we were there and we were just running around doing our thing.  We went on to the convention, we were in the front row nationally televised a few times 'cause my wife Jeanne [Jeanne Gore Roberts] as a matter of fact said some--she was in California at the time and some--she was at her aunt's house and said, "Aren't those the Roberts brothers from St. Louis?"  And they had actually saw--it's just a small world, and we didn't even really, we knew each other by family members, but we didn't know each other within you know a year or so later.  We actually re-met and dated, and she told, shared that story with me.
Story_ID: 543988
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind how you got to be a member of the Missouri Athletic Club [St. Louis, Missouri], I mean was there, were now were you the first black members of the Missouri (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, there, there--yes there's an interesting story.  I--because I was emerging politically there was a mayor by the name of John Poelker who was very active at the Missouri Athletic Club, and you know the winds were starting to blow to, to desegregate clubs like this, and so John led the way and identified--it takes about six or seven sponsors to write letters for you to be considered, and John along with some very high end named individuals in St. Louis [Missouri], really some of the blue bloods who were more liberal minded, wrote the letter for me and to many of our surprise we ended up being accepted because it's a voting process.  And I mean I remember once--then I brought my brother [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] in right after he finished school [Washington University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] and, and got him admitted.  By that time, we had figured it out and we were starting to bring in more African Americans and ultimately women to become members of this club.
Speaker 1: That's sort of anti-intuitive, I mean it's like most people I guess would think that New York would be first to admit blacks--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --rather than Missouri, but.
Speaker 2: Right, and, and I mean I don't know who was first-first in that group of net- network, but I can assure you that you have, so you have the New York athletic association and the New York Athletic Club [New York, New York] and you know it's, they were all members of the same old boy network and so we, we've been breaking barriers for quite some time.
Story_ID: 543989
Speaker 1: In fact, our entire life has been breaking barriers.  I remember in law school [Saint Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri] when I, when I went to The Hague Academy of International Law [The Hague, the Netherlands] and--during my summers.  And one particular summer, my first summer there, I was in an area right outside of the world--The Hague is the world court, the International Court of Justice, and I spent both of my summers in law school studying international law there, and in Strasbourg, France.  Well, this is just a quick side story.  There was an area called Scheveningen [The Hague, the Netherlands], which is the beach area, the hip area where the discos.  They were having a lot of problems with people from Suriname, Indonesia, at the time.  The Dutch had alre- you know had colonized those people back in the day and now these folks are coming to Holland [the Netherlands] as citizens, and they were beginning to be sometimes disruptive because they didn't feel they were having fair treatment.  I went to a disco with a bunch of my fellow law students from The Hague, and they did not admit me at that time--I had a pretty big Afro, and they did not admit me and all of, all of us are like, what?  You know, so with that we initially created The Hague Academy committee for, for justice and we wrote a letter, I wrote a letter to the burgomaster, to the Queen Beatrix [Beatrix Wilhelmina Armgard] at the time to, to the equivalent of their attorney general, and, and to the head of the country.  And as a result, interestingly enough because I remember Monsieur Dupre [ph.] who was the headmaster for, for our school program and I wasn't real comfortable in the fact that we used The Hague's name, but we sort of modified it so it's not truly The Hague.  I returned a year later, and he pulls me into his office and he first apologizes and then he goes on to say that as a result of my letter I have changed the laws in Holland to allow for open admittance to public places.
Speaker 2: So, they actually had official segregation in Holland?
Speaker 1: They, they had, they had--I don't know if it was official--
Speaker 2: Against the--well--
Speaker 1: --but they had a policy that didn't prevent it, or they, they didn't have a policy to prevent it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, a business could discriminate against a Sur-
Speaker 1: Theoretically you could--
Speaker 2: --somebody from Suriname or--
Speaker 1: Yeah, people of color basically is what, is what this issue amounted to.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, but you know my efforts actually changed the laws in Holland, and that's a small bit of history that will probably never be identified or, or written, but the reality is as a result of that there, there were nondiscrimination laws passed that were directly attributed to that episode.  So, you never know what you might do to make a difference, and, and it resulted in, in a difference.
Speaker 2: Now did you, when you were there during that summer did you have any close associations with any of the people from Suriname?
Speaker 1: No, none at all.  I was only associated with, with lawyers and judges and, and diplomats and legal advisors, the heads of state, the people that attended this, this program, and that was it.
Story_ID: 543990
Speaker 1: It just so happens that through my research I realized why it happened.  I guess that was the first time I realized it was the Dutch that were also sort of the leaders of apartheid in South Africa.  Because when you're in Holland [the Netherlands] and Amsterdam [the Netherlands] and Scheveningen [The Hague, the Netherlands] and Den Haag [The Hague, the Netherlands] it seems okay on its face.  I mean they seem liberal and friendly and everything was--seems okay, but then you scratch the surface as I did and I found something quite different.  And as I researched I learned even more, especially again about the South African connection.  And, and s- you know, it, it's really interesting.  In fact since our last visit, I've been to South Africa and Dubai [United Arab Emirates] and met with de Klerk [F.W. de Klerk] and listened to him as he described to me, you know, his relationship with Mandela [Nelson Mandela].  I went to Mandela's home in, in Soweto [South Africa] in a location where you know the young children were shot and killed, all these things that led to, to the loosening and elimination of apartheid.  I went to Robben Island [South Africa] and actually looked in the cell where Mandela stayed.  And then I met with de Klerk after that and it was quite an interesting story.  He'd actually told me he'd been to St. Louis [Missouri] two or three times, but the relationship between him and Mandela during the time they were gonna release Mandela was one that was a little tense even though Mandela was, you know, pleased with the proposal and they both were, they still were of different political parties.  So, there's this balance of diplomacy, respect, and a tension between, you know, ri- rival parties, and he told me that when--he actually visited with Mandela about three times during the process.  So here's a man who's fighting his own party who does not want to eliminate apartheid, so he had to internally, diplomatically work through the process of his party and at the same time work with the nation and the international community to sort of show how it's going; a very interesting process.  But, in conclusion, so we said, "Well what, what did Mandela say when you went to him, you know, to tell him he is now released and he can leave?"  I think Mandela's response was, "Are you sure it's not too early?"  But, that then goes of course into another interesting story and a side bar.  I'm sorry to have diverted a little bit here (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But so just for the point of clarification like when did you go to South Africa to meet de Klerk?
Speaker 1: This was, this was in November.
Speaker 2: Of this past--
Speaker 1: No, I'm sorry, this was in August, the end of August, first of September is that right?  That's right.  I'm sorry, I'm--it's, it was in the fall of 2007.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, somewhere around September I think it was, I mean it was in September.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: It was essen- it was between the time you were here last, I believe.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: All right.
Story_ID: 543991
Speaker 1: So you were Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] campaign--
Speaker 2: I was his campaign manager.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I worked in places like Des Moines, Iowa.  Frequently what I would do is go in and organize the black communities so that there would be a, a connection.  And generally they're left out.  In the past, the politicians were just taken for granted, especially the Democrats.  And part of my mission was to change that, and in both of his, both his, the election he won and the, the one he lost, I'd go into places, even places like New Orleans [Louisiana] and other cities where we would organize.  We would use the political organization base, but then raise them to a higher level so that they can be at the table and not be taken for granted by just giving them a few dollars to, to organize it inside of their, their areas.
Speaker 1: Now what was appealing about Jimmy Carter for you?  I mean as you stated earlier a lot of people said, "Jimmy Who?"
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Where'd he come from?
Speaker 2: Well, Jimmy Carter was a plain talking guy, and I think people appreciated that.  He had a good moral compass.  His, his, his, perhaps his only downfall was that you know instead of letting his, his campaign manager become his chief of staff, Hamilton Jordan--who became a good friend.  I mean I actually played tennis at the White House [Washington, D.C.] for the four years I was at the White House once every two or three months and literally walked through and sat and met with everybody, got to know a lot of people.  A lot of young, at the time we were all young emerging people like [HistoryMaker] Alexis Herman and Ben Brown [Benjamin D. Brown] and, and there were just a lot of folks that were, were in that became higher levels politically in presidential levels of politics.  These were, all of us were all starting at the same time.  (Laughter) I mean--Ernie Green [HistoryMaker Ernest Green], I mean all of us were just right there starting at the same time and at different levels and different levels of involvement through the Carter campaign.  As I said, he's a plain talking, straightforward type fellow.  We thought he was very honest, and to, maybe to a fault, not that you should be less than honest, it's just that he, he frequently would take the responsibility of passing on more heady duties and responsibility to people who perhaps weren't really prepared.  And so I used to go into the White House like it was my house, I mean quite literally, in the Oval, Oval Office and play on the tennis courts.  Hamilton Jordan and I actually played in the Congressional Black Caucus tennis tournament, which was their ann- and we won (laughter).  The following year I'd gotten to know a guy by the name of Judge William Webster [William H. Webster].  Bill Webster was a federal judge, Republican from St. Louis [Missouri] that Carter nominated to head up the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation].  Now I'm a member of the Board of Aldermen, so what I did was I drafted a resolution at the Board of Aldermen that was read into his [U.S.] Senate hearings and as a result Bill ended up being director of the FBI, not as a result of that, of course, but during these hearings you know it played a role.  He and I were fast friends as well, and we played tennis the following year at the Congressional Black Caucus tennis tournament.  I think we took second place.  That goes, it must tell you one of them must play pretty good tennis, not me, right (laughter).  No, we, we, I was a tennis pro in, in college and I taught tennis, so it was one of my favorite sports, that and basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were the ringer then (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a ringer, but they both played.  They played pretty well.  I mean it was, we, to get to that level and the guys we had to pass and many of the names, you know, that played tennis back in those days you would know those names of folks.  And again all of us were emerging around the country.  We were all later became opinion makers and did things in our community that were fairly consistent with each other's dreams and, and aspirations.
Story_ID: 543992
Speaker 1: Are you thirty years old yet at this point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: I was like twenty-nine approaching thirty.  I might have been thirty, thirty-one.
Speaker 1: You got access to the White House [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Access to the White House, to [U.S.] Congress.
Speaker 1: And playing tennis with Hamilton Jordan and William Webster [William H. Webster], congressman.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And other, I mean many congressman I mean because I'm, I'm--.  Why am I so involved with the Congressional Black Caucus?  Well, my client, Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies], at the time was one of the major sponsors.  And right about that time my, my good friend, [HistoryMaker] Wayman Smith, actually became, in 1980, became a vice president of Anheuser-Busch and he brought me in and I brought with, with me Bunny Mitchell who is a black woman who was the, you know highest ranking black woman in, in the Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration in the White House.  So, ultimately she came out and, and we served together to help develop the Anheuser-Busch partners of economic progress program, and their affirmative action program, under Wayman Smith who was the corporate vice president of Anheuser-Busch at the time.  And they were large sponsors of the Congressional Black Caucus as well as the Urban League [National Urban League] and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and I was frequently the, one of the guys with Wayman who would go in and we would be the highly visible corporate people, but I was always the outside consultant.  So, I was living both as an alderman serving in levels of high corporate responsibility that--without actually being tied down to a job per se, and at the same time I was developing my own little cottage of businesses.  I was buying more homes in inner city areas and of course then there's a whole issue of my responsibilities as an alderman, which led to you know tons of legislation that came about, legislation that helped turn St. Louis [Missouri] around.  My brother [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] and I and a few others were close sponsors of legislation that built, rebuilt Union Station [St. Louis Union Station] in St. Louis center, the Fox district area, which is my political area [Ward 19], Fox Theatre area [Fabulous Fox Theatre, St. Louis, Missouri], the convention center as I said and a variety of other very high profile, still high profile locations today as a result of that.  Now, we had a group of, there were, there were five African American aldermen down there, and, and we were like the Young Turks and we, we were all pretty bright, my brother, Wayman Smith I men- mentioned earlier was one, Virvus Jones and Michael Jones and myself, and, and we really played a pretty dominant role during the years on the Board of Aldermen.
Speaker 1: No wasn't Freeman Bosley, Sr. on the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he was there as well, Freeman Bosley, Sr. was, was on at the time.  We--there were several black alderman, we had about ten or twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But I was just saying that our five were always, you know, we were the guys with the degrees and, and you know we had, we had some strong plays.  Virvus for example later become, became our comptroller in the city.  He is now one of my vice presidents within my company [The Roberts Companies, St. Louis, Missouri] as a matter of fact.  And Mike Jones continues to work in the political world.  Wayman is now retired from Anheuser-Busch and practices law, but we're all St. Louisans, and we believe in it and we've been very engaged and continue to be engaged in politics at all levels.
Story_ID: 543993
Speaker 1: I think one of the things we really should talk about though is, what was it like to be an alderman two blocks from the projects?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's where I ultimately lived for ten years.  All four of my children were born there.  Other kids had swimming pools, my kids had fire hydrants to play in.  We had to deal with shootings, deaths in front of our home, next door.  I would travel and come back and have stories told to me.  I'd observe it, you know.  It's heart breaking when you know an elderly man, but not, did not know he didn't have heat and he lived four or five doors down from you and you, you hear fire trucks and you find out that he was burned alive because he was sleeping in a tub, and, and he had a fire going in his sink in order to stay warm and that fire led to the house burning up and him being killed.  I mean these are real life experiences that I went through.  The funerals of, of friends and families that I attended or spoke at.  The resolutions I wrote and passed that related to issues of life and death.  I mean it, it could harden you if, if you didn't keep an open mind to the realities of it all.  And you know for eight years I enjoyed the opportunity to represent one of the poor areas of, of St. Louis [Missouri], and we started to turn it around.  It was tough, but, but we made some major changes.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  What do you think when you look back on those, at those years what were some of the major pieces of legislation or major activities that really helped the community that you live in the most?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Well I remember some of the companies that needed cooperation in order for them to expand within my ward [Ward 19, St. Louis, Missouri], and that created jobs.  I mean it, it's, it seems a little mundane, but for you to be able to help a large company close a street to expand a facility or increase their parking, you know, you, you, if you don't realize the significa- the business significance of those types of things and you're a politician who's really more interested in, you know, another, other issues, you can lose your businesses.  I remember having discussions with them and being able--because I'm, I understand the corporate language to sit down and listen carefully to what they had to say and what they were saying and, and, and in fact to, to step up quickly so the- so they could be responsive and we could get things done in a timely fashion for them.  And that of course kept jobs in the community and a tax base.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We were always concerned about our schools back in those days and you know one of the things that I worked on was to have a continuing education program placed in one of the elementary schools.  That was really for the adults in the neighborhood so that they could continue on.
Story_ID: 543994
Speaker 1: We were talking about your career as an alderman, and you were talking about educational issues, I think is the last thing we--
Speaker 2: Well, there's a co- inside of our, the 19th Ward [Ward 19] in St. Louis [Missouri] we had a continuing education program that we helped to fund, and it was largely to reeducate adults in maybe helping them reinvent themselves, giving them a higher self-esteem plan, and it was, it was a very good program, and I spoke there many times and was quite supportive.  We were seeing developments in, throughout the area, new developments, new properties that we saw coming up.  There was gentleman by the name of Michael Shepard [ph.] who was very active in that.  It's interesting because he was a really strong man who was doing his thing, and Senator Jet Banks [J.B. "Jet" Banks] who was the committeeman for the area was also a strong guy and so it was this interesting pull and push between these guys.  I was always in the middle (laughter) because I, I just wanted to get things done, but I also wanted to be politically connected too, so.  It was an interesting time and learning how to balance and to mediate between these types of heavy ended political forces and come out as being, you know, a guy that can work and talk to everybody.  It was some great lessons, wonderful lessons for me.
Story_ID: 543995
Speaker 1: I remember when Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] people came and said, "We would like for you to be a part of our U.S. ambassadors program, and we want to send you and about six other people to Brazil."  At the time, President Figueiredo [Joao Figueiredo] was being sworn in and Walter Mondale was gonna go, but they wanted to increase, they really wanted the president and I think Mrs. Carter [Rosalynn Carter] was gonna go and Walter Mondale was gonna go for his inaugural--.  So, this group of political and professionals were selected.  I was one of them, and went to, to four major cities in, in Brazil while we were there: Brasilia [Brazil], which is in in- interior parts of Brazil, which is of course their capital city, Sao Paulo [Brazil], which is one of the largest populated areas in the world, Rio [Rio de Janeiro, Brazil], and Salvador, BRA, Bahia [Salvador, Brazil].  What a great experience that was.  All of that, we heard so much about Brazil and the beauties of Brazil and the (unclear) and, and the, and the beaches and I will tell you that it's not at all exaggerated.
Story_ID: 543996
Speaker 1: Another interesting trip that they had me to go on, and this is a volunteer program, was to go to Mississippi, and I was appointed as the chairman of the Tennessee-Tombigbee Waterway project, specifically to engaged African American businesses to be a part of the, the expansion and the development of this huge waterway, and I did that for a number of years.  But, it took me to Columbia, Mississippi, and--Columbus, Mississippi, which is close to a town called West Point, Mississippi, which I had heard my father's father [Squire Victor Roberts] was originally from.  (Laughter) And it was a, I decided well let me go there and see whether or not there's any farmland that may be still owned by the family, or should have been owned by the family, but for the fact that it was taken away as a result of, you know, that era.  And 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Haley] had just come out, so it was sort of a fun time for us to check this out.  So I went in and, and I couldn't find anything related to Roberts directly, but ultimately the clerk down there helped me 'cause he knew I was an elected official, he knew I was a fairly academically prepared guy and I could talk intelligently (laughter).  So, he said, "Well why don't you check out the archives on the schools?"  'Cause you had--. Then he took me in a room and there were books census tracts there were colored and white, some were interesting, so I started combing back turn of the century and I think by 1901 I actually, or 1902 every other year they would do these census.  I actually found my grandfather in school, and we found out that he had a sister, several sisters it appeared, at least two, and maybe some brothers or cousins all in the same schoolhouse, all in the same day.  And two years later I found him again in the next census, and there were some people that were there and some who weren't there.  In other words, if you weren't there the day of the census you weren't counted.  But it was really quite, quite a moving experience (unclear) I made copies, got back with my dad [Victor Roberts] and said, "Dad, I found, you know, your father, and he had a sister by the name of Viola [Viola Roberts Lathon]" (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay now, what--yeah.  Once again the story's that they were banished from town--from, from that area by the--
Speaker 1: There was--
Speaker 2: --from, from West Point.
Speaker 1: There was a ton of stories that I was, that I ultimately learned about.  Some stayed.
Story_ID: 543997
Speaker 1: In fact I had an extraordinary experience a few years ago when we were building a TV station [WRBJ-TV] in Jackson, Mississippi, when my brother and I were back and forth, and Steve [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] went down and he was at a given point introduced to one of the more successful black businessmen who had a gentleman next to him, and the gentleman next to him was name was Lathon [Harold Lathon].  We wouldn't know him from anyone else, right, and so Steve started chatting about the fact that we had roots, roots in Mississippi, in West Point and this guy Lathon says, "Well, I'm from West Point, Mississippi."  "Oh really?"  And he says, "Yes."  And he says, "Well my father's father, my grandfather's name was Squire Victor Roberts."  He looks at Steve, and he says, "My grandmother was Viola Roberts [Viola Roberts Lathon]," my grandfather's sister.  Steve was actually sitting next to his cousin.  So we then found out that his dad [Robert Lathon] and my dad [Victor Roberts] who of course have been first cousins.  None of us would have ever connected, it would have never happened.  Viola was as a female took on the name of her husband, Lathon [Esau P. Lathon], and, and, and we learned so much.  Because then we learned that, that his father's father, or my, my great-grandfather's name was Wright Roberts married to Rose Roberts and, and that in fact there was still about forty acres that were there, that was--there even today that's connected to Harold Lathon's father's family side of things.  So, we recently lost him and unfortunately we couldn't get our dads together.  But, there is an aunt [Rosetta Lathon Allen] who was even older than his father who we understand live in De- lives in Detroit [Michigan] today and probably before it's over we'll, we'll try to track her down and, and see what type of history we can pull out of, out of her.  So, when, when my grandfather left West Point, he left never to return.  He became a Pullman porter.  He worked his way through medical school, graduated from Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  Interestingly enough I was looking, I went to Meharry to research that, and I found that in the year that he graduated from Meharry a friend of mine's grandfather [Oscar Albert Joyner] graduated from Meharry, a guy by the name of Tom Joyner who's, who's a well known radio disc jockey and, and comedian.  And I, I said, "You won't believe this."  And I gave him a copy of it, "Look you know there's, there's, your grandfather, my grandfather a hundred years ago who graduated from, from medical school together, and how about that?"  I mean and now hundred years later we're, we're talking business and, and, and becoming friends and, and just think a hundred years ago our grandfathers would have been doing exactly the same thing that we're doing right now, true story.
Story_ID: 543998
Speaker 1: You worked on Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] second, the campaign in, in '80 [1980]--
Speaker 2: In 1980, yes.
Speaker 1: Eighty [1980], yeah.
Speaker 2: That was his, his second run, of course he lost, but in that one I was able to go back to places like Iowa and replenish relationships that I'd made a year earlier, so it was a lot easier.  I also went to places like New Orleans [Louisiana], stayed you know with, at Lindy Boggs' house.  In fact, it was Mar- Martin Luther King III, Marty King and I campaigned together during that time.  That his early years in the campaigning and ever since then we, we've become friends and known each other.  But, areas like Plaquemines Parish [Louisiana] and the rural areas where there is you know abundance of African Americans, not necessarily registered to vote, but we were able to start to move them in the direction of thinking about the importance of that.  So, a great deal of our efforts was to, was to educate and to, into the voting process as well as the campaign.  We, we pretty much knew that if we got them to register they would vote, and so we had to inform them.  And the way you do that is you just have to be, you have to create the rule of being persuasive and being repetitive with your message, get a clear message.  And from that I actually, I ran for the president of the Board of Aldermen myself, which is a citywide race here [St. Louis, Missouri].  I lost by only a handful of votes.
Story_ID: 543999
Speaker 1: And then once for mayor as well and lost by a handful of votes and then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, now when did you run for mayor?
Speaker 1: I ran for mayor in 1989, and at that, at that, in that race we'd, we'd lost two years earlier Board of Aldermen president by 159 votes.  And what we found out was that the issue of hanging chads and all the things we've heard about so far, well I took it to federal court.  I created the first voting rights case outside of the South.  You know originally it was only limited to the South voting rights cases.  So I created the first voting rights case out of the, outside of the South.  And the case related to disproportionate impact on African Americans as a result of the punch card system.  You see what we found was out of the almost ninety thousand votes cast, there were some three thousand votes that were counted, cast, but not counted.  By that, I mean, the cards would go through the reader and they would show no votes.  So, that created a question in my mind, and the question was: well, why would someone go take a card and not cast a vote?  Why would three thousand people do that?  And then we go, went deeper to find out of the--there's twenty wards in St. Louis [Missouri], about twelve are black, but out of the ten or twelve that are black close to two thirds of the ballots came out of those black wards, so that's a disproportionate impact and we said, let's go to court.  So, I brought in the NAACP Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] and the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] and we filed, and we actually won, Judge Hungate [William L. Hungate], the first round.  We were versed on the standing issue, but in the course of that we forced a recount that showed that there were many ballots that were punched inappropriately.  Elderly people for example didn't put their cards in the right way.  Our argument was, okay if they put it in upside down and they were trying to push number 23, but they ended up pushing you know 199, it's because the card was upside down.  If you were to reverse the card and do the analysis, it would show that that's their intent you see.  We also saw the pregnant chads.  That's where they would push and if you had, say, let's see, if you had arthritis or you had a problem and you, you would push it, it would dent it and it didn't push through, the reader couldn't read the, the card.  So it read the card, but it wouldn't read who you voted for.  So, but what was your intent?  Could you say that the punch, the penetration, it wasn't a penetration, but it was the denting of it, was that in fact intent, was that an indication of intent?  Argument was, of course, it was.  We even had situations where when we would run for office we would, we'd have people, would give the number to look for, but some people we found that took a pencil, found the number and punched it, which destroyed the, their voting 'cause it may have hit more than, it might have pushed too much, didn't read.  But, what was their intent.  And then there were illiterates who tried to vote and there were mistakes.  The result of my case showed that this, that there was a disproportionate impact, and therefore by its nature people were being disenfranchised.  And when, when Gore [Al Gore] had his case [Bush v. Gore, 2000], you know, and he lost not because he, he just didn't pursue this.  All he had to--.  We, we sent our, all of our information to the White House.  We, we let them know, hey, there's a precedent here.  Just come on back to the Roberts versus Wamser [Roberts v. Wamser, 1989] and look, this guy had fought this issue (laughter) you know back in the day and, and actually won.  So, that's another bit of history for you that will probably never (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's Roberts versus Wamser.
Speaker 1: Wamser.
Speaker 2: And how do you spell Wamser?
Speaker 1: W-A-M-S-E-R.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He [Jerry B. Wamser] was the chairman of the Board of Election Commissioners at the time.
Speaker 2: This is 1989 correct?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I just wanna make sure we linger over that so whoever watching this will know it's important (laughter).
Speaker 2: We can get you, you know a lot of information on that.
Story_ID: 544000
Speaker 1: But the point is I mean here's a black man who fought this issue.  Had, had America embraced it Gore [Al Gore] might have been president today because you know one of the things that came out of it was the requirement on the part of the board of elections [Board of Election Commissioners] to ask every person: "Do you need help?"  "Do you understand the process?"  And you must sign the card saying that you don't need help, because many people will go in--now remember I was an alderman [in St. Louis, Missouri] for years and, and, and folks would you know go in and they would try to vote and we would see the problems, so we'd have to work with it and we under- I understand the issues, and that's when we decided we were gonna take this to court.  Not necessarily to, I mean we know that we actually won the race because if you lose about 170, 157 votes and 1800 of them of the 3000 are yours, then those are--when you get 99 percent of the black vote, which is what I got, then you know, you know that I, I had enough votes that I actually won the race, I actually won it.
Speaker 2: Well this, this is serious.  This is serious business.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a 1987 race by the way.  The case came out in '89 [Roberts v. Wamser, 1989].  I ran for mayor in '89 [1989] as well.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Different, different times, different races.
Speaker 2: Yeah the last, last seven or eight years have been colored by vote controversy--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --in Ohio, the last presidential election.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: In Florida the previous.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So it's--
Speaker 1: Oh no it's, it's, if, if they were just to take the approach that I took, is there a disproportionate impact on, on a segment of the community, you'd find it very interesting because the segment that is disproportionately impacted would be usually people of color.
Speaker 2: Now do you have an opinion about, you may or may not, but do you have an opinion about why president, I mean Vice President Gore at the time did not pursue the case with as much diligence as many thought he should?
Speaker 1: Well, I mean there's the argument that America needs to go on and take care of business and move on with its life.  He probably fell into that.  He was probably worn out and tired and beaten up.  He, he probably knew that he won the popular vote, but he lost this other process.  But, the reality is he didn't lose the other pro- .  He would have gotten the electoral votes if he had won Florida.  Well, the reality is he probably did win Florida.  I mean I can't imagine the elderly people, the Jewish community that was in those, in those areas where they voted for Bush [President George Walker Bush].  It's just impossible.  We know it's not the case.  And, and so you know he's probably faced with, with all of the issues.  You had a [U.S.] Supreme Court that was already on the other side, so we see which way that that would have gone even if he had been successful and it would have been appealed, we probably would have seen some reversals at the highest level.  In the meantime, who is gonna run the government?
Story_ID: 544001
Speaker 1: Back to the Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] campaign, what's, do you have any reflections on the Jimmy Carter era?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do.  The, the concerns I had about Jimmy Carter as I mentioned earlier in the interview was that he was extremely supportive of his friends.  Now that's not a bad thing, but you know I don't think Hamilton Jordan had the capacity to be chief of staff, or president.  You know, he, he was a great campaign guy, 'cause I worked side by side with him.  He was tough, almost ruthless when necessary.  But to assume that your campaign manager can also be, manage the government of the United States (shakes head) is not the same thing.  And I think if there was one mistake, one that you could point to, it was his, his, his firm commitment to his friends and to Hamilton and others like that, and put them in positions of high responsibility as opposed to, you know, looking at the right type of manager to run, to manage the White House and manage this government.  I believe that was the biggest challenge.
Story_ID: 544002
Speaker 1: And were you close at all to [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the situation (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I knew Andrew.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We, we in fact played tennis in those tennis tournaments that we talked about and his, and his brother, Walter [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young], as well.  You know again, you know he was a great congressman.  He's an articulate guy.  He's a preacher.  You know he's not a lawyer.  You know he's, he's, he's a guy that worked his way through, you know, with Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], was a civil rights leader, and, and he was just a brave guy.  And he continues to struggle to make, you know, businesses work.  He had a business, young ideas, and, and they would do very well, but I'm not sure that, you know, they made even the Black Enterprise 100 top businesses.  Now, that isn't necessarily a negative reflection, it is not intended to be that, but, but when I look at a lot of the guys that came along with us at the same time, like I said, Ernie Green [HistoryMaker Ernest Green], you know has made his way on into the municipal finance side of business and things like that.  [HistoryMaker] Alexis Herman, you know, became secretary of labor (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is the same Ernie Green who was one of the Little Rock Nine?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The same--okay.
Speaker 2: Same Ernie Green, Little Rock Nine, yeah.  He was very active, he was secretary level.  And then under Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] you know you had people like I said, Alexis Herman who was also coming along at the same time I was who, who became secretary of labor under Clinton, and recently, I believe, she just went on the board of Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] I think.  So, I saw a lot of, of people who were young when we were all young together going, all ambitious trying to make it happen and, and so many have in fact succeeded.  You know we were involved with--one of the things I did as an alderman was, was, was----one of the top guys in an organization that we helped develop was the National Black Caucus of Local Elected Officials.  It was all the black elected mayors and councilmen of all the, of all the count- all over the country, those who participated.  And every year we would have a couple of meetings a year, and we've stayed with that organization even though my brother and I both are out, out as elected officials.  Steve [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] is still general counsel to that organization, which keeps us familiar with mayors and councilmen from all over the city.  So, now we own eleven hotels and four TV stations and whenever we go into a city we just connect with our council or our mayors that we're still linked to.  Or if we have clients that need help, we just make some phone calls.  It's a network, and it's a true network that's very helpful and useful.
Story_ID: 544003
Speaker 1: Speaking of radio and TV stations in '80 [1980] of course Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] lost the election, how did, did the Republican administration, how did it affect you and your, your business and political life (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It, it really didn't affect it.  You know one of the things I always joke about is the fact that I'd run and run in the White House, but I really didn't know enough about how to leverage that relationship into business back in the day.  I was still growing business, becoming more prepared to do things in the future.  It wasn't until 19--the end of 1981 that we became applicants for our first TV station [WRBU-TV, St. Louis, Missouri].  So we, when Carter came out we were, we actually probably found, I found more time to look at where I wanted to take my businesses.  So, Steve [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] and I developed businesses that began to make long term sense.  For example, our first TV station, our first license.  We applied in '81 [1981].  Our first office building we bought in 1981 or '82 [1982], which is the old Sears building on North Kingshighway [Boulevard], which is an entire interesting story.  Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] was moving out of the black communities all over the United States as the, as the neighborhoods went brown and black, and they would move out, and in some cases they had I guess purpose, other times they were just boarded up.  We did not want to see that happen here.  Ebony magazine did a story in 1979, and the caption was, "Roberts Brothers--," "The Dynamic Duo Roberts Brothers Yield a One-Two Punch on St. Louis Government."  You see, at the time we were the only brother team on a major city council in the United States.  Somebody at Sears read that and called me and said, "We've read about you guys, we see you're in business, you're representing construction guys and helping a lot of local developers, and you do some real estate would you like to buy the Sears building?"  We said, "Sure, we were born just two blocks from here, and of course.  But, I thought you had a little deal going on with the Urban League at the time to try to get them to do it?"  They didn't want a black guy, so they were trying to find ways to sell it to someone like that.  Well, the Urban League was taking on an interest in it.  So, I said, "Fine."  So, I called the Urban League I said, "Listen, are you guys committed to this deal and making this happen, or you're not because if you are, we'll back off.  But by the way they called us and said if we wanted we can, we can talk to them about acquiring it."  I said, "But I'm not gonna let Sears pit the Roberts brothers and the Urban League against each other.  So, we're out of the way, we're out until you decide that you can't handle it."  And they, they were a little upset with the Sears people, but they realized, they appreciated how--what we did in the process.  Well, about a year and a half later, and by the way this was '79 [1979] or early '80 [1980], about a year and a half later, they called us and said, "Look, we can't make this work."  And they were now fifty thousand dollars or more into operating capital for the Urban League.  They were just trying to get this thing started, brought a few tenants in, and it just wasn't working.  So, Steve and I moved on it.  A guy by the name of Bob Hyland [Robert Hyland, Jr.] who was one of the city fathers, if you will, in downtown St. Louis [Missouri], who was also one of the ones that wrote a letter to help me get into the Missouri Athletic Club [St. Louis, Missouri], he headed up KMOX Radio [St. Louis, Missouri], along with a few other key political people and business and they said, let's try to make this happen.  So long story short, Steve and I were able to get the financing, and we were able to purchase this 200,000 square foot building.  We did not want this property in our neighborhood that we grew up to become just a 200,000 square foot monolith dedicated to crime and pestilence and the other negative things that go along with a vacant building.  And since then, we've developed it, and we've changed the name from what they use to call it as the old Sears to the Victor Roberts Building [St. Louis, Missouri] named after my daddy [Victor Roberts] because you know Dad was the guy that came in at that time to help us develop the relationships with our tenants and our other people.  And besides, all Mr. Sears did was move out of my neighborhood, so why should we honor him?
Story_ID: 544004
Speaker 1: All right so you acquire a television station [WRBU-TV, St. Louis, Missouri] in 1981.  Now--
Speaker 2: We applied for a license in 1981.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was an interesting time because Ben Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] who became I guess was head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at one point made his move to--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: He was the chairman of the Federal Communications Commission and at that time when we were approached there was a license available in St. Louis [Missouri], but you have to apply to the FCC for a license.  They had minority preferential treatment established, and the minority preferential treatment basically meant that if everything was equal and you were a minority and the others weren't, then you win.  So, we applied.  Actually we were in our first little offices, this little cubbyhole that Steve [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] and I had and the lawyer in that firm who was adjacent to us said a consultant had come to him and was interested or if he knew of any minorities interested in going after a TV license.  Well, I have a degree in communication arts and English literature.  Steve and I both did in our respective schools radio and so we said, well, we have some credentials, let's go for it.  And we just made some money on a little contract, so we were able to pay five thousand dollars in a legal retainer and you know a couple of grand for a, for the engineer and the consultant and we said, let's go for it.  So, we did, and at the time the idea was there was this preferential treatment.  The problem was no one else had applied, and the moment that we applied within a few months before the closing of applications, see that triggers the applica- the first applicant triggers the time clock for other applicants.  Then about six or others applied, but they all weren't minorities, so that leveled the playing field.  It wasn't until 1989 that we went on the air as a Home Shopping Network.  It took that long.  The appellate process we won the first round.  We negotiated some deals to buy some people out who were in, who looked pretty good, and we were rolling right along, but it took forever, and that is a full story in and of itself just how we got our first TV station and licensing process.
Speaker 1: Now I think that, I remember years ago I think there was a station in Detroit [Michigan] were the first black owned television station (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we looked at buying that. Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think it was owned by a non for profit group, either the Shrine of Madonna [Shrine of the Black Madonna] or some like that.  We were the first here, and then we pursued one in Denver [Colorado] and were successful there, ultimately built it.  Then we started buying stations in, in Raleigh [North Carolina] and Durham [North Carolina] and Nashville [Tennessee], Hartford, Connecticut, some low powers in Mobile [Alabama] and Pensacola [Florida], ultimately over into Albuquerque [New Mexico], one in Santa Fe [New Mexico], and one in, in Salt Lake [Salt Lake City, Utah]. Okay.
Speaker 2: We had built towers and built full facilities, then sometimes we would sell them and that would get us the money we needed to ultimately go into our wireless PCS company [Roberts Wireless Communications], but that's of course years later from where we are chronologically right now.
Story_ID: 544005
Speaker 1: What you, you're saying is that in the process of acquiring the first station [WRBU-TV, St. Louis, Missouri] you learned how to put the, put a station together I guess.
Speaker 2: Correct, that's correct.
Speaker 1: And were able to sell that on some level down the line.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, I mean the understanding of going through the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] process and meeting the people and of course using our political relationships inside of that process was very helpful.  I mean letters of recommendations from congressmen and mayors and, and those types of things were going on, and that's all going simultaneous with all of our other businesses that we, we were starting up and creating at the same time, the buying of the building that we talked about earlier, the Victor Roberts Building [St. Louis, Missouri], the old Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] building, acquiring other commercial properties ultimately as we rolled down that path all became a, a, a parallel of multiple businesses that we, we developed.  It was a dive- diverse group of, of specialties.
Speaker 1: Okay, what I also hear you saying is you've already said it, but just to emphasize it again is that you're talking about complicated set of relationships that have to be constructed in order to be successful--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in business.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Relationships that a lot of black people don't have, or will never have, even though they may have good, you know, skills otherwise.  If they don't have those relationships, those political relationships or those relationships like with the athletic club and other things, you know.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: How hard would it be to do what you do without those relationships?
Speaker 2: Well, people succeed without relationships, but not as easily, if you will.  You know I, I emphasize it because it's part of my mantra; it's what I wanted to do.  I had it, I was gonna exploit whatever relationship I had wherever it fit inside of the mix.  I mean if it didn't fix, you didn't use it.  I mean we were very active with the clergy coalition [St. Louis Metropolitan Clergy Coalition] in St. Louis [Missouri].  We were active with the activists groups in St. Louis, the Nation of Islam in St. Lou- .  But, you just, you become okay with everybody and, and they're okay with me, so you use the relationships just like they use you on an as needed basis.  So my suggestion would be to, for anyone who wants to succeed to develop relationships and to, to not think that that's it all based on one acumen and skill, you know that there are relationships and at times when you need assistance and, and be ready for that.  So, yes get active politically, get active in civil rights, get active with the activists, and sometimes you need, you know, some loud aggressive representation at a given point.
Speaker 1: Is there ever a time when, when relationships backfire?  Where you have a relationship with somebody that's, whose persona becomes poisonous to what you're trying to do?
Speaker 2: Well, you know my attitude has been that I'm not going to build my relationships on somebody else's opinion.  I mean I'm, I'm close to the Nation of Islam.  I'm friends with [HistoryMaker] Minister Louis Farrakhan, but I'm also friends with Muhammad Ali.  Now both of them are, are Muslim.  But at the same time, you know, the American Jewish Committee gave me their, their, my brother [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] and I their, their annual Levy award [John D. Levy Human Relations Award] because of our relationship in building communications between the black and Jewish committees, and what we're doing to rebuild our neighborhoods [in St. Louis, Missouri], which is good for everybody.  So, I, I don't, I think one of the greatest fears that too many people have is once they've succeeded they think they have to be quiet and shut up because somebody is gonna take it away from them.  What are they gonna take from you, and, and who is gonna take it away, the same people that gave it to you?  Well, you earned, so nobody gave it to you.  So, we have to be more mindful of the responsibility of--as successful people to present our message in front of the young interested African American people who are, who need the support and need the knowledge that there are folks who have succeeded and can succeed and they started off just like I did.  And if more of us can do that, I mean the biggest problem I have is that young people think that the only way you could become very wealthy or rich as they would put it is if you had some kind of athletic capability and there was a ball in your hand, or you are a rapper, entertainer or you were an illegal pharmacist, a drug dealer, and that's what they see as being, you know, success models.  My brother and I've made it a point to work in the direction of being out in our community, not leaving our community, so that young people could point to us as examples of business people with success that did none of those three.
Story_ID: 544006
Speaker 1: In terms of the stations, did you have, when, when you were developing your first station [WRBU-TV, St. Louis, Missouri] did you have an ideal kind of programming you wanted to--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --offer?
Speaker 2: You always have to look at the timing and sort of what is your era, E-R-A, and for us when we started independent broadcasters were doing pretty well, that was in 1981.  By the time we went on the air in the late '80s [1980s] that wasn't the case.  Why wasn't it the case?  Because a company by the name of Fox [Fox Broadcasting Company] was just creating a new network.  So, now you had the big three plus Fox succeeding.  The independents who didn't have a network were now struggling.  Fox was already given up, so we didn't have that as an option when it was time for us to go on the air, but I knew that we needed a brand of some kind.  So, there was this organization out of Clearwater, Florida, that was just kicking off about four years earlier, it was called Home Shopping Network, and I flew down to meet with them and learned a little bit more about their product and their programming and what I learned was that they were on cable, and cable was kicking them off because cable was starting to create their own home shopping, they called it QVC and CVN [Cable Value Network] and the JCPenney [JCPenney Television Shopping Channel]--it was sixty copycats, but, but Roy Speer and Bud Paxson [Lowell "Bud" Paxson] who founded Home Shopping shared with me that if they can go on a broadcast station--broadcast was must, there was must carry provision that said that the broadcaster had to be carried on cable, so where their businesses were getting kicked off of cable because cable was actually competing with them, they would go buy TV stations, and the TV stations would then be brought back on cable.  Now understand at the time we were applying for TV, cable was emerging too, and we were involved in helping cable companies around the country get licenses back in the early '80s [1980s].  You know, how did that work?  Well, the city council voted for licenses.  So, if we served as a consultant to companies and we were able to go to New Orleans [Louisiana] or Atlanta [Georgia] and say hello to our colleagues as a result of our relationship with the National Black Caucus of Local Elected Officials, we then had, we could open the doors for the possibility of our clients to actually win.  So, we were engaged in the cable business without owning it, but we were learning from that.  So, about in the mid-'90s [1990s] as we, it looked like--I mean the mid-'80s [1980s] it looked like we were gonna win this thing.  We had to figure out how we were gonna finance it and what was our programming.  So, when we met with Home Shopping we, we found out that they were very interesting in St. Louis [Missouri] and other cities, and so we cut a deal that made us the Home Shopping affiliate and they financed to build out of our station.
Story_ID: 544007
Speaker 1: And one of the things that we did in, in, in, in building this station, of course we were learning as we go, was we would, we would populate the station with a workforce at a size that was not necessarily important for a program that was gonna come over the air through satellite and run twenty-four hours a day.  We needed to have our breaks, and we had a program called 'In Your Interest' we shot, but we really didn't need to have the, the fifteen, eighteen or twenty people we had.  So, I sat down and Steve [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] and I talked about this, got with our engineers, and we created the first fully automated television station in the world because by then the computers were able to push the buttons instead of humans, the buttons that said okay it's time for a commercial break, it's time for a different program to kick in.  So, our second station in, in Dallas--I mean in Denver [Colorado] when we built it and we operated it the way we operating in St. Louis [WRBU-TV, St. Louis, Missouri] we basically operated with, with two to three people in an automated environment because our programming was, was, was coming in off the satellite and we would then load it and, and send it out.
Speaker 2: So, this is in '89 [1989]?
Speaker 1: This was, it started in '89 [1989], but right through the, you know, right through the early '90s [1990s] as we were building our stations and we would build them quite differently than anybody else in the world.  I remember the chairman of the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], Bill Kennard [William E. Kennard], who was a black man came out here to, to take a look at it and they were all amazed because it's the same look as any other station, but didn't have all the human bodies running around you know.  And the nice thing about automation is it doesn't show up late to work and doesn't spill coffee on your machines, you don't have labor issues, and does all the work; it's robots.  And I was the first one to create that in America, maybe the world, fully automated.  At night, we would leave and--on a Friday and no human would be around until Monday morning.
Speaker 2: So really you didn't create any programming yourself?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: It was all (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We had one local program, it was called 'In Your Interest,' and I used to host it and then Steve [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] hosted it, then my brother Mark [Mark Roberts] hosted it, and then we had others host it for a while.  Now, my kids have done some of it even, but it, it's a, it's a half an hour non-entertainment issue oriented programming that we brought in the community to give them a chance to speak.  The block units who didn't have a word and businessmen who were successful to show the community that there were successful people and, and achieving people.  And usually on a regular TV show you, you didn't get it.  I mean the normal news stations if it, if it bleeds it leads.  I mean they don't, you only see the negative for the most part.  Ours was 100 percent positive.  We brought in like I said block units and successful young people and people of all ages who were doing things that are positive, and it was called 'In Your Interest' and, and we, we still have our summer program today.
Speaker 2: So, is it still going on today?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Is that shot here in?
Speaker 1: Yes, it's shot here.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, and so you do have studio space--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you just don't have all the people (unclear) yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah we have studio space and editing equipment.  We, we--today it's different.  I mean today we're not home shopping.  You know years ago we, we went to UPN [United Paramount Network] and in some of our stations now we're The CW [The CW Television Network] or MyNetwork [MyNetworkTV], and we, we have, we, we have produced local shows inside of our studios.  And although we're still sort of quas- today we operate all four of our stations out of one master control.  So, it's not automa- automated per se, but it is automated.  In other words, we, we might have one person, but they're running four stations.
Speaker 2: So, this is the mo- now had the radio industry gone that way prior to you or, or, 'cause I know nowadays there, there are very few local deejays anymore.  They're all--
Speaker 1: Well, my radio station is local deejays.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We do have some syndicated programs, which is really what you're referring to.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean, if you really look at TV at a local basis, nobody is producing anything unless you have news.  They might produce one, one half hour show or something, but everything else is syndicated and sent in by satellite or purchased.  So, your programming is not local anymore.  Nobody does it.  Everybody is doing the same thing.  Even the cable guys are doing the same thing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Like BET [Black Entertainment Television], I mean they're not a TV station.  It's a channel on cable, so they're basically, they buy programs and fill in their programs, or their--in their case they do a lot of religion and, and video music type things.
Story_ID: 544008
Speaker 1: How important has the, has Roberts Broadcasting [Roberts Broadcasting Company] been in developing what now I guess anybody would consider to be a fortune?  Was that the mainstay business that, that created the fortune?
Speaker 2: No, it was not the mainstay of business that created the fortune.  It was a contributory, contributing factor.  It, it was certainly nice strong assets that we continue to grow.  We sold several of the stations.  That's why we're at four now versus eleven because we needed that to fund the wireless phone company [Roberts Wireless Communications] that we wanted to get into.  So in the middle '90s [1990s], when the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] was beginning to tell us you're gonna have to go digital from an analog signal we reali- we realized that ultimately the phones are going to have to go there.  So, Kay Gavrett [ph.] and myself, someone here in my office, we, we started looking into it.  We'd already been involved in the FCC on some other matters, and we realized that maybe we should get after these auctions, or this thing called the PCS phone company.  Nobody understand what PCS [personal communications service] was.  Back then the coolest person in the theater was the, was the guy who had the big suitcase and a phone inside of it, answering the phone in his shoulder or something.
Speaker 1: The one they call the brick now.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But, as a futurist we saw the future.  Steve [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] and I decided we were gonna after licenses, and we went into, we sold off some stations, got into the mix of doing that.  We'd already taken another company public with our TV stations, Acme Communications that, where we dumped our, our Salt Lake City [Utah] and our Albuquerque [New Mexico] stations into that deal.  That went public, and one of the things that we learned was when, when selling a station or merging it that you want to make sure that you only sell what they want, they the buyer want.  And in the case of the TV stations really all they want is the, is the frequency, the rights to broadcast, because that's the core of it and they're accustomed to leasing tower space or studio space.  So, we would keep the studios and towers and then lease back to our, to our sellers, our buyers and, and so, which became another structure later when he built our wireless phone company, our PCS company.  I knew we needed a brand like Home Shopping [Home Shopping Network], well then we also needed a brand in, in wireless.  We had licenses as a result of the auctions for, to build a phone company, a digital phone company, PCS, in, in all of, in half of Missouri except for St. Louis [Missouri], the, the eastern half of Missouri.  We sa- we, well who are we gonna work with?  We went to Sprint [Sprint PCS Group].  Sprint said, "Well, you're not our model for world development."  See Sprint was building at this time, and this is the late '90s [1990s], they were beginning to build all over the United States, but the big cities.  They had spent over $10 billion, but they knew that to build, to be ubiquitous they had to be all over the country.  So all of their rural areas they were beginning to connect with, with wire line rural phone companies and giving them a wireless overlay.  And, and when we came in and we should them that we, we were ready to go, we had our engineers, we had our experience, not in building phone companies, but building TV stations, a tower, an antenna, and a, and a big transmitter.  Well, to build a wireless phone company it's a tower and antenna, and a little base station that goes back to a switch, I mean so theoretically it's, it's very similar.  And I knew that digital was gonna be the future, so I figured if we can get into a phone company, being the only African American in history probably to own a phone company and build it, that would be pretty interesting; I don't know what color you are really.  And so we cut a deal with Sprint, and Sprint said, "Well--."  We tried to cut a deal with Sprint, and Sprint said, "You know you don't hit our motto.  You're entrepreneurs, you're not these wire line rural phone companies."  I said, "Yes, but I already own half the state and you see we have the capability to do it, now what you need to do with us is make a decision, either be prepared to compete with me or bring, bring me into the fold."  Within two or three months later, we got a call, "Can we have dinner?"  At that point, they said, "We want you."  We were the first entrepreneurial group to, to, to do it.
Speaker 1: Now what year is this?
Speaker 2: This would have been in, in roughly the year 2000 more or less.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000], 2001, we're rolling into that period of time.
Story_ID: 544009
Speaker 1: And so (laughter), so we ended up getting all of Missouri, except for St. Louis [Missouri] or Kansas City [Missouri], southern Illinois, a little taste of Oklahoma, and a little bit of Kansas.  Now the question was--first of all we figured it was gonna cost $100 million to do it the first time.  Where are we gonna get that money from?  I'd go to New York [New York] with my little suitcase and, and call myself you know ready to, to get this deal done and I'd tell the bankers who we were, what our experience was, and we need $100 million for this thing called PCS [personal communications service].  They had no idea what that was.  They're used to analog phones, you know the snap, crackle, drop phone, can't hear anybody, sometimes it drops off.  So, they'd laugh so hard I'd have to pick them up off the floor, put them back in their seats.  And then I was at a golf tournament for the Sprint [Sprint PCS Group] affiliates in, at The Broadmoor in Colorado Springs [Colorado].  I was listening to the guys talk about how they were financing it, and then I learned about something called vendor financing, and I said, how interesting, vendor financing, what is that?  And it's as it would seem the vendors who are going to make all the money on the, on the buildup would finance you.  So, so Nortel [Nortel Networks Corporation] had built St. Louis, middle of the state, Columbia [Missouri], and Jeff City [Jefferson City, Missouri] and Kansas City, the opposite side of the state.  We now owned the middle of the state, so we owned those parts that were built already by Nortel.  We went to Nortel to discuss financing, and they said, "We'd finance you, but it would be a dollar for dollar financing."  At the time, we needed about $54 million.  We had sold some stations, and we put about two or three or four million into, into what we'd done so far, sold TV stations to do some of this.  And Nortel was pretty cocky with us.  They said, "We'll give you, loan you a dollar, you put up a dollar."  Well, we didn't have the extra 25 million or so.  So, I went to Lucent [Lucent Technologies, Inc.], their competitor, and I said, "How would you like Missouri?"  Which is the front yard of Sprint there in Kansas City.  They said, "How do we get that, I mean Nortel has this, that."  I said, "Because I control it.  What do you want to do?"  And they said, "We wanna go for it."  I said, "Great.  I need $54 million."  They said, "You got it."  I said, "There's twenty-three base stations that we're building on my footprint by Nortel.  We're gonna give you those twenty-three and build them out and change them to Lucent."  So, Forbes came along and asked the question of me once, "Well, how did you get this done?"  I said, "Well you just gotta fake it 'til you make it."  Well, unfortunately that also ended up being the caption in the Forbes article: "Fake It Till You Make It."
Story_ID: 544010
Speaker 1: And a lot of folks--this came about after we had did that part of it, we began the building.  At the time that we were about, hm, 25 percent through completion, we were looking at alternatives to our transaction.  WorldCom [MCI Inc.] at the time was trying to buy Sprint [Sprint Corporation].  If WorldCom bought Sprint, those of us who were affiliates knew that eventually they would roll us up.  If they were gonna roll us up, then the best way to be rolled up is to be the bigger of all of the affiliates.  So four of us got together and decided we would merge and go public.  That was the first time Steve [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] and I had ever been in the New York Stock Exchange [New York, New York], and we actually were up there as part of the ringing of the bell because we took our company with the other companies and we went public.  By doing that, I w- I drew from my lessons when I was selling the TV stations I knew my wireless company [Roberts Wireless Communications] really only needed the spectrum.  So, we kept the towers, the antennas.  We kept that we had built, and the switch building, et cetera, and the stores and let the publically held company become the owner and the tenant back to us, you see?  Again, the same rules I'd created on the TV sales, I was not applying on my wireless phone sales.  And on that day, we went from $54 million in debt to $380 million or 400 million in net asset stock value for my brother and I in one day.  And so when Forbes came and asked the question, and I said, "You fake it 'til you make it," they, they wrote it up.  So, so the white guys on the other side, part of our new corps, said, "Well we don't understand that, what does that mean?"  I said, "Well you ever read the book, 'Dress for Success' [John T. Molloy]?"  They said, "Yeah."  I said, "Then don't you have these things called voodoo economics?"  "Yeah, well, we understand that."  I said, "Well in my neighborhood we called that fake it 'til you make it," (laughter).  And that then resulted in you know some very interesting times because we were watching this stock begin to do fairly well, 9/11 [September 11, 2001] had hit, people were using cell phones, but then because of so much, so many things, Enron [Enron Corporation] and all the other economies our stock like everybody's stock dropped from almost thirty-eight dollars to almost thirty-eight cents.  So, all of those hundreds of millions we had, because we're insiders and Sarbanes-Oxley [Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002] was not, would not let--you can't just sell.  Now we sold a lot, 50, 60 million here, that's how we got into the hotel business, which is another part of our story, but then we got to a point where we would sell where we were dropping down, and then when it got really low, we'd buy again.  So, by the time the stock went back up to 18, ultimately Sprint bought us out, and, and that brought us about $100 million in, in cash at that point.  Now that was about 2005, I think, or the two thousan- early 2006, or late January.  And that's when we got engaged in buying hotels.
Story_ID: 544011
Speaker 1: We're talking about the hotel business now, how you got involved with hotels.
Speaker 2: So in--we started, we continued to build our, our real estate base, especially in the black neighborhood and around the Victor Roberts Building [St. Louis, Missouri].  We built a strip.  It's known as the village--The Shops at Roberts Village [St. Louis, Missouri].  And this is interesting, forty-two thousand straight open air center.  We had made money.  We look pretty good on paper.  Went to the bank and said look we want to build a, in our neighborhood we want to build this nice little shopping mall strip, and it's on Martin Luther King [Dr. Martin Luther King Drive] and Kingshighway [Boulevard].  Now I emphasized Martin Luther King.  I could have said different streets.  I could have said Page [Boulevard] and Kingshighway, or s- but I did it on purpose you know.  And, and I did it on purpose because too frequently we take all that Dr. Martin Luther Kings in the country, the streets named after him [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and they're in the worse neighborhoods, the absolute, they're bad areas, true in St. Louis [Missouri].  But, whose responsibility is it to make those neighborhoods better.  You know somebody from somewhere else or us?  I believe it's us.  So we, we have an office here on Martin Luther King and Kingshighway.  Now, when I had said that to the bankers they said, "We don't understand that business model.  We won't be able to loan you the money."  So, Steve [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] and I wrote a $4 million check and built it in our neighborhood, and now it's 100 percent occupied.  The bank presidents are looking at us saying, "How brilliant."  I said, "Well we told you."  And, and before when we used to have to go see them at their offices, now our level of success is such that every bank president who wants to see us, they have to come to Dr. Martin Luther King and Kingshighway and they've all been here and they want our business.  They plead for our business, and we make them compete after they've come to visit us on Martin Luther King and Kingshighway.  So guys like us, if we don't drive that type of exposure by people in the establishment, they'll never know and they'll never give anybody a break.  I mean, how can you know this little family minimart get a ten thousand dollar bridge loan if guys like us can't get a $4 million loan to do what we do?  So until people like us continue to, to, you know, bust this issue and, and continue to, you know, break down the barriers by--we're from Missouri, it's called the Show Me State, and we sort of believe in that: you just show me.
Story_ID: 544012
Speaker 1: So, once we started on our real estate quest commercial, and we started building in, in our community we looked at downtown and we said, you know, we need to really take a look at what's gonna happen.  We know that other cities are starting to see downtowns emerge, and St. Louis [Missouri] hadn't quite gotten there yet.
Speaker 2: Let me ask you one question about this, the Roberts Village [The Shops at Roberts Village, St. Louis, Missouri] or a couple of questions about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause other, I know in other cities there have been attempts to revitalize shopping districts in the black community and they, I don't know, they don't, there aren't many people with the commitment that, that you all have to build something in the black community.  That might be part of the reason why these don't work, but a lot of, it seem like a lot of efforts to revitalize the, the shopping districts in the black communities have actually failed, and the people in the black community actually go someplace else to shop.  Is there, do you have any thoughts about that dynamic--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --and how you were able to overcome it here?
Speaker 1: You know, you're asking a shopping center question is a good one for me.  I--just so you'll know that there's an organization called the International Council of Shopping Centers and it's some seventy-eight thousand members representing over a hundred countries.  It's fifty years old, and in its fifty years they had never had an African American on their board of trustees until I went on last year.  And once I'm there, I began to, to meet and greet and visit with the largest shopping center developers in the world, and I've asked the question you know what is our urban initiative that they talk about and it's they're beginning to realize that there's opportunities in inner city areas now.  But, they don't really say inner city, they say urban.  I have to bring the word inner city in because there's a difference between--.  I mean you can have an urban and be in downtown, and in downtown Beverly Hills [California] and call that urban.  I s- I wanted them to have a discussion about inner city development.  And when we've discussed that as a body and there's over fifty members in this trustee boards, and it's both the developers, but it's also lawyers, it's accountants, it's, it's the actual tenants, and we're trying to get into the heads of you know what does it take for Target [Target Corporation] or Wal- a Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] to develop the type of motto for inner city.  Usually it's a vertical scenario versus a horizontal scenario.  There's a certain parking consideration, security considerations.  So, the industry with my leadership is starting to push the question of more of an inner city revitalization.  If you were to go to a abandoned strip and try to develop it today, you need to look at a variety of issues.  Are you putting in the type of tenant that caters to the community in which you're dealing with?  In, in our case, it's, it's not only an issue of us being here every day and having you know security and folks twenty-four hours a day and we're on top of it, to people who are absentee.  They take a shot at it, they mean well, but they don't really get in there and fight it.  This business like any business, the development business has its peaks and its troughs, and if you don't catch it at the right time and understand how, what to deal, how to deal with it, you can't have, your outcome may not be as you would like.  So, our success, I think, is based on the blend of the type of tenants we have in there, known that these are the tenants that the community normally would shop at with, and, and then there may be a few that are gonna experiment, and that works pretty well.  You need, you need an anchor or you need, you know, the type of location where people are gonna come to the location feel safe and feel good about it, and that's what we've developed here, right in the middle of the hood.
Story_ID: 544013
Speaker 1: Have you had to make special arrangements with anybody in the city to make sure that the area is safe and, or to--I mean what do you do to assure people (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We have our own security force.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that security force is a no nonsense force.  We have standards.  You can't stand in the hallways.  You're either here for business, or you're not gonna be here.  And if you tried to, you know, break from our rules, then you know, you, you stand to have, you know, severe problems with who you are and your ability to walk out of here.  We have the police right on board to call and take folks away if that's necessary, and it has been.  I mean we have a zero tolerance position.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And by keeping it that way, everybody recognizes it that this is just an area you don't come and, you know, you don't come and play with us.  We're very serious about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How many businesses are, are located in the, within Roberts Village [The Shops at Roberts Village, St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: In the Roberts Village, there's about, there's forty-two thousand square feet, so there's somewhere in the neighborhood of about twelve or fourteen businesses.  There is over fifty in the Victor Roberts Building [St. Louis, Missouri].  We also now own the rest of the, roughly a twelve acre location and will be tearing down the older buildings and warehouses that surround this property so that we can now grow into an even larger complex.  And we have another one just a mile away to the south of us on Delmar [Boulevard] and Kingshighway [Boulevard] where we own another strip, a very large property that was a grocery store, and down from it another city, another three city blocks that we all own.  And so our plan is to build an economic engine much like a dumbbell approach, an economic engine on one end and other one on the other, and, and we're already starting to see in between these two areas in the black community, that people are starting to fix up their homes and starting to realize that it is important to stay and/or invest in our neighborhoods.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell us about Roberts construction company [Roberts-Roberts and Associates, LLC].
Speaker 2: Well, Roberts construction company is really more of a program management company.  You know we, we oversee our own projects for the most part and we've done a few things with, with others.  Our primary target now is for our guys to be LEED certified, L-E-E-D, Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design so that we can advise others.  We're the only company in St. Louis [Missouri] that has two LEED certified projects that we built.  We built green, and we built our own facilities.  So we're more futurist on that.  You know we're just the carbon footprint, be more energy efficient and, and save money were we can after construction and peoples lifestyle, improve the lifestyle of individuals is really our target from a health standpoint as well as from a financial standpoint.
Story_ID: 544014
Speaker 1: Can you tell us like what is the Roberts [The Roberts Companies, St. Louis, Missouri] philosophy of entrepreneurism and, and you know there's a--you've been involved in a number of different diverse--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --things and is there--
Speaker 2: Our philosophy?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: In three words, one hyphenated [sic.]: don't go broke (laughter).  You know we, we wanna be first in class.  We want to be perceived as having a brand standard, so we name all of our companies with our family name.  You know somebody once said, "Well, Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.], isn't that a lot of ego?"  I said, "Well I don't know.  What's your problem?  It sounds like you have a lot of envy."  I said, "You didn't say that to Rockefeller, Mellon, or Mr. Anheuser Busch as you sip on the forty from him."  I said, "So if what you think is ego today, forty years from now will be legacy."  And it's very important I think for more of us as African Americans to, to have a link back to who we are and our name.  Because I'm sure that we, we know that there are many inventions and many concepts and many success stories, but we don't know who they are, it's lost.  It's lost through an ambiguous name.  I mean we've heard of Rockefeller, and you know.  We, we heard of Ford--
Speaker 1: Hilton.
Speaker 2: --and, and you know all, Hilton and Marriott, and, and all the names that have come along the way, and nobody said that they're big--you know this is an ego issue.  You know it's an issue of building legacy.  So, and one of the things I want us to do is be able to have people for even a hundred years from now be able to look back and say a-ha you know here is a success story that, that would go well.  So, I'm, I'm pushing hard to keep that alive and well and everybody's bought into it.
Story_ID: 544015
Speaker 1: So when we go downtown and we buy the board of education office building and turn it into forty-seven new condominiums, we're the best condominium apartments in downtown St. Louis [Missouri], not even close.  I mean no one's even close, and they're outstanding.  When we then left acro- then we saw this hotel that was for sale across the street the Rob- now the Roberts Mayfair Hotel [Magnolia St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri], we bought it in 2003 first with the idea that maybe we would find ourselves able to convert it into more apartments or condos if we didn't understand the hotel business.  But we latched onto it, now it has some of the most beautiful renovated rooms of any hotel anywhere in the country.  In fact, we were written up in hotel magazines as what they call the new look or first look, and our hotel was featured in that.  When we build our hotel in Atlanta [Georgia], we recently became a Crowne Plaza.  It was a renovated property.  It was the first, it became the number one renovated property in all of the Crowne Plaza group of hotels this year in 2007, and it was just became a Crowne Plaza in November of '06 and we're also ranked number one in, in the growth and the customer service of any, of any Crowne Plaza in the entire world.
Speaker 2: Now what, what's the name of that, that one in Atlanta?
Speaker 1: That's the Roberts Crowne Plaza [Roberts Crowne Plaza Hotel]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in Marietta [Georgia], Atlanta-Marietta they call it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And the one here is the Mayfair?
Speaker 1: The Roberts Mayfair.
Speaker 2: Roberts Mayfair.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's a Wyndham [Wyndham Hotels and Resorts], right?
Speaker 1: It's a Wyndham historic hotel it's called.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was built in 1926.  And in 1926, they didn't even want African Americans to deliver the mail, but today we own that hotel.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then next door we bought the Roberts Orpheum [Roberts Orpheum Theater, St. Louis, Missouri].  It was a theater built in nineteen seven- '16 [1916], and it was the old vaudeville show.  I'll tell you a story about that.  Our mother [Delores Talley Roberts] as a little girl tried to go to, to a show there and they didn't allow African Americans in, and eventually they let black folks come in and you could, you know, sit in the nosebleed section and look down on the stage.  Well, today we own that stage too.  So, we, we own about three city blocks in downtown St. Louis and continuing to look at other opportunities.  We have three hotels in St. Louis.  We have a total of eleven hotels nationwide: Dallas [Texas], Houston [Texas], Shreveport [Louisiana], Spartanburg [South Carolina], Atlanta, Tampa [Florida], Fort Myers [Florida], and Memphis [Tennessee], a recent acquisition.  It was sort of fun to buy this one because actually some African American men had, had owned this one and built it over the years.  It's gotten kind of run down and we're gonna renovate it.  It's across the street from the Peabody [Peabody Hotel, Memphis, Tennessee], and we're gonna make it one of the best, two blocks from the, from Beale Street in Atlanta--I mean, I'm sorry, in Memphis.
Speaker 2: What's the name of that one, you're calling it?
Speaker 1: Well, it's called the Benchmark [Roberts Benchmark Hotel] today.  In the future, it will be something else.
Speaker 2: It will be the Roberts (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it will be the Roberts, yeah you know ultra hotel and spa, or something, you know, (unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We're gonna start branding our hotels where we can now that--we have a little bit of a challenge in doing that because bankers would like for, if they're part of the deal and they're lending, they, they want your hotel to have a brand name.  So, if we were to be you know the Roberts Courtyard or something, that wouldn't work.  They want a Marriott Courtyard [Courtyard by Marriott] you see, even though we, we probably could do the same job or better job by creating it.  So, where we have opportunities we're gonna start to slide the name in and start to create a brand.
Story_ID: 544016
Speaker 1: I'm also chairman of the board of the National Association of Black Hotel Owners, Operators and Developers [National Association of Black Hotel Owners, Operators and Developers, Inc.], NABHOOD, N-A-B-H-O-O-D dot com [sic. NABHOOD.net].  And as chairman of that organization, part of our responsibility is to introduce the concept of ownership of hotels to African Americans and other minorities actually around the country.  We have, and we're doing it quite successfully actually.
Speaker 2: I think even at this moment there's probably someone in the community meeting, some black person saying, "We don't even own a hotel," but they're not aware of this organization [The Roberts Companies, St. Louis, Missouri] or--yeah.
Speaker 1: I regret to say that is the case.  And there are probably 215 or so black hotels that are nice hotels, not the little motel (unclear), that isn't really defined as a hotel.  And, and so they exist and we're growing and we have more people, affluent individuals who are looking at this as an addition to their portfo- life portfolios and it's really a good one actually and we're, we're very pleased with our progress.  We're the only black hotel management company, we're certified by all the hotel brands that we're connected with.  So, we're connected with Holiday Inn, Marriott [Marriott International, Inc.], and InterContinental [InterContinental Hotels Group PLC], Radisson [Radisson Hotels], you know so we, we can go on there are several, Clarion and Comfort Inn and Suites [Choice Hotels International, Inc.], those kind of thing, so.  We have quite a diverse group in our portfolio.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, when you make an affiliation with, with a hotel chain or is it like a fast food franchise you have to, I mean there's certain--
Speaker 1: Yeah standards, sure.
Speaker 2: Yeah standards, things that--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  Yeah they have what they call you know project improvement plans [sic.] they give you, PIP, short for PIP.  So, if you buy a hotel and you want it to become a Crowne Plaza or La Quinta [La Quinta Inns and Suites] or something, then you have to go, they will go in and they'll give you a list of the changes and, and what you have to do.  Type of beds, bedding, flooring, et cetera, restaurant, no restaurant, whatever the case may be, yeah.
Story_ID: 544017
Speaker 1: I have to ask this question just because, having lived in Chicago [Illinois] for thirty years, years ago we had the Roberts motels in Chicago--
Speaker 2: Those weren't us (laughter).
Speaker 1: --run by [HistoryMaker] Herman Roberts, black man who was you know had Roberts Show Lounge [Chicago, Illinois] and have, have you ever met him by any chance?
Speaker 2: No, I've heard about him, yeah, of course.  They've asked us this question before, yes.  Is he still in business as far as you know?
Speaker 1: Well, he, he still has some business activities.  He's, he actually felt the pinch when he, when integration hit.  A lot of people didn't stay in the black community anymore--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --they moved downtown.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: The big entertainers, and his lounge (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, that's very interesting.  I have another story on that.  A.G. Gaston out of Birmingham [Alabama] was very famous and very wealthy individual, successful business.  The A.G. Gaston Motel is right next door to the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute [Birmingham, Alabama], across the street from the 4th Street Baptist Church [sic. 16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama], I believe it is, where the four little girls were bombed.  Well, it's a vacant building and it's sitting there in disrepair, even though everything around it is developing.  So, the mayor of Birmingham [HistoryMaker Larry Langford] and I have signed agreement where Steve [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] and I will go in and take ownership of it and renovate it.  We're still working through the business plan and looking at, you know, how this is gonna work and how it's best financed because it really isn't a model of, of a true hotel, but this is where Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] slept and stayed whenever he was in Birmingham.  I mean the civil rights, all the civil rights leaders stayed there.  All the black entertainers stayed there.  It's like the story you referred to.  And so you know we may do this with thematic rooms, in other words we know the room that Dr. Martin Luther King slept in and stayed in every time he came.  So, you know my question would be if we renovated it back to the way it was with comfortable beds of course and facility, then you know how many corporate guys would come in and say, "I'd like to sleep in the same room that Dr. Martin Luther King slept in."  Sort of our version of the Lincoln Bedroom at the White House [Washington, D.C.] if you will.
Story_ID: 544018
Speaker 1: We have so much history in this country I think that we don't know about or we--
Speaker 2: Yes, right, it's huge (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) walk over.  And as a hotel operator you, you know is that like one of your goals to try to call attention to some of that, that history and--
Speaker 2: Within the hotel itself?
Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely, and we've done that especially at the Mayfair [Roberts Mayfair Hotel; Magnolia St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri].  I mean if, if--.  (Laughter) I remember when we cut the ribbon when we first took it and we had the head of Wyndham [Wyndham International, Inc.] there and the mayor [Francis Slay] spoke and he said that he had actually spent his honeymoon at this hotel, and we found out that his father had spent his honeymoon at the hotel.  My conclusion was probably about a third of St. Louis [Missouri] was conceived in my hotel at one point (laughter).  But, you know when you look at all the real history, we can go into it, but I mean unfortunately it's not necessary black history, it's history now withstanding.  I mean in this hotel it was the first place where there was a Cardinals [St. Louis Cardinals] baseball game broadcast because KMOX [KMOX Radio, St. Louis, Missouri] that did it.  And the way they did it, it was old Sportsman's Park [St. Louis, Missouri].  They would be on the phone talking back to the studio, and they would say, "So and So just hit a home run," and, and, "So and So just hit a home run."  And it came out of that hotel.  This is the hotel where Cary Grant used to stay.  We have a Cary Grant suite.  Whenever he was performing in theaters like our theater [Roberts Orpheum Theater] and others downtown St. Louis, and he'd always have a paramour that would come over to meet with our, well the owners then, maitre d' who would then take her to his suite.  And when he would walk in they would have these candies that would be on the floor to the bed to the pillow, sort of a map of some kind, I don't quite know why, but the origin of, of chocolates on the pillow started at the Roberts Mayfair Hotel in St. Louis.  The Mayfair dressing is a dressing that started at our hotel.  We, we had the recipe and own that.  That's a, that's a, you know similar to a Caesar type dressing, cream and garlic type thing.  And there, there's so much history there.  I remember when there was a woman that was a general--one of the first women, not minority, but, female manager of the hotel for many years, and she started, she had a barbershop and she let women cut men's hair and that was--and women could not be licensed back then in Missouri.  Only men could be licensed barbers, and they fought the issue and she ultimately won.  Royalty has stayed there.  Ethel Kennedy [sic. Rose Kennedy] had her fundraisers for, for her son J.F.K. [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] at this hotel.  Harry Truman [President Harry S. Truman] whenever he was in St. Louis stayed at this hotel.  I mean the history I quite, quite strong and to have two African American brothers own it today is also interesting.  And by the way there's some other sides too.  I mean some families that were, I don't want to use the word mafia 'cause I don't think that's the correct word, but let's just say an organized group of individuals used to own it too, and when I first looked at buying it I, I pulled my due diligence team together and I stood up and I said, "Well the first thing we have to do is get an exterminator."  They didn't understand.  I said, "Well, let me explain."  The FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] used to have this hotel totally bugged at one point (laughter).  And guys went to jail and but these are sort of the same guys they owned this hotel, but they also owned the Aladdin [Aladdin Resort and Casino; Planet Hollywood Resort and Casino] in Las Vegas [Nevada].  St. Louis has a strong connection between, you know, underworld and money and Las Vegas and St. Louis and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --some union connections et cetera.
Speaker 1: Some kind of reference to that in the movie 'Casino' (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's right.  'Casino' had, it was, a large of it was based on the St. Louis families that were funded and, and went to Las Vegas to build, yes.  And we know them, and we knew them and we, we went through an era where, when Steve [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] and I were alderman when there were car bombings and you know I remember when Jimmy Michaels left the restaurant that Steve and I were at, all the politicians and he left there and was, was blown up on highway 44 [Interstate 44] going south, and then his family members retaliated with some others and they were, their cars were blown up and, and all these are cousins or related by marriage.  It's, it's, it was the most bizarre time in history.  And this hotel blended right in because you know some of the guys were hiding out in the hotels and some things like that.
Story_ID: 544019
Speaker 1: But that was back, you know, in the, in the '80s [1980s] and so much has happened.  The hotel's [Roberts Marriott Hotel; Magnolia St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] transferred hands.  Ultimately we bought it from Wyndham [Wyndham International, Inc.].  Wyndham actually owned it, and, and we had a chance to keep the franchise with them.  So much history continues on.  Wyndham was sold to Blackstone [Blackstone Group].  Blackstone then sold the name Wyndham to Sundance [ph.].  Sundance paid $100 million for it, just the name and the franchising rights, and we of course are connected with all of that.  We were blended into that whole process.  As chairman of, of the black hotel owners [National Association of Black Hotel Owners, Operators and Developers, Inc.], I'm, I'm meeting all the heads of all the hotel groups and all the people who are looking to expand their diversity of ownership within the hotel.  (Unclear) most people see a Marriott [Marriott International, Inc.] or a Hilton [Hilton Hotels and Resorts] or Wyndham or any of those sorts and think that Marriott owns these; they don't.  You know they only own like maybe out of three or four thousand hotels that carries their brand name they might own two or three hundred.  So most of these companies really are branding companies and management companies.  And I--in learning that I've developed a management company as well.  So, should I ever sell a hotel then we'll, we'll attempt to manage it on a going forward basis, or even new hotels that others might need managers, we're developing quite an interesting management company run by black folks.  And it's funny because when you come to my manager's meeting you see all these black men and women managers of hotels, and they look around and they're saying, well when we worked for all these big firms we never saw anybody of color other than us, and yet in my company it's all.  So, my question has always been, even when I built this award winning hotel in Atlanta [Roberts Crowne Plaza Hotel, Marietta, Georgia], recognized as the best renovated Crowne Plaza in the InterContinental--InterContinental Hotels [InterContinental Hotels Group PLC] owns the brand of Holiday Inn, Indigo [Hotel Indigo] Crowne Plaza, you see.  But, we were received as the best renovator of ti- but it was renovated by African Americans.  My art work was a woman out of D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and New York [New York] who I met at an Urban League [National Urban League] convention when I was signing my book ['Action Has No Season: Strategies and Secrets to Gaining Wealth and Authority,' Michael V. Roberts], and I looked at her work I said, "I love your work.  You ever supplied art to, to hotels?"  She said, "No, but I know how to."  I said, "Well how would you do it?"  And she showed me her process of taking her art, beautiful art pieces, and put it into a computer can spit on canvas and you touch it up and it looks like an original.  So she got my contract and all the art in my hotels are now with this black artist female who's now in business doing that.
Speaker 2: What's her name?
Speaker 1: I don't have her name off the top of my head, I'm sorry (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, I thought I'd ask if (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, but we can get that information of course for you.
Story_ID: 544020
Speaker 1: We were talking about the hotels and the history of running some of the hotels, bust, but the Roberts brothers, you and your brother and really your father [Victor Roberts] and I think you have some siblings [Mark Roberts and Lori Roberts] now involved have made quite a bit of history here in St. Louis [Missouri] and in the country.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: You said you recently received an award that you didn't even know existed for entrepreneur, entrepreneurial--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --success, right?  And that was--
Speaker 2: In, in, indeed.  We're the 2007 recipient of the Entrepreneur of the Year Award in emerging areas and it was through the Roberts hotel group [Roberts Hotels Group, LLC], which is actually the winner.  This is sponsored in large measure by Ernst and Young [Ernst and Young LLP], but others has, SAP, S-A-P [SAP SE], Bank of America [Bank of America Corporation], Kauffman institute [Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, Kansas City, Missouri], some of the big sponsors in this.  I mean this event cost three and a half million dollars just a two day, three day event in Palm Springs [California].  It was very extraordinary.  The backdrop of this award is, is about 1700 entrepreneurs selected in the country.  I mean in the past companies like Google and Royal Caribbean cruise line [Royal Caribbean Cruises, Ltd.], I mean a variety of companies, Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation] have, Enterprise leasing [Enterprise Holdings, Inc.], Build-A-Bear [Build-A-Bear Workshop, Inc.].  I mean there's all these companies that have been in these different categories.  I think it's twenty-two years I believe it is.  And this year we won first our region, which is what you have to do.  Out of the 1700 nationally, there's a certain number selected in every region, there's I believe eleven regions, and then out of those nine or eleven regions the winners in the categories go to the national level.  And then each of their categories, in my case it's the emerging business category, we would be in final competition for the national winner.  And it boiled down to about four at a two thousand person black tie event with Jay Leno as the emcee.  It looked like the Academy Awards [Oscars] of entrepreneurship honestly, it was extraordinary, and Steve [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] and I won and gave appropriate speeches, and it was a lot of fun.  We, we enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 544021
Speaker 1: It--it's nice to be recognized.  I mean we've been--Black Enterprise, one of their one hundreds, this year we have two companies in it for many years.  We're the only black to have ever built a phone company [Roberts Wireless Communications] probably in America and operated it, took it public.  In most of the cities we go to, no one's ever built TV stations, I mean, that are African American.  I mean places like Columbia, South Carolina, you know was interesting because I, I remember speaking at Benedict College [Columbia, South Carolina], and I was telling the young students there, be proud of who you are, and don't worry about the fact that the Confederate flag is still on the grounds of the capitol [South Carolina State House, Columbia, South Carolina].  After all, all they have is a rag and you have a full powered television station (laughter).  So, wherever we've gone in those areas we found to be the only and first African Americans.  On the hotel side, same thing.  I mean, Shreveport [Louisiana] we bought the at one time what was the largest hotel in Shreveport, and we may be the only African American hotel owner in Louisiana, and we're certainly it's the largest, possibly here in Missouri as well.  Atlanta [Georgia] we were the first full service hotel owned by African Americans.  There were motels and, like Paschal's [Paschal's Motor Hotel and Restaurant, Atlanta, Georgia] and others, but this is a full service large with meeting rooms.  The only blacked owned hotel in Tampa [Florida]; Fort Myers [Florida]; Spartanburg, South Carolina; Houston, Texas, you know.  I think in Dallas [Texas] there's another African American owner, but we're talking you know in Houston the full service hotels versus limited service.  So, you know although it's, it's nice to talk about, I don't consider that a brag to be proud of because this is something we should have been doing as African Americans you know for the last a hundred years really, if we could have, but we haven't and through many forms of, of ways to oppress us, we've, we've not made it.  But, after all, in the hotel space, we've always worked them, we've cleaned them, we've cooked in them, we've done accounting, we've done front desk support.  We've done just about everything in it, except own them.  So, I think on a going forward basis it would be wonderful for us to see more of our folks believing that, that the hotel business is a business we can go into.  So, from a futuristic standpoint I always like to look at you know, where will America be and where will we be as, as businesspeople, and what should we be doing?  We should be looking at alternative fuel sources and better ways to operate our lives, healthier ways, are we gonna see a growth in business space there.  You know a hundred years ago this country was built brick by brick, but today it's pretty much click by click.  We don't really see the future as being anything like it was in the past to be--other than some of the basic human needs for Americans.  We are consumers and, and not producers in America.  I remember in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] black folks were, we were always saying let's stop being consumers, let's make something, let's produce something.  Well now America is just like black folks back, you know, thirty years ago where we're only consuming.  We're buying, you know, plasma TVs 'cause we, not 'cause we have to have one, but we have to have one (laughter).  We just seem like we need it, and, and whose making all of the items that we're wearing, the clothes we wear form China.  And the tech- technology equipment is coming from all over the world.  We're just not, at some point we're gonna realize that America is gonna follow some of the plight of some African Americans and we're just gonna be, you know, consuming, consuming, consuming and not producing.  So, we have to begin to reverse that.  We have to find ways to be more creative.  We have to think more globally.  We have to do more for less.  One of the reasons we've invested in the Bahamas in the area of, of condominiums and apartments is because there's 73 million baby boomers that are reaching an age where they are, they have more money they've ever had.  They're looking for that island home, or they're gonna travel, they're gonna stay at our hotels.  As we always say, we, we know Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had a dream and we know everyone else has a dream, we just want you to dream on Roberts hotel pillows when you're travelling (laughter).  It, it is just a part of what I think is gonna happen.  We're gonna see a much more, more transient movement, people moving around and doing more, and good hotels.  And if we know that we own certain hotels, we're gonna, we're gonna be selective.  And we're gonna probably stay in these hotels that, that African Americans own.  We've always wanted to support it.  We've heard that argument in the '70s [1970s] and the '60s [1960s] you know, buy black, helping the community, but we really didn't have the businesses to support, not really, not the same quality.  And comparatively speaking I mean I work as hard as anyone and I want to spend my money and get the best I can with my money.  And so what we have to do is learn that sometimes we have to give, give up more for less and in a global environment that's, that's really gonna be the mantra at the end of the day.
Story_ID: 544022
Speaker 1: At the present time as we sit, sit here, I have a note that says you all have, The Roberts [The Roberts Companies, St. Louis, Missouri] have thirty-four different companies?  Is it---
Speaker 2: No, it's more like seventy-four different companies.
Speaker 1: Seventy-four, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We have as we speak about 823 employees.  We have employed thousands of people over the years.  And one of the great moments is when I can look out of my window, you've been in my office, and you look down and see those cars.  Many of those cars are my employees, and those people because of you know our vision and the plans that we put together and the success that we've had you know they have kids that are in, in school, in college and you know they're buying homes and they're driving nice cars and they're living well as a result of, of this little thing we started, and it's very rewarding.  So, so when, when a community recognizes this, not just our community, we've gotten really literally hundreds and hundreds of awards and we appreciate every one, every one of them.  Recently in a business journal a few years ago was written that we, we are one of the 100 wealthiest families in St. Louis [Missouri], and there are some very wealthy families in St. Louis.
Speaker 1: You're talking about the Busch beer people, you're talking (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah people like the Busch and Danforths, they're Ralston Purina [Ralston Purina Company, St. Louis, Missouri], or the Taylors, which is Enterprise leasing [Enterprise Holdings, Inc., St. Louis, Missouri], or Emerson Electric [Emerson Electric Company, St. Louis, Missouri] heads of those companies, and we were now considered one of them.  And we're the first African American to hit that list.  And you have to realize that, I mean, that started with, you know where I started in '74 [1974] and, and we really jumped significantly in the '90s [1990s] and in, in the early parts of the, of 2000.
Story_ID: 544023
Speaker 1: Now you're sought after as a public speaker, and I was, earlier we were discussing your visits to, to college campuses--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) megachurches, speaking before thousands of people.  What's your message to young people when you (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean my, my, my message is you know I'm a guy whose, who comes from, you know, no money per se.  I mean it's, as, as I say to them you know we, we weren't rich, we weren't poor, we just didn't have any money, and you may not know of us and I share with them that the reason you don't know of us is because rich people scream, but wealthy people whisper.  And I would like, however, to see more wealthy people, African Americans, to do what I'm doing and that is to get out and speak to young people, people of all ages.  I want folks to be encouraged that, that there's no such thing as retirement.  You should always find a way to work and be productive and do things even if you change jobs or, or leave one job and go to the next.  And, and I, I try to tell young people you know if you could realize what your life would be back if you could eliminate the fear of failure, the fear of failure.  If that didn't exist, you know, let's break it down, it's two words, fear, which is more than, nothing more than a mental construct.  It's just a simple play on words and in many ways it's a way to con- sort of get you on a control factor, but it doesn't really exist.  It's not of nature.  It is not snow or rain, you know it's not the wind blowing.  It's not of nature.  It's, it's a mental construct.  What is failure?  Failure is no, I don't believe--there's no such thing as failure.  I think that you have experiences where the outcome may not be as you would have liked, but you gain from that.  You, you enjoy the benefits of, of it, even though you know it may not be the outcome.  So, you have 86,400 seconds in a day, that's twenty-four hours, for anyone who is doing the math.  Every moment you either live it to its fullest extent or you lose it, and you don't live on memories, you live on imagination.  You don't drive a car by looking in a rearview mirror, so why would you spend your life, you know, lamenting on the past especially that usually things are lingering on negative things.  When in fact, you could be proactive and aggressive, and my book is the title 'Action Has No Season: Strategies and Secrets of Gaining Wealth and Authority' [Michael V. Roberts].  But action is the fundamental word.  See that's the--and, and you don't--the only time to take action is in the moment.  Action is something you don't take in the future, it's not something you missed in the past, it's only in the moment, so if you just understand the concept of living your dreams out.  I coined the word the Actionaire.  The Actionaire is one who takes their ideas, the dreams, their vision, and they pursue the, pursue them with courage and confidence, and bravado.  What does that mean?  What does it take?  I mean how many times have you heard people say, "I had that idea two years ago."  You know somebody else has now made millions of dollars on your idea.  What stood between you and that action?  Now that action encompasses a lot of things.  How do you raise the money, how do you write the business plain, dah, dah, dah, dah.  Inaction is what creates the problem, when you don't go for it and you don't try, you don't pursue it.  So, to be an Actionaire you have to be like an existentialist.  You have to live every moment to its fullest extent.  As folks know, you either use or you, or you lose it.  We learned that in the TV business.  If when a minute runs, we can, and we can't sell advertising in the minute, we can't go back and get that minute.  In the hotel business, if a night goes by without some, without having a head in the bed, you can't go back the day before and say, okay, let me retry to sell that hotel right.  Life is the same way.  And all of our business ideas and pursuits, relationships, and everything, you know, is really based on a moment to moment basis, and, and as, as long as we can find that to be the least common denominator in our existence, then we can grow from there.
Story_ID: 544024
Speaker 1: Why do we have seventy-two different companies [under The Roberts Companies, St. Louis, Missouri] and you know eight to nine hundred employees and growing in just the l- in just the last fifteen years that really this thing happened.  Somebody said, "Well how does it, how does it work?"  I said, "Well it sort of works like a hurricane."  I said, "If you're flying through a hurricane it's bumpy, its bumpy you know, it pushes you up and pushes you down, but then when you hit the eye and it's calm you know your plane just takes off and goes straight up, and business is the same way."  You know once you get to a certain point and you have developed a degree of wealth, you know, it, it does become a little easier.  But, it's only easy if you sort of stay at that level.  If you start to move to the next level, you know, and we know from being hundreds of millions of dollars in assets to billions of dollars in assets that's another major step, but a step we're gonna take.  But it's, but it's one that requires another set of--you have to bring on new tools and, and new ideas and new concepts and new players and new relationships and, and you can get there.  We're in the throes of doing that now.  We're looking at, how do we create a credit facility that's larger enough that we could continue to grow our various businesses without necessarily going step by step or only writing the checks personally?
Speaker 2: Okay do, so what I, what I hear you saying is you get a thrill out of meeting the next challenge rather than just, 'cause you could easily say well I've got enough money now, I'll play golf or something.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah this isn't about money per se.  I mean that's, of course money plays a role, but you know the, the successes of our ventures and the diversity of our ventures is what you know is the fabric of our life when it's all said and done.  I mean we, we always will have times when you know it's not quite where we want it to be.  We've had outcomes that weren't as we wanted it to be.  Some people would call those failures; we call them experiences.  We see it that way, I mean literally see it that way (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can, can you give me an example of something that people would say was a failure that you tried and didn't work?
Speaker 1: We, we put together a USBL [United States Basketball League] basketball team, United States basketball team.  It was a pro team, sort of a minor league approach to it.  St. Louis [Missouri] didn't have a professional basketball team, but it's a big sports town.  So, in, in fielding this team for a couple of seasons you know you still had to have a coach, you had to go, take them on the road.  They had to go to the different league cities and that all cost money.  Well, then you need sponsors to pay for that.  There's no TV like it would be in, in, in the NBA [National Basketball Association].  And although ticket sales weren't really that strong, 'cause you couldn't use the right size facility and you couldn't use an NFL--NBA basketball facility, you used a college facility for example, and, and so it could never take on the more serious mindset, even though in this league you know some very famous ball players moved up into it and they made some great basketball, but it didn't carry the panache and the success level that we felt it needed to and, and money was lost, so we decided we would terminate that.
Story_ID: 544025
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, hopes and concerns.  Well I, I think the concerns are gonna continue to be the level of education, level both in terms of quality and quantity concern, concerns me, continues to concern me.  I think the representation of who we are in the world still concerns me.  The level of incarcerations concern me, and the process by which these young men and women are being processed in and out.  What, what are the influences that, that causes that or the types of things that we like to set as examples to make the changes.  Again, you know if, you think that being an illegal pharmacist or a drug dealer is, you know, your way to great wealth and success, then you know, you're unfortunately wrong.  But, if nobody else is telling you anything different and you see no other examples of, of this, then how do you, what do you do or how do, how do you proceed, or where do you go from here.  So, what, what I wanna see us do is to you know get the young people who are, who are indeed trying to make it and make sure that they have the, all the money and the skills and the co- contacts to do it.  When I go into the black colleges [HBCUs] you know I see broken sidewalks and you know inappropriately equipped schools, and just about everybody at these colleges and universities are on some form of, of financial welfare.  If, you know if, if Corporate America could figure that out and say, well, listen why don't we dump a little bit more into this and make sure that these young people are, are equipped with the types of technology, equipment and, and, and, and the faculty to, to really make them succeed I think we'll find that, you know, we'll, we'll have greater value there than putting them in jail.
Story_ID: 544026
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done at this point, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: In, in terms of looking back on anything major, it's probably not in my demeanor to look back really because my level of successes are, are, are strong enough and my future opportunities and ideas are pretty significant.  Again, you know, I, I don't see the productivity in looking back.  I mean I've already gained from any of the challenges that I've had.  I've gained from it.  I don't have to go relive why I gained from it.  I mean I think in the interest of this program, of course, there's, there's some need I guess to sort of articulate a few things so it would require you know a moment to think about it.  If, if I had been elected mayor of St. Louis [Missouri], what would St. Louis be like today, using my mind and, and how I function in business and my, you know, remarkable success, if you will.  Had, had, had I won that would that have been a different course, yes of course, but I probably would have still had businesses and I would have only held office for, you know, a limited number of years and I probably would still continue on.  Probably the, you know the notion of having held office is, has been a good one, not a negative one.  Sometimes people would say, well you know you're gonna be a politician, you're gonna be stigmatized, and your voracity might be in question (laughter), that never came about for us, not really.
Story_ID: 544027
Speaker 1: You mentioned legacy earlier.  What today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I think my children are my legacy.  I have four, three [Michael Roberts, Jr., Jeanne Roberts Johnson and Fallon Johnson] have now completed law school, the last one [Meaghan Roberts Johnson] is in law school [Pepperdine University School of Law, Malibu, California], first year.
Speaker 1: I think there's a story I don't think you told on the first tape about when you graduated from law school [Saint Louis University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri], I think your brother was graduating from college [Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts], and your mother [Delores Talley Roberts] was graduating from--
Speaker 2: College [Harris-Stowe College; Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri], yes.  Yeah, it was in the same week or so that, that I graduated from law school, very profound week or two for us.  I graduated and my brother, Steven [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.], graduated from law school the same time--I'm sorry from college the same time and he was, he then of course went on to law school [Washington University School of Law, St. Louis, Missouri].  But, at the same time you know some thirty years later my mother graduated from college and she'd always been a teacher or teacher's assistance, but never had that degree, and she wanted to continue to pursue it and I mean here we are watching our mother all those years, you know, teach probably for less money because she didn't have the paper, but would do it anyway.  She had a passion for it, and then only to find that she graduates the same time we all graduated.  It was a, it was a great time for all of us and our family and it's, it's one to always remember and a great story to be told.
Story_ID: 544028
Speaker 1: And your, your children, now you've got four children and--
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: --two have finished law school right?
Speaker 2: Three.
Speaker 1: Three.
Speaker 2: No, there's--two finished, they went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  It's a boy, girl twin.  My son [Michael Roberts, Jr.] is working with us in the hotel group side [Roberts Hotels Group, LLC] after spending one year with a law firm, and my daughter [Jeanne Roberts Johnson] is continuing to stay with the law firm that represents us [Armstrong Teasdale LLP, St. Louis, Missouri] until she gets a level of expertise, and she's rapidly getting there and perhaps we'll bring her inside as inside counsel.  We have another daughter [Fallon Roberts] who recently graduated from, from law school [Pepperdine University School of Law, Malibu, California] and is moving in the area of finance and, and working in areas that's gonna help us as we're looking for bigger financing in case we put out a private offering or maybe even go back to an IPO [initial public offering], or, you know which is taking our companies public, running them together for, for our own public offering.  So, she's engaged in that and then my last daughter [Meaghan Roberts Johnson] just actually this week, I hate to date this piece like that, but she just started her final exams for her first year in law school.  So, in sports we'd call that four for four I guess.  All four will be legally trained and, and this is where the legacy kicks in, I think, because through that you know if they come into the business, fine, if not they're still going to have sort of the entrepreneurial spirit.  See, I used to be an entrepreneur, but now I'm not anymore.  Today I'm a cold blooded capitalist.  Now when I say cold blooded, you know for black folks we gotta understand when I use that word I use it in the, in the Rick James concept, you know, like, she's cold blooded (laughter).  A capitalist is one who really bases their mindset and their business for generations, and it builds long term legacy.  Entrepreneurs are very comfortable in making a living for their family and pretty much live and die with their vision and their plan.  The capitalist is gonna be more sustainable, more long term, more generational, and generational doesn't always mean your genes, even though that's the core of the word generation of genes.  It could mean anyone within our company or those who may be joining our company to carry on our vision and, and our direction.
Story_ID: 544029
Speaker 1: Now, do you still live in the neighborhood here?
Speaker 2: I do, I live one, one mile from, from the office here [Victor Roberts Building, St. Louis, Missouri], and my brother does.  My parents [Delores Talley Roberts and Victor Roberts] live one mile from the office, one north, one south.  We, we--this building we're in is only two blocks from where we were born, three blocks from where we were born.  We, we've always lived in the city.  We've always believed in the city, and, and, and we're urban people.  Yes, we have a very beautiful new, I built my home and Steve [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] has an older mansion.  They're, they're very lovely large properties, high profile, and people could drive by and say, "Hey a black man owns that."  That when they keep driving they'll tell you he owns that and he owns that.  I had somebody joke and he said, "We're gonna have to change the name from St. Louis [Missouri] to St. Roberts," or something like that (laughter) 'cause we, we are buying up our city big time.
Story_ID: 544030
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your wife.
Speaker 2: Jeanne, Jeanne Gore, Jeanne Gore Roberts.  Jeanne is a St. Louisan also, about three generations like me.  Her, her father [Herman W. Gore, Jr.] was a, a Baptist preacher.  Her grandfather [Herman W. Gore, Sr.] was as well.  They, they actually built a church, Christ's Southern Mission [Christ's Southern Mission Baptist Church, St. Louis, Missouri] that was occupying in an area called Mill Creek, and the Mill Creek area in St. Louis [Mill Creek Valley, St. Louis, Missouri] was ultimately wiped out.  It was where the core of black folks lived, and they were one of the last hold outs down there.  But ultimately they, they had to move, and my mother [Delores Talley Roberts] was a member of that church (laughter).  And here's a great story, my, my mother knew my wife's father and sort of knew them, belonged to the same church and sort of grew up with him.  My father [Victor Roberts], one of his best friends, was my wife's mother's side of the family, her uncle and of course he would have known her mother 'cause he'd hang out at their house.  So, my, you know her, my mother's people and her father's people were like family and friends and her mother's people and my father's people were like that before they even knew each other.  So, it was an interesting mix of families when we got married.  I mentioned earlier that she actually saw me on TV back when I was at the Democratic Convention in '76 [1976 Democratic National Convention, New York, New York] and was--'75 [1975] I guess it was, '76 [1976] was--so yeah, and so from that, you know, she actually was living in California for a while, Atlanta [Georgia] for a while, flight attendant--a schoolteacher, went to Harris-Stowe University [Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri] and, and as a licensed schoolteacher and taught here.  Eventually she was a flight attendant, came back.  We spent about three or four years, then we got married, and right after we got married we had the twins [Michael Roberts, Jr. and Jeanne Roberts Johnson].  But, she had a lot of courage 'cause she followed me down in the hood where I lived and you know for about ten years, so she was there about eight years with me, and she's a, she's now, she continued to teach for a little while and then eventually as a mother, then she pretty much didn't do anything like that.  She's been involved with producing some movies in California, and she's done a great job of being a mom to the kids and a good wife.  She's, she's a, she's a great lady, well, well liked, extremely liked by everybody and as I said you know we're, we will be celebrating our thirtieth anniversary in, in June of '08 [2008].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Thirty years.
Story_ID: 544031
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you think that we need to touch upon before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, one of the questions you asked earlier that comes to me is you know why did I write my book, 'Action Has No Season' ['Action Has No Season: Strategies and Secrets to Gaining Wealth and Authority,' Michael V. Roberts].  And, and the reason was I saw my kids coming out of school, heading in a direction, but have I written down anything that they could sort of use as a guideline and, and for, for building one's own persona, person, personality, et cetera.  And so I wrote the book with them in mind, but really all young people in mind.  As see when I was growing up, we didn't have that rich Uncle Goldstein, who came to dinner every Wednesday night and heard you know our parents [Delores Talley Roberts and Victor Roberts] talk about you know loans and business challenges and opportunities and so on.  We didn't have anything like that, not even close, and we weren't politicians and we weren't, you know, weren't business people.  So, I don't know where I got that from, but, but over time I developed it and these little strategies and secrets that I thought needed to be written, but they're really written for people coming out of school because how many times you know I see it over, over, and over, you see it over and over, you come out of school and you don't know what to do, you don't have anybody there to mentor you or guide you.  You really don't know anything, even though you might have a business degree.  Well, the book was written to sort of give you some thoughts, some strategies to, to sort of work through those moments when you have, you know, lapses in commitment to yourself and to what your dreams and aspirations are and to build you as an entrepre- as an entrepreneur or to build you in this case as an Actionaire.  I, I hope my word Actionaire makes it into Webster's Dictionary someday.  You know black folks get words in, but they're usually words like bling bling, bootylicious (laughter), so we want to get a, a more lofty intellectual word in for a change and hopefully somebody who is watching this might help the, the word get out.  It's a philosophical book with anecdotal support.  And so it's an easy read and, and it's one that every word meant something when I wrote it.  It was--and I wrote it.  I didn't have a ghost writer or anybody to assist.  And I published it of course, that's what an entrepreneur would do and a capitalist would do, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now when did your book come out?  In--
Speaker 2: My book came out in '04 [sic. 2005].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in fact we've done some revisions.  We will probably bring it out again in '08 [2008] with, with some additional work.
Story_ID: 544032
Speaker 1: The last question we ask is like legacy, but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the concepts of being remembered would apply to what I've done first of all.  I think that the remarkable feats in business is, is how we should be remembered.  I think we should be remembered though based on the totality of who we are.  I mean, am I a father of successful children, am I a husband, am I a businessman with a variety of successes, and have I built a pretty decent workforce, and is it sustainable, you see.  Can, can all of this be around after I'm gone, and if that's the case then I'd like to be remembered as a person who built a sustainable business, and an example for people coming along to what success is best defined.  So, if you open the dictionary and you see the word success, you might see my picture next to it.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Appreciate it.
Story_ID: 544033
Speaker 1: This picture is Michael Roberts [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.], me, on the right and of course as we face it on the left is my father, Victor Roberts.  I see I'm sporting some two tone shoes and have what appears to be a pretty cool teddy bear.
Speaker 2: Here I am chilling next to my father's car it appears.  That's probably in the early '50s [1950s], and I'm enjoying cars and I still do today.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother and my father and me.  Again, this is probably in the very early '50s [1950s]
Speaker 2: I did not become a football star, but I did enjoy it.  The house in the back is the house where we were basically born on Vernon Avenue in St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Obviously this is Michael Roberts as a, as an infant.  It looks like I couldn't even sit up.  They had me on a pillow, but I was always well dressed, very clean.  I, I'm not sure what that hairstyle was, but it looks like a baby Mohawk without cutting the rest of it (laughter).
Speaker 2: All right this is a high school class picture.  I would say this would be my senior year in high school at Northwest High School [St. Louis, Missouri].  I graduated in 1967.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my graduation day from law school.  This is in 1974.  As you could see, I was sporting a big time Afro, but I had my Juris Doctor stripes on, and I was very cool.  Saint Louis University School of Law [St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is the graduation day from Lindenwood College [Lindenwood College for Men; Lindenwood University, St. Charles, Missouri].  This would have been in June of 1971.  Still sporting that Afro.  Cute story is I didn't wear my robes on that day because I didn't really think I was, I, I wanted to remain a proletariat at the time.  But, once I got my doctorate stripes it made a difference.
Speaker 2: This is a picture, this is a, of college before my Afro, so I probably was about a sophomore or junior in college before I started growing my Afro.
Speaker 1: This is my brother Steve [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] and I receiving the walk of fame.  If you look at the bottom, you will see a plaque that's in the sidewalk, and we're holding our, our awards.  This is in the City of St. Louis.  I believe it's the Gateway Foundation [St. Louis Gateway Classic Sports Foundation, St. Louis, Missouri] awarded us with this honor.
Speaker 2: This is a photo of our boardroom where we're celebrating someone's birthday, and usually people speak.  From right to left, is Steve Roberts, my father, Victor Roberts, my son, Michael Roberts, Jr., and myself, all applauding somebody.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of one of our Christmases.  I would say this picture is about four years old, meaning it would probably be back around 2006.  From left to right are my kids.  At the top on the left is the youngest, Meaghan [Meaghan Roberts Johnson], then Fallon [Fallon Roberts], Michael, Jr., and Jeanne II, or Jeanne, Jr. [Jeanne Roberts Johnson], and of course my wife.  Jeanne [Jeanne Gore Roberts] is below and I'm to the, to the left of Jeanne.  And the picture is taken in my home and actually that's a fairly recent picture, probably more like 2006.  The mural in the back is above our couch in our home.
Speaker 2: This is a shot from one of the holidays.  Again, it's at my house.  Every year we have a Christmas party at my home.  We do all the cooking.  My brother, Steven, is on the right, Mark [Mark Roberts] is in the middle, our younger brother, we have a sister after Mark, and then myself.
Speaker 1: We have a home in the Bahamas.  It's called the Roberts Castle On The Beach, and I bet you can't guess what this is.  This is in Nassau [Bahamas].  The ocean is off to the right and the street is right there to the left.  That's a complete compound with ten bedrooms and eight, eight bathrooms, a swimming pool, an outdoor Jacuzzi, and 150 feet of porch and deck right next to the river--I mean next to the, to the ocean right near Nassau, Cable Beach they call it.
Speaker 2: This is just another office party shot where my dad is now speaking.  Based on where I am it's probably my birthday and he's, he's saying some things.  My son, next to my son is Bobby Tate, our HR [human resources] vice president, Michael States who heads up our building ma- maint- management.
Speaker 1: This is just another picture again, my son is, he must have just said something similar to my father who had spoken, he's off to the right, and we're shaking hands, Mike, Sr., Mike, Jr.
Speaker 2: One of the fun things that we would do every year as members of the National Brotherhood of Skiers, which is a group of black skiers, this is my friend Christopher Smith [Christopher Smith, Sr.] who was my college roommate, fellow acolyte at All Saints Episcopal Church [St. Louis, Missouri].  (Unclear), he was an Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], I'm a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], and that's us posing for a shot in Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] outfits.  We were both--he's a lawyer as well, we were both representing Anheuser-Busch at the Black Ski Summit [Black Summit].  Five thousand black skiers to seven thousand black skiers at a given location.  I think this must be Steamboat Springs [Colorado].
Speaker 1: This is a Thanksgiving family shot a few years ago probably around 2005 or '6 [2006].  In the family to the right is my brother, Steve, his wife, Eva, Dr. Eva Frazer, my wife next to her, my sister Lori [Lori Roberts] at the bottom, Steve's kids as younger ages from right to left is Steven, Jr. [Steven Roberts, Jr.], Christian [Christian Roberts], Darci [Darci Roberts], then my daughter, Jeanne, coming up above her is my daughter, Meaghan, me, as you can see my mustache, so that was probably about 2003 or '2 [2002], Fallon, and then Michael, and then in the middle in the sort of red/pink tone is my mother, Delores [Delores Talley Roberts] and my father, Victor Roberts.
Speaker 2: This is a piece of campaign literature.  This is a piece of campaign--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: --campaign literature when I ran for president of Board of Aldermen in 1987 and, and this was an interest campaign 'cause we lost by very few votes and it led to the first voting rights case [Roberts v. Wamser, 1989] outside of the South.  The picture in the middle is me with Prince Charles of England [Charles, Prince of Wales] and shaking hands with him.  The bottom left is President Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], and the bottom right is Senator Eagleton [Thomas Eagleton], and at the top of left to right is "Stan the Man" Musial [Stan Musial], [HistoryMaker] Wayman Smith, Whitey Ford, and myself.  As we up this up--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: My piece of literature, but it's symbolic of some pictures.  On the far left, it's my brother Steve and I are both on the Board of Aldermen one where we're seating looking over some legislation and then we're walking down the steps of city hall [St. Louis City Hall, St. Louis, Missouri].  On the upper right is Duncan Bauman [G. Duncan Bauman] who was the editor and publisher of the then Globe newspaper [St. Louis Globe-Democrat], which is no longer the case, myself.  The gentleman who is chairman and CEO of Emerson Electric [Emerson Electric Company], Chuck Knight [Charles F. Knight], and then next to him was August Busch III.  Now in the center is just a variety of pictures where I'm giving speeches and the top I'm doing those interview and giving a variety of speeches at, at different other locations, shaking hands with the chief of the police on one side and the Catholic priest on the other, Cervantes [Alfonso J. Cervantes].  In the lower right hand is when we were fighting to try to keep a black hospital open, and I took my son with me, Mike, Jr., so that's him riding my shoulders as we were organizing in the community to keep the then Homer G. Phillips Ho- Hospital [Homer G. Phillips Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri] open.  And if you flip it, there's a family shot of--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a shot the family man.  Again these are my kids, Fallon, Jeanne, Michael, and Meaghan, and my wife Jeanne and I on the steps at our home.  It was a shot used in the piece.  You can see the age of the kids.  So, they've been in politics all their lives.  They, they don't know any different.  So I was the alderman when the first two were born, the twins, Michael and Jeanne.
Story_ID: 544034
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my grandmother, my father's mother, Edna Locke Roberts [ph.], and she's on the front right as we face it.
Speaker 2: Right here?
Speaker 1: Yes.  And then, then she has three sisters that are shown here as well.
Speaker 2: (VICTOR ROBERTS):  And this is at the funeral of the older sister.
Speaker 1: And, and this is actually at the funeral of their oldest sister.  How many were there?
Speaker 2: (VICTOR ROBERTS):  There were six girls.
Speaker 1: There were six girls total, no boys.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right this is my father's father, my grandfather, Squire Victor Roberts.  He was a physician, born in West Point, Mississippi, a graduate of Meharry medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] in 1909.  He died at a very early age.  My father was only sixteen at the time of, of his death, but he was a well known individual in the community, one of the few in St. Louis [Missouri], and this is a shot of his obituary.  As you can see, it was Friday, October the 4th, 1940.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right this is a picture of my father, Victor Roberts, at the age of six, and his sister Marion [Marion Roberts], who was three years old I believe.  She was age nine.  And this is their mother, Edna Locke Roberts.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: From the left to the right if you-
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: William Locke [ph.] is the, is the grandfather of my father, Victor Roberts, my great-grandfather.  And seated next to him to the right is his wife, Ella--
Speaker 2: (VICTOR ROBERTS):  Anna Harwell Locke [ph.].
Speaker 1: Anna Harwell Locke, and this would be my father's mother's parents.  She's also pictured in the, in the photograph right above her mother in the center, and that would be Edna Locke, now Ro- Roberts.  And the balance of the picture would be their children and grandchildren.  All of these would be my relatives on my father's mother's side of the family.  And they were all in Selmer, Tennessee, and Jackson, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: (VICTOR ROBERTS):  Alabama Harwell [ph.], Harwell.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Alabama Harwell who was a slave.  She is the, my father's great-grandmother, my great-great-grandmother.  Again, they were in Tennessee.  We're gonna show you a picture of her husband who was, I'm sorry who, who--the slave master who impregnated her to create, who was the, who fathered the two girls, one of which was my, my great-grandmother, my father's grandmother.  And--okay let's get this straight.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is my great-great-grandmother.  She, she fathered, she, she was, she had two daughters and, and, and, Nora [ph.] and Anna, and Anna is the, is the mother of my father's mother.  Now--let's turn the page.  Now remember she was a slave, okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right.  This is a picture of Robert Bruce Turner [ph.].  Robert Bruce Turner was my great-great-grandfather.  He was a slave owner, and he was the one that fathered the two girls, one of which was my father's grandmother.  So, ultimately down the road this is one of the slave stories of America where he actually had two daughters by a slave woman and that would have been my great-great-great-grandmother [sic. great-great-grandmother].
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my first car.  It was a TR3 [Triumph TR3].  That was my second year of college.  My brother Steven [HistoryMaker Steven Roberts, Sr.] is sitting next to me.  He's getting influence already by his older brother.  My daddy wouldn't buy me a car, but he said I could buy one if I could pay for it, so I had to work three jobs that summer to try to pay for that car.  And I'm sorry that's not Steve, that's Mark [Mark Roberts].  Mark is ten years younger than I am.  I guess Steve would have been, well only two people could sit in the car at the time (laughter), but I was cool.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Steve, his son Christian [Christian Roberts], Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], Steven, Jr. [Steven Roberts, Jr.], and, and myself, Michael Roberts [HistoryMaker Michael Roberts, Sr.].  We had a fundraiser for Barack in St. Louis, and as you could see we're continuing to introduce the next generation to some politics.  Barack left this particular event and went over to Steve's house and ran on his treadmill and hung out at his house for a few hours.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Mike Roberts, me.  I would guess this would have been, I was six months old, so it would be 1949.  It would be May of, just six months after I was born, which was October 24th, 1948.
Speaker 2: This is a picture a little older.  I was about a little over a year at this age, Michael Roberts.  Look at that hair.  What happened to it?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISUCSSION)
Speaker 2: All right this is a picture of--we had a great, it was a tradition we always had pictures of us with Santa Claus and every year we would get a picture like this.  This is Steven and I.  He's about six months old.  I'm three and a half years older than he is, so this is 1952 Christmas with Santa Claus.
Speaker 1: What year is that?  And now this is with Santa Claus.  By now Mark is on the scene.  This is 1958 and it's Steven to the left, Mark of course is being held by Santa Claus, and I'm still looking over all of their shoulders as I continue to even today.
Speaker 2: Father was the charter member of Beta Nu chapter of Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] in St. Louis, which was founded in '42 [1942], February of '42 [1942], 1942.  I pledged Kappa Alpha Psi Beta Nu.  Steve pledged Chi chapter in Boston [Massachusetts], and my son, Michael [Michael Roberts, Jr.], who's to the left pledged at Beta Nu.  So, you have three generations of Kappas here, three generations that actually pledged right here in St. Louis at the Beta Nu chapter.  So, the national journal of Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Journal] did a feature on us in April of 19--'02 [2002] where we're on the front page and complete story about the family and our different businesses.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That, this is a picture of my ship with, with, with me second down in line.  You see they made us shave our heads and this is the end of hell week.  This is the night of our induction.
