Story_ID: 59185
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns and sir could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Joseph D. R-O-U-L-H-A-C, Joseph D. Roulhac.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: August 18, 1916.
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Selma, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: The day is the second of August 2002.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Akron, Ohio at 381 Sun Valley Drive, Akron, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired judge now and of course over the years I've been a school teacher and dish washer and just about everything in the book.
Story_ID: 59186
Speaker 1: Okay now before we get into depth sir, there are five more light weight People magazinish type questions I'm compelled to ask you.  The first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is for breakfast, dinner or lunch?  My favorite food would be--oh I like chicken yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite season of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Florida
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have several so it would be hard to think which would be my favorite.
Speaker 1: Well can you give us one of them?
Speaker 2: Do your best.
Story_ID: 59187
Speaker 1: Alright, let's talk about your beginnings and your background.  Can you give us the name of your mother and her birth date and her birth place and can you spell her name for us?
Speaker 2: The maiden name of my mother was Minerva Rhodes, R-H-O-D-E-S, M-I-N-E-R-V-A, Minerva Rhodes.  I don't know when she was born but I think she was--she thinks she was probably born in Florida.
Speaker 1: I think you speculated that she was born in 1889-- (unclear).
Speaker 2: 1889, I don't remember that but I got that from one of the Roulhac books there.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1889.  What about your father?  Can you give us his name and where he was--(unclear)?
Speaker 2: His name was Robert Daniel--I think Robert Daniel R-O-U-L-H-A-C.  He was born in Florida, I don't remember the exact date but about 1885, something.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your--did either one of your parents have stories about their parents or ancestors that--and how far can they go back.  How far can your family go back, can they go back to pre-Civil war or do they remember?
Speaker 2: My mother doesn't have any remembrance.  She was, her mother passed when she was just a small girl and the story goes that at the cemetery when they buried my mother's mother that one of the members of the community said they would take her.  So she went with Mama Aggie.  So that's where and how Mama Aggie comes in but she doesn't know anything further than that, other than some years after she was married she received the deed to some property in Florida which had not been administered and her brother's--was the first time when she learned of a brother who was an engineer on one of the railroads there in Florida.
Speaker 1: What part of Florida?
Speaker 2: That was in Goulds, Florida which is about twenty miles south of Miami.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Goulds?
Speaker 2: G-O-U-L-D-S
Story_ID: 59188
Speaker 1: What about your father?  Can he recall?
Speaker 2: Well now my father--quite a number of Roulhacs.  The Roulhacs are traced or he was able to trace his beginning from the time when the Roulhac slave owner came with his slaves into Jackson County in Florida.  That was in the early '80s [1880s].  So he's able to trace back that far and his growing up in--around Marianna, Florida and working for the--I can't think there's a store there now.  I can't think of anything.  The Daffins [Food Service] so that connected him--plants his being there in Marianna, Florida so it's quite a number of Roulhacs still around that area.
Speaker 1: Around Marianna?
Speaker 2: Marianna, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's the hometown of the famous Timothy Thomas fortune.  I don't know if you ever heard of him but he's from Marianna, Florida.
Speaker 2: No I have-- (unclear).
Speaker 1: That's completely extraneous to this discussion but--tell me about the Roulhacs in that part of the country.  Did they pass down any stories about things that happened to them around that part of the country?  Did they have stories about where they were when slavery ended and during reconstruction and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I don't know of any of those direct stories but from the time of my daddy was able to get that information and as we usually go to Florida each year, we hear some who have stories of what has happened, when it happened and so forth.  But my daddy was--worked for the Daffins who were famous people there in the market and they had a big department store and feed stores and so forth and he was one of the favorites of the Daffins and just at the family reunion last month in Detroit, Roulhac family reunion of that section of the Roulhacs, I heard that my daddy, of course black, had preached at the white church there way before-many, many years ago because the Daffins wanted to hear him preach and that was the information I got but other information as to his going to school there and leaving Marianna [Florida] going to Pensacola [Florida] working on one of the--working for someone--a loading company which did unloading of the ships and so forth and the influence and the impact of the Presbyterian women.  They would carry--they would take catechism on Sunday afternoon for the blacks and they tried to get him to go to Stillman Institute [now Stillman College] which was a Presbyterian school up at Tuscaloosa, Alabama but he didn't want to go to school, he wanted to work.  So he worked--working loading a ship and I understand that on this particular night they wanted to get the ship out to avoid dunnage and one of the persons who was carrying--pushing one of those carts had run overboard but they didn't stop to look for him.  They wanted to get the ship out.  So the next day he went to the Presbyterian Church and told them he would go to Stillman.  So then at that early age he went to Stillman Institute where they'd give you training and he became a Presbyterian minister and was a Presbyterian minister for fifty five years.
Speaker 1: Now can you spell Daffin for me?
Speaker 2: D-A-F-F-I-N, Daffin, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's the family that had him speak at the church?  So he became a Presbyterian-- (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Presbyterian minister and he pastored church for twenty five years in Selma, Alabama, Sylvan Street Presbyterian Church and the church in Macon and Columbus, Georgia for about two years and about three years at the Brown Memorial Presbyterian Church at Tuscaloosa, Alabama and for about twenty five years at the Second Presbyterian Church in Thomasville, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay so he had a long career as a minister?
Speaker 2: Yeah, fifty-five years very successful minister; very effective and quite a favorite pastor.
Story_ID: 59189
Speaker 1: Now what did your mother do?
Speaker 2: My mother was a teacher but after we left Selma she didn't teach anymore.  She raised--we had eight brothers and sisters. Let me see.  There were six boys and two girls.
Speaker 1: And you're number five on the--?
Speaker 2: Number five yeah.  That would be four brothers before me and one sister--let me, four brothers, see I'm number six--no no, one, two, three, four before me, I was the fifth then I had a sister and twin brothers below me--younger than I.  So there are four of us still living.
Speaker 1: So you grew up in several different places?
Speaker 2: Yes
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in the south and they're all in the south so and the different places that you lived that you can remember.
Speaker 2: Well in Selma, Alabama I can remember the school--walking to school.  We lived on Sylvan Street, 1939 Sylvan Street in Selma, Alabama.  I remember the area where we lived; I remember a fire in a house not too far from us.  We had a view of an open field, a blacksmith shop.  In those days, you know, a blacksmith was quite a personality in the community.  I remember walking to the school and working around the yard and the two beautiful big fig trees and I remember those early days. We left Selma when I was about eight years old.
Speaker 1: Now the blacksmith was important because a lot of people were still on horseback then?
Speaker 2: Well no I didn't see much horseback riding there, they were--that was about--I was born in 1916 so we didn't see too much horseback riding although folks in that area had horses but he would do work for wheels for wagons and I can remember the fire that the shop and pounding of the irons and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay now when you all left Selma then you went to--?
Speaker 2: To Columbus, Georgia, we lived on Second Avenue in Columbus, Georgia.  We were there about a year and half and then after Columbus I can remember we were just about a half a mile from the Chattahoochee River.  I can remember walking down to the river and walking to school and to church and around the neighborhood and kind of learning about getting away and looking around the cities and so forth.
Story_ID: 59190
Speaker 1: Okay what kind of things did you like to do when you were a little boy?
Speaker 2: Well we used to--I used to fly kite and climb the tree, fig trees and any tree you could get to.  We used to play house, play doctor, play hospital and the usual games of the community and around and watching what other people were doing.  The folks who lived next to us were--had children and you'd look through the fence and see what they were doing.  You would play with them on the--in the alley and it was always something to be done.
Speaker 1: Alright, what kind of things did your parents teach you when you were coming up?  Do you remember what kind of rules they had?
Speaker 2: Well one thing we had family altar, that is in the morning before we got out--before we started there was prayer and the reciting of scripture so we learned early to recite passages, scriptures, the different Psalms.  Twenty third Psalms, oh, many many Psalms--much much scripture and the same thing at night was usually a prayer.  So we called that the family altar and of course my dad was a strict, constructionist and he wanted you to do what's right, to complete, and to not be afraid to help.  So in the neighborhood we learned early and were sent out to rake the yard, to cut grass and to help people.  Go shopping for them and to just be helpful around the house.  Many people were widows and people who were in need of help so we--I and the other children and with the children of the neighborhood just made ourselves real solid citizens in the early life.
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's something that's not really done today in the cities, the north especially.  Sometimes neighbors don't know each other, it's hardly any of that kind--
Speaker 2: Yes that kind of passing of the old generation.  I'll be eighty six on August--week after next.  Today is the second so fourteen more days, August eighteenth, August, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen more days, yeah.
Story_ID: 59191
Speaker 1: So what kind of a little boy were you when you were young?  What did you think about and what did people think about you?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I had a positive image around the neighborhood.  I didn't bother anybody and I wasn't disciplined for any behavioral problems.  I'd get a spanking now and then but I had a pretty good reputation.  I got along well with my brothers and sisters, and the neighbors and I'm going to say I would get an A plus.
Speaker 1: Well speaking of an A plus, how did you do in school.  Did you like school and where did you go to school?  Can you remember the names--?
Speaker 2: Yes well I went to my daddy's school in Selma, Alabama before we left there when I was about nine.
Speaker 1: Your daddy had a school?
Speaker 2: Yeah at the church, at Sylvan Street Presbyterian Church.  We had a church school there and I was in about second or third grade when I left then I went to Columbus--we went to Columbus, Georgia and so I went to the public school there for about a year and a half and I didn't flunk out of those years but was a good student.  I did my homework and we had slates.  You know what a slate is?
Speaker 1: I might know but the people listening to this tape might not know.
Speaker 2: Well a slate was a piece of material, they called it slate.  I think that came from the mines and you had a slate--
Speaker 1: Like a chalk board?
Speaker 2: You had a chalk and then you would write on that slate and wipe it out.  So that was your tablet.  So that was my writing.  So I did pretty good in school, I didn't flunk out.
Speaker 1: So this is like--was the Presbyterian school in Selma the only school--the only black school in Selma?
Speaker 2: Well that's the only one I knew about but there was a public school there.  They had another school, Knox Academy it was run by one of the religious groups, I don't know whether it was Baptist or Methodist but I can remember Knox Academy and then they had Selma University which had a school but I don't remember even knowing where they were located during my time.  But I knew of the schools and heard about them.
Speaker 1: The school in Columbus, Georgia that was a public school?
Speaker 2: That was a public school.
Speaker 1: That was a black school, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yes indeed, that was a black school.  We lived on Second Avenue and on one side of us was a white family lived and on the other side was the Tallys.  They had several children who were good students and their parents--one of the parents was a teacher and one worked for the Post Office.
Story_ID: 59192
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher in school or did certain teachers inspire you or was there anything special about it?
Speaker 2: Well at different times at different levels you were impressed by them and had favorite teachers.  In my school in Thomasville, Georgia I went to a school there which was known as Allen Normal School which was sponsored by the American Missionary Association.  That was the same school which had founded Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama] and they had several schools.  One was at Thomasville, Georgia, Allen Normal school, A-L-L-E-N, N-O-R-M-A-L school.  They went from about--I think they had a nursery there and it went to high school and it was a tremendous school but most of the teachers there were whites.  They came down from New England and one of my favorite teachers was Mrs. Grace Caruthers [ph.] and she was pounding on me always on the idea of doing your very, very best.  She would just go out of her way, I think, the word that I learned later was she was supererogatious in her efforts to impress and you just wanted to always be out front and do your very best and she encouraged that by when she would go on vacation she would bring back pictures of items and tell you about them, long before the television and radio.  I remember a time--I think I knew of two radios in the whole city of our associates in Georgia who had a radio.  She would bring back pictures of the Rose Bowl Parades and all of that so it just made you want to get out and see some of these things and to enjoy them and to appreciate them.  So it gave you a longing to learn all you could and to do what you could from time to time.
Speaker 1: That was more important in those days than kids now in the sense that people have television now and other ways of looking at the rest of the world almost constantly.  But in those days in you were in a country town--a small town you were isolated.
Speaker 2: I remember in Thomasville [Georgia] we had radio but we couldn't get news, it wouldn't turn on, you couldn't get anything until about midnight; Paul Sullivan from Cincinnati [Ohio].  You ever heard that name?  Paul Sullivan was a reporter, you could get the news about eleven o'clock at night but that was if the radio was not acting up and you poured enough water on the ground.  The ground connection you could get those television, those radio programs.
Speaker 1: When you were in grade school did you have any idea of what you wanted to do career wise with the rest of your life?
Speaker 2: I wanted from about the time I was ten years old at our church in Columbus, Georgia was a lawyer--black--well of course that was in Columbus, Georgia a lawyer named Lawyer Oaks.  He was the treasurer of our church, a very fine robust black gentleman.  He had a great voice and I knew him to be a lawyer so then I wanted to be a lawyer from way back there from about the age of ten or eleven.  And of course, Lawyer Oaks' daughter is in Akron now.  She's been retired for a good number of years but she is in Akron, Ohio and she's a member of our church, Centenary United Methodist Church.  But that was my first longing and person who impressed me to be a lawyer.
Story_ID: 59193
Speaker 1: Okay now where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Well I went to the high school at Allen Normal School in Thomasville, Georgia but I finished when the funds for the American Missionary Association closed down.  They closed down the school; I went to Stillman Institute at Tuscaloosa, Alabama which was a Presbyterian religious school there at Tuscaloosa.  So I finished high school at Stillman Institute High School at Tuscaloosa, Alabama in about 1933,'34-1934.
Speaker 1: So tell me about high school.  What kind of activities were you involved in, in high school?
Speaker 2: I don't remember anything.  I didn't play any sports because I don't remember any organized sports being--oh at Allen Normal School in Georgia there I played football and we went to several cities, Valdosta and Bainbridge and some of those other cities around to play football.  I didn't make the baseball team but they had a baseball team at Allen Normal.  At Stillman in high school, I didn't participate in--I don't think they had any teams, just a building where we had around three classes, eighth, ninth and tenth or tenth, eleventh and twelfth grade in one room but got a pretty good education at Stillman Institute.
Speaker 1: Did they have a music program or did you play an instrument, could you--?
Speaker 2: No I don't remember any instrument or anything sponsored by the school but there were students there--members of the school who were taking music and singing and so forth in connection with the college courses.  Stillman was a junior college so the folks who were, they were older now in those years than they are now.  So they were easily blended in and participated with the junior college students at Stillman Institute in those days; now it's Stillman College, a four year institution.
Story_ID: 59194
Speaker 1: I wanted you do just recap that again.  Now you were at Stillman [Institute], you finished high school and you went to junior college there.
Speaker 2: At Stillman, yeah.
Speaker 1: You were trying to save money to go to Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] so let's get that on tape.
Speaker 2: Well at Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] I went to--after I finished high school, I went back to Stillman for two years because I didn't have money to go to Lincoln but I could go to Stillman [Institute, Tuscaloosa, Alabama].  My dad was a Presbyterian minister and he got a special dispensation for the minister's children.  So I went back and when the junior college--I attended junior college I had to get money to send to Lincoln [University] because each year they had sent me a letter of admission but they needed some advancement money to see whether they should reserve spaces for me and place it.  So the last--so the year after I finished junior college that summer, I went to--went back home and the morning I got on the train, I went to the factory.  I took a letter with me and asked the gentleman, I can't remember his name now, to advance me $35.00 to send to Lincoln and I showed them the letter and he wanted to take the letter home.  So he took the letter home and a couple of days later he came back and gave me the $35.00 and he said that he was interested in that letter because he thought the letter was wrong, that one of the paragraphs was too long and he took it home and his daughter who had recently graduated from Duke [University] said there was nothing wrong with that letter, that must be a mighty good school.  So he came back and gave me $35.00 and he was to take out some money each week and I would remind him that he didn't take it out but then he'd say well I'll get to it but he never got to it and when I got to where I could pay him he was deceased.  His wife told me that he never intended to collect on that $35.00.  So that was a great fellowship and underwriting in those days and it was a critical difference in my educational progress.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now--
Story_ID: 59195
Speaker 1: Now how did you find Lincoln University [Pennsylvania], was it what you expected it to be?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, Lincoln [University] was where I was happy that I went because it was at Lincoln that I learned so much.  I learned that I had so far to go because I was just, so much I hadn't learned but I was willing to learn.  I had one experience, I tell, there's had been some articles written about it but I think it's important.  In those days people were being shipped back from Philadelphia, New York and from up north because they caught pneumonia and all kinds of diseases and so forth but one of the things was pneumonia.  So my brother was working with G. [George] Wilson Becton.  Have you ever heard of G. Wilson Becton who was a great evangelist?  So I said to him my brother and asked him to see what clothes the folks didn't want and shoes and so forth that the people didn't want and they--he sent a box down and in the box was some spats see this was in 1936.  You know what spats are?
Speaker 1: Now tell--for those who don't know, tell them.
Speaker 2: Spats were those were kind of covering for the shoes and you button them, you wrapped them around the foot and around the top of the shoe and button them up.
Speaker 1: Generally white, right?
Speaker 2: They were colored and I remember these were brown spats.  So when I got up to Lincoln [University], I'd never been any further north than Atlanta, Georgia.  So when I got up to Lincoln, I wanted to make sure that they didn't send me back to Georgia in a box and one morning and being at Lincoln they were quite class conscious in terms of the freshman, junior, senior, sophomore.  But I could go into--I was a junior at Lincoln and I went into the junior room but it was kind of cool that morning I thought.  Right up from South Georgia and I dressed and the one thing that I put on was those spats.  I had taken those spats and cleaned them up with gasoline and so forth.  So I put those spats on and stepped on in through the dining room and the fellows in the dining room were looking and laughing and getting the attention of the other folks and looking at him.  So that was a--one of the members of the dining hall who was one of the students came over and told me to pull them damn things off and I didn't know who he was or anything but I could tell that I wasn't going the right road so I went up and pulled those spats off and came back and laughed with them.  But that was one of the things I learned but it was no more than just a cool morning but I was conscious of it.  But at Lincoln I learned so much.  I ran into people from everywhere.
Story_ID: 59196
Speaker 1: From Africa, Nkrumah was a good person whom I met and we were fraternity brothers, Phi Beta Sigma fraternity and others from all across the country.
Speaker 2: Now that's very important.  He becomes the first president--
Speaker 1: The first president of Ghana, yes.
Speaker 2: It was the first independent West African country in 1956.
Speaker 1: Yes
Speaker 2: Osagyefo Kwame Nkrumah
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Now you knew him as--?
Speaker 1: Francis Nkrumah, yeah.  I met him some years later Azikiwe, Benny Azikiwe [Benjamin Nnamdi Azikiwe] you probably heard of him.
Speaker 2: Azikiwe, first president of Nigeria.
Speaker 1: Yeah so but that was a part of my learning and my experience.  I had a lot of experiences at Lincoln and of course, I had so much to learn.  I had a question which seriously gave me concern was the way the students were speaking.  They boys from Boston were talking Boston, the boys from Philly were talking Philly and the boys from Jersey were talking Jersey and it just upset me.  But I--Lincoln was all men at that time but Chaney Teachers College came over to play Lincoln men and they had a dance that night and I went up to one of the girls who was a student at Chaney and asked her for this round, may I have this round.  So she took hold of my hand and held on them and just laughed and laughed and she said I'm not laughing at you, I'm laughing at what you said.  She said here they ask for this dance but I didn't know, down in Georgia we said you know, may I have this round and of course as we began talking I was telling her that I was just not doing too well because I was being upset and kind of confused by the talking and I just figured that to be successful, I should change my talk.  I can see it now, she said don't you dare do something like that.  I haven't changed since.  But that was fine and you know you don't have to go to some big university or professors or somebody to help you, just the person you are talking to, the person who is next to you or around the corner, the person who you come in contact with can solve so many of our problems and that was a big problem in that day.
Speaker 2: So she's just basically telling you to be yourself and to understand what other people are doing but be yourself.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's important.  Tell me just going back a minute to Nnamdi Azikiwe, Kwame Nkrumah did you have any sense at that time that they were going to be great.  Were they just other students to you?
Speaker 1: Well no I don't remember anything touching you out, other than the fact, now this I remember very well because one of the vacation times, I had no money to go anywhere.  I was there and some girls came out from Philadelphia to view the campus and someone called me and said that there was some girls there that they wanted me to show them around the campus and Nkrumah lived on the next floor--.
Speaker 2: So you were showing these girls around campus--.
Speaker 1: So I knew Nkrumah was there so I went and knocked on his door and told him we had some girls from Philadelphia, do you want to show them around and he said no thank you that he had about seven books and several Hershey bars and that was going to take his time.  But it indicated that Nkrumah was quite a scholar and he believed in reading and learning and he was very alert.
Speaker 2: So he was a very serious student?
Speaker 1: Yes
Story_ID: 59197
Speaker 1: What else about Lincoln?  Who were some of the outstanding professors there when you were there?
Speaker 2: One of my professors, a professor in sociology was Dr. Labare, L-A-B-A-R-E.  He lived just on the--on U.S 1 used to come right by Lincoln and right through the campus, he lived there and he was professor of sociology.  So then I got a chance to work around his house and for his wife then washed dishes and be around and that was one of my favorite professors.  But there was a professor on the faculty there Lawrence Foster a black professor, Dr. Labare was white.  Dr. Lawrence Foster you will probably run into him in the black history series.  He had two PhDs.  He was from Mississippi and of course anytime you see a Lincoln man who was there during the time of Dr. Foster will always tell you that they called him Shabby because of the way he dressed and he just wouldn't pay much attention to it but he was a tremendous influence on students to do your best and to not let anybody out do you, no more than you knew.  He was the person who negotiated after I finished in 1938; he heard that I was going to be a preacher.  My dad was a preacher so Lincoln had a very fine seminary then and I was to take seminary courses to teach a couple of courses in sociology and to work and to go to the University of Pennsylvania where I started my work for my doctorate in sociology.  So that was my assignment in the year after my graduation from Lincoln in 1938, 1938, 1939.  So that's what my assignment was.
Story_ID: 59198
Speaker 1: So how did you--what was the University of Pennsylvania like?  Were there very many black students there?
Speaker 2: Not too many black students there.  I went there after graduating from Lincoln in 1938 and that was the summer session.  There were none in any of the classes I took but there were not too many students there at the University of Pennsylvania.  Most students who were black students, I understand, were up at Temple University but not at Penn.  There were some teachers there who were coming from down south and from Richmond [Virginia] and so forth but I understood that the folks in that time were going to Columbia University up in New York but not at Penn.
Speaker 1: So were you lonely there or did you--?
Speaker 2: No, I stayed in the dormitory down there.  Penn had those famous dormitories, I stayed in the dormitory there and worked hard and studied hard and of course one of my teachers was the famous James H.S. [Herbert Siward] Bossard who wrote the book 'The Problem of Poverty'.  You see, that was back in 1938 and the problems of poverty and--
Speaker 1: Can you spell his name?
Speaker 2: B-O-S-S-A-R-D, James H.S. Bossard, Jr.  He wrote the book now and of course it would be good the folks who are talking about poverty and problems of poverty and what poverty is.  And of course, one of the things you learned in Dr. Bossard's class was, what was the definition of poverty.  I can remember from those years poverty is the socio economic insufficiency based on the present standard of living involving a definite pattern of living and extending over a period of time.  Now if the politicians and the educators and the students will learn that definition they will find that it will pass the test.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's different from what most people think.
Speaker 2: Yes because it's socio economic insufficiency based on the present standard of living and extending over a period of time.  It's quite a challenge; quite a definition.
Speaker 1: It's not just like--it's not just like being poor right now; that's a deprivation that's a condition that's stretched out over a period of time.
Speaker 2: Yeah based on the socio economic condition.
Speaker 1: So you can be--it's not just the economic condition you are in but the social condition you're in as well.
Speaker 2: That's true you see and that's being over--attacking that whole problem now from the president and the senators and legislators and so forth are far off, you see.  The rich are getting richer, the poor are getting poorer and they--it's a real mess.
Story_ID: 59199
Speaker 1: So you received your masters at--?
Speaker 2: I received a masters at the University [of Pennsylvania] in 1940 and of course it was just after that time and--yeah after that time that Julian Bond's daddy, Horace Bond was the president of Fort Valley State College. He approached me and some of the younger scholars around the country.  So we flooded into Fort Valley State College.  I went in 1940 in sociology--professor in sociology and was there for one year.  After that time he indicated that they had indicated that they didn't want me back at Fort Valley.  I was outspoken against--the big thing in those days was segregation and the governor--he wore red suspenders, what's his name, Talmadge, Governor [Eugene] Talmadge, you ever heard of him?  He was segregation now, segregation forever.  But I didn't get back to Fort Valley [State College] after that one year and then of course, they indicated that when school was out the next day I was to report to the army because they were drafting folks and I didn't report back to the army, I went back to Philadelphia and got a year's extension and didn't go into the army until May 1942.
Speaker 1: Now just to go back a second to Fort Valley State, that was a state school in Georgia?
Speaker 2: That was one of the state schools.
Speaker 1: That's why it was so sensitive for you to talk against segregation in a segregationist state.  Even Horace Mann Bond couldn't keep you on the faculty.
Speaker 2: No he told me that they had suggested that (unclear). He told me you won't be back, you know.  So that's okay with me.  That was 1941 so that was alright.  But of course the big thing was you see we had done the registering and going for the draft board, getting people registered throughout the county and throughout the backwoods, Peach County [Georgia] and that area of folks to be drafted.  You were not born in that time, were you?  Those were terrible times.
Story_ID: 59200
Speaker 1: So did the students at Fort Valley State--were they really willing to discuss the conditions of black people in Georgia?  Were they anxious to discuss--?
Speaker 2: I think they were conscious of the fact that things could be and should be getting better.  The idea was that you didn't have anybody hitting it like Martin Luther King came along later.  You had the different orators and so forth coming around on what you could do, when you could do it and so forth like this.  But you know in those days that was when they were lynching people and you wanted to eat regularly, you wanted to be around so folks would be concerned and you would hear sermons and all of that.  You were hoping that by and by things would be better after awhile.  So you were living-
Speaker 1: Sounds like a sermon.
Speaker 2: Yeah but you were living that things will be better, will be and you can make it so.  That was the idea of Lincoln and the idea that I'd learned earlier that just do your best to attack it and of course in those years you got some encouragement always from the whites.  There were whites who would lynch you and that kind of thing but you saw indications here and there.  See, take my instance of the $35.00 advance to go to Lincoln.  Folks trying to borrow money that was something.  See that was about the time the banks you know went broke on folk's money and paid them two cent on a dollar, three cent on a dollar, four cent on a dollar.  That was after [Herbert] Hoover--after Hoover came [Franklin D.] Roosevelt and the minimum wage as I remember back in about 1935 in 1935 the minimum wage was about thirty eight cents an hour and then when the billboards and signboards down there, they were talking about lynching the president who was President [Franklin] Roosevelt because he wanted to raise the minimum wage to thirty eight cents an hour.  You could get all the help you wanted for ten cent an hour, fifteen cent an hour because people would say my mother works for Mr. X and she brings home three dollars a week and a crooked arm.  You've heard of the crooked arm haven't you?
Speaker 1: No I haven't, that's the first time I've ever heard that phrase.
Speaker 2: Well if you ask a person, you say what do you mean by a crooked arm?  Well that was when you cooked for the family--the white family at the end of the day, the leftovers and food you had stacked away for you to take home; you would put that in a pail and so forth.  When you got home you had a crooked arm and that was permitted.  That was expected, you're going to take that home to your children, to your husband and so forth.  That wouldn't be your only food, maybe, it may or may not have been but that was highly dependable but this was a part of the way of life for many, many, many families.
Speaker 1: So you're actually saying that [Franklin] Roosevelt when he proposed a thirty eight cent an hour minimum wage, what he was proposing was three maybe four times as much as what people were paying--people in Georgia--?
Speaker 2: In those days the Georgia Crate and Basket Company where I worked the minimum wage--what they were paying there was ten cent an hour and they had folks waiting around the gate, grown men, boys and so forth to get those jobs.  When I got there the gentleman who had the (unclear) said when you pay him, they're talking about me, fifteen cent an hour because he's Rev. Roulhac's son.
Story_ID: 59201
Speaker 1: My daddy was pastor of the Second Presbyterian Church and of course the white--the First Presbyterian church was a white church there but my daddy was pastor of the Second Presbyterian Church which was black.  But in those early days he did a lot of pioneering because he sponsored there the daily vacation bible school up and around in the neighborhood.  He would get the folks to that--the students--let the church conduct a class on their front porch and he would get help from the students up at the white church.  It was a very fine cooperation between there.  He did a lot of interracial work and encouragement there.  So that was one of the things I remember of the daily vacation bible school.  The teachers would put on plays and musical and singing and so forth, it was quite a taking on some of the work done by the Urban League and that kind of thing.  We didn't have an Urban League there in Thomasville [Georgia] at that time but I can remember that part of the daily vacation bible school.
Speaker 2: Now did you get a chance to visit your parents much when you went to teach at Fort Valley State in Georgia?  Were they still in Thomasville?
Speaker 1: They were still in Thomasville, yes.  I went down from time to time-I would say five or six times in the academic year.
Speaker 2: Were they fairly pleased with your progress?
Speaker 1: Well I think they were.  I was a professor at one of the state universities but I didn't hear any displeasure.
Story_ID: 59202
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Can you give me your impression on some of the historical figures mostly scholars and activists that people now tell us were historically important?  Did you have a sense of what they were doing in those days like people like W.E.B. Dubois and James Weldon Johnson, Alain Locke and Kelly Miller, people like that?  Did you have any sense of their importance or were they discussed on campus--on the black campuses?
Speaker 2: Well I--my privilege that Alain Locke, Dr. Locke was a fraternity brother of mine.  So I met him down at Howard University [Washington, D.C].  So being president of the local chapter at Lincoln [University,Pennsylvania], I invited him up at Lincoln and he came up to Lincoln and of course the Pennsylvania Railroad runs through Wilmington on its way North.  So I went to pick him up at Wilmington, take him to Lincoln and he addressed the Sigma program and so forth.  We got a chance to do a lot of talking as we drove from Wilmington to Lincoln and from Lincoln back to Wilmington and during his being on the campus.  I got the idea that he was--I think he was the first--one of the first road scholars--first black Rhodes Scholar and his general idea was to "let's get on with this thing, let's do a thorough job, let's go higher; we can do it, it can be done".  I'm an example of what can be reached so that was a kind of item which the students appreciated and I think all of them there were lifted with their spirits higher and higher with [W.E.B.]Dubois, [Alain] Locke and Mordecai Johnson and so forth.  When they came to the campus when you went to Howard, when you went to Washington [D.C.] you wanted to know where they were speaking and when they were speaking, Howard Thurman, Benny Mays and those folks.  You never underestimate--no one would underestimate what Howard Thurman could do.
Speaker 1: Howard Thurman, let's talk about him for a second because he was a theologian, a minister.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now Howard Thurman was a kind of what I think they call a mystic.  He used to come through Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and speak on a Sunday afternoon program.  But let me tell you about this, he spoke at the Baptist church around 40th and Market there.  Thurman, Howard Thurman, yeah, the fella who worked with A. Philip Randolph, I used to go in and put down a cot in his apartment there coming in from Lincoln.
Speaker 1: Chandler Owen, Chandler Owen you're talking about?
Speaker 2: No, Rhodes, no this is George E. Rhodes.  But anyway on this Sunday morning [Howard] Thurman was going to speak and he was a graduate of Union [College] down at Richmond [Virginia] and he said well let's go around and let's here Thurman because he figured that we were--he was a graduate of Union and I was a student at Lincoln and so forth.  We would be able to understand Thurman and what he was doing because you know, Thurman was deep.  He gave the idea that the folks there at this church won't be able to appreciate it.  So Thurman got up that morning and before he could get through with the first sentence, the folks were shouting at the church because Thurman was just that kind of person who cashed in on the day.
Speaker 1: So by shouting--so now let's get this--so the people--
Speaker 2: The way he was saying--let's see what was one of the great songs--Jesus Keep Me Near the Cross and before he could get all of it out, the folks were responding to his--
Speaker 1: That's a traditional way that people expressed their joy in church, hollering, fall out and all that stuff.
Story_ID: 59203
Speaker 1: Now the first year I was at Lincoln, I was a junior but I didn't have anywhere to go.  They had a big convention--worldwide Christian confederation at Miami University here in Ohio.  You've heard of Miami University?
Speaker 2: In Oxford.
Speaker 1: Oxford, Ohio, yeah. I as I told you, I was poor very poor.  I didn't--at the YMCA; the YMCA was going to send somebody there.  Now I was a member of Phi Beta Sigma fraternity, you know those fraternity boys wanted to help here and help here and boost someone.  Then the president of the YMCA was a Sigma man and so forth and so they wanted to send someone to this convention--world confederation at Miami.  That was during the Christmas and they were coming from all over the world and I got up to object--not to object, to decline my nomination to go because I didn't have any clothes to wear and that kind of thing.  But the fellows borrowed clothes and so forth, suit cases and so forth and I went to Miami [Ohio] for this convention or this confederation.  I hadn't heard of Thurman at that time but Thurman--each person who was to head a section gave a kind of an introductory talk and Thurman got up and started saying "we die but you who live must do a harder thing than dying is, you must think and our ghosts will drive you on" and of course you never heard Thurman but you see "we die but you live".  He was that impressive and where they had assigned his place they had to re-change it and everybody had changed--not everybody but a goodly number had changed where they had to change where he was conducting his seminar during that time.  But that was my contact with Thurman and from time to time after that I heard him before and then of course after that time.  But now Benny Mays, I had much more contact with Benny Mays than I did with Howard Thurman.
Story_ID: 59204
Speaker 1: What was your impression of Benjamin [Elijah] Mays?
Speaker 2: Benjamin Mays was--I would just say was my boy.  On Easter Sunday in 1940, I spoke at Claflin State College [Orangeburg, South Carolina] for my fraternity in the afternoon and Mays spoke in the morning at South Carolina State across the fence at that time.  And of course several times later but some years ago while Mays was still living, he--who were the millionaires in Birmingham [Alabama], the husband and wife combination in Birmingham--?
Speaker 1: I don't know?
Speaker 2: I'll think of it in a few minutes.
Speaker 1: These are black people?
Speaker 2: Yeah they have a restaurant there, a funeral home, a place where you stay over the night.  I'm trying to think here now, go on I'll come back to it.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Mrs.--I can't remember now.  In Birmingham he's a famous--we'll think of it later.
Speaker 1: But Benjamin Mays you were talking about him.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he was Mrs. Carter--President Carter's mother had introduced him in Birmingham [Alabama].  They had a student from the black colleges.  I was elected as a representative of Stillman College, [Benny] Mays was there at that time.  That was the last time I've seen him.  Mrs. Lillian Carter, the president's daughter--president's mother was doing, earlier that year-a couple of years earlier I appeared for an hour program on television in Fort Valley with her on a--where people come in and get their picture taken with Mrs. Carter and me or Mrs. Carter by herself or whatever they wanted.  They were raising money for one of the charity funds there at Fort Valley.
Speaker 1: So you were very impressed with Benjamin Mays?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Benny Mays, yeah.
Story_ID: 59205
Speaker 1: Now let's go back to, I guess--are there any other figures you want to talk about from that period that were inspirational to you?
Speaker 2: Well quite a number that I---it is kind of tough to find out--I was greatly impressed with a person who was called James A. 'Billboard' Jackson.  Have you ever heard of him?  He was on the board of Billboard.  He was a republican and he was with the Small Business Administration.  When the republicans were booted out with Roosevelt coming in way back there before you were born, with all that knowledge and information he had on blacks he approached Standard Oil Company which was then known as Esso.  Have you heard of Esso, E-S-S-O?  He tells it, he went to the company and said that I'd like to get a six month trial and see whether I can turn some business over to Esso and they said well if you can do what you say you can do, that's many more than six months, six years project, that's a lifetime.  So he did a lot of getting blacks into the gas business--the Esso Company.  He was quite an Elk over in that section and there was a stadium just a few blocks--two or three blocks from Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  They had an Esso station in there and the first year he took that over.  They did more retail business for the Esso Company than any other retail business in the country.  And, of course, James A. 'Billboard' Jackson when he came somewhere to speak he would build the audience because he was quite an orator.  You've probably heard of the old time orators and so forth but he was just wonderful.  So I--he was a member of my fraternity, Phi Beta Sigma fraternity and he asked me you know that he would come to Lincoln.  So I thought that he would be looking for a fee.  He said oh no you couldn't pay me for coming when I leave I leave something for the fraternity and we scheduled him for Lincoln University with one of the finest turnouts at Lincoln University because everybody who knew he was going to be there came.  Mrs. Wilson, Dean Frank Wilson's wife had retired as a concert--she was a concert artist on the piano; she came from retirement and played two pieces there and she said I wouldn't do that for anybody else in the world but for 'Billboard' Jackson I'll come back and be able to say that Mrs. Wilson will play a couple of pieces brought that music--folks who loved music to Lincoln.  I was very happy to have been the president at that time of my fraternity for that [James] 'Billboard' Jackson being there.
Speaker 1: So you were involved in presenting a number of cultural events for the Lincoln community.
Speaker 2: There was just one or two.  Alain Locke, I was--we were responsible for that, James A. 'Billboard' Jackson and others I helped with but other than that that was just a little bit--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: It's the kind of thing-(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah Alain Locke and James A. 'Billboard' Jackson.
Story_ID: 59206
Speaker 1: Okay let's go back to the end of your stay at Fort Valley State.  You said you went back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and you registered for the draft.
Speaker 2: I had registered for the draft because you see, I was supposed to have been inducted just after school closed in Fort Valley.  But I went back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and I could get my job working for those professors at the university doing research.  You see they were researching different items and of course when I could do that, I got a year's extension in my time to be inducted in the army.
Speaker 1: Okay so what did you do for that year that you spent in Philadelphia, what did you do that year?
Speaker 2: Well I got a compensation for working for the university for the professors at Penn University [University of Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay so you worked as a grad assistant there?
Speaker 2: Yeah
Speaker 1: Okay now when you finally were inducted into the army--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: In May 1942.
Speaker 1: Okay it was in the middle of a war basically, right?  World War II was just about at a midway point.
Speaker 2: Well it was in '41 [1941] that (unclear) that Pearl Harbor--wasn't it in '40 [1940]/'41[1941].  So that was--it was hot, yeah.
Speaker 1: So where did they station you and what kind of duty did you have to perform?
Speaker 2: Oh I was stationed at Camp Lee Virginia and they had a quartermaster replacement center and training.  But they had a black section there with Colonel Frank Snowden, a black Major.
Speaker 1: Is this the same Frank Snowden that taught at Howard University?
Speaker 2: That was his daddy, Frank Snowden.  That was Dr. Snowden at Howard.  See they came from Boston and when I got there at Camp Lee I ran into a Lincoln [University, Pennsylvania] graduate who was a sergeant and he introduced me to Snowden's daddy, Frank Snowden and of course I had--they had what was known as a school but it was just more than-there is going to be where we are going give you some training here and while you were there you would dig ditches and doing the yards and so forth like this and then they had a school known as the service school.  But he introduced me to Frank Snowden the head of the school and having the background that I had plus what I was able to do, we were able to find out who was at the camp because in those days we had--there was Robert Ming.  You know Robert Ming who was a professor of law at Chicago, the University of Chicago.  They had PhDs from, in the army digging ditches and school principals and so forth.  All of that (unclear).
Speaker 1: These were black PhDs and professionals and they've got them doing--simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: These were blacks there, undertakers and so forth.  They were just around there training the troops who were coming in mostly from Mississippi from Georgia and from Louisiana and so forth.
Story_ID: 59207
Speaker 1: They allowed the colonel and with me and other help to go through and find out who was there so we would be able to find out here's a PhD, here's a person here Bob May.  So we were able to get those and bring them into the school and we wrote the different manuals.  See they had manuals there with the folks-they used them in World War I on people for troops loading packs on horses and so forth, you know way outdated.
Speaker 2: Okay so those procedural manuals had to be rewritten.
Speaker 1: So we got those folks there who were in this and in a matter of year, we had the school was--from service school the school was the service salvage rail head and grays registration schools.  We had rewritten manuals and they were sending folks back from overseas to our school.  We were, they sent one day I remember they sent about six white officers down to the school when they found out that the faculty and I were black.  They walked away from the school and about an hour later they drove back down there with some superior officer saying you're going to be at this school and of course we had a good reputation at that time.  I received the quartermaster general recognition for exceptional meritorious conduct.  They had a big parade of big companies and the regiments there and I received that.  I don't have that on the wall anywhere here because it's somewhere in the books and papers I have but that was a part of the army experience there at Camp Lee Virginia.
Story_ID: 59208
Speaker 1: Now you had a kind of a bad experience--you were asked to leave there when they asked you do something that you couldn't do, right?
Speaker 2: Well I was there for about three years at Camp Lee and I was lecturing to the troops.  We had a big school and so forth so the commanding officer, I don't remember his name but he called me into the main office and wanted me to--well in other words there was a rumor going around that the boys coming in from New York and from Chicago [Illinois] and from northern states, California and so forth were going to riot.  They were going to take their rifles and just shoot them up here and so that was the big rumor and so forth.
Speaker 1: Was that--just to set this up, most of the recruits from what I understand, you can confirm this, from the north, they are always trained down south, most of the military bases are down south and so when northern blacks go down south they weren't used to the racism and they would respond.
Speaker 2: You see at Camp Lee they had the last two regiments on the layout there were the ninth and the eleventh regiment and these two regiments had a PX [Post Exchange] but when they passed the laws and so forth and they start sending in troops with white troops and black troops and so forth in some of the regiments north or south of the ninth and eleventh regiment, they wanted the black soldiers to pass by the seventh, eighth or ninth regiment to get their beer for shopping to pass by those white regiments usually that's in history through the eleventh and the ninth regiment.  The boys began to say we ain't going to do that.  This was the order that you don't go to this PX and they have the KPs [Kitchen Patrol] out saying no no you go down there and so forth.  So things were getting tough.  The rumor got around that the boys were going to put a riot on and tear things up and they took out the rifle racks and they took out rifles and all of that.  So the commanding officer called me in and wanted me to, in my lectures, you see, I was giving them lectures on the whole setup and this kind of thing plus my influence too because I rationed and quartered separate.  I was master sergeant and the colonel--he became colonel after we did so much for the school would pick me up in the morning and I'd ride to camp with him and so forth.  So they figured that this was a good thing.  So he wanted to tell the boys that let's forget about this race problem and talk beating Hitler.  So I told him that no, no I think we ought to fight it all at the same time and that what's I did and he got to the point where he said you're going to refuse an order? And I've never been an Uncle Tom and I said let me see.  I'd like to see that written so I'll know just what I'm supposed to do and he told me that would be all.  I told him, you know, that in our school we had shown that--I told him about those folks who had walked away from school, from the troop, the soldiers, the white officers that walked away because they figured that--they knew we were black and one of the persons that said that was army orders and they marched them back down to school and we taught them for the period of what we're going to do.  But anyway he told me that would be all and I held a salute oh about for a half an hour.  I didn't get a salute but when he did something I interpret that as a salute and I walked out and that night a white major came and told me that with everything that had happened, he wanted to know one thing and I told him that and then he told me that they were going to get rid of you.  But you will still be in grade, I was master sergeant.  So the next day I called my wife who was back in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and said I would be leaving.  So then on the day the president died that was President [Franklin] Roosevelt died, I was en route on the land route from Camp Lee in grade, master sergeant.  But that was that.
Story_ID: 59209
Speaker 1: Now I wonder what did Snowden say about that, did he say anything about this, do you remember him--?
Speaker 2: I don't think I saw Snowden after this.  I can't remember anything but two or three days later that happened and I went away in grade, master sergeant.  They didn't change my army designation as a teacher and of course it was the finest thing in the world because everywhere I went, folks had been through our school.  Now I had nothing to do from May until January 2nd 1946.  But overseas I--one of the lieutenants who was commanding the 34 45th QM Trucking Company wanted me to be first sergeant.  I told him I didn't want to take a reduction from master sergeant to first sergeant but I consented then they promoted me or assigned me as first sergeant master sergeant of the 34 45th QM Trucking Company.  I left the Philippine Island in December of 1945 and was discharged on January 2, 1946 and then I went back to Penn [University of Pennsylvania] and changed to the law school and finished the law school in '48 [1948] and then couldn't go back to Georgia so I came to Ohio.  So that's where that brought me to Ohio.
Story_ID: 59210
Speaker 1: Before we talk about law school, I wanted to ask you about how you met your wife, I didn't ask you that?
Speaker 2: Well I go back, we were married in 1942, December 21, 1942 and of course you could remember that I was at Fort Valley [State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] for 1940, 1941 but my friend there in Fort Valley was a friend of my wife's who was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and of course they used to correspond about what was going on in Philadelphia and so forth.  So when at the end of that year I was--I did not come back and so forth, I was going up to Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: That's why you were so glad to go to Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: No I didn't give it a second thought.  So I asked you know give me that on your friend in Philadelphia and I will go by and say hello for you.  When I got to Philly after a period of time I went by to see her, Ms. Phoenix that was her name.  She was there and of course I went by again to see her and so forth.  After a while things got tighter and tighter so that's how I met her.
Story_ID: 59211
Speaker 1: Alright now after the war, you come back to law school in Philadelphia--(unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah I came back and then I switched to law school because of the G.I. Bill, I was able to pay my way with army funds and the law school.   So I was--had no difficulty in switching from working on my doctorate to the law school.  And of course that was at the famous University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] with its famous professor.  One of the key professors was Edwin Keedy who was a great criminologist and you just learned so much and in those different fields, in trust in equity and international law, I was able to study under the world known professionals, leaders and so forth.  So that gave me a good law background, I think in about 300 persons admitted in that particular year at the time I was admitted about three blacks were there and I was one of the fortunate ones.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Keating for us?
Speaker 2: K-E-E-D-Y, Edwin Keedy
Speaker 1: K-E-E-D-Y?
Speaker 2: K-E-E-D-Y, yeah Edwin Keedy
Speaker 1: So did you find the law school easy or was it hard?
Speaker 2: No, I found it hard because in our class we had so many who had different areas of majors and so forth but I was a sociologist and we had a course in accounting for lawyers and there were six to eight public CPAs [Certified Public Accountants] in that class and the professor indicated that he was not going to try teach us to be accountants but as lawyers to be able to appreciate and understand basic accounting principles and so forth.  So one day the--sometime the professor would get out on some problem and it looked like they would take those CPAs would take over and I'd raise my hand and told them I thought you were not going to try to make us CPAs but to just understand.  You CPAs are taking over here, that was the general idea. So in time after that during the class when they wanted to kind of--you know sometime you get to a point you want to emphasize or develop he would say and if we have no objections to Mr. Roulhac, we'll do this.  But I wanted to get that which was going to help me.
Speaker 1: They were starting indulging themselves.
Speaker 2: That's what I was thinking sometime but I was able to get through but then in the library--they had big, tremendous library at Penn and I had nothing else to do, I was not working so I would stay in the library until they closed and nobody was in there and I can remember the custodian coming in and said alright Mr. Roulhac, you say, you don't have to go home but you can't stay here and he would lock up the library at 10:00 at night, the whole law building.  But I'd go home and my wife would have something to eat and I'd eat and study some more and get up the next day.  I was able to get through law school okay, that was in 1948 and then I think August or September I came to Akron and that's where I've been since that time 1948.
Story_ID: 59212
Speaker 1: Now why did you come to Akron [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: That was a--Norman Rubin was a student in the law school.  We studied together, digested together and they allowed him in Ohio to take the bar before he finished law school--subject to finishing law school.  So when he came back and got notice of his grades and so forth, he said Joe you would tear Ohio's bar apart.  So that was a fine place for me and I was a little fearful of the Pennsylvania Bar because there were rumors around that folks who were of color had flunked the Pennsylvania Bar and they further rumored that they would do a little searching in the closet to see who was taking the bar and I didn't want that to be against me so I was--I came on out to Ohio so I took the bar and was successful the first time and I've been here ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay what kind of practice did you engage in?
Speaker 2: Well while I was waiting for the bar here and so forth, I worked for the Dunbar Life Insurance Company. That was going around--walking around, I didn't have money to buy a car, collecting fifteen cent, twenty cent here and all around and then I worked at the post office.  When I got there, there were two lawyers there, Jay Franklin Sproll [ph.] and Rufus Thompson.
Speaker 1: Two black lawyers.
Speaker 2: Two black lawyers there were others--about three other black lawyers in town at that time.  But they told me they had an office on East Market Street, 44 East Market Street with a big sign in front there and they said come on up, we've got an office.  So I went up there and I was able to do so much of the work and help them out.  After I had been admitted a few weeks later Rufus Thompson was appointed to the attorney general's staff.  So that left a big, wide open area there.  So I was able to work in, so I worked in there with clients who he had and with my clients and just hoping that things would get to going and I could eat regularly and do well.
Story_ID: 59213
Speaker 1: What kind of cases did you handle in the beginning?
Speaker 2: Oh I'd handle anything that would come in the door but I had one case where I have a picture of some boys up on the hill had found a cookie jar which had been buried in the earth over there from 1800s, back in there.  They were rolling the dollars on the sidewalk, they were young boys, little boys and when some of the older boys saw them, they wanted to take them and they said, why not get your own, there is a whole bunch of them back there and that caused a lot of commotion.  The different people who used to own the property years back--the folks who represented the estate where it was found on Large Street back up in that area and so forth all went to court because with that ruckus found with that money, the police came and took all of the silver dollars and took them to court--took them to the police station and turned them over to the court.  So the people from Bath, this is out where we're living here now wanted to know who was representing those black boys who had found the money.  So they sent them to me.  So that was right down my avenue because at Penn [University of Pennsylvania] I studied under the--Penn taught you the common law and of course in England back in the old days, you know, they were finding treasure troves quite often.  That came my way so I wrote some tremendous briefs in terms of who was entitled to it legally and of course I won the case and I have a picture of the Beacon Journal took of my giving the money out to the boys, two black boys who had found it.  And of course I took some of them for myself but of course, in those days that was a way of getting some publicity.  I took some, gave my friend, gave my wife some and I think I still have two or three of those old silver dollars.  They have cankered now with a goodly portion of canker on them but that was one of my first cases.
Speaker 1: How much money was it altogether, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Around $300 and some dollars.  So I just took some of the dollars and divided the other dollars which were there among the other children and I don't know but I had enough to kind of pass around some and then we still have some three or four.
Speaker 1: So you gained some notoriety with that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 59214
Speaker 1: And then of course the person who had told me to leave one fraternity house suggested that I leave one of the fraternity houses and come to the fraternity house where his aunt ran.  He was here and he was uh, he had his left arm reconstructed from the army days and so forth.  He had wanted his automotive truck which he had bought and the person who had put the truck's name, put the truck's title in that person's name Hubbard; Hubbard wouldn't give him the truck back.  So he came to Rufus Thompson and Rufus Thompson was in the attorney general's office so I worked with him on it and I just thought it was just a matter where anybody should know that equity--the law of equity should cover a case like that.  So I went all the way to court becoming you know, the learned student from the University of Pennsylvania and the law read no person at law or in equity shall be entitled to bringing action on a motor vehicle unless he had a certificate of title.  Now that's the way the law read.  But I didn't read the law because I just knew no law like that could exist and I went all the way to court and the court said you've got an advantage because you don't have a record.  You don't have to worry about transcribing your record; I'm going to rule against you and follow the law.  So I appealed and of course in the famous case, Douglas v. Hubbard it was affirmed by the, by the court of appeals. I argued because I had equity with one of the strong cases the law of trust and equity that was one of their high points of my learning at the University of Pennsylvania.  The Supreme Court affirmed the court of appeals opinion and so that was set straight and the law and of course they cite Douglas v. Hubbard as a precedent of that equity case.
Story_ID: 59215
Speaker 1: Yeah Douglas v. Hubbard
Speaker 2: Yeah
Speaker 1: What about the case of the State v. Norwood, can you tell us about that 1971?
Speaker 2: 1971 you know when you stay around a city, I've been here since 1948, you learn so much about what the police will do, what areas you're not supposed to be in if you're black and the reputation here and the reputation there. Well now at that time I had jury case where they had brought an action against a black defendant who was in graduate school at Kent State [University].  You've probably heard of Kent State University.  Kent State is about fifteen miles from here. And during the course of the trial it was brought out that this student was a roommate of a student here in town over in that area of Akron [Ohio] where blacks didn't live, they didn't go and that's one of those places where you stayed out of the way from because in those early years, you see, you couldn't go to all of the restaurants and areas around here.  It was--they used to call it West Virginia.  But anyway--(unclear).
Speaker 1: This is a white's roommate that he had living (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Lived in that area and he went to pick him up and got out of the car looking for the address and so forth like this and somebody called the police and the police came and evidently this guy didn't know what was happening to the defendant, Hubbard.  What's the name of the--Norwood.  So they charged him with something and he got a lawyer and they went to get the lie detector test and he passed that.  This guy doesn't know he was--negative everything.  So during the course of the trial, they had a jury of eight people during the course of a trial, of course you couldn't bring in the fact that he had passed the lie detector test.  Now in today's paper you can see something about the FBI asking the people in congress in that committee to take FBI examinations and so forth.  But anyway that didn't come to the jury.  The jury voted around seven or eight times for acquittal because he was a graduate student at Kent State, had no previous record or anything of the kind and made just a good witness.  So I, very attentive judge as I was, over the, I was elected four times as a judge in the court there.  When the jury couldn't--they reported that they couldn't reach a verdict and it was seven to one, seven to two and so forth on the different votes.  After that, while the jury, while they were there, the lawyer for the defendant, Norwood--is that his name?
Speaker 1: Yes
Speaker 2: Norwood asked for the judge to grant a motion for acquittal.  So I asked the jurors, I said this is an interesting case there and I'd like for those of you who would like to stay to have a conversation with us on that and I invited the defendant to stay, his lawyer, the prosecutor to stay and so forth and all the jurors, seven of them, came in to my court-in my office.
Speaker 1: Chambers
Speaker 2: Chambers and I wanted to know just what had happened and then I learned for the first time that he had passed the exam and the qualification.  Well now the time I had been on the bench and then on practice and so forth, I knew about that area and so forth and I just indicated that this is it plus the fact that the judge every day almost you've got the prosecutor that's going to recommend dismissal of this case your honor.  Well you wouldn't argue it, you just go on and dismiss it and so forth and I had dismissed much worst cases against the defendant than that when whites were involved and so forth and so I listened and so forth
Story_ID: 59216
Speaker 1: After I got through, I wrote the opinion and that's a beautiful opinion.  It was picked up and commented on the University of Pennsylvania's Black Law Publication some time later.  I'll give you a copy of that opinion--
Speaker 2: The Black Law Journal.
Speaker 1: Black Law Journal but that was one of the cases I was able to indicate that that's the duty when you are sitting on the case to let everything come out as far as you know to spread equity and to prevent an injustice to anyone who might be before the court.
Speaker 2: Your opinion on that case is it should have never been brought to court--to trial.
Speaker 1: No, I just indicated that the state didn't prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt and that more important and worse cases in terms of the allegation against the defendant had been dismissed because you have to watch sometime on just what they are doing because when I first went on the bench there was a case where before trial, before you open the court formally, the prosecutors got some motions and matters where it just called for a signature and a dismissal of paid and so forth and there was a case where this white man had come up and he had not dismissed, I think charged him with trespass or something--some minor matter and he paid costs of $25.00, in costs and so forth. So after--when court formally this black girl came up and I asked her with some section on prostitution and so forth.  I asked her what happened here and she told me I was with them up here before court, I was with him.  So then you know, you remembered this was the guy. They had her charged with something with a sex case and this guy was going through with disturbing the peace or some simple thing.  So I called the prosecutor in and I said now, what is this and I had him change the charge against her to just what he had been charged and plead guilty to.  You have to be conscious--a judge should be conscious of what the prosecutors are recommending and what they did yesterday, what they are going to do tomorrow.  So that comes to my mind as one of the cases I had.
Story_ID: 59217
Speaker 1: Now tell me, we didn't talk about how you became judge.  You were a lawyer in the black community, how did you become judge?
Speaker 2: Well I had come and--well when we leave the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] you just feel like there is no better lawyer in the world than you and one of the things I tried to get into the prosecutor's office and the prosecutor was a democrat and the democrats--the boys who were democrats would go into the prosecutor's office and eat regularly and get that -- while they were trying to find someplace to go.  But we had a graduate here from--I was at Penn, we had one from Ohio State University, one from Harvard and so forth and we put on a battle for blacks in the prosecutor's office.  We were able to win the battle when we elected a John Ballard, a republican.  Well you know the republicans, usually the boys there in these silk stocking organizations of firms and they didn't worry, they didn't go into the prosecutor's office.  So when he was elected one of the judges and of course you know a judge if he's got his eyes open can see good lawyers and so forth.  So when John Ballard was elected Judge Emmons was one of the judges who got in touch, I understand, with John Ballard and he said by no means let that Joe Roulhac get away, put him on your staff and I was selected the second person for John Ballard.  Of course, John Ballard stayed prosecutor for several terms and became mayor then of course in private practice and so forth.  But we had one of the finest for six years I was in the county prosecutor's office.  I did a lot of work there and one of the cases I took to the Supreme Court which set the law on burden of proof on evidence was a case, State v. French.  That's now one of the head markers and leading cases in that area, State v. French.  But for six years I was with the, in the Summit County prosecutor's office.  At the end of that time, I figured it was time to get back into private practice because I had a lot of fine--very fine publicity in the prosecutor's office.  Fine cases and some nice write-ups from the Beacon Journal on, he cooked his way into law school or into law, those kinds of cases plus a reputation.  So when I went back, there was the opening of a lawyer, I think that the lawyer passed or resigned and there was so much pressure--not pressure but recommendation cards.  They printed up a million cards-maybe not quite a million cards but folks was asking Governor Rhodes to appoint Roulhac as the judge and he sent word, don't send no more cards, we're going to appoint Roulhac.  So I was sworn in--(unclear).
Speaker 1: Can you spell Ballard for us?
Speaker 2: B-A-L-L-A-R-D, John Ballard.
Speaker 1: And Rhodes
Speaker 2: R-H-O-D-E-S, Governor Rhodes, yeah.
Story_ID: 59218
Speaker 1: From left to right that's my father, Rev. R. D. Roulhac, Robert Daniel Roulhac.  That's my brother, Edgar Roulhac he is retired, he lives in Matteson, Illinois and he is retired as a teacher in Dunbar and used to be assistant principle down at Dunbar High School.  That's my mother, Minerva Rhodes Roulhac, she's retired well of course she's passed now and that's my brother Edwin Roulhac.  He's retired from the school of Flint, Michigan, he was an electrician.  That's my sister Ruth Roulhac, she's retired and she was known as Ruth Best.  She's retired from the school system of Chicago [Illinois] and lives in Matteson, Illinois now.  That's my brother Simeon Roulhac.  He worked as an aid to G. Wilson Becton and retired from one of the hotels in New York City [New York].  That's my sister Mary Roulhac, she worked for the Presbyterian of Detroit [Michigan].  She's retired and was a musician for-she claimed eighty years in different churches.  That's my brother Robert Roulhac, he's deceased.  He was an undertaker and embalmer for Hudson's Funeral Home in Macon, Georgia.  That's Joseph D. Roulhac, that is me and you will note that I didn't have shoes on but I don't remember now whether I had shoes or not but I think maybe I did have shoes since I see my other brother Edgar didn't have shoes on but that was me.  Now that's John Roulhac, he was the brilliant Roulhac.  He was sixteen years old but the first weekend he was at Stillman College.  He went to the Black Warrior River which he knew he better that he couldn't swim and he drowned in Black Warrior River there between Tuscaloosa and North Port, Alabama.  But that's the Roulhac family taken in about 1925.
Speaker 2: Now that goes back to one of the first big cases I had.  Some of these boys, I think one, two, three, four, five boys there.  They had found a treasure trove with silver dollars all of them in 1800s and so forth and they were being claimed by a state's certain deceased, previous owners and different other people and nobody represented those black boys.  So some people from Bath Township and we're in Bath Township came in and they appointed me, the Bar Association appointed me to represent those black boys and I had of course knew this from University of Pennsylvania where we studied the common law and had very good background in the treasure trove and so forth.  I wrote some beautiful briefs and the judge ruled in our favor.  That shows the Beacon Journal picture there of my-(unclear).
Speaker 1: This is you.
Speaker 2: That's me in black with hair this time.  I was passing out parts of the portion to the, what's that, one, two, three, four, five boys who were declared the legal owners of that money.
Speaker 1: What year is this?  It looks like it's 1952 in July.
Speaker 2: 1952, yes.
Speaker 1: Now oh this is a picture of--from left to right Judge Mann, he's a retired judge from Detroit [Michigan] and next is my daughter, Delores Nance.  She is retired and after retirement worked with--who was that publishing company?  Lake Shore and now she is in her second year as curriculum specialist at a school in Charleston, South Carolina, River School in Charleston, South Carolina.  Next is my lovely wife for sixty years in December, Frances Coretta Roulhac, Frances Coretta Phoenix Roulhac and to the right yours truly and down there is Christopher Sean Brigman a grandson.  The son of my daughter's first marriage.
Speaker 2: That's a picture that someone took.  They were tearing down their building and this was my our office on the second floor there at 44 East Market Street in Akron [Ohio].  The Dunbar Life Insurance Company had an office there and you will see my name down there, Joseph D. Roulhac but at the top law offices was Jay Franklin Sprool and Rufus L. Thompson but someone sent that picture to me just before they had lowered the boom on that section of the building.  That was given to me at some meeting and I treasure that.  Howard (unclear) who was the black lawyer here when I first came and he was very helpful and encouraged me during the time I was preparing for and studying for the Ohio Bar.
