Story_ID: 71969
Speaker 1: Okay. my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for the History Makers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am will you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My name is Delories Dell Ricks-Wallace.  The first name is D-E-L-O-R-I-E-S.  Dell D-E-L-L, Ricks R-I-C-K-S Wallace W-A-L-L-A-C-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what's your date of birth?
Speaker 2: August 28, 1933.
Speaker 1: And, where were you born?
Speaker 2: Huntsville, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what's your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm self-employed.  That--I wear many a hat--I don't know.  I do various things.  Right now, I run a limousine service.
(OFF-CAMERA):	(Telephone ringing).
Speaker 2: Okay.  And, what's today's date?
(OFFI-CAMERA):  (Telephone ringing).
Speaker 2: Today, is July, July 29, 19--I mean, year 2002.  I'm--
Speaker 1: Yes.  And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Fort Wayne, Indiana at the Black History Museum [Fort Wayne African/African American Historical Society Museum], I guess, that's what its' called.
Speaker 1: African American.
Speaker 2: African American.
Speaker 1: History Museum.
Speaker 2: History Museum.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 71970
Speaker 1: And, now before we get into depth, there are five "People Magazine"-ish type questions, that they compel me to ask everybody.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Ice cream (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay. That's mine too.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple and lime green.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is your favorite season of the year?
Speaker 2: I like spring time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: That I've been to or where'd like to go, or whatever?
Speaker 1: Well, favorite destination.  You might not have even been there before, you might not have made the trip yet, but, do you have a favorite destination?  It could be someplace you've gone to or someplace you wanna go.
Speaker 2: Well, basically really, I just really wanna see the United States.  I like--I have no desire to go overseas or do anything of that sort.  So, I just--I'm looking forward to going to Alaska and I wanna go to Hawaii but I don't wanna fly.  When they build a bridge, then I'll drive over there, you know.  So--but I've been a lot of nice places.
Speaker 1: Right here--
Speaker 2: Right here in the United States, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandmother told me, and she and I talked a lot, and she told me; she says, "Baby all you have to do, to achieve whatever you're trying to do, is plan your work and work your plan."  That's my favorite phrase.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the other part of it is, "Through God all thing are Possible."
Story_ID: 71971
Speaker 1: Alright.  Let's talk about your early years and maybe--can you give us the names of your parents and the dates of their birth and the place of their birth?
Speaker 2: Well.  My mother was born in Huntsville, Alabama in 1911.  And, my dad was born in Tuscumbia, Alabama.  And, I'm not quite sure, it was 19--, 1900 I believe because he was eleven years older than my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was your mother's name and can you spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Nellie N-E-L-L-I-E O-D, just like O and the D.  Hatton H-A-T-T-O-N Ricks R-I-C-K-S and then she got married to my, well, my other dad, was Pyles P-Y-L-E-S.  That was her name that she--when she passed away.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my dad was C-O-L-L-I-S-S Colliss, Ricks R-I-C-K-S.
Story_ID: 71972
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did they have a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: No.  I never heard them talk about it.  I know he moved from, he moved from Tuscumbia, Alabama.  He came there, I think, at a very early age to work with, I don't remember with whom, or whatever, and he met this pretty little girl, which was my mother [Nellie Hatton Ricks].  Which was much taller than he, and everything.  And, the rest of it is history.  He had a little bo--they had a little boy name William and he died at like twelve months old, or something, from eating berries.  And, then my sister, Mildred, and then me, three years later after my sister was born.  And I came along.  But, my dad [Colliss Ricks] had a daughter earlier before he came, you know, before he came to Fort Wayne, I mean, to Huntsville [Alabama], which still lives in Tuscumbia, Alabama, Julia Bell Ricks-Freeman.  And, she still resides there.
Story_ID: 71973
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can--Did either one of them have any stories from their parents or grandparents about reconstruction or slavery?
Speaker 2: Well, not really from slavery too much.  My grandmother told me stories and my mother [Nellie Hatton Ricks] told me stories about the house that I was born in.  Down in Huntsville, Alabama there was a place called Tenth Calvary Hill and that's where the soldiers' place was.  And, my grandfather; he acquired a lot of land there in Huntsville and this one of the areas, and of course in Huntsville its red clay.  And, he needed a place, he was very ambitious, he had houses, land, and all this kinda stuff.  So, my mother tells me about the experience they had.  They made their own brick and hauled it five, five miles down to Holmes Avenue, where they built our homestead, where I was born.  It started out like four rooms and when he finished with it, it was 27 rooms.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me ask you this.  You said something very interested, you talked about Tenth Calvary Hill.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tenth Calvary is the Buffalo Soldiers.  Black Calvary.
Speaker 2: Oh, is it?
Speaker 1: Yeah. U.S. Calvary, that's the Tenth.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is the Buffalo Soldiers--(simultaneously)
Speaker 2: We still own land there.
Speaker 1: So, do you know anything about the history of that spot?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Tenth Calvary Hill.
Speaker 2: No other than my grandfather and his daughter, which was my aunt; they started a grocery store up there and it's still in existence.
Speaker 1: There's probably a story there, you know.
Speaker 2: Probably.
Story_ID: 71974
Speaker 1: Okay.  What--any other stories about that area that you, I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, I--
Speaker 1: --about your family that you can think of?
Speaker 2: I, I'd like to tell you about my, my grandmother's dad.  Which was Ed Lowry. (clears throat) Excuse me.  Ed Lowry; he was from Nashville [Tennessee] and he tells a story about his family and they were, they was, I don't, I guess they was semi-freed slaves or whatever else you want to call it, you know.  And, he had sisters and everything, but Ed was like the--he was the master's son and he stayed in the house all the time, you know.  His, his master's wife took him in as, as her own.  And, they would have, they would go to various places and have--in the afternoon, and have teas and all that kinda stuff and tatting sessions and sewing sessions.  So, she would take Ed with her.  So, he took her to this one particular plantation house and they was sewing so Ed pulled on her and said "I want some water".  So, she told the host--the lady at other house where she was, says, "My boy wants some water".  She said, "Well, you want a minute, I'll go out to my Niggras and get a dipper for him to drink water.  She said, "Oh, No.  No, he doesn't drink out of anything other than--that anybody else drinks out.  And, he reach in her pocket and found--and pulled out a silver cup.  This is what her and Ed's drinks out of.  Not what every common everyday people--look but he did, he looked white.  And, he was very short with blond hair and blue eyes and everything.
Story_ID: 71975
Speaker 1: But, also they tell the other story about, how the other sister--they did laundry for the soldiers there in Nashville [Tennessee] so, and on Friday's the soldiers got paid, okay.  So, they would all sit around they drink and they play cards and all this kinda stuff.  So, anyway, this one sister of his, went out on the, the grounds where they were; what do they call that?  I don't know.  You know where they--the camp ground where they would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: -- the soldier's ground, you know.  So, they went out there to gather up the laundry to take it back to do it for the weekend so they have it ready by Monday.  So all the soldiers had gotten very drunk and they had all this money piled in a pile and she saw they had fallen out so she grabbed up the army blanket with the money and everything and ran home to her parents and her brother, you know, and everything.  And, they all moved to Huntsville, Alabama.  And, my grandfather, I guess he was my great-grandfather [Ed Lowry], I guess he was the oldest one.  He went there and he taught shoemaking at A and M College, the Alabama A and M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Huntsville, Alabama].  So, that's one of the very interesting stories.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is.  (Simultaneously) once she grabbed it up, the thing was--would be to leave. (Laughter)
Speaker 1: Right, right.  She grabbed one and left with it.  And then, I'll tell my grandfather moved back to Nash--my great-grandfather, I'm getting it mixed up, hold on, my great-grandfather moved back to Nashville after my great-grandmother had passed and everything, and he married again.  And, for history purposes or whatever else is, he married Henry Allen Boyd's mother, that lived, lived in Nashville and I had been to her home.
Speaker 2: Now who--
Speaker 1: I remember when I was a little girl, she had a big baby grand piano in the living room and had an elevator in her house.  And, the house is still standing.
Story_ID: 71976
Speaker 1: Now, who's Henry Allen Boyd? (Simultaneously)
Speaker 2: Henry Allen Boyd was the one that--what did he say, "The Baptist Song Book" [National Baptist Publishing Board]--he--what do you, what do you call it?
Speaker 1: Was he the author or the publisher of--
Speaker 2: Publisher, he was the publisher and he's very popular.  And, I guess his son and his, and his grandson is still living in Nashville [Tennessee].  But, you've heard of Henry Allen Boyd, haven't you?
Speaker 1: No, I haven't, but (simultaneously)
Speaker 2: You might do some research on him.  He was quite--but, anyway--
Speaker 1: Was he black or white?
Speaker 2: He was black but he was white.  You know what I mean, very fair skinned.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, light.
Speaker 2: Yeah, light.  My grandfather [great-grandfather, Ed Lowry] was very fair skinned.  My mother and all of them, you know so.  And, my grand, my grand--my great-grandfather, he married an Indian, which was Nellie.  And, she was an Indian Cherokee, I think, very tall, very stately with black hair and everything.  And, of course, papa was very short, like four foot nine, eleven, somewhere there and about; and they had eight children.  Four of them was brown with red, reddish-brown with black hair.  Four of them was very, very fair with blue eyes and blond hair.  My grandmother was a blue-eyed with blond hair.
Story_ID: 71977
Speaker 1: So, that's about as much as I know as far as my mother's [Nellie Hatton Ricks] people.  Now, on my dad's [Colliss Ricks] side, I know that they were Quakers and some of them were, you know--and English, you know from England.  And, I don't know too much about them.  We're doing a-well I brought that book.  They're doing some research and everything on them.  And, I know that, Parson George came over here and he was a slave.  And, he was the first person to start the--what do you--Lord, I lost the church; Church of Christ.  He built the Church of Christ in Huntsville [Alabama].  We owned half--he bought acreage and everything, a half of mountain right down in Tuscumbia [Alabama] and until this day, we have the Ricks'.  It's called Ricks'.  The school house and the church is still standing and we have the graveyard there.  My grandfather and all of them are still buried in that grave and everything.  So, of course, you saw the, you know, the monument and everything, so.
Story_ID: 71978
Speaker 1: But, anybody else--only thing I do know other than my grandfather on my mother's [Nellie Hatton Ricks] side.  He had a sister name Callie, and she married into wealth or a prominent person and his name was--I lost it.  But, anyway she married this man, he was a solider, and he's in the history books.  I'll think of the name in a minute.
Speaker 2: When would he had been alive and--?
Speaker 1: Well, I knew him.  I saw--the last time I saw him was in 1962.  Marchbanks was his name.  Vance Marchbanks.  And, he was quite a solider.  And back in those days, he was lieutenant, colonel, something of that sort--maybe a little bit off there, I don't know.  But, his son was a doctor.  Doctor Vance Marchbanks and he was one of the persons--and I'm looking for him, his children anyway.  He was one of the persons that monitored the first astronaut.  So, that's about it.
Story_ID: 71979
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell us then--now you grew-up in Huntsville or in Fort Wayne?
Speaker 2: I grew up in Huntsville [Alabama] until I was about nine years old.  My dad [Colliss Ricks] went to Fort Wayne [Indiana] where is brothers was, 'cause he could get a job and et cetera, you know.  And, then he sent for my mother [Nellie Hatton Ricks], and myself, and my sister and we came to Fort Wayne, March 1943.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were about--
Speaker 2: About nine, I was about nine.  Yes.  So, I've been there ever since.  But, I always go home.
Speaker 1: Oaky.  Well tell us about, I guess, you have to tell us about two place, but if you can let us in on some of the sites and the sounds and smells of growing-up in Huntsville and in Fort Wayne.  You might be able to compare in contrast for us, you know.  And, talk about the kinda things you did when you were a little girl.
Speaker 2: Well, basically, what I did when I was a little girl, I was, well, the kid on the block, let me put it that way.  I was, I was the outgoing one.  If there was anything to do or whatever else, I was the one that did it and instrumental in doing it.  I lived on Pulaski Pike.
Speaker 1: Okay, but now what was the block like?  I mean, where did you--where was--where you grew up?
Speaker 2: Where I lived?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We could walk to town.  I didn't live in the country.
Speaker 1: In Huntsville?
Speaker 2: Yes, in Huntsville.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We could walk to town.  My grandfather like--he was a masonry or a concrete person, you know.  And, he--we lived like, what, six or eight blocks from downtown.  And, we knew nothing about farming.  I knew nothing about cotton.  Other than listening to the other kids.  And, I know the truck would come along and pick up the kids to pick cotton and everything.  And, I, you know--we didn't have to do that 'cause, my grandfather, he was, he was a very stately person.  He was a very smart person, and he was one of the ones that had the opportunity to travel all over the United States, building columns.  And, talking about building columns, I just built a new house and I think my grandfather did it for me; 'Cause my house is full of columns.  It's called the house of columns, you know.  So, and--but, we lived pretty-good.  I can't say we lived bad or anything of this sort.  We had a little grocery store right next door to our house where we lived that my aunt and uncle ran, you know.  And, that grocery store is still existing, but it's on Tenth Calvary Hill.  But, we--I went to school there and we walked to school and I really didn't have any problems, you know.  My sister, well we were Seventh-day Adventists, my grandmother's Seven-day Adventist and we had to walk to church and everything.  But, my sister--she was very beautiful, she is very beautiful--let me put it that way, and she was kinda mean.  And, she would walk on the sidewalk and you talking about people moving, if they didn't move, she wouldn't move, she would throw her arms and everything and practically knock 'em off the street, you know.  I don't care whether they was white, black or green or whatever, you know.  So, we--I didn't experience too much prejudice.  I'm a tell you right now, because as I said, my grandparents, she and her sisters and all of them, they were seamstress and everything--very talented people.  And, they, they sewed for the Bankheads and everything.  They were very respected.  And we had a, we had a different kinda place maybe in this life than other people did, and everything.  And, I had--we had good neighbors.  I had a lot of friends and I still, I still associate with down in Huntsville.  I'll go home, maybe at least once a year.  We just had a reunion in November.  By best girlfriend, I lost her for thirty years and I finally found her about twenty-one years ago so, lived in the same block.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you mentioned the Bankheads.  Now those--the Bankheads became famous because of a daughter, right.  That was an actress or something?
Speaker 2: Right.  Tallulah Bankhead.  They owned a hotel there.
Speaker 1: In Huntsville [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: In Huntsville.  And my, my parents, my grandparents, the family--we, they sewed for them.  They did all of that tatting and that lace and all the fine clothes that they wore; they did those things.  Consequently, that was my gift too.
Story_ID: 71980
Speaker 1: God gave me the gift to being able to sew.  Not anymore, I got bad hands, you know, but anyway--and as I said, my grandfather, he traveled all over the United States, building columns and everything.  And, he had to go and he--they wasn't quite sure what he was and I don't think they asked.  But, I think he passed for white all that time down in Hot Springs and he used to go down there for baths and all that.  And, he went to Colorado and various--Chicago [Illinois] and various--to help build the courthouses.
Speaker 2: Okay.  He was an expert in building columns.
Speaker 1: Right.  Well, he was, yeah--he was a con--yeah, he was a, he as a mas--he was a mason--a concrete man.  He was a builder, contractor, you know, that's what he did.
Story_ID: 71981
Speaker 1: So, and you asked me about Fort Wayne [Indiana]?  Well, when we moved to Fort Wayne, it was just home again.  I met some people and some kids and we had a--I can't say anything bad about--I love Fort Wayne but I love Huntsville too, very much so.  And, the only thing that I remember very vivid was when I first came to Fort Wayne, was like--I was like nine years old and we came into Cincinnati [Ohio] on this big train, this big train station and all this stuff and all the (unclear) when we got to Fort Wayne, my--we stayed with my aunt and my uncle.  And, they didn't have but like one bedroom, two bedrooms, and my dad [Colliss Ricks] and mama [Nellie Hatton Ricks] stayed with them.  And, my uncle took us to his house.  And, my sister was--I told her the next morning--I said "Listen, we got to go find mother", you know.  And she said, "No, we gotta wait 'til they come."  I says, "No, not at all, I know where I'm going."  She said, "You don't know."  So I said, "Come on, I'll show you."  So, I walked back to where my mother and dad was, which was like six blocks away, in the morning--the next morning when we got there.  But, the thing that I remember mostly was, right after we got here on--the War stopped, you know.  The V.E. Day [V-Day], I guess that's what it's called?  And, everybody was out just blowing horns and shouting and all this stuff and everything.  And, I think apparently it had rained or something, but you know, how they have the drains along the sidewalk and everything, we're standing there, my aunt looked down there and she found a twenty dollar bill.  And, I remember that day so vivid because she found a twenty dollar bill and of course then, you know, forty-three [1943] or forty-two [1942] whatever forty-four [1944] it was, that was--
Speaker 2: Twenty dollars was a weeks' wages--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --For some people (simultaneously) in those days.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.  So, I found Ft. Wayne to be--I've been there ever since, so.
Story_ID: 71982
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Now, what did you enjoy doing when you were a girl?  What kind of a little girl were you?
Speaker 1: Oh boy (laughter).  What kind of little girl was I?  You probably can answer that better than I can.  I was very outgoing.  I met no strangers.  I'm still the same way.  If there was anything going on, you can better believe Delories was in front of it, a part of it or maybe started it.  And by the way, they called me Lolo and that was, that was my nickname.  So, L-O-L-O and I'm still Lolo to a lot of people.  But, if there was any fundraisers or anything; I'll more--I'll raise more funds than anybody else did.
Speaker 2: What, as a child?
Speaker 1: As a child, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: If there was a contest, I remember I sold more pencils and I raise more money at church and I got a reward as an apron, you know, and et cetera, you know just little things, little motivated things that we did in church and everything.  I was--I went to church on Sabbath, which is Seventh-day Adventist.  Because my grandmother was Seventh-day Adventist, I went to Oakwood, a little church in town.  But, my grandfather was Methodist, so then I went to the Methodist church on Sunday.  So, I, you know, I had a lot of church in my life and--but I can remember people liked me and I liked people.  And, I wanted to remain that way.  And, I hope I did, you know.  And, I was just--I was there, everywhere, you know.  Got a couple of grandkids kinda like me too, right now, you know.  But, I was--I worked.  I liked to work.  I remember my first job, when I was like eight years old or so, and I was down the street at a neighbor's, going down there washing her face or doing some little old lady down there, you know.
Story_ID: 71983
Speaker 1: And, then when I came to Fort Wayne [Indiana], my grand--my uncle had a drycleaners called Norville Ricks' Dry Cleaning Place.  So, and at this time, I was nine and I was nosing around--I was very noisy too--that's how I learned, you know.  So, I went to work in his shop as doing alterations, 'cause I just knew I could sew, because, I've been sewing all my life, you know.  But, I'll tell you one inspirational thing that happened to me when I was in Huntsville [Alabama].  My grandparents, my grandmother and my mother [Nellie Hatton Ricks] and all of them sewed.  So, I wanted to sew and everything and I went and I--I can say it--I guess I stole some material.  And, it was some seersucker, green or whatever.  And, when my grandmother found out I had did it--it was like three yards of it, she said, "Okay baby you wanna sew, you gonna sew."  My grandmother was just a little bitty dynamite person, you know.  She said, "Now you got this material here" and my doll was about this big, she said, "You sew every inch of it."  I made everything under the sun that you thought--in my own way, you know, that you could think of.  But, you can believe that was the last time I ever stole anything.  So, that was quite memorable.
Speaker 2: You made three yards worth of doll clothes?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Three yards worth.  Can you imagine?  So, but, again like I said, when I came here, I started doing alteration with my uncle.  That's how I learned a lot more about tailoring and everything, in his shop and everything.  So, and then, what I'd say, Fort Wayne--and at a very early age, I met my husband at a place called the McCulloch Center.
Speaker 2: Now, you're going too far ahead.  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you asked me about Fort Wayne.  What kinda person was I?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: But I was out, I was outgoing.
Speaker 2: As a little girl.  As a little girl.
Speaker 1: Right, as a little girl, right.  So, but I was one of the ones that was involved in everything, let me put it that way, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 71984
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now let's take you to school.  Let's see if we could go to school--
Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you about school.  What I think about school is, it all depends on the individual.  And, who am I to tell you, how much schooling you need, or where you learn it.  Now, I didn't, I didn't take much stock on school.  I am a self-taught woman.  I learned by listening and watching.  Okay.  And, I know when I was at James Smart [James H. Smart School], we had home economics.  I sewed quite well and my teacher looked forward to me to come into the class because when I came in, she walked out and I was the teacher at that point in time.
Speaker 1: Well, that's in high school, right.
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't.  That was eighth grade.
Speaker 1: James Smart's (simultaneously)
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's Junior High.
Speaker 1: Okay, junior high.
Speaker 2: Yes, seventh and eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So.  But, I don't discuss school too much.  Because, like I said, I have--I'm still educating myself.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did you like school?
Speaker 2: I, I guess, yes, I did like it to a point, or whatever else is, but to me it was a handicap.  It slowed me down to what I--now they have the magnet schools for people, you know, sort of like--and I'm not building, you know, myself up or anything of this sort.  I'm just telling you how I was, you know, what was important to me.  It's not important to me that you have a doctoral degree or you don't have a degree at all.  It's what kinda person you are, that's inside.  And, what you're satisfied with and what degree do you measure success and how you got there and who did you step on.  Who you did not step on or who you helped along the way.  So, I mean, and--like I said, I educated myself more or less 'cause I quit school at a very early age, you know, so.
Story_ID: 71985
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what was grade school like?  I mean, you, say you were involved in home economics, I guess and later on, I mean, you know, sewing and so forth.  But, what was grade school like?  In the early years in grade school?
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't a slow learner or anything of this sort, I excelled, you know, and I learned what I was supposed to learn and everything.  But, I also wanted to learn a lot of other things.  And I was a people person.  I remember when I was (unclear) in first grade, my teacher, Ms. Jordan at Winston Street School there in Huntsville [Alabama], I was a helper and she truly loved me and she'd take me home with her.  You know, and that--in those days that was the big thing.  If you got to go home and spend the night with your teacher.  And, I got to go home with her quite a bit.  And, I remember her very vividly when she got to the gate where she lived, kinda out in the country, she had a dog, a big dog and he would meet her at the gate and pick her briefcase up and take it to--and that was important to me.  That the dog liked her, you know.  So, but, I, I didn't say, I mean I can't say, that I didn't like school but I wasn't, what do you say, I wasn't enthused about it.
Story_ID: 71986
Speaker 1: Okay, well what kinds of things excited you or things enthused you in all this?
Speaker 2: People liking me.  Me doing--I'm somewhat of a showoff.  You know, and that's the way I was when I was a kid and everything.  I like to please.  I like to be pleased also, you know.  But, that's a tough question.  I'm not gonna ask you to repeat that question (Laughter) but--
Speaker 1: I'm just asking, what kinda of things that you really like to do?  That you were really interested in, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, the flowers was a good thing for me.  Sewing was a good thing for me.
Speaker 1: You said social interaction with other people.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  That's, that's what was important to me and building things.  You know, starting things, you know, things of that sort, you know, I, you know, I like that kinda stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, when--excuse me, when you were talking about education, I just remembered, and you may say I'm getting ahead of myself but as far as education is concerned, I can remember several years ago, I was in trouble with some business and everything, and the MRI out of Washington, DC wanted to hire me as a consultant.  MRI is Men Retail Association of America.  And that to me was quite an honor that I never, you know.  I never finished school and I would be offered a job with the United States Government, more or less.
Story_ID: 61981
Speaker 1: Okay, but yeah let's go--so, in grade school, you were developing your, your ability, your sewing ability and that sort of thing.  And, now, what happened with high school, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, then I met a young man and got involved with him and et cetera, et cetera, the rest of it is history.  So, but, I did go to a trade school.  I went to Lockhart's Tailoring School and I did do some training and, I'm a floral designer also.  I did some training there.  And a little bit, I went to that school in Chicago [Illinois] to start a course there and they told me, after they gave me an exam, or when they tested me out, they said ma'am we're sorry, we can't help you.  Says you are, where we stop off is where you are right now.  The best thing for you to do is to go hire you a designer and put him in your shop and learn from them and that's what I did.  I opened my own floral shop and everything.  And, I hired me a couple of designers and I learned the flower business and everything.  And, at Taylor Lockhart's Tailoring School, I did learn tailoring there; the right way to do it, you know.  And, that's another story too of--that motivated me to go to that school, so, you know.  And, I don't know whether you want to know it or not.  But, it was quite interesting when you talk about prejudice, right here in Fort Wayne [Indiana].
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: I ran across some of that.
Story_ID: 61982
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But, let's go back, now you, after grade school, now you meet someone.  Do you get married?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I did.  Yeah, we got married later on and--His name is Charlie Bob Wallace, Charles Robert Wallace.  We're still married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it was the right decision? (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Yes.  I think so.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Okay, so--(simultaneously) and then, did you have children?
Speaker 2: Yes, we have seven children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And like, twenty-some grandchildren.  Seventeen great-grandchildren and one great-great-grandchild.  And, I tell everybody that we--I was quite active in church and I read the Bible and everything and I knew what it said about the Bible, the Lord told us women to go forth and bear fruit.  I missed understood Him.  I bared an orchard.  (Laughter) So, that's--I have quite a legacy as far as family is concerned.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 61983
Speaker 1: Now, okay, so when did you decide to go to trade school and at what point?
Speaker 2: When, what do you mean?  When did I go to--
Speaker 1: Or, what happens next?  I mean, you met a guy and y'all get together--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We got married and--
Speaker 1: Did you go to trade school right away after that or did you--
Speaker 2: Well, no.  I was having babies and I did, I did--it wasn't too long after--we needed to--I did work in sewing factories, et cetera.  But, I had--I wanted to do tailoring and whatever.  I wanted to, I wanted to get a job.  I did alterations, you know, and things later on.  But, I went to this store called Fishman's to get a job, to help feed these babies.
Speaker 1: In--
Speaker 2: Fort Wayne [Indiana]?
Speaker 1: Fort Wayne, okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is all Fort Wayne, yes.  And, it was quite a prominent store.  And, I asked them for a job and they said--I said I'm a seamstress and I wanna sew in your alternation shop.  And he looked at me, he said "Oh, no."  He says, "You're not good enough to sew our clothes."  I said, "I beg your pardon, Mr. Fishman."  That's his name.  So, he said, but you know I have a position open on the elevator.  Now, what position are you gonna have on the elevator other than running the elevator.  So, fine, I needed the money, I took it.  And, I worked very shortly, there.  And, I was gonna do better.  There was an opening across the street at a store called Nobson's.  So, I went over there and I asked him for a job and I wanted to do alterations in the shop.  That would give me my, you know, that was my field.  Oh, no girl.  We don't, we don't hire people like you to do our clothes and things of this--it's a very exclusive shop.  He said but, you know what, I do need someone to clean up this store.  Fine, Mr. Mansbecker (ph.), I'll do that.  So, I took that job until one day he asked me, he said "Girl, I need you to vacuum my office, third floor mind you.  I said, "I don't have a problem with that Mr. Mansbecker (ph.), I'll do it, I'll sweep your floor but you take that heavy vacuum cleaner upstairs for me, and then, I'll do your floor.  Oh no, that's what I got you here for.  If you can't sweep, sweep my office, and you can't take the, the sweeper up there to do it, he says, "You don't have a job."  I said, "Thank you very much, but you're right, I don't have a job and you don't have anybody to sweep your floor, 'cause, I'm outta here."  So, I left.  Then--and then I had a personal vendetta.  I went to school.  I went to next door to him.  The man's store and I talked to this man's name was Bill.  I said, I am--I lied--I do alterations, I'm somewhat of a tailor and et cetera, you know.  He said, "Come on downstairs, I'm gonna give you a chance."  He says, "Here's a pair of pants, you hem 'em for me."  So, I did, which normally takes you about 15 minutes to hem a pair of pants.  So, he came back an hour later, he said, "how you doing"?  I said, "I'm almost done."  He came back again.  I said, "Well, I'm almost done."  And then, he said, "Well, you call me, when you get done."  So, I called him when I was finished and he said, "You know you do a fine stitch.  You're so very nice and neat.  He said there's only one thing wrong.  These pants are seven inches too short.  And, I just turned green and I said "Oh, my God, what have I done, you know.  So, he said, "I'll tell you what you do.  Go around the corner, there's a tailoring shop, Mr. Lockhart.  You go upstairs and you tell him I sent you to teach you tailoring."  And, that's how I ended up there at Lockhart's tailoring and that's how I ended up to be a tailor.  And, this is very early in my life.
Story_ID: 61984
Speaker 1: So, but, the end of that story is, as far as the people across the street, and the one that said that I couldn't do that thing and I ended up starting my own store, men's store and tailoring shop.  My greatest height in my life is when I was able to move in next door to Nobson's; across the street from Fishman's with this very exclusive men's store which was call Dee-Lee's.  And, really the height is when I met Mr. Fishman in the drug store, no, in--yeah, where somewhere, but anyway and he said "Don't I know you."  I said, "Yes, you do."  I said, "I'm the one that has the store across the street."  He said, "Naw, I know you."  I said, "You're, right", I said "Mr. Fishman, I'm the lady that could only run your elevator."  So, the Mr. Mansbeck (ph.) was in Florida.  You know how they always go to Florida and stuff.  So, after I got opened up, beautiful store, he came in there, he said "I'd wanted to come over, where's the owner of the store, I wanted to congratulate him, cause he's right next door to where his store was, and very exclusive.  My store complimented his.  I said "I am the owner."  You the owner, who's backing you?  I said, I'm backing me.  My knowledge and whatever.  I said, "Mr. Manbeck's (ph.), you don't know me, do you?"  "No.  Should I know you?"  I said, "I'm the gal, the girl, that you told--that you fired because I wouldn't take the vacuum to your third floor."  And, believe it or not, it was over as far as I was concerned.  I had accomplished everything that I wanted to do.  'Cause I was equal.  So, and I had the store for--I carried the store for quite some time until I moved to Indianapolis, but we're not gonna go into that.  (Simultaneously)--
Speaker 2: Now so (unclear)
Speaker 1: I moved the store to Indianapolis [Indiana] back in the '70's [1970's] we're talking about.  This was '68' [1968] when I had the store.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So. But, that was quite--I had accomplished, and that was part of my education.
Story_ID: 61985
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, well how did you manage to, you know, be the proprietor of your own store?
Speaker 2: (Clears throat).
Speaker 1: I mean, what's the--what steps did you take to accomplish that?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a wonderful mother [Nellie Hatton Ricks].  And, anything that I really wanted to do, she was there for me.  And, what I decided I wanted--I had two new girlfriends and we were talking one Sunday.  But, prior to that, I always had a tailoring shop, I mean an alterations shop at home.  Behind my house, my husband [Charles Robert Wallace], he winterized the garage and put my little shop in back there and in the meantime, I opened another little shop across town someplace and I had a cosmetic store and selling cosmetics all this kinda stuff, you know.  So, but anyway, I had these two girlfriends and we were at our house-my house on a Sunday and they would say, "We outta go in business for ourselves".  This was Mable and Rosemary.  And, let's start a store.  Rosemary was--she was a model and sung and she, you know, could model clothes.  Mabel was somewhat a designer and everything and of course, I'm a designer and a seamstress or whatever and I asked them a question, about "What do we need to start a store?"  I guess, I work on challenges, I don't know, after I think about what you're telling--I'm listening to this.  So, Rosemary said, oh, we need to do this, we need to do that and Mabel said well, first of all we need to go to Paris [France] and see what everything is all about and get some office furniture.  That died right there.  But, it got my head to working.  I went to bed.  I woke up and I looked--well, before I went to bed, I looked--I'm gonna do this, I'm gonna do this.  So, I looked in the Sunday's paper and I found this building for sale on Calhoun Street.  Calhoun Street is the main street in Fort Wayne [Indiana].  This is where all the businesses are and this is--you don't hear of black people going on Calhoun Street doing anything, you know, other than shopping or this kinda thing.  So, I went and look at the building.  I told my husband about it, he said, I'm not--and I showed him, he said, "I'm not doing nothing in this raggedy building, you know, I'm not gonna even look at this."  So, but I'm determined.  So, I went and I talked to the lady and I told her what I was all about, what I wanted to do and I didn't have enough money for down payment and she said, "Well, I don't mind helping you" or whatever, she says, "Tell you what"--I said--told her what I had, I said, "Can I put the rest of the down payment on time payment?"  "Not a problem."  My mother, my dad [Colliss Ricks], came in with me, helped me kinda remodel it and we were sewing in there.  And, then I wanted to carry some merchandise.  So I accumulated a little money and I went to Chicago [Illinois].  And, I went down at the garment district and I think I brought two dozen pair of pants and I brought them back and the rest of it is history.  'Cause I ended up--when I finished--I had over a hundred some thousand dollar worth of inventory.  So you buy, you buy a dozen and you go back and you buy two and then you buy six.  And then, I accumulated or acquired some credit after a hard time getting that and the man from American Headwear was the first person that gave me credit to buy merchandise and everything, so.  That how--and I was the first black person to own any property on Calhoun Street and today, Fort Wayne Community School Administration Office sits on that, on that land; they bought it from me years later.  And this is in 1968.
Story_ID: 61986
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Well, now during that period of time, there were a lot of--in most cities, I know it was true in most mid-Western cities, there was turbulence around jobs for black people in these major department stores and the retail outlets and so forth, were you part of that struggle?
Speaker 2: Well, you just heard my story about the problems that I had with going to the retail stores and everything.  My mother did work in the department store which is Wolf and Dessauer's; biggest, largest department store in Fort Wayne [Indiana].  She was a presser.  She pressed wedding gowns and things of that sort.  And, she did do alterations at that shop, you know.  So, as far as anything else--the only thing that I know that they did, they did elevators and they cleaned up, or--yeah, it was unheard of to see a clerk or anything in that store, in the, in the retail stores at that point in time.  And, but, it--soon after that you did, I mean like Paris Store and all this kinda stuff.  I remember, (unclear) Betty and Delores, they started there and some friends of mine.  And, you know, it eventually got to the point, where we had some clerks and everything but, yes, it was hard to get a job there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, had some of that started breaking up by the time you started your own store?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, Oh yes.  Yes.  Yes.  It did.
Speaker 1: So the Fishman's and this other place had started hiring black people as sales people?
Speaker 2: I don't ever remember seeing a black person selling anything in Fishman's or Nobson's.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now they may have had, and I was right next door to Nobson's, but I didn't frequent it very often.  So, I'm sure that they did have some, you know, what they call a token--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Person, you understand that don't you?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: I think most people will, when they hear this tape; they'll understand that.
Speaker 2: They'll understand what that is, okay.
Story_ID: 61987
Speaker 1: Let's see.  So, how long did your store last?
Speaker 2: I had my store until, let see, I started in 1968 and in 1972 I guess it was, when things started going down downtown and everything.  They opened up the big mall and everything and I went to the Mayor and I talked to him, I says, "everything is moving out around here, how long--I mean, what's happening here?" you know, am I gonna stay here, what am I gonna do?  So, anyway, I decided that maybe I better move, I knew (unclear) in Indianapolis [Indiana] that there were a lot black people and what I cared like was really good, you know, clothes that the black people buy, you know.  We're the ones supporting all these store, you know, with all this buying these clothes and these expensive things and Tommy Hilfiger and all that kinda stuff, you can strike that out, (laughter) I don't need to call that, you know.  But, anyway, I went to Indianapolis.  I had just had surgery and everything so I had my cousin, which was working for me, we drove down to Indianapolis and I said, "I think I'm gonna open a store down here."  I talked to my husband about it.  And I did.  I moved to Indianapolis.  I moved my store, which was called Mr. Adrian, right in front of Shortridge, which Shortridge is right in a town, it's on; it was on Meridian Street, 30, 34th and Meridian.  So, I moved.  I had a big store down there and that was quite an experience.
Story_ID: 61988
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, in what sense?
Speaker 2: In what sense?  I opened the store up and it was basically the kinda store that I had--all the only ones had--it was in Jew-town, Jew stores, you know, around town, little white stores, whatever you wanna call it, if I'm allow to say that, you know.  But, and they got wind of me coming there.  They sent speculators, shoppers and everything to come there to see what kinda store--I was a threat to them.  I had the shoes that they carried.  They--I had the pants that they carried.  I had the coats, the leathers, the hats, the whole nine yards that they carried.  This upset them.  They sent me messages that I had to leave.  You are not wanted here, you need to get out of town, you need to go back to Fort Wayne [Indiana], et cetera, et cetera.
Speaker 1: Now, what form of these messages taken, notes, letters, telephone threats or what?--(simultaneously)
Speaker 2: I had some notes, but they sent some brothers with messages, you know.  There're some of us who'll do that, you know.  And, I had a quite a few robberies, they took a fifty-five gallon can and threw it through my window, reached in and took all my leathers and took off with them.  They sent guys in there to grab up stacks of pants and run off with them, and everything.  And, they even broke in my store, behind it was a little alleyway, they had a ladder, went up to come in a duct that came down.  I had Valary Shoes and things of this sort.  They took all my shoes, went down out the ladder.  They even crapped underneath this ladder to say, you know what with me.  They did that.  And, they didn't realize-- probably wanted to really hurt me, they didn't realize they only had a right shoe.  The ones that they took, 'cause they left all the left ones there, (laughter) you know so (laughter), that was funny.  But, anyway, then that didn't work.  I didn't move.  I didn't bulge.
Story_ID: 61989
Speaker 1: So, then they decided, well, we're gonna run, we're gonna get you out of here one way or the other.  So, they searched around and tried to find some way--find my debtors.  There was quite a few people that I owned some money to.  American Headwear was my first creditor.  I owned him maybe $300 and somebody else $200, and I'm sitting on a lot of merchandise, you know, and they thought they'd hurt me.  But, anyway so they tried to throw me into involuntary bankruptcy.  They put--took me to court.  I went to the organization there in Indianapolis [Indiana], I can't remember what it was or whatever, and I needed some money to survive.  And, they loaned me $10,000 or gave me $10,000 however else you wanna say it.  But, anyway, I went to court.  I had an attorney there.  She didn't do very much for me.  She was a black attorney.  The time that I was supposed to go to court, she was in Europe somewhere and she told me, Delories, you can handle it, you can go represent yourself.  Which I did for a point, but I was losing.  The judge told me that he hired an attorney to watch my business for me, gave me salary, which I've never had before and he was the overseer.  We left the courtroom and he told me, he said "Miss Wallace," he said, "I don't know anything about retail business.  He said, "I'll tell you what," he says, "You just handle it, you just tell me what, you know, to do and how to do it.  I don't need to be directly involved," or et cetera.  You just take your salary and you know, and I'm just, I'm just an overseer."  Said but "I'm gonna tell you one thing," he says, "Whatever you do, don't stop moving."  He says, "Because there's vultures out there that's after you. And vultures only strike anything that's dead."  And, I remembered that.  With my salary, I saved up.  I got on a plane for the first time, went to New York and bought me some more stuff and et cetera.  So, I stayed in court for over a year.  MRA Men's Retail Association, got involved and got a wind of it.  And this is, and all the things that had happened to me.  This is why they wanted to hire me as a consultant.  I left, I left 38th Street and move over on--I mean, left Meridian, moved to 38th Street and had a store down there and, and I finally decided--my husband [Charles Robert Wallace]-I finally decided, I said, "Well, I'm coming home," after two years.  I said "I'm coming home."  Let our daughter run it.  They set her up to come to Fort Wayne and whatever and they went and they rob her.  I said, "That's it.  I quit."  I went down on a Sunday and backed the truck up and I loaded my stuff and I went home.  So, that's what happened with the retail business.
Speaker 2: This was like, what time?
Speaker 1: This is like in, like--my retail business was like '68' [1968] until like '74' [1974], somewhere in there and about.  So a few years.  I was in there a long time.
Story_ID: 61990
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Okay, so, well, what did you do next?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: You're an entrepreneur, to your bones here, so you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess.
Speaker 1: Oaky.
Speaker 2: What did I do next?  Well, I decided, I wanted to do macrame and all this kinda stuff.  So, I taught myself how to do macrame and make hangers and everything.  I wanted--I bought out a fabric store and et cetera, and I went in the building with that.  When I was doing this in my home, my husband [Charles Robert Wallace] said, "You gotta get this stuff out the house, it's too crowded."  So, I rented a building and I went down with that.  So, then I moved from that building, 'cause it was kinda roach infested and everything.  It wasn't very nice.  An opportunity came to build--to go into a store that had been a white bridal shop and I went into that.  And, I was just doing like, plant hangers, and cut--not cut flowers but, you know, flowers, potted flowers and all this kinda stuff.  And, a lady came in there one day and she asked me to do her wedding.  I say  "I've never done that before."  She said, "All I need is some corsages, and stuff, some corsages and stuff like that, you can do this.  So I told her, I say, "Well, I'll tell you what, I'm game.  I'll try it, if you wanna, you know, do it."  She was from Ohio.  So, I made my first corsages.  Needless to tell you, the bottoms of it was about that wide.  I didn't really know what I was doing. But, where I was getting my flowers at, there was this little lady, Shirley, that worked there, was a designer.  And, I remember what this man had told me when I'd gone to Chicago [Illinois] and everything, to hire a designer so I hired Shirley.  Shirley came in.  My shop was named, Impulse Florist, it's still standing today.  And, I hired Shirley and I hired David, the other guy from the same place.  And, I ended up--I bought a building over on the corner of Oxford.  On Oxford, on Ox--1400 block of Oxford, very nice building and that's where I excelled out there. I did, I did--I was there for quite some time, like, this was like, '76' [1976] and I sold it in, well I lost my son in 1982 and then after I did his funeral and everything, I just kinda lost interest and all.  So, I think I sold it in like '84' [1984]--'80' [1980]--'83' [1983] I guess it was.  I'm gonna retire at that point in time, quit.  Well, unfortunately, I didn't.  I sold the building, the business and all.
Story_ID: 61991
Speaker 1: And, the next facet of my life was, my husband [Charles Robert Wallace].  We had bars, and liquor stores, and night clubs and et cetera, 'cause that was his end of it, you know.  And, he decided he was gonna be, I don't know what, but he wanted a limousine.  So, he saw one in Detroit [Michigan] somewhere and he liked it and he came back and he came and said "Look honey, I'm take you, I'm a show you this limousine."  I wanna buy this car, just for us to ride around in, et cetera, you know, with the liquor store and all this kinda stuff, and taverns and everything, you know.  To me, it was just a pimp car.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: You know what I'm saying, being honest.  So, he look me up there and showed it to me and I look at it; I said "Are you crazy?  Are you a pimp?"  I said, "This is what this car is telling me."  I said, "Now if you want a limousine now we can do this."  It was a great, big, long, black one sitting out in front of this place where they had this limousine for sell.  I said, "Now we can buy that one right there.  Or, better yet, I will buy that one right there, 'cause I already got a down payment for it because, I bought a car at the auction that I never driven, which was a blue Lincoln, this was a black Lincoln.  I said, "I'll buy that."  And, then, you know what, we can start a limousine business.  This is in '84' [1984].  I'm still in the limousine business.  So, that was, that was good.
Speaker 2: Did it grow pretty quick, quickly?
Speaker 1: Yes.  At one point in time I think I had six.  Now I only have two and a town car.  Because I didn't need all that, you know.  They had some problems during the way, nothing has been, you know, smooth sailing or anything of this sort.  So, I'm comfortable with what I'm doing.  I'm making just enough.  Would like to make more.  I, you know, I wanna grow, but I'm old now.
Story_ID: 61992
Speaker 1: Now, who's your clientele, pretty much, with the limousine service, is it just black people or is it other people?
Speaker 2: No.  Basically, that is my weakest point, right there, the black people are.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I am the first black limousine service in Fort Wayne [Indiana].  I like that word, first, I guess, you know, (laughter) I don't know.  But, it just--it means something to me that, you know, I like to be original.  You know, I like to do what I like to do and whatever.  But, anyway, my, my, my clientele, I do a lot of weddings and they're mostly white, let me put it this way.  But, at one point in time, I did a lot of celebrities.  That was--the good celebrities, I really enjoyed driving them around.  The bad ones, they will tear your cars up and I really didn't want to fool with them.
Speaker 1: Did you do any driving yourself?
Speaker 2: I--yes.  My husband [Charles Robert Wallace] and I, we were the first drivers--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --To drive the limousines.
Story_ID: 61993
Speaker 1: Now, with some of these celebrities, then you had some first-hand experiences with some of them?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about some of 'em and you know.
Speaker 2: Well, the one I mostly enjoyed was Ruby Dee [HM] and Ossie Davis [HM].  Beautiful people, beautiful people.  And, the Un-cola man, I can't ever remember
Speaker 1: Oh, Geoffrey Holder [HM]? (makes noise)
Speaker 2: Right.  I drove him around.  And Susan Taylor [HM], I drove her around in my husband's [Charles Robert Wallace] yellow Mercedes.  I think I scared her to death 'cause she's (unclear) individual.  I drove Holder in the Mercedes too.  My husband had brought himself a yellow Mercedes, against my better judgment, but however.  It was in 1977 and we still have it.  So, and, Dionne Warwick [HM] and just--BB King [HM], you know, and a number of them.  We just had--last year, we did the Whispers and we've done, I--the list goes on.  Engelbert Humperdinck and it just goes on and on and on.  Anybody that came to Fort Wayne [Indiana] mostly.  Loretta Lynn's sister, I can't remember her name, I can never, ever remember her name.  But, oh man. I can't remember whether I drove, one of my favorite people, Earl Graves [HM].  I said if he was single and I was single, boy he'd have a problem, you know (laughter).  But, Mr. Graves was quite a--quite a man.  He came here for something.  Ann was just telling me about what it was, I don't remember, maybe there--when he brought him here, whatever.  But, I took him home with us, when they came out to our house.  I had cooked dinner and everything and he came out and he ate dinner--he ate greens at my house.  And, he was very special to me; took pictures with him and et cetera.  He sent me a beautiful eight by ten [8x10] glossy with a nice letter.  And, then we just--a couple of year ago, we celebrated our fiftieth [50th] anniversary.
Speaker 1: Now, was he here to speak at--
Speaker 2: Yes.  At a function here, right.  And, I sent him an invitation to our anniversary party and everything.  And he sent me the beautiful letter back and that was important to me, you know.  So, but as far as celebrities, yes, I've--we've done lots of them.
Speaker 1: Now, what are the antics of some of the celebrities who--you don't have to name them necessarily but, that some of the ones that didn't really--
Speaker 2: The Fat Boys.  They tore up my car (laughter).  Yeah, they were quite irate.
Speaker 1: Now, they're a famous rap group from the '80's [1980's]?
Speaker 2: Right.  Absolutely.  Yeah, the Fat Boys.  And, Ice-T was nice.  He was quite rowdy but you know.  He as, he was, we drove him around--
Speaker 1: He wasn't destructive or anything?
Speaker 2: No, he, no, he wasn't destructive, he had a little nasty mouth and everything but I guess we all do in our own way, you know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But, he was, he was nice and Tony, Toni [Tony! Toni! Tone!] was okay.  Was very nice.  And, he was a nice young man at that point in time.  And, I think Babyface, we drove him around, he was nice as he is today, a little meek, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, he's from Indianapolis [Indiana] too?
Speaker 2: Right.  He is from Indianap--I didn't know him down there though.
Story_ID: 61994
Speaker 1: And, oh Ms. Ella Fitzgerald.  She was quite a lady but she was quite different.  That's all I would say.
Speaker 2: Quite different?
Speaker 1: I had to let her know that I own the car.  I was not her servant.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Tom Cruise, we drove him around.  Had--I had white drivers and everything and I walk in and opened the door and he looked up and he says, "This is a private car, I--I'm not supposed to be disturbed" or whatever and I politely said "Mr. Cruise, I say, "I just wanted to introduce myself," I said "I'm Delories Wallace."  I say, "I own this limousine and I--it's a pleasure to have you here." (unclear).  So. You get all kinda things, you know.  They, I mean , they go in shock, some of them, but basically, they're--I just drove Amy and what's his name, just had him--you know who I'm talking about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--I know who you're talking about.  Clifford Davis.
Speaker 1: Clifford Davis.  Yes, I just drove him around just last month.  My daughter was recognized at one of the functions and of course, we were assigned to drive him around.  It was a pleasure, he's a wonderful man too, to pick him up and everything.  So, like I said, through the years, I can't say I had too much bad experience or too many of them.  But, I had a lot of them and they were good.
Story_ID: 61995
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we haven't asked you that you need--that you think that we need to know?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know what that could be, but I wanna tell you about this building here.  It's quite beautiful.  It holds a lot of fondly memories for me.  I was here when it was just, what they say, almost a weekly center, but it was the Urban League at one time.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you here when it was (simultaneously) too?
Speaker 2: No.  That was a little bit before my time.  My husband [Charles Robert Wallace] know about that.  But, this was the Urban League building and I have a daughter that works at the Urban League right now.  She's been--she's head of the Senior Citizens Program.  I forget what her title is but--anyway this building--I was--it was very active back in '86' [1986], and I happen to be another first.  I was the first Urban League Queen from the Guild, so--and it was right here, you know.  So, it--this was one of the places at that time that we could go to that was, you know, that we had access to.  And, one of the most memorable things, we used to come and play Bid Whist.  I'm a great Bid Whist player, I think.  Some people say no, I'm not, but I love it, you know.  You know what that game is and all?  So.
Story_ID: 61996
Speaker 1: But I don't know.  Only thing I can say is that I've been blessed and the Lord is still blessing me.  I am--I go to Turner Chapel A.M.E. Church.  I'm the Pastoral Steward there.  I'm on the Board of Directors at the Old Fort Y [MCA], which holds very dear--it's very dear to my heart.  And, it's in the, it's in the area, you know, what they call the Hood and everything, and we're trying to get some things done.
Speaker 2: What's it's called, the Y?
Speaker 1: Old Fort YMCA.
Speaker 2: Old Fort YMCA?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Old Fort, yes, that's what it's called, this is Old Fort Wayne as you know.  And, they're just kinda--
Speaker 2: Okay.  This section of town is called Old Fort Wayne?
Speaker 1: No.  No, no.  This is the Old Fort Wayne, right.  This is the Old, what do you say--Neighborhood Associ--neighborhood area, you know, all over in here, you know.  And, you haven't been around, or whatever, but it's--you're right in the hub--what they would say--right, you're not in the ghetto 'cause we never, we never even considered ourselves as ghetto people or anything of this sort.  I mean, inner city.  That's the word I wanna say.  This is the inner city where, you know, we hung around.  And, this is one of the places that we came to.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know.  Along with the McCulloch Center that I spoke of.  And, I met my husband at the McCulloch Center, which was a neighborhood place, you know, house, barn, and everything.  We had our own little places that we could go to.  And one other thing I'm proud of, you're talking about, the Movement and everything, as far as Martin Luther King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is concerned.  My mother [Nellie Hatton Ricks] had the opportunity to drive Martin Luther King in Huntsville, Alabama in a parade.  So, that was kinda good for me too, you know, to know that.
Story_ID: 61997
Speaker 1: Now, what are your hopes and aspiration for the black community here in Fort Wayne [Indiana] and generally?
Speaker 2: That's a broad question.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, what I don't--how do I wanna answer this?  It's not just a one part answer.  Okay.  But I just hope, and this is any inner city in the United States, that the black man would get wise to what is going on here today, as far as our people are concerned.  They are making us destroy ourselves by doing all the things that these people are, you know, are doing in the inner city.
Speaker 1: Like what instances?
Speaker 2: Like, destroying your own property; making things hard for me, making things hard for the older people that live in the neighborhood.  They move the stores out, the grocery store, even convenient stores, whatever else there is.  All the--you know, everything is just, I mean, they closing down.  Down in the south part of town, they have branded that so, that nobody wants to move out there.  They had a beautiful mall out there, the black people, I guess didn't patronize it like they should have.  It's not close to where I live, but I would drive over there.  It's close where my sister lives and I--it holds dear to my heart because it is something that is convenient for the people in this area.  They basically closed that down and you can't--I own--I bought some buildings a few years ago; 22,000 square foot building.  It has set vacant for a year and a half now.  I can't even rent it out.  It's, good for a lot of things.  It's a two part building and everything, and I invested--God love me--I'm still paying for it, you know.  So, I just wish that they would realize all of this shooting and gang-banging and just, just rowdiness and doing things that they shouldn't be doing.  They're destroying their own neighborhood and the man is over there.  They're not bothered with that.  They don't care.  They wanna see you destroy yourself.  And, I just wish that they would just realize what's going on here.  When I was a little girl, we didn't do the things that these kids do.  We didn't even--we never heard of it.  And that word, bored, I never heard of it.  These kids now--and I got grandkids--and I tell 'em don't use that word with me 'cause you don't have to be bored, you can go out and do something constructive, you know, if nothing but turn a flip.  'Cause they go to, they go to Hawaii and go to overseas to turn flips, whatever else.  So that's an achievement, you know.  So, the schools, they've taken the Bible out of the school.  They've taken the prayer out of the school.
Story_ID: 61998
Speaker 1: And, the other thing is--the problem I think is, the kids don't have respect for anybody, anymore.  When I was coming up,(unclear) you better not do nothing in school that you got a spanking for, you go home and you're gonna get another spanking.  You go to school and say your mom spanked you, they gonna call the police.  And, they--and you are in jeopardy to go to jail and whatever else--that's ludicrous.  How could you raise your child without disciplining them, and believe me I had a lot of 'em.  And, my daughter got angry at me one time, she was gonna go downtown and tell on me because I disciplined her.  They said I was a cruel mother because I spanked.  But, I got spankings too.  Didn't have to get many of them, 'cause I was scared and you know, and all.  But--and I told her, I said, "I'll tell you what you do, you go upstairs and pack your clothes 'cause when you leave here to go tell on me, you better need to have--you need to have somewhere to go, 'cause you're not coming back here.  'Cause nobody runs this house but your dad and I."  I said, "So you need to think about this--what 'cha gonna do."  Consequently, she didn't leave.  She went on graduated school, went to college, you know so.  But, the kids have no fear.  My daughter is a principle at one of the main schools here in Fort Wayne.  And, (unclear) when she's in charge of discipline and there's 2,000 kids out there and the problems that she have, is unheard of.  Why?  Why, do you wanna do this when you're trying to teach you something?  And, my husband [Charles Robert Wallace] has a phrase, "Free school and still fools", and you wonder why.  But, they better get wise.  The parents threaten teachers and they--you have no backup when it comes to kids.  My kids, I tell them, you know--I taught my kids, I say, "I'll tell you one thing, now I can stand a thief better than I can a lair.  So don't lie to me about anything."  And, the reason being is, if you're a thief and you stole something from me, and I ask you, you're gonna tell me the truth.  And, I had seven kids and don't think that any of them have every lied to me, that I know about.  They had the fear.  But, there's no fear in school.  There's no fear in living.  There's no fear in walking--then these kids walking, they know they got the law on their side.  And, believe it--I believe that sometimes the law is made for the criminal, the ones that want to act-up or whatever.  And, the ones that are doing good, sometimes they're being punished for being--for doing good.  So, you know, I don't know what's gonna happen here, or whatever else is--but, I pray that the black man will get wise.
Story_ID: 61999
Speaker 1: They go out and they buy all of this expensive clothes and all this kinda stuff and they don't even happen to have a roof over their head.  I had a friend, well my husband's friend, they was--I don't know that they did, I think they did all kinda stuff in the street and everything and they got in bad luck. They was leaving town, and I rode down the street and she had her stuff out front.  Seliness (ph.) had five kids.  And, I--when I stopped the car, I said, "What are you doing"?  There's beds out here.  She said, "Well, we're selling out, or whatever, we're moving out of town, across town, or whatever.  I said, "What are you doing with those beds"?  We'll I'm selling the beds 'cause I need to raise some money, 'cause I think he needs to get another load or whatever else it might be."  I said, "Let me tell you one thing, that's what my grandmother and my mother told me, "never sell your bed."  You're always gonna need the bed to lay on.  I said, "if you're leave town, take 'em and put them in storage."  And she did do that.  Consequently, she needed those beds again.  So, but, we need to start thinking and looking in the tunnel.  And, I tell my husband and my kids and everybody, if you look through this tunnel and you can see the light, then you proceed to walk in it.  Otherwise, if there's no light at the end of the tunnel, you know that you can't turn around and come back, 'cause you can't get through to the other end.  So, you need to think about these things.
Story_ID: 62000
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I know you still have some activities that you're still be engaged in, but what would you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: To my family?  Or, to anybody that knows me or whatever else it is?  I was my wisdom.  'Cause my grandmother gave me wisdom.  She talked to me and talked to me and I talked to her, and my mother [Nellie Hatton Ricks] the same way.  I could talk to my mother about anything.  My kids are the same way.  They can talk to me about anything.  I don't care what it is.  'Cause we all are adults now.  My baby is forty years old.  So, we keep that line of communication open.  So, I hope it's wisdom.  No monetary things.  'Cause they can achieve that on their own.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your mother get a chance to see you become a big success?
Speaker 2: My mother was right there hand and glove with me.  My mother died twenty-two years ago and at that time, I was in the flower business and that too, had a lot to do with me selling my flower business.  'Cause I buried my mother also and I did every flower for her; and two years later it was my son.
Story_ID: 62001
Speaker 1: Now, this questions, is slightly different from the legacy one, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  As a fair, positive person.  I'm very affectionate.  Probably too much for some of my kids, but I have one son he leans over, only when I make him kiss me, and I end up kissing his nose 'cause he's burying his head in my shoulder, you know.  So--but, I'm very warm and I know that I'm very domineering.  I--they say that I'm very controlling and I'm still, you know my kids are grown, but I'm still trying to raise them.  But, like I told them, "How do you stop after all these years?"  'Cause I raised all them and I've raise about seven or eight grandchildren too.  So, where--when do you know to stop?  So, I just hope that I'm--to be the best that I can.  They'd say that I was the best that I could be.  And, to know that I--if I ever hurt anybody, it was not intentionally, and I apologize.  So, you know, just, just good things, positive things, 'cause I am a positive person.  And, to know that you can do anything that you wanna do.  Maybe not the way somebody else want you to do it; but, in your own way.  If you're not crushing anybody, or hurting, or walking on anybody, or using anybody, it's okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you very much.
Story_ID: 62002
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Well, there you have Delories Dell Ricks-Wallace.  This is my only culture time or when I have culture whatever else is.  And, this is my quiet time that I had at home.  I had all of this reserved area for me and I say, I'm having my rest at--I have my tea every afternoon at two and my demitasse and read my favorite book, which is "Certain People."
Speaker 2: Okay, and what's the date for this photo?
Speaker 1: Oh my, let me see, this has to have been back in about '80' [1980], '85' [1985], I'm not quite sure, somewhere there and about.
Speaker 2: '80's [1980]?
Speaker 1: In the '80's [1980's], that's fine.  Yes, in the '80's [1980's].
Speaker 2: Next, please.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is my great-grandparents; Ed Lowry and Nellie Lowry.  And, this was quite a few years ago and right beneath them is my grandmother, which was their daughter.  She was one of eight children.  This is the grandfather that I said, that came from Nashville [Tennessee] to Huntsville [Alabama] to teach shoemaking at A and M College [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Huntsville, Alabama].
Speaker 2: And, what was her name again?
Speaker 1: Nellie Lowry and Ed Lowry.
Speaker 2: She spells it, -llie or -lly.
Speaker 1: Nellie.  N-E-L-L-I-E.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My mother [Nellie Hatton Ricks] was named from her.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Alright.  Next please.
OFF-CAMERA:  We're doing the bottom one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she described it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I described that one, yeah.  Which has my cousin in there also; but that's not important.
Speaker 2: What's next here?
Speaker 1: This is--
Speaker 2: No, we don't wanna do that one next, it's so heavy.  We'll wait 'til last for this one.
Speaker 1: But, that's, that's (unclear), her son.
Speaker 2: It doesn't have to be in chronological order.  (Simultaneously)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead please.
Speaker 2: And, this one is my mother.  My beautiful mother, Nellie OD Lowry.  No, Nellie OD Hatton.  And, she was just my mother, she's gorgeous and she--this was when she was about maybe forty years old and she died in 1978, I think it was.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) about what year?
Speaker 2: That one, well, what is--I don't know, she was sixty-eight when she died so forty from sixty-eight, was she twenty-five or so or something like that?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What's next?
Speaker 2: A picture of myself when I started a holiday magic cosmetic store and I did all kinda things in that store.  I even put a barber's chair in there and did shaving and picking bumps and stuff to make (laughter) money, you know.  And, my mother's on the right and my husband's mother, Fannie Wallace is on the left.  And, basically that's it, you know.  My grand--my mother-in-law died, she was eighty years old and she died sixteen years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you say when this was?
Speaker 2: That was in the 70's [1970's].  That's when that was.
Speaker 1: Very good, next.
Speaker 2: This is--not a very good shot.  But, this is my mother, and her two daughters.  My sister on the left, Mildred Ricks-Lapsley, still lives in Fort Wayne, and of course, myself on the right.  And, we were just--that was about the best picture that I have, the three of us together, so.
Speaker 1: How does your sister spell her last name?
Speaker 2: L-A-P-S-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Great.  Year?
Speaker 2: That had to have been, let's see, we moved--that was in '76' [1976].
Speaker 1: (laughter) Great.  Next.  Okay, go ahead please.
Speaker 2: This is a before picture.  Before he and I got heavy (laughter).  I fed him too good.  But, this is my husband, Charlie Bob [Wallace] and myself.  We're at Pokehagen Park.  And, this had to have been about 1955.  So, that's a before picture.  You'll see our after picture later (laughter) so.  But anyway, we're at the beach at Pokehagen Park.  What else do you need to know about it?
Speaker 1: Okay, that's great.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is a shot of the Urban League Guild 1950--'56 [1965] or '57 [1957] somewhere there and about.  And, this-we have meetings right here in this building where we are, but this shot was taken at--we had a Hawaiian Luau at the McCulloch Center in Fort Wayne [Indiana].  So, and there's a whole bunch of us there.  I'm there to the right there, the one that's pregnant.
Speaker 1: When is this?
Speaker 2: This was like, about '57' [1957] or somewhere there and about.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Did you identify her?
Speaker 1: Yeah, which on are you?
Speaker 2: Right there.  The one that's pregnant, but I can't say that, I think it was six of us pregnant (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Go ahead, next.
Speaker 2: Aw man.  I should've done what I did.  I got, I got bad feeling in my--I wear a glove all the time--most of the time.  Okay.  This is, this is a picture of my family.  This is my whole orchard here.  We have DeCarlo to the--
Speaker 1: We'll start to the left.
Speaker 2: That's DeCarlo, that's the oldest one, sitting next to her Dad, which is Charlie Bob.  And, then I'm next, mother, I'm Delories and then LeeAnn our second daughter, on the--well last daughter, that's LeeAnn and the oldest son, Charlie, Jr., and then Emmett Armstead there and then the baby WenDell Warren and then the--what they call a knee baby, Clifton Adrian, okay.
Speaker 1: Can we get a couple of spellings? DeCarlo?
Speaker 2: Capital D-E Capital C-A-R-L-O.
Speaker 1: Okay, and LeeAnn.
Speaker 2: Capital L-E-E Capital A-N-N.
Speaker 1: There were one, I forget all the names.
Speaker 2: Charles Wallace, Jr.
Speaker 1: Front row--
Speaker 2: Armstead, Emmett Armstead.  E-M-M-E-T-T A-R-M-E-S-T-E-A-D.  Armstead, he's named from his two grandfathers.  And, then we have WenDell, Capital W-E-N Capital D-E-L-L.  He has part of my name, WenDell.  And, then we have Clifton Adrian, C-L-I-F-T-O-N A-D-R-I-A-N.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is me in the buggy, Delories, and that's my sister--it's an old picture; that's my sister Mildred.  And, we were standing in front of the house where we were born and I told you about the brick that my mother and my grandfather made.  This is the brick house.  Those brick there are the ones that they made from scratch; with the straw and the red clay.  And, that's in--on Holmes Avenue in Huntsville, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: I'm the baby.  And, this is she and I, my sister.  Where we grow up, my mother lived in Chattanooga [Tennessee] (unclear).  My uncle and my grandmother was keeping us so she asked my mother to send her some pictures of her two beautiful daughters.  And, my grandmother found the worst thing in the world she could find to put on us and took us out in the field and took a picture of us.  And this was back, I think I was like, three years old.  So, this had to be about '36' [1936], 1936.
Speaker 1: Very good.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And that's, that's just another shot--you know back in those days, we didn't take a lot of pictures so, can't prove it by me though, but anyway, that is a picture of me.  I think I was about eight years old, somewhere there and about.  And that's one of the dresses--I had on one of the dresses that my grandmother made me.  It was one of my favorite ones.  It was gray and pink.  That's basically it.  It says, I'm shy but that's not true.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Laughter)
Speaker 2: This is another one of my special pictures.  My husband likes this.  'Cause it shows all the hair on my face and he says I look like a little Indian with all the hair around the face.  So, I had to have been about nine, nine years old or somewhere, eight or nine, okay.  And, that was taken in Huntsville also, okay.
Speaker 1: Next.  Go ahead please.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is a picture--that's one of my favorite ones.  I called myself being an adult at that point in time.  I think I was like, maybe fourteen or fifteen years old.  And this is what my husband fell in love with.  That lady on that picture and that's how I looked at that time.  And that was back in 1948.  Yes, somewhere and about.  So, that was in Fort Wayne.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Very good.  Next.
Speaker 2: Not all of them.  But, this is our oldest son, had gotten married and we had--was posing for pictures.  My little granddaughter there with the shirt on, with the logo on it; she was in the wedding, but had to hurry up and get undressed.  That's little Delories; my namesake.  And of course, there's myself, my husband, and--do you want to know the names quickly, but I don't know if you need to know that or not.  But, it's Charles, and Tara, and Onika, and Bobby, and Kim, and Delories, and Kyla, Colliss, which was named for my father, and right there and then little Emmett, and then Ashley in my--in my husband's lap, and Amanda in my lap, and Doshia standing there in the pink, my granddaughters, and we have Aaron a great-grandchild, right there that Tara is holding, the little baby.  And Terry--his dad is over there to the left with the green shirt on.  Okay.  That's just a few of 'em.
Speaker 1: You know if we're gonna do it, we're probably need to know, based on what their position is in the photo.  You fill like doing that?
Speaker 2: I don't care.  Whatever you wanna do, I'll do it.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Do we have a pen or something so she can point Larry or you point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we can just go left to right.  That's the best way to do anything.  So, if we start at the top and go left to right--(simultaneously)
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a good place to start.  That's my first grandson, that's Terry.  Okay.  Next to him is Onika, she's not the first granddaughter, but she was the second granddaughter.
Speaker 2: Spelling please.
Speaker 1: O-N-I-K-A.
Speaker 2: Okay, who's next?
Speaker 1: The next one is Bobby and that's my grandson and (unclear) when he was fourteen years old, he's quite special to me.  And, then over to the right, that's Doshia.
Speaker 2: Point please.
Speaker 1: With the, with the pink dress on.  No, down there, low, the little bitty one.
Speaker 2: Shouldn't we go straight across?
Speaker 1: Oh, I was just going--
Speaker 2: Then we should go left to right.  Like you're reading.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's fine.  Okay.  That's Terran.  That is Terry--that's my first great-grandbaby.  No he's not the first, but he is--no he's a grand, great grandbaby.  This is Tara, my grand, my granddaughter Tara, T-A-R-A.
Speaker 2: Then we go over there.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then Kim.  We call him Juice.  That's my youngest daughter's son.  And then, next to him, in grandpa's lap, is Kyla.  And, then the other person in my husband's lap is Ashley. That's our first great grandbaby.  And, then the one's next to me standing up, that's Doshia, D-O-S-H-I-A and that is our--
Speaker 2: You, just say it's you.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.  That's me, I'm sorry, that's me.  And that's Doshia, D-O-S-H-I-A, that's my daughter's oldest, only girl.  My first granddaughter and that's her brother Charles, my grandson.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Bottom row.
Speaker 1: Bottom row.  That's my namesake.  That's little Delories and then there's little Emmett, my grandson and next to him is Colliss, which is named for my, my dad, Colliss.  That's my oldest son's baby.
Speaker 2: Spelling?
Speaker 1: C-O-L-I-S-S-E.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then, next to him, the little girl in my lap is Amanda.  That's my youngest boy's daughter.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I need to give them some play.  You know, I'm sorry about that.  I don't mean it that way (laughter).  But anyway, this is a photo that was taken in Tuscumbia, Alabama, my dad's home.  That's my Aunt Willa, she was gorgeous standing on the post.  And right down to the left on the top row, is my cousin Roslyn and my sister Mildred.  I'm not sure who the other girl is, but I don't know her.  But anyway, on the bottom, that is I, Lolo and I'm not quite--oh, Marian, that's Marian my cousin, that's her mom standing there.  And then there's Alice and then--I'm sorry, I--I'm mixed up, wait a minute.  Roslyn.
Speaker 2: Should be this one right here, is the next one.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's Jean.  That's Roslyn's sister, that's Jean Long.  And then there's Alice Leach, and then there's bra-boy (ph.) and--at the very bottom is--Oh Jesus, James Godfrey, that's his name.
Speaker 2: Myself, Delories, we were going to a debutante and this is what I call my twin cousin.  His mother and my mother was sisters and he's three weeks and a day older than I am.  And, we both nursed each mother.  So, and he's still living, he has a voice box.  Now he lost his throat and has a voice box and everything, but he lives in Huntsville.  That was taken in 19--let me see, about '85' [1985] somewhere there and about.
Speaker 1: Okay, thanks.  Next please.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This was one of the photos from when we were little.  To my left is a little red boy there, that's Ernest, the one that's on the other picture, that's Ernest Jones.  He still lives in Huntsville.  He's quite a business man down there.  The middle one is my sister Mildred.  And of course, the one that's being real nosey, that is I.  Is there anything else you need to know?
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is when I was crowned queen of the Urban League in 1958.  Was quite a time for me, and the young lady that's crowning me is, Gail Kingsbury (ph.).  She--I think she was the president at that time, of the Guild.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously)
Speaker 2: Oh, don't ask me to spell Kingsbury (ph.).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The gentleman?
Speaker 2: The gentleman is our friendly undertaker, Cecil Ellis.  The two of them are deceased.
Speaker 1: Go ahead please.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And this is--this was taken back in 1960, in the '60's [1960].  And, I'm at a, one of my favorite places, at a sowing machine.  I was helping a guy that had an upholstery shop there.  So, that was me.
Speaker 1: Here's one.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm--last year.
Speaker 2: Back row, left to right.
Speaker 1: Back row, left to right.  It's Emmett Armstead, DeCarlo, I'm sorry DeCarlo, LeeAnn, Charlie, Jr., WenDell and up over their head is our deceased son Kim, Sr., and Adrian's on that--to the left side, Adrian Clif--
Speaker 2: (unclear)
Speaker 1: Yeah, front row, Adrian, my husband, Charlie and then myself, Delories.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anyway he's head of the Martin Luther King Association here.  And then, of course my husband, Charlie.
(OFF-CAMERA):  (Phone ringing)
Speaker 1: And then I'm there, next to him in the middle.  And that's a plaque that we received at the Martin Luther King Day.
Speaker 2: How many more do we have?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):	I don't know.
Speaker 2: Not here but just--
Speaker 1: I'm just picking out now.  'Cause let me tell you--
Speaker 2: Let see this one.  This little one here (unclear).
Speaker 1: You have any other picture of some of the celebrities?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I do have one and this is--they told me by all means do this one.
(OFF-CAMERA):  (Ringing)
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, by all means.  Ossie Davis [HM].
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: You know his name is--you know what his real name is?
Speaker 1: No.
Story_ID: 62003
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is one of my favorite people ever.  This is Earl Graves [HM].  I'm sorry.  This is Earl Gray--Graves.  He happened to come to Fort Wayne.  I met him and I told him I had cook dinner.  He said, "Well, I'm going home with you."  And indeed he did.  With my husband and I, of course, and this is a picture of he and I at our house.  He sent me a beautiful 8x10 picture with a wonderful note thanking me for my hospitality and everything.  I'm not sure exactly, but this was in the '80's [1980's]; early '80's [1980's] I think.  And, when we had our anniversary, I sent him and invitation.  He sent me another nice letter so, Mr. Earl Graves was one of my favorite people.
Speaker 2: Next please.
Speaker 1: I'm on the side where you're copping off.
Speaker 2: We're just get it in the center.
Speaker 1: Oh, Okay.  That's my grandson.  He's my best driver.  He's my right-hand right now.  I raise him.  I'm proud of him.
Speaker 2: He's going to church?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes.  Okay, this is just a shot of half of this limousine.  This limousine is extremely long, its 180 inch stretch.  It'll carry 14 people and with me there's my granddaughter, which helps me in the office.  There's my girl--the tall--I'm sorry, next to her, coming from you, left to right, it is I in the middle and then next to her is Jane.  My girl Friday.  I call her my girl Friday.  Friday through Friday.  So, she's been with us now 17 years and this is just a shot of the--we were at a show at the coliseum and we were just--had our limousine in that--in the show.
Speaker 2: Since my husband [Charles Robert Wallace] and I, we've gotten too old to drive; that's Kim Wallace.  But, next to him is his wife Alissa, A-L-I-S-S-A and they live with us.  I raised him, him and his two sisters and this was just this year and we happened to, at that point in time, we were at--he was driving the Whispers around at that time.  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is one of the stores, and this was back in 1972, '73' [1973], '73' [1973] I believe and I had in Indianapolis.  This is the one that's on 38th Street.  That was called Mr. Adrian's.  That was the last--that was my last clothing department store, whatever.
Speaker 2: Next please.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Just put 'em all down.  This was the early, early, tailoring shop when I moved to Huntsville to try to develop some land and everything.  I went down there for two years and this was an old alteration shop that I opened up.  It's called Dell and that's on--in Huntsville, Alabama, 1964.
Speaker 2: Next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is--to the far right is a store, Dee-Lee's, this is the one that I first opened up down on Calhoun Street and next door to the Nobbson's where I--was my aim to do, or whatever, and that was, that was my Dee-Lee's Dad and Lad Store.  I had a better picture of that.  I think you got it.  I gave it to you on a copy there, down there.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of two of my very favorite people that I've rode--drove around.  When I was driving the limousine, we always dressed in black and white, and this is Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee.  I drove them around, it had to have been at least, I think it was the late '80's [1980's]; about mid-80's I think it was.  They were here in Fort Wayne and I was their official chauffer.  And, they are some beautiful people.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which photo you want; top, bottom, both?
Speaker 1: You wanna do the top first?
Speaker 2: I guess.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the arch that is in Tuscumbia, Alabama, which holds a sixth--the Rick's Cemetery that has been in our family for a hundred years or mo--or more and its right down in Tuscumbia [Alabama].  It's called The Elks.  The First Church of Chris that my great-grandfather started is stays--is on this land or is housed on this land and that building is still standing too.  I'm sorry.  Okay.
Speaker 2: One of my accomplishments.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is the picture of my youngest daughter's wedding which was, it was twenty-five years ago come next year.  And, I designed the dress, it was imported fabric.  There was story that was wrote on it.  That's my daughter in the wedding gown and this her husband Kim Thompson.  Fortunately, they're still married.  I am standing right behind them in that, you know, the long dress, so.  I was quite proud of that.  They did a story in the newspaper on that.  There's an article that you have, okay.
Speaker 1: Early pictures.  Like, I think we were both about maybe six, seven months old.  Earnest, which is to my left, and myself, Delories to the right.  And, that was taken out on our grandfather's yard.  And, I don't know whether we had clothes or not, but we didn't have any on then.  So, that's, that's it and here's a--that's the two of us as we grew up and, you know.
Speaker 2: Same two, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that the same two.  And, we are still very, very good friends.  That Earnest and Lolo, Delories, you know.  And that's, that again is standing on the porch at our house that our grandfather built and our mothers.
Speaker 2: Well, okay.
Speaker 1: And I needed to have--wait, I had one other thing here.  Let's see if I can cut this.  Okay.  Another one of my movie stars that I really like.  And, I had the opportunity to drive him around back in, it was about '87' [1987], '89' [1989], somewhere there, late '80's [1980], early--yeah somewhere and that--I call the "Un-cola Man."
Speaker 2: Geoffrey Holden [Geoffry Holder, HM].
Speaker 1: Geoffrey Holden [Geoffry Holder, HM], yes.  And he was quite interesting.  He wanted to go to antique shops and I took him.
Speaker 2: Go ahead please.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.  This is a--my store as of today.  That was taken a few months ago.  This is three of my great-grandchildren.  The one lives with me is to the left there, that is Christy Ann and the other that partially lives with me that's Terri, Tara I'm sorry, T-A-R-A, Tara and then the other is Onika LeeAnn.  I mean, I'm sorry her name is LeAnn, the one, the last one there.  She lives in Texas, so.  I don't know whatever else.
Speaker 2: I got one.  We'll see.
Speaker 1: Well, I got--I don't know what--
Speaker 2: He's got the big one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a shot of my first department store.  Dee-Lee's, it's on Calhoun Street and this is just the area--they were standing a baloney shooting me in the store.  It was a very nice store, I thought.
Speaker 2: Okay. OFF CAMERA:	Is she in the orange?
Speaker 1: I'm in the orange, yes, and there was customers in there, I was waiting on them.
Speaker 2: Next please.
Speaker 1: This is my wise old grandmother, Mabel Henry-Hatton.  She was Mabel Henry Lowry Hatton.  She died on my birthday, forty-seven years ago.  I don't even know what the math--I think it was about '56' [1956] some where there and about.  And, his is the copy of their marriage license, in the middle.  And, this is my grandfather that build the bricks and everything.  His name is Will Hatton, William Hatton and he died in '48' [1948] 1948.  He was quite a stately man.  He was about six foot seven and she was like four foot nine, so.
