Story_ID: 467624
Speaker 1: We're going to get started with our HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview. My name is Cheryl Butler. I'll be conducting the interview today. We're also joined by Matthew Hickey who is the videographer. Please state your full name and spell it please.
Speaker 2: Kenneth Gerald Rodgers [HistoryMaker Kenneth G. Rodgers], K-E-N-N-E-T-H, G-E-R-A-L-D, R-O-D-G-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: And when were you born and where?
Speaker 2: October 22nd, 1949 in Siler City, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Spell Siler for us.
Speaker 2: S-I-L-E-R.
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: That is a very good question (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's the 22nd.
Speaker 2: Today is June 22nd, 2007.
Speaker 1: Where are we conducting this interview today?
Speaker 2: We are conducting the interview in my home.
Speaker 1: And where is that located?
Speaker 2: My home is located, officially in Durham, North Carolina, however, I have an Orange County [North Carolina] address.
Speaker 1: And what is your profession?
Speaker 2: I am a museum director and when time permits I'm a painter.
Story_ID: 467625
Speaker 1: We're going to start with some fun questions. What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is probably a Mexican dish. I love tacos and fajitas, so that's probably it.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is probably the summer months. Things are a little less hectic during the summer months, and I have an opportunity to reflect on those things that maybe haven't gone so well. But I also have time to do some of the things that are of special interest to me like painting. During the regular months of the year, I have business concerns and so on, so yeah, I think the summer months.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is probably black.
Speaker 1: What about a favorite vacation spot?
Speaker 2: I have a number of favorite, favorite vacation spots. I tend to lean, however, to Africa and although I don't have an opportunity to get there as often as I'd like, that is my ideal vacation spot.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite quote or saying?
Speaker 2: I do. And it's a very simple one. It's, nobody's exempt.
Story_ID: 467626
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your family. What's your mother's name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Cornelia. As a matter of fact, her mother named all of her daughters after flowers.
Speaker 1: What's her full name?
Speaker 2: Cornelia Johnson Rodgers.
Speaker 1: And when was she born and where?
Speaker 2: She was born June 6, 1928 in Siler City, North Carolina. Actually, I should say she was born in suburban Siler City, in a hamlet called Hickory Hill [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Did she have siblings?
Speaker 2: She did. She had two brothers and four sisters.
Speaker 1: What are their names?
Speaker 2: The brothers are Carson [Carson Johnson] and Johnnie [ph.], and the sisters are Arzallie [Arzallie Johnson], Christine [Christine Johnson], Olivia [Olivia Johnson] and the final one is Saundra [ph.]. And there's one other, I said four, there're five, and Brenda [ph.], so there're, if my math serves me correctly, there are five.
Speaker 1: What about your maternal grandparents. What are their names?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was a fascinating man that I only saw maybe once that I can remember. His name was Junior Pearl Johnson [Junior Johnson], and my grandmother, maternal grandmother, was Iona Johnson [Iona Glover Johnson].
Speaker 1: Spell that please.
Speaker 2: I-O-N-A.
Speaker 1: Do you know when they were born and where?
Speaker 2: I do not know a lot about my maternal grandfather's date of birth and where. I can only assume that he was born again in rural Chatham County [North Carolina]. My grandmother, again, I assume was born in rural Chatham County, and I believe that she was born somewhere around 1907 or '8 [1908]. She's still alive and is about to celebrate either her ninety-ninth or her one hundredth birthday.
Speaker 1: Were these educated people?
Speaker 2: Not in terms of going beyond the high school level. As a matter of fact, my grandmother was to have finished up her schooling at the eighth grade, and in the rural cities throughout the South and in particular North Carolina, it was considered quite an advantage if you were in a small community to get beyond the eighth grade. As you may or may not know, there were not many opportunities, not many schools that provided education for colored children in the South beyond the eighth grade. If one were to go further, they had to find a school that would allow, that had further education. There were schools in Greensboro [North Carolina] and there were schools in, I'm told, Rockingham [North Carolina], so my grandmother went to Rockingham to get more education. She went there from, I believe, the ninth grade to the eleventh. And I'm not certain what happened after that, but my suspicion is that she had to come back and help work as the family were sharecroppers. And, as anyone knows, sharecropping demanded a great deal from the entire family.
Speaker 1: And your maternal grandfather, do you know anything about his education.
Speaker 2: I'm not really sure. I think he probably went through about the eighth grade, and again, because there was no opportunity beyond the eighth grade, he simply didn't go anyplace.
Speaker 1: And were they both members of sharecropping families?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, they were.
Speaker 1: What kind of farms?
Speaker 2: I'm not a 100 percent certain, but I believe that there was some tobacco, and probably an assortment of other crops. I'm not--really talked with my grandmother a great deal about what actually, what crops they worked with. I simply know that life was pretty difficult for them, and that they moved around quite a bit.
Speaker 1: As children and adults?
Speaker 2: As children and, and as adults. There were not very many opportunities and oftentimes if crops didn't do as well as maybe they should have, they would have to find, you know, some other land to work. So they moved around quite a bit.
Story_ID: 467627
Speaker 1: Do you know Chatham County [North Carolina] at that time, the early 1900s, the racial make-up?
Speaker 2: I don't, I really don't, but I would imagine that the African American population was probably somewhere near 15 to 20 percent of the population.
Speaker 1: Do you know the names of their [Rodgers' maternal grandparents, Iona Glover Johnson and Junior Johnson] parents, your great-grandparents on your mother's [Cornelia Johnson Rodgers] side?
Speaker 2: I only know the name of my, I guess, great-grandmother. Her name was Cordie [sic. Cordia Glover].
Speaker 1: Spell that please.
Speaker 2: C-O-R-D-I-E [sic.].
Speaker 1: One more time.
Speaker 2: C-O-R-D-I-E. She--
Speaker 1: What's her last name?
Speaker 2: Glover. G-L-O-V-E-R. She was quite an enterprising lady. I, I don't guess it's unfair to say she was kind of the matriarch in the sense that she did look after the larger family, but she had very unique abilities that I think were partly passed down to her and that maybe she also learned on her own. She was a midwife. We now know that she delivered more than three thousand babies, black and white in rural Chatham County, including a number who became mayors of Pittsboro [North Carolina], and so on.
Speaker 1: Do you have the names of some of the people she delivered (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't, I don't, but I was told by an older lady some time ago that, "We knew that someone was going to have a baby any time we saw Miss Cordie coming across the way in her wagon." She not only was a pretty extraordinary midwife, but had the special skills that I think are part of that African tradition that was part of the continuity and what I mean there is she was, I think, a bit of an herbalist, and could go out into the woods and find these things and put them in jars and maybe cook some of them and, you felt immensely better after. I do remember, as a kid, that we were always taken down to Mama Cordie, as we called her, when there was some special--when we were sick, and she would give us something, tasted awful, but we felt better after a while. So she had these special skills that went beyond simply the midwifery.
Speaker 1: Was she respected in the community?
Speaker 2: Extraordinarily so. As a matter of fact, Mama Cordie, as we called her, (unclear) quite a bit. Everybody kind of looked up to her because she had, obviously these unique skills and delivered babies and, and was kind of the rural doctor. And many individuals who didn't have money would give her chickens and whatever, in return for her services. So yeah, she was quite well respected in the community, and as I've indicated, had a clientele, to coin the expression, that was multi-racial.
Speaker 1: Do you know when she was born approximately, and when she died?
Speaker 2: I'm gonna guess that she was born in the 1880s. She lived a very long life and died somewhere around 1960. At her funeral, I distinctly remember a camera crew coming to document it, and we know that she made a number of visits to the University of North Carolina medical school [University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] to give talks about the tradition of midwifery as practiced in the African American community. And I have the suspicion that there is a good deal, good bit of documentation there at the University of North Carolina, about her experiences delivering babies and finding those herbal medicines. I simply haven't gone over there to take a look at it yet.
Speaker 1: So any stories about where she may have learned these skills?
Speaker 2: I'm, I haven't, I don't have any stories, but my belief is that a part it was probably passed to her from her mother, who we don't know a lot about and probably she was trained in some way, and again, we don't, that's kind of a gray area that I hope to make clearer as the years go on.
Story_ID: 467628
Speaker 1: Do you know any of your other ancestors on your mother's [Cornelia Johnson Rodgers] side?
Speaker 2: I really don't. Most of them moved away, not unlike many African Americans who couldn't earn a decent livelihood in the South and migrated, most of them left, and they went to Washington, D.C. and they went to Detroit [Michigan] and they went to Harlem [New York, New York]. About all I know is that they left the South and they would frequently come back, but I, I really don't have any recollection about a lot of them.
Speaker 1: Is your mother an educated woman?
Speaker 2: She is an educated woman in the sense that she did go beyond high school, and her story, it's, it's quite interesting and I think parallels the stories of a lot of African Americans who feel somehow trapped in a situation that they can't get out of. And what I mean there is she was actually working in a ham processing plant and she just shared this with me, by the way, a few years ago. Her oldest son [Carson Rodgers] was in school and needed a car and she went to her boss and asked him to borrow two hundred dollars to help her son get this car, and he wouldn't let her have it and she told me that, you know, something happened, and I knew then that I had to move. In any event, at forty she went back to school, received what amounts to an associate of arts degree, left that ham processing plant and became employed at the University of North Carolina [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina], where she had special skills that no one else could do her job and, and was, of course, immensely proud of that.
Speaker 1: What was her job?
Speaker 2: She processed data, but I think it was a special data associated with the billing and so on. And, of course, I was prouder than she was at that, that accomplishment.
Story_ID: 467629
Speaker 1: What's your father's name?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Johnnie [Johnnie Rodgers, Jr.], J-O-H-N-N-I-E.
Speaker 1: And his last name?
Speaker 2: Rodgers.
Speaker 1: When was he born and where?
Speaker 2: He was born, again, in rural Siler City [North Carolina] in 1926.
Speaker 1: And was he educated or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Educated?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, if you ask him, he would say categorically yes. He did have a year of college.
Speaker 1: What college?
Speaker 2: North Carolina A&T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. And I'm, I'm told that I might have had a little something to do with his leaving North Carolina A&T.
Speaker 1: You were born?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was his profession?
Speaker 2: He was a laborer, and not unlike many black men in the South, worked where he could, and one of the things I think should be clear is that one's location obviously impacted the jobs that were available. If you were in the larger cities, if you were in Greensboro [North Carolina] or Durham [North Carolina] or Raleigh [North Carolina] or Charlotte [North Carolina], there were many more opportunities, but if you were not in one of those major centers, the pickings were kind of slim. So his work was primarily menial jobs. He worked in the saw mill, he worked in hog processing plants, et cetera.
Speaker 1: Did he have siblings?
Speaker 2: He did. He had two brothers and three sisters. All of his brothers are deceased, all of his sisters are very much alive. Most, most of them in their nineties, and if you saw them you would not believe that they are anywhere near ninety years of age.
Speaker 1: What are their names?
Speaker 2: Codella [Codella Rodgers].
Speaker 1: And please say the name and spell it if you can.
Speaker 2: Okay. Codella is C-O-D-E-L-L-A, Claudie [Claudie Rodgers] is another one and I believe that's spelled C-L-A-U-D-I-E, and Tinner Mae [Tina Rodgers], T-I-N-N-E-R, M-A-E, is the third one.
Speaker 1: And the brothers?
Speaker 2: The brothers were Charlie [Charlie Rodgers], C-H-A-R-L-I-E, and Alton [Alton Rodgers], A-L-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: What about your paternal grandparents' names.
Speaker 2: My paternal grandfather was also named Johnnie, J-O-H-N-N-I-E.
Speaker 1: Johnnie Rodgers [Johnnie Rodgers, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: When was he born and where?
Speaker 2: I'm not certain of the date of his birth, but he was born in Guilford County [North Carolina] in an area outside of Greensboro that they simply referred to as Guilford. So rural Greensboro is where he was born.
Speaker 1: And approximately what decade was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born, again somewhere around 1895, maybe a little earlier, and again, I'm not certain of the dates.
Speaker 1: And what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was a laborer. Unfortunately became blind, I think during the mid-thirties, during his mid-thirties, and, of course, was limited in what he could do after that point.
Speaker 1: And what about your paternal grandmother?
Speaker 2: My paternal grandmother taught school. Interestingly, she did not have to have in the rural area where they lived a college degree to do that. And I think in a number of situations where there were people of a certain level of intelligence, they were kind of pulled in to provide instruction and that's what she did.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Agnes [Agnes Alston Rodgers].
Speaker 1: Do you know her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Alston.
Speaker 1: Spell it.
Speaker 2: A-L-S-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Do you know where she was born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Pittsboro, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Around what year?
Speaker 2: I'm going to guess around 1900.
Speaker 1: And was she a teacher in the black school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you know your great-grandparents' names on your father's side?
Speaker 2: I don't.
Story_ID: 467630
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your childhood.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You were born in Siler City, North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory is of attending a circus. I was not quite two years of age and I am certain that it was the lights and the animals, and in particular a tiger that stuck with me, that had this lasting impression. Some question whether or not I remember it, but I certainly do. So the earliest memories of being taken to this circus and being fascinated with all of this.
Speaker 1: Who took you to the circus?
Speaker 2: My mother [Cornelia Johnson Rodgers].
Speaker 1: And siblings as well?
Speaker 2: She took my younger brother who is almost exactly a year younger.
Speaker 1: Tell me the names of your siblings.
Speaker 2: Darrel [Carson Rodgers], D-A-R-R-E-L, Linda [Linda Rodgers], L-I-N-D-A, Rochelle [Cheryl Rodgers], I call her Rochelle, R-O-C-H-E-L-L-E, and Anthony [Anthony Rodgers].
Speaker 1: And where do you fall?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: And so at the circus, describe for me all of the images you saw.
Speaker 2: What I remember apparently is a ringmaster of some kind bringing in an animal or two, and more than anything I remember the colors. I'm certain that I'd not seen anything like that before. And again, the lasting impression was because of this new environment and these colors and the particulars (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were the colors?
Speaker 2: I see reds, I remember seeing these reds and blues and again, although it's not, it's not very distinct, I'm certain of the memory, yeah. I might not have been two because my mother says she was holding my brother. She said you couldn't remember it, but that's my earliest memory.
Story_ID: 467631
Speaker 1: Describe your home.
Speaker 2: Our home was a warm home, both parents worked, they spent a great deal of time obviously providing for us. We were heavily dependent on each other as children. Being the oldest, I can't say that I had any special role. As a matter of fact, my younger sister [Linda Rodgers], three years younger, probably was the dominant one, as she is today, but we had a very warm home. There were though, frustrations at times, but I think came about largely because of the circumstances of trying to provide for a family with salaries that were miniscule, that, and I think it probably also impacted to some extent, my parent's relationship as well.
Speaker 1: So your father [Johnnie Rodgers, Jr.] was a laborer?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was your mother [Cornelia Johnson Rodgers] doing while you were growing up?
Speaker 2: She was also a laborer and worked during those years at a, a poultry processing plant, better known as a chicken plant. And while I've not worked there myself, I, it's very hard work, and, you know, it demands a great deal of stamina, as it does today, but that's what she did.
Speaker 1: Describe for me some of the smells of your home.
Speaker 2: I remember Sundays in particular because on Sundays there would generally be a cake or a pie and I don't, I don't think I was any different from any other kid in that we looked forward to those (laughter), those Sundays because we knew we were going to have something sweet, but that's what I remember more of, those special days, not just the Sundays, but the holidays because we were gonna have these, these goodies that we couldn't wait to get our, to sink our teeth into. So that, that's pretty salient, the, the, sweets that were, to be honest, I don't remember the other, the other smells, but I'm certain that they were there and they probably came from pinto beans that we ate a lot of (laughter). Mom says you have to remember the pinto beans because they were cheap, they were inexpensive and they went a long way and we had them (laughter) pretty frequently, but I don't remember them.
Story_ID: 467632
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the sounds of your house. Was it a musical home?
Speaker 2: It was not necessarily a musical home, but we did have music of sorts. My father [Johnnie Rodgers, Jr.] purchased a piano and, although no one was musical and no one, at least during the early years, took piano lessons, he was the musician of the house and loved to play the piano, so he claimed. And he would say all the time, very frequently, "If you sing it, I'll play it," and no matter what we sang, he played the same thing (laughter). But in addition to that beloved piano, we did have the, I guess the first phonograph that appeared across America and we were so fascinated with that phonograph and with the 45 records. We didn't have necessarily the 78s [78 rpm record], I don't, my, my grandparents had one, but we had the 45s and we played any and everybody and Motown was, of course, in, becoming en vogue, and I think we had probably all of the Motown people.
Speaker 1: What are some of the songs or artists you recall?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson was big. We loved him. Al Green, believe it or not. I think that was the first record we got, was a record, Al Green's 'Back Up Train,' and since we have four or five, we played them over and over so we knew them very, very well. Of course, we added to the collection a little bit later on, got a few more records and we would, like most kids, mimic the singers and have fun, dance, and I don't know, I think some of what I learned relating to swing, probably came from, you know, those, those romps in the living room before the phonograph.
Speaker 1: What are the sights that stand out in your mind either inside your home or surrounding your home?
Speaker 2: The sights that stand out are the kitchen and, in particular, when something was being prepared by my mother [Cornelia Johnson Rodgers] and, without question the kitchen is number one. Number two is the living room because that's where the phonograph was.
Speaker 1: Describe those rooms.
Speaker 2: The kitchen was basic. We did not have running water initially. We had an outdoor spigot, so we had to go out and get the water and bring it in, and although there was a sink in the kitchen, there (laughter) was no running water. We later got running water in, in, in the house. So I remember the sink and, of course, a basic table that, ironically, is being reintroduced today. I can remember distinctly the very modernist table that we had. I think the edge of it was laced with a kind of aluminum, real shiny, but we had that one set there and when I say the one set, there was no division between kitchen and dining room. There was one room, with a dining table and chairs right in the middle, and a few cabinets around. So the kitchen is, is one place that is outstanding, and, of course, the other is the living room where all of the action took place. And I, as I think about it, maybe the living room is pronounced in my memory because we had more space in the living room than we did in the other rooms. It was a fairly large room and not only was there the phonograph, there was also the upright piano that I distinctly remember. There was also in the living room a, an oil stove that I assume provided ample heat. I don't remember being very cold throughout the rest of the house and that might be attributable to the fact that we had lots of quilts. I wouldn't say that they were the fanciful quilts that, that maybe we think of today, but they did the main job, they kept us warm.
Speaker 1: Who made those quilts?
Speaker 2: I suspect that my [maternal] great-grandmother [Cordia Glover] might have and I should know a whole lot more about this since this happens to be one of my areas of specialization.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the patterns on the quilts?
Speaker 2: They were basic. I wouldn't say that they were shoo-fly or any of the patterns that we, that have been popularized today. They were simply basic patterns made from scraps.
Speaker 1: Squares (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And primarily rectangular, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 467633
Speaker 1: Was your neighborhood [in Siler City, North Carolina] a racially mixed neighborhood?
Speaker 2: No. Not unlike many communities in the South, particularly the smaller hamlets, the smaller towns. There was no such thing as a mixed neighborhood. There were occasions, obviously, when individuals worked on the properties of large landowners where maybe the landowner would have a house where the workers stayed and so on, but in our case, we were in a black neighborhood that was a really fascinating one, with an interesting mix of people, educated and quote, unquote, not so well educated.
Speaker 1: Take me around your block. Who lived there?
Speaker 2: And that term is particularly appropriate. We referred to it as the block, and indeed it was a block and on every corner practically there was a school teacher, and the school teachers kind of looked out for us. My best friends were, of course, were the school teachers' kids.
Speaker 1: What were their names?
Speaker 2: The (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) School teachers' kids, your friends.
Speaker 2: My, my very best friend was Gerald [Gerald Dawson (ph.)], who was a school teacher's kid and very bright.
Speaker 1: Gerald?
Speaker 2: Dawson. Yeah, he was my, my best friend.
Story_ID: 467634
Speaker 1: What school did you attend, elementary?
Speaker 2: I attended Chatham, they called it Chatham High School [Jordan-Matthews High School, Siler City, North Carolina], although it went from the first grade to the twelfth and they didn't necessarily have the divisions that we have today, middle and primary. It was Chatham High, and, but I attended Chatham High from first to twelve.
Speaker 1: Were you a good student?
Speaker 2: Not really. I think that I was fascinated with the idea of learning, but I really didn't put a lot of energy into it.
Speaker 1: What was your role in the classroom?
Speaker 2: My role was probably mediator. If there were any squabbles, I was the person that kind of brought them together. I don't remember any fights at all. I don't think I had any, as kids will have, coming through high school, et cetera.
Speaker 1: What was--
Speaker 2: So my role was basically to keep people honest and to bring them together.
Speaker 1: Do you remember one such episode where you were the mediator?
Speaker 2: I believe there was an instance where a couple of buddies were, well they weren't necessarily buddies, they were about to go at it. And I simply intervened and, and, you know, maybe just physically separated them and probably calmed them a bit. But there aren't any real outstanding examples, but I do think that because I had a lot of friends, I didn't have anybody that wasn't a friend, I was able to intervene a great deal, not just with males, but females as well. So I think that was probably, probably my role.
Story_ID: 467635
Speaker 1: Did you take art class?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: When did you develop an interest in art?
Speaker 2: My interest in art began with my uncle who was seven years older, but who had this incredible skill. He was what we call today a caricaturist, and he'd come to our house with his drawing pad and he did people in the neighborhood [in Siler City, North Carolina]. To be honest I'm not sure that there was any striking characteristics of the individuals that he did, but as kids, we were six or seven, we'd say, "Do So and So," and he'd make the sketch, and we'd just have the biggest time with that sketch. Kids are impressionable and I wanted to be like Jay [ph.], so I started attempting to, to do what I'd seen him do, to draw. So that's where it began.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your first drawings?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah. (Laughter) I had a buddy who also drew and we probably should have been paying more attention to the math that was, that we, that was being taught, but we were drawing. We were always drawing, and--
Speaker 1: So you'd be in math class--
Speaker 2: In most classes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Most classes, and you'd be drawing. On notebook paper or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, on notebook paper. I think our first series of drawings were cars. Kids are always fascinated with cars and we were no exception and, you know, we draw the '56 [1956] Ford and the '55 [1955] Chevy [Chevrolet], and the so on. So the first drawings were of cars. And, you know, we wanted to see who could do the most fanciful car with mud flaps and all of that stuff. That's, I think, the earliest memory and then we gravitated to more humorous kinds of things. For example, we would do donkeys, but we put them, we dressed them up and put 'em, put on suits and ties, and we had a lot of fun with that.
Speaker 1: What was your friend's name?
Speaker 2: My friend's name was Larry, Larry Goldston, who I believe today is still an outstanding draftsman, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was this art form encouraged by teachers or parents?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say that it was encouraged, it wasn't discouraged, partly because, well they probably didn't know what we were doing back there in the back. I can't say that those early years drawing had any real resonance at that juncture. It was just something that I liked to do.
Speaker 1: Did you like any of your academic subjects?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Probably I did like English. Unfortunately, I didn't care very much for math. I, to be perfectly honest, tolerated it, and it tolerated me, (laughter) and my instructors really were nice people.
Speaker 1: Do you remember your favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: I do, I have a distinct memory of a math teacher, a Miss Grissom [ph.], who probably recognized that I was not working really hard and challenged me. She said, "I'm gonna fail you because you can do better. You're not applying yourself," and I actually have the report card, and there are three Cs, there is an A and then there are three Cs. The A is when she challenged me and said, "I'm going to fail you." She let up of course. So yeah, Miss Grissom I liked a lot, I had quite a warm feeling for her.
Story_ID: 467636
Speaker 1: Describe race relations in your town.
Speaker 2: Race relations were difficult. Siler City [North Carolina] is in the seat of a hotbed of, well, was in the seat of a hotbed of Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] activity. The Klan were quite a presence and I distinctly remember riding through, what I guess were, were rallies. So with that presence, obviously, there was not a very good relationship between the races. And--
Speaker 1: Describe some of these rallies.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I simply, I really can't describe the rally because I wasn't invited (laughter), but at the same time, they were visible and--
Speaker 1: What are the images (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hell was quite, what I remember distinctly as a kid was making this trip and having to slow down because all of these guys were on the side of the road and my memory is of these costumes that I'd not seen before and thought they were part of the circus. I had no idea that they were, in fact Klan, but, so that kind of sets the stage for the town, if not the county. I don't remember there being many opportunities to reach out to the black community. I can't, I can't say that I, on the other hand, remember any overt acts as a child.
Speaker 1: No lynchings or burnings or?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember any of those, but the presence was there.
Speaker 1: What about going into town and going to restaurants, stores, did you know your place, was there a place for black kids (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely, absolutely. Jim Crow was alive and well and segregation was the order of the day. I distinctly remember the colored only signs and having to go into the back entrances everywhere.
Speaker 1: Like where?
Speaker 2: Downtown, restaurants.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the names of these restaurants?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the names of the restaurants, but wherever there was a public facility, there was a back entrance for African Americans, and I guess I have this unique memory of the movie theater. We were relegated to the upper section and the truth is I don't know that as kids we thought a lot about it. We were just delighted that we could go to the theater, and, and, see a movie. I think later on probably by the teenage years, we, we knew that clearly there was something amiss here, something was wrong.
Speaker 1: Did you or your friends ever try to challenge that?
Speaker 2: We did not, we did not. I don't know why we didn't, but we didn't.
Speaker 1: Was there a movement at all in your town? Were there adults who were protesting or putting pressure on white leaders?
Speaker 2: No. I don't recall any active leadership in that direction at all. Most people were, for whatever reasons, accepting and it may have had to do with fear of losing a job or something, but we were not very active in Siler City and I can't recall any instances of opposition.
Story_ID: 467637
Speaker 1: Did you attend church?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: What church and what was it like?
Speaker 2: I attend Corinth A.M.E. Zion Church [Siler City, North Carolina]. It was a wonderful place with an incredible choir.
Speaker 1: What was the choir like?
Speaker 2: They were dynamic, and always, there were individuals in the choir who had these special skills, you know, someone who sang with this booming voice and I distinctly remember, you know, those guys and ladies who had these special skills. I was not a part of the choir but it was a, a big part of the church going experience. Sunday school was kind of special. And I'm certain that we did pay a lot of attention to the lessons being taught, but we were kind of mischievous and, you know, I think someone had to keep their eyes on us.
Speaker 1: Did you draw during church?
Speaker 2: I did not, I did not. And I think I didn't because I was fearful of being caught by my mother [Cornelia Johnson Rodgers] who (laughter) would not have tolerated that at all.
Story_ID: 467638
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate high school [Chatham High School; Jordan-Matthews High School, Siler City, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I graduated high school in 1967.
Speaker 1: So during your school years, the Civil Rights Movement was alive and well?
Speaker 2: It was alive, I don't know how well it was. Certainly it was throughout and across much of America but not so much, once again, in the rural communities. And I think we all know about Brown, Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and what it was to do and that, of course, many of the cities, counties drug their feet on implementing the decree. That was clearly the case in, in, in Chatham County [North Carolina] and at my high school. Sixty-seven [1967] is a period of time when we're supposed to be integrated and we're supposed to have an opportunity equal to that of the schools across the way, but it had not happened. In fact, it wouldn't happen in many small towns in North Carolina, my town in particular, until '69 [1969], two years later. So the year that I graduated '67 [1967], was not unlike a decade earlier in terms of the facilities, in terms of the opportunities provided. As an example, many of the schools that had integrated in other parts of America, had art programs. I am here, a junior and senior in high school and I still have not had any opportunity to study art at all outside of drawing. And there is a teacher in the high school during my senior year who recognizes that there are some guys and young ladies here who need this. I don't know how to provide them this opportunity, I simply know that it's needed, and he did do that. He says, "Okay, I'm gone let you guys draw. I can't really help you but I'm going to provide in my mechanical drawing course this opportunity for you," and I'm thankful that he did.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Alexander Graves [Alexander Graves, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Was there a library in your school?
Speaker 2: We did have a library.
Speaker 1: Were there art books?
Speaker 2: There were art books, however, I really don't have any recollection of, of going looking at, at and pulling out any books and learning anything about any of the artists. It was, I don't know that at that point it was something I had seriously thought about. The turning point though and I guess the defining period was Mr. Graves, deciding that he was gonna let these guys focus and I think it was pretty clear then that this is what I wanted to do and I never thought about doing anything else.
Story_ID: 467639
Speaker 1: So your dream at that point, when you thought about your future, was what exactly?
Speaker 2: To be an artist. That, that's what I wanted to do. And again, I think it was having the opportunity to make art on a sustained basis that was the catalyst because I hadn't really had that before. It was just drawing here and there and all of a sudden we had a structured environment, although we don't necessarily have instruction to do this, again, on a continuous basis that made it, made it real for me.
Speaker 1: Did you apply for college?
Speaker 2: I did. I had not thought too much beyond Greensboro [North Carolina] and it should be clear that exposure as we all know is vitally important and my, the extent of my exposure was Greensboro. I didn't know about Durham [North Carolina] or Charlotte [North Carolina] or Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] or Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. All I knew was that my father [Johnnie Rodgers, Jr.] had for a brief period gone to North Carolina A&T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] and maybe that's what I needed to do. I didn't think about anything else, so my application was to North Carolina A&T.
Speaker 1: Did Mr. Graves [Alexander Graves, Jr.] or your parents encourage you?
Speaker 2: Absolutely. I, I don't know who I owe the biggest debt to, but I would have to say, probably to my mother [Cornelia Johnson Rodgers]. Without question, my mother, because like most kids I wasn't really sure, but I know I want to go to college but maybe I want to go to the [U.S.] Air Force. This is a possibility. I had taken some exam and they said you did really well, probably I had not, but it sounded good. And I said, "Okay, I'll do this." She said, "Oh no, no you won't do this. You won't join the service." Anyway Vietnam [Vietnam War] was gearing up. She knew that. I had no idea. What do kids know at seventeen? Anyhow, she said, "No, you're going, you're going to, to college." So the debt is to my mother who was a visionary and knew that this was something, you know, that should happen. And the second debt though is to Mr. Graves who, not only provided that opportunity, but who gave me the Chatham High School alumni scholarship [Chatham High School; Jordan-Matthews High School, Siler City, North Carolina]. Now let me (laughter) explain that. It was the premier scholarship given by the alumni group, and I was the least qualified. I am absolutely certain that there were eight to ten individuals far more qualified than I. He might have seen something, I don't know. I'm delighted though that he (laughter), that they did make the decision and that they gave me a scholarship.
Story_ID: 467640
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember the ride to North Carolina A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I certainly do. It was, I had been there before. Again, my father [Johnnie Rodgers, Jr.] had, had gone through and since his parents [Agnes Alston Rodgers and Johnnie Rodgers, Sr.] lived in Greensboro [North Carolina] at that time, when we went to visit them he would cut across campus and we were in awe. "Wow, look at these guys," and if we saw a group of ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] people, that was clearly impressive. But the ride up to actually enter the school was, was certainly memorable.
Speaker 1: What are the images or sounds?
Speaker 2: What I distinctly remember is seeing all of these well-dressed boys and girls, men and women, and I'd not quite seen that many before. And, of course, next to that is, is those things associated with the registration (laughter), long lines, obviously never seen anything like that, yeah, but it was certainly--.
Speaker 1: How were people dressed? You said they were well-dressed. Describe the girls you saw.
Speaker 2: The girls had on outfits that I, I'd not seen before and the guys similarly had on clothes that I had not really seen before. Remember I'm coming from a small rural place--
Speaker 1: What did their clothes look like (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and here are these guys in particular who had on these knit shirts and these fancy shoes that you couldn't get in Siler City [North Carolina]. And I'm not certain, I guess you could have gotten them in Greensboro, but I'd not seen anything like this. And like most college students, it didn't take us long to find out where to get them, and within a month or two, we all were wearing similar clothing, but, yeah, my memory, again, is of this. But next to that, my best academic memory during the very first week of classes involves a friend of mine and I, who had left an English class. It was late, well it wasn't late, it was kind of dark and we'd come out of the class and we were at the bottom of a set of stairs in the back of the building and it's dark and we see a light in the distance, and we moved towards, you know, this obvious room where there's a light and we peer in, and there is a fellow [James Melvin] painting on an easel.
Story_ID: 467641
Speaker 1: So describe for me the scene leaving English class [at North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Well we were peering into this room and we see a fellow painting, and we're like two deer, struck in the headlight. We are in complete awe because we have never seen an easel, and I am like, wow, not only is there someone painting, doing this thing that I've always wanted to do, but he's painting on an easel, wow. Obviously, many other individuals there had seen easels before, they've come from music and art high schools all across the country, but I have not seen this. I knew then and there that I had to somehow do what I saw this fellow doing. Before the week was out, I went downtown and bought paints, I bought latex house paint to prime some canvas and did my first painting. I simply couldn't wait to go to a painting class to have instruction. I simply had to do it and I guess in one way or another I've been attempting (laughter) to paint ever since.
Speaker 1: What was your first painting?
Speaker 2: My first painting was of my sister, and I've always been fascinated with figures and particular the face, and I must have had a photograph of her that I brought with me to school, so the first painting was, was of my sister. My mother [Cornelia Johnson Rodgers] still has it hanging in her living room and actually it's not a bad painting. In fact, I said, you know, I could learn something today from what I did back then, but yeah it's a painting of my sister (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which sister?
Speaker 2: My younger sister, Rochelle [Cheryl Rodgers].
Speaker 1: And what did you do, what was that process like?
Speaker 2: It was among the most incredible experiences, in retrospect, that I think I've had because I've never painted. All I'd done up to that juncture was draw, and there was something particularly stimulating about drawing with the brush and I guess that's how I would have described what I was doing then 'cause I didn't know about painting but I was drawing with the brush. And I was attempting to mix flesh tones and, to match the color of her sweater, and it was, it was really just an incredible experience that, I guess, is gonna stay with me (laughter) a little while longer.
Speaker 1: And the man you noticed painting on the easel, what was he painting?
Speaker 2: He was actually doing a figurative painting. Ironically, that fellow was kind of the star of the art department. I didn't know it at the time, but the department chair recognizing his singular ability had provided him with a space to work. No one else in the department had their own studio, but James Melvin had his own studio. Interestingly, since being here at North Carolina Central University [Durham, North Carolina], I have shown James Melvin's work.
Speaker 1: Must have made a serious impression.
Speaker 2: Yeah. He certainly made an incredible impression that, that evening.
Story_ID: 467642
Speaker 1: So how did your artistic ability develop from there?
Speaker 2: Most programs in art provide an opportunity to get fundamentals, and through the series of courses there at North Carolina A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], the fundamentals began to come together, basic courses in drawing and design and composition and color theory and, the whole gamut, lead to an understanding of how to not only conceptualize, but how to, to maybe complete the process of painting. However, I had gone through the series of courses but really didn't know how to paint. Painting like most disciplines requires, you know, a very extended period of activity. I didn't really know that at the time, but I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You mean repetition, practice?
Speaker 2: Absolutely. I always said as a teacher of painting that you'll know what you're doing after your fiftieth painting. But not until you've done that fiftieth painting will you have a clue.
Speaker 1: What were some of the paintings you completed while at A&T?
Speaker 2: They were primarily exercises that are typical of beginning courses. They were still lives, still lives where inanimate objects are set up, and they were also figurative. But during the senior year, one of the special courses was to, to produce an exhibit, a senior show. During that experience, I had an opportunity to maybe experiment a work in the direction that I hadn't worked before, and did a series of paintings, a very large heads in a hard-edged manner, hard-edged as in no modeling, using no modeling to do the work. But that series of works got me into graduate school [University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Tell me about that series. What did you paint?
Speaker 2: They were primarily images of myself. Notice I didn't say self-portraits, I simply happen to be convenient and I would use my countenance, my face, as a point of departure. And, shifting directions, do paintings, but there wasn't any intent to get a likeness, but rather to use the nuances of the face, my face, to produce these paintings that were largely abstract. And I don't remember how many were in the series, but I, I do remember the scale, some are quite large, and I suppose they accomplished what I had set out to do.
Story_ID: 467643
Speaker 1: What was North Carolina A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] like at this time? This is late '60s [1960s] moving into the '70s [1970s], politically, activism (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) North Carolina A&T was a hot bed of activism. There, remember this is, the late '60s [1960s], follow the celebrated sit-ins that Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and company were so par- so much a part of, so the activity was still there from a number of individuals who had prominent positions on campus. The president of this SGA [student government association] was a very fiery fellow, Nelson Johnson.
Speaker 1: Who--what's his name?
Speaker 2: Nelson Johnson who's quite a fixture on the national scene today as an activist. So there was a great deal of activist-oriented activity. Almost any incident, not only a nationally affecting African Americans, but within the campus itself, did not go unnoticed, so it was an atmosphere of, I think, heightened awareness of the need for activism, but there was also something very wholesome about the campus. It wasn't all political activity. There was an awful lot going on and if you were on the campus, you obviously wanted to be a part of it and, you know, the sororities and fraternities--
Speaker 1: Were you involved in a fraternity?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Which one?
Speaker 2: Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there anything you can share about that, either pledging experience, (laughter) I know it's a big secret, or after you crossed.
Speaker 2: Well the experience of joining a fraternity is again a very unique one and, of course, there are rituals that are peculiar to most institutions, but are, that have distinctiveness within HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities]. I simply knew that I had to be a part of that and I did become a part of it and I like to think that we did some very positive things on the campus. We had all kinds of programs going on, to assist, maybe make campus life a little better.
Speaker 1: Did you step?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely. We considered ourselves to be the best although we probably weren't, but, you know how that goes. I distinctly remember there at A&T, all the fraternities being given a room in the basement of what was the largest dormitory at the college, Scott Hall [Greensboro, North Carolina]. The Ques [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] were in one section, the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] were in a section, we were in a section and, of course, when you have this kind of close proximity, there is this competitive thing that kicks in and, you know, one fraternity kind of pits itself against the other. So that was kind of neat actually. But it was a wholesome time and, without question, it added quite a bit to, to college life.
Story_ID: 467644
Speaker 1: Describe the activism on campus. Were there specific incidents you can recall that precipitated this activism, around either the Vietnam War or civil rights?
Speaker 2: Well certainly the Vietnam War was a big episode in the lives of most of America, but was not lost on students there at, at North Carolina A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], and certainly the assassinations were also a very lively presence. Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination galvanized a great deal of activism. As a matter of fact, one of the more significant moments in the history of North Carolina A&T involved the riots that took place after his assassination. It was total chaos. As a matter of fact, one of the sadder chapters in my experience there at North Carolina A&T was the death of a fellow classmate who unfortunately, was slain by individuals unknown during, during the riots. School had to be shut down.
Speaker 1: Describe for me the scene. What did you see?
Speaker 2: The scene was totally, it was total chaos. The, actually I didn't actually see Willie Grimes shot, but we had a very active group of Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] on the campus and they were quite well armed and they had running battles with the local police who then brought in outside people and it really became nasty, tanks (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you see? Describe for me the visual.
Speaker 2: I remember helicopters hovering above shining these blaring lights trying to find the snipers, and the snipers were some of the, unfortunately, some of the students who were Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK], but not Klan, but who were Panther members, but I remember the helicopters flying over, and smoke. I didn't know at the time but they were, they were firing tear gas and paralyzing gas. So it was quite a chaotic scene.
Speaker 1: How did the administrators, who was the president at the time and how did the administrators handle this?
Speaker 2: President Dowdy [Lewis C. Dowdy] was leading the campus at that time and he realized that it had escalated out of control and that the only reasonable thing to do was to close the campus. Classes were ended I think three weeks early. And without question it was the right thing to do because there seemed to be no end to the skirmishes. Some of the outside people that came in, came in with odd behavior themselves. Eventually tanks were brought onto the campus and clearly it had to, had to be brought to a close and I think his decision to close the campus was the right one.
Speaker 1: Were you fearful?
Speaker 2: Absolutely. As a matter of fact I, actually I had a close call, oh yeah. On the evening that Willie Grimes was killed, a group of us were running to another end of the campus and really, we did not take it very seriously. We weren't out to do anything, we were simply onlookers, but I remember turning a corner and for a fleeting second, in front of me, a leaf on the tree was red. It's in the evening, so why is this leaf red? It's red because someone was shooting and that bullet had just passed before me. And that was a very frightening moment in my, my life, and we then, I think we all knew it was very serious. They shot up the dormitories after that, so yeah.
Story_ID: 467645
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate?
Speaker 2: I graduated in 1971.
Speaker 1: Were you drafted?
Speaker 2: I was not drafted but that's quite an appropriate question, Vietnam [Vietnam War] was indeed at its height and I was called. I went down and a couple of things happened. One, I registered as a conscientious objector. I was, today I'm the only person during that period of life have met, that did that, but I registered as a conscientious objector. I don't know that that had any reason for, for my not being drafted, but when I did go down, I guess I had some health issues, maybe high blood pressure, but I also think that maybe that initial registration might have had something, so I fortunately I avoided Viet- Vietnam.
Speaker 1: You applied to graduate school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was your goal and where did you apply?
Speaker 2: My goal was to actually work in a museum. That was the goal, but also to maybe somehow merge this with painting, and I applied to the University of North Carolina at Greensboro [Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Why that school?
Speaker 2: At the time it had the most, I think, aggressive program in the arts, not just in fine arts but in music and on, it was quite a progressive school that had a faculty, most of whom were from New York [New York] and were practicing artists with national reputations. That was part of the attraction. The other attraction was it was across the street from North Carolina A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. It was there in Greensboro.
Speaker 1: Did you graduate with honors or did you do pretty well as a student there, undergraduate years?
Speaker 2: No. I, I did well in my art classes. I was not a bad student but by no means was I a great student. I was always tremendously fascinated with my art classes and did well in them.
Story_ID: 467646
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was life like in graduate school at UNC Greensboro [University of North Caroline at Greensboro, Greensboro, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Life was difficult. Primarily, it was because of the culture shock. I had had absolutely no experience around other cultures. I'd grown up in rural Siler City [North Carolina] and my only involvement with whites was as a worker. I'd had no contact of any measure at North Carolina A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] and here I am at this school and I'm the only African American in the class. So it was a bit of a culture shock for me.
Speaker 1: What shocked you? What are the first images that kind of struck you?
Speaker 2: I think one of the things that struck me was some of the backgrounds of some of the fellow students, but more than that, some of the (laughter) faculty who are clearly different in many respects, and challenging. I guess my, I was really shocked by some of the personalities, personalities the like of which I hadn't seen before. For example, during my very first week, I had a faculty member who played during our initial class nothing but electronic music and it sounded like airplanes flying over. Imagine listening to this for an hour without any context, there was no real explanation for why we were doing this, and at the conclusion of the session, this is the very first class, we're given an assignment, and you know, nothing is connecting. And the assignment to most of us is kind of odd. In any case, the assignment by the way was to bring in something that had given you inspiration, that tangentially had been influenced by listening to this electronic music and it must be fifty feet. Well, most, I would say a third of the class, went withdrew from the class because they, you know, decided that there's something wrong with this guy or something. And, of course, I wasn't there to withdraw. I came up with a solution to this problem, and I think I did a, a eight millimeter movie that was fifty feet or something like that, so, anyhow, we went back to the class and he said to us, "I simply wanted to know who was serious." And from that point on, the class was normal. We had no more experiences like that. So yeah, that was quite an introduction, the likes of which I hadn't quite experienced before.
Story_ID: 467647
Speaker 1: What else shocked you about that experience, another memory?
Speaker 2: I think the other shock was the difference in facilities and the wealthy individuals that supported the school as opposed to my undergraduate school [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: So you say the facilities were different. Can you provide for me the contrast? Describe the building at UNC Greensboro [University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: The buildings were, of course, much larger. Some of the classrooms were probably comparable, but inside the classrooms, the facilities were, were better. The sculpture studio was simply amazing.
Speaker 1: Describe it.
Speaker 2: There were facilities for doing foundry work, we had nothing at all, remotely close, to that. There were in the ceramics studio, kilns that were sim- would simply dwarf anything that I'd seen before. So clearly, there were facilities that were, were somewhat better.
Speaker 1: Did you have certain moments where you really excelled in the program there? Did you have to create--
Speaker 2: Well, yes, the program was a master of fine arts, at least my concentration had the (unclear), master of fine arts in painting, but there were also areas outside of that. For example, one had to have and demonstrate a competency in art history. One had to demonstrate a competency in drawing. In the drawing arena I did well I suppose.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of your drawings?
Speaker 2: Oh yes. Again, because I had done self-portraits before, I think I said I was convenient, well now they became self-portraits. But there was never any real question about the drawing ability. As a matter of fact, the questions were, if you're doing painting, your paintings shouldn't chase your drawings, and at that point, the paintings weren't quite where the drawing was. And, you know, that was a very realistic--
Story_ID: 467648
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who were some of your role models? You studied art history. Who were some of the artists you admired?
Speaker 2: My very favorite artist then and now was Charles White [Charles Wilbert White]. But you know something else interesting happened and I think this is an important point to make. Perhaps it was because I was a minority that I became acutely aware and sensitive to African American issues, and began to focus more of my energy on learning African American history. I began going to the library and reading about all of these iconic figures from history.
Speaker 1: Like who?
Speaker 2: Marcus Garvey and that whole Harlem Renaissance phenomena that I had not known very much about.
Speaker 1: Did you read Langston Hughes and Zora Neale Hurston (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, abso- absolutely, and I, I suppose looking at them was a way of counterbalancing maybe some of what I was feeling there [University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, North Carolina], but I probably should have been putting more energy towards producing my work, but I just went off in a different kind of direction to try to maybe get some grounding that would maybe reinforce something that was obviously missing in the large arena.
Speaker 1: Which work really spoke to you? We're talking about literature.
Speaker 2: Well, was there a similar work, 'Eyes are Watching'--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Their Eyes Are Watching God' [sic. 'Their Eyes Were Watching God,' Zora Neale Hurston].
Speaker 2: 'Watching God.' And I can't remember specifically any individual Langston Hughes work so much as the biography. I was really fascinated with all of these guys and their incredible stories and how they overcome the odds, and I read as much as I could, and I think, I think it helped out.
Speaker 1: You said it helped with your situation, were you feeling alienated?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely. Very much so.
Speaker 1: How did that manifest?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it gave me a sense of belonging. It also gave me a sense of the notion that I could excel, that you can bring to this experience what everyone else does. And obviously there was in the beginning some question, some self-doubt. After all, if you are sitting next to someone who's traveled to Europe every summer and they've been to the Sistine Chapel [Apostolic Palace, Vatican City], and you've only seen it in a textbook, there is, you know, a concern that you have.
Story_ID: 467649
Speaker 1: Did you make friends with white students at UNC Greensboro [University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I would say yes, but I wouldn't say that there were any lasting friendships, and I think one of the reasons that that was the case was probably because I did not socialize very much. I had an assistantship [at Weatherspoon Art Museum, Greensboro, North Carolina], but I also had to work another part-time job, so when all of those activities were going on I was probably working.
Speaker 1: Were you conscious of the Black Arts Movement?
Speaker 2: Oh, very much so, very much so. I had learned a great deal about not only Charles White [Charles Wilbert White], but [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett and other artists who were promoting positive imagery. And I guess in some way I was beginning to transition in my own work to looking at some issues that maybe I gleaned from some of them. I distinctly remember, however, a series of works that I did of some of the revolutionary figures. I don't know that Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was one, but certainly Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and I think I had one or two of the Communist figures, Chairman Mao [Mao Zedong] maybe. I don't know, but what I distinctly remember is that that critique did not go very well, when they saw these images that were, well political minefields, and I also remember being in the studio one day and a group of faculty came in, not aware that I was there, and there were some comments about where this guy's work is going, and I'm delighted that I was there to hear those comments because it made me take a look at my direction.
Speaker 1: And was it a political climate at UNC Greensboro with respect to Vietnam [Vietnam War], integration?
Speaker 2: Not really, but the art department had always been kind of on the edge and they were very liberal in many ways and kind of led the nation in terms of some arts quote, unquote events. For example, the first so-called happening took place at UNCG [University of North Carolina at Greensboro] in the art department. I think they did two or three and they got national recognition so there was a, I guess a minor tradition of going against the grain already entrenched there at the university.
Speaker 1: Did you have any mentors?
Speaker 2: I don't know that I had mentors but I did have individuals that supported what I was doing.
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: One was the chairman of the department. His name was Bert Carpenter [Gilbert Carpenter]. He purchased one of my works and you can't get much better validation than the chair of the department purchasing your work.
Speaker 1: What was the work?
Speaker 2: Again, it was one of my drawings. I think it was a, well I know it was a self, it was a self-portrait, but he was a supporter, but no I don't think I had any, any real mentors, no.
Story_ID: 467650
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate [from University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I graduated in 1973.
Speaker 1: And what was your plan from there?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My plan, since I had a degree in painting, but I had also been an assistant in the Weatherspoon Art Museum [Greensboro, North Carolina]. My plan was to get a position in an art museum, as I suggested, and maybe paint. But my initial plan was to get this position. After all the North Carolina Museum of Art [Raleigh, North Carolina] had the semester before hired a fellow graduate. A fellow that interestingly, I had tutored. So I, that was my dream. I'm going to work at the North Carolina Museum of Art, and I did apply to North Carolina Museum of Art, and I did get a response and I distinctly remember my mother's [Cornelia Johnson Rodgers] excitement. She called and said, "You have a call from the department of cultural resources and they'd like for you to return the call," and I did, and they told me they were happy to inform me that they had an opening as security guard, and I did decline the position.
Speaker 1: This was after a face-to-face interview?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have an interview. No, I sent them my resume.
Speaker 1: So they knew your background based upon your resume (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Absolutely, absolutely. Interestingly, many years later the News and Observer which was the major paper in Raleigh [North Carolina], did a piece on the museum and myself and wanted to take a closer look at that. Of course there were no records, nobody could vali- could verify whether or not it was true or not. But, so my goal is, is, was to work in a museum.
Speaker 1: Why the museum? What was so great about the museum? What are some of the, the images that you remember from the museum, the paintings--
Speaker 2: First of all, it, it was this place that I knew next to nothing about, but it was the ultimate place to work from my perspective in North Carolina if you were going to be involved in curatorial work, then you worked at the North Carolina Museum of Art.
Speaker 1: Had you been there?
Speaker 2: I had been there and I had seen some of the grand paintings. In fact, I'd gone down as part of research to do a paper or two and, you know, of course was fascinated with what I envisioned, what I thought were grand halls, you know these major works.
Speaker 1: Describe to me what fascinated you, what did you see?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember seeing some of the Baroque and probably modern works that has always fascinated me. And I, and I thought it would be neat to kind of go in and work among these works. Of course, I don't recall seeing any works by African American artists. There were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you aware of the body of work created by African American artists?
Speaker 2: Pretty much. And I certainly knew at that point that the legendary figures, Romare Bearden and Jacob Lawrence were of museum quality and should be included, but they were in the Metropolitan [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York], they were in the major museums, they should be there. They were not of course, and I don't know maybe a small part of me may have even believed that I could have impacted the acquisitions policy maybe that somehow having someone at the curatorial level might bring to bear the importance of including African American artists. However, it would be many, many decades before that would, would happen.
Speaker 1: The security guard incident, was that a turning point for you?
Speaker 2: I guess yes. It certainly let me know that it would be difficult securing a position at a mainstream museum as a, as a curator, but it was a turning point too, because it then said to me well, you've got to find a job, you've got to work and I had simultaneously applied for positions at colleges.
Story_ID: 467651
Speaker 1: So tell me about your work at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida].
Speaker 2: Florida A&M was a wonderful experience. I went there as an instructor of painting. I was delighted to get the position, but I ended up also providing curatorial leadership for their exhibition space. They had, I wouldn't call it a full-fledged gallery, but they had a space and about midway of my tenure there at Florida A&M, I was given that space to try to do something with. Now obviously, to do curatorial work, you need time. The good news is that they had some things in place and I had to arrange shipping and basically mount, mount the exhibit.
Speaker 1: What was, what was your mission as a black artist and now someone who has an interest in acquisitions and institution building?
Speaker 2: There is, and hasn't always been, a dearth of African American visual artist visibility. We've had the iconic figures. Everybody knows Jacob Lawrence and Charles White [Charles Wilbert White] and a few others, but after ten artists, you can probably not, with most people, get any other names. I'd like to see all of that change, and certainly having an opportunity to present unsung artists, to pull them, to coin an expression, out of the shadows and, and give them visibility for me is what it's really all about.
Speaker 1: Tell me one of the highlights during your experience at Florida A&M.
Speaker 2: I think the highlight for me was doing a design class ironically. While I very much enjoyed doing the curatorial work, it was a design class and in particular I had a number of students that initially frightened me, but that were truly as it turns out, extraordinarily gifted individuals that really taught me almost as much as I taught them. I distinctly remember going to that class and not sleeping much the night before because I'd never had any experience before a class, and a fellow coming in asking, you know, who's the instructor here, and I was embarrassed to tell him that I was the instructor because I was younger than he at the time, but that design class was unique experience because of the students and both our senses of discovery.
Speaker 1: Share one day.
Speaker 2: I had an individual actually bring in a collage project I had assigned to the project and he brought in a collage of the famed football program, FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University], interestingly, and the question becomes how do, how do you reconcile this football category with something that is aesthetically pleasing and that has all of these design components. I think we, we worked it out pretty good, but I was, it stands out because of fascination with the design problem, but also with that football legacy that was, that was so big there. And also the support that the other students gave, and maybe it was because of that special unique collage that he brought in, I don't know, but it's, it's, it stayed with me all these years.
Speaker 1: And how long did you stay at Florida A&M?
Speaker 2: I was there one year.
Speaker 1: And your biggest accomplishment while there?
Speaker 2: I think my biggest accomplishment was probably becoming a little more confident (laughter) in the classroom. It was the first experience and I certainly grew a great deal. But beyond that, I think I was able to impact a number of students. As a matter of fact, I received an e-mail just last year from a student that I had all those years ago and he said, "You don't remember me, but I was on the Internet and saw, and you came up and I said I have to call and thank you for what you did for me in terms of my drawing ability." I do remember him. I remember almost nothing else, but I said, "I do remember you because you were, you know, quite an incredible draftsman."
Story_ID: 467652
Speaker 1: Tell me about your experience at Voorhees College [Denmark, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Voorhees College was a small Presbyterian related school in Denmark, South Carolina, and essentially I was the department. If anyone knows anything about small colleges, there are one-man departments and I was the art department, and, of course, by definition, the art department means that not only do you teach classes, but you arrange almost everything relating to art, including exhibits and everything, so I did everything, from teaching courses in general art appreciation to providing instruction in the studio to getting students ready for what was called at the time the National Teachers Exam [National Teacher Examination; Praxis Series] component. Voorhees offered education and a number of their students needed to have some experience with art problems that would be on the National Teachers Exam, so I had to do that. So it ran the gamut.
Speaker 1: Share some of your favorite sights from that period.
Speaker 2: My favorite sight is a festival that we would have every year. We would arrange tables in kind of an oval and we'd have paintings all around and frequently we would bring in artists from neighboring colleges, one of whom was a fairly renowned painter by the name of Leo Twiggs, who was the founder of the art department at South Carolina State College [South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], and sometimes we would bring in his mentor, a gentleman known throughout South Carolina by the name of Arthur Rose, a very dear man who it's been said, was responsible for every artist of a certain age to come out of the State of South Carolina. But, yeah, Arthur Rose and Leo Twiggs would, would come in and we'd have a good time, so that's my snapshot from Voorhees, that festival.
Speaker 1: Were you politically active at this period of your life, in your twenties?
Speaker 2: Absolutely not. Some people might have, I don't know where they got this impression. I remember being asked to give the Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speech at Voorhees. I don't know, maybe I made a statement or something, but other than making that speech, I, I can think of almost no activity (laughter). No, I was definitely not active at all.
Speaker 1: Was it a political campus?
Speaker 2: No. No, not really. Voorhees, like many small historically black colleges [HBCUs], had an open door policy and a number of the students not only came from the community, but from the State of South Carolina. And it's not that they were not engaged politically, but many were grappling with maybe some other issues.
Story_ID: 467653
Speaker 1: Tell me about meeting your wife.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know there are always conflicting stories, depending on who you ask. My wife was actually a friend of my, my sister [Linda Rodgers] and being three years older, I don't remember her. There's a point of disagreement here, but in any case--
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Shielda [Shielda Glover Rodgers], S-H-I-E-L-D-A. In any case, I had gone to college [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] and had come back to a basketball game and saw this young lady sitting there and we have different versions of who made the contact, but in any case, I met her at a, at a basketball game back in my hometown [Siler City, North Carolina] probably during my senior year or thereabouts.
Speaker 1: And what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, like most (laughter) relationships, you write a letter or two, or you have some conversation and you ask if you can come visit, which I did, and as the expression goes, the rest is kind of history.
Speaker 1: And how many children do you have?
Speaker 2: I have two children, a son and a daughter.
Speaker 1: What are their names and when were they born?
Speaker 2: My daughter is Nia [Nia Rodgers]. She was born in 1978 in Salisbury, Maryland. My son is Kenneth [Kenneth S. Rodgers], born in 1981 in Salisbury, Maryland.
Speaker 1: What do they do for a living?
Speaker 2: My son, for at least two weeks more, will be a, a procurement officer for the City of Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Did he graduate from college?
Speaker 2: He graduated from Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], and he will happily tell you that, where he also played football and became the all-time leading receiving at Morehouse College history. My daughter graduated from Carnegie Mellon University [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] and is currently a landscape architect in Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Did you have some influence on her decision to go into architecture?
Speaker 2: I think so. My daughter was a pretty serious student and extremely well-rounded. We didn't know what she would do. She drew, she played the piano. She was musically inclined. She wrote very well. As a matter of fact she won a national writing contest that gave us all a chance to go to Florida, so we didn't know what she, she would do, but being around art, I think that that was something that was in the back of her mind and while she didn't go to major in art, she majored in civil engineering as an undergraduate. She said you know I don't want to do that. And about six months ago, actually called and said, "You know I'm being paid to work with crayons, something I've always wanted to do, to draw," and of course, a part of, I guess, the job responsibilities required some hands-on, some stuff that the computers can't do.
Story_ID: 467654
Speaker 1: Were they [Rodgers' children, Nia Rodgers and Kenneth S. Rodgers] involved in organizations growing up, like Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] or?
Speaker 2: Any and every organization that one could imagine they were, they were involved with from Cub Scouts to Boy Scouts [Boys Scouts of America] to Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] to you name it. Almost everything. And, of course, the assortment of, of programs that strengthened them, piano, gymnastics, football, almost everything that one can imagine, they were certainly involved (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's a favorite memory from their childhood?
Speaker 2: With my son, it is probably (laughter) his swimming lesson at the age of probably three or so. And what happened there is still characteristic today. We took him to the swimming pool and he was the loudest person there, but he wouldn't put his head into the water. In other words today, he loves to, to be seen. He loves to talk. Hopefully, these days he'll put his head under the water (laughter). With my daughter, it's probably her seriousness. Almost every, any memory that I have of her is of, you know, her participating in something.
Speaker 1: Share one story.
Speaker 2: She would participate in I think it was the Odyssey of the Mind, it's called, and would design some kind of contraption, I don't remember the exact details, that was taken to the state level and, if I'm not mistaken, they came in second place. Of course, she was upset because obviously they should have gotten first place. But that's the way she's always been. On the surface a self-doubter. Never feels that she's done anything right and we think just the opposite. That probably coupled with her winning at state level a National PTA [National Parent Teacher Association] art contest in the third or fourth grade. I'm in the process of framing that too. So, you know, the memories of her go back to, of course, obviously, the art inclination that she kind of left. I kind of feel she's gonna come back to it.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your father [Johnnie Rodgers, Jr.] passed away in 1976?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 467655
Speaker 1: Tell me about your work at both South Carolina State University [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] and the University of Maryland [University of Maryland Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, Maryland].
Speaker 2: At South Carolina State I taught painting. And I was given charge of students at the intermediate phase. They were just a little beyond beginning, and we had, of course, some very talented students. I should say they had some really talented students at South Carolina State, and I like to think that I was able to help them find some direction. One of the things that I was always a stickler on was having your own handwriting as I called it. You've got to have your own style (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Signature.
Speaker 2: Yeah. And I think in some cases that happened with some things, not with all.
Speaker 1: What's a favorite image from that period?
Speaker 2: A favorite image interestingly is of an exhibit that was held there in Orangeburg [South Carolina] in which some of my students attended. The exhibit which is ongoing today, was the Festival of Roses exhibit [Orangeburg Festival of Roses]. And the image is very vivid about the Festival of Roses is that it was a juried exhibit and artists were all over from all over the state were there, and it was a two-day affair, and I was encouraged to enter and I did. The first day the judges, I guess, made their decision.
Speaker 1: What did you enter? Describe--
Speaker 2: I entered a series of oil paintings of facial expressions, laughing, grimacing, et cetera. In any case, what is distinct about that is that I was able to win first place, but had my students tell me, who had, who had come, because I didn't know it. They had learned from Arthur Rose and they sought me out and there were some who maybe doubted my ability, look at me, I guess, in a slightly different light after that.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the creative process. You have created a number of self-portraits. What is that creative process like?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the process, creativity itself is partly innate, but partly constructive, and for me there is a blending. My inspiration is also a part of that as a third component, and those self-portraits that I've talked about, I don't think necessarily were all that creative, but they did come from a yearning to develop and to be productive. And, in that instance, when all else fails, I knew I had a model then in myself, so I, so I, you know I could do that.
Story_ID: 467656
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about some of your own artwork.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: There's a painting called the 'Cardplayers' [Kenneth G. Rodgers].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What inspires you? What inspired that painting?
Speaker 2: The inspiration for 'Cardplayers' was actually a Baroque artist by the name of Caravaggio who happens to be my favorite artist, who did a series of paintings of ordinary people doing ordinary things. And in the series there is one called 'Card Players' [sic. 'Cardsharps,' Caravaggio] that has always fascinated me, and I always liked that work, but also wanted to do something similar, but in my own vein, and I had actually a number of students and we were working together and oftentimes during the painting class I would set up something and paint right along with the students, but on this occasion we were talking and somehow Caravaggio came up and I said, "You know, I need to do my version of Caravaggio's 'Card Players,' and would you two guys be models," actually three, but there were two in this one particular painting. So we set it up. I actually had, not unlike what we're doing today, a kind of photo shoot, but I also had objects that I would put in the painting that were not in the photograph. For example, in the painting the two fellows are wearing leather caps. Well I actually had the leather caps in the studio and painted from the leather caps. I had the tables. There is a still life on the table of the, of the painting. Well the still life was set upon, at the time, my kitchen table and was painted from, from life. So the idea there, which really ran through my teaching philosophy as it related to painting was define life and as best you can, find as much as information as possible and the best source of information is life itself.
Speaker 1: Do you aim to capture snippets of black American life?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. We all have these episodes in our families in our lives that are very special, and part of what I've wanted to do has, has been to capture some of that. But also, I haven't lost sight of what worked for the old masters. Again--
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: For example, the, most of the old masters would do the full figure, and a part of me said, well you know, maybe you need to try to do the full figure. As an example, if you walk into any of the major museums in the country and you look at old master works, or for that matter, 17th and/or 18th century American works, you'll see the grand formal portrait of women and oftentimes in these grand formal portraits, the women will have on white dresses. I've been fascinated with white dresses, anyhow I, I did eventually do a painting of my daughter [Nia Rodgers] in a white dress. So the inspiration comes from obviously African American life but also from the traditions that have worked.
Story_ID: 467657
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who are some the great artists in your opinion when you talk about the old master?
Speaker 2: Well, the list is very, very long. I've mentioned Caravaggio already. By the way, I think he was a far better painter than Michelangelo or Leonardo da Vinci, and obviously they stand along, alongside him, and certainly the gamut of Baroque painters, including Rembrandt and Frans Hals and company, I like all of them, but when I shift to the 19th century, I obviously have to begin with Henry Tanner [Henry Ossawa Tanner], who obviously is the seminal African American painter, bar none, and is universally acclaimed for not only his extraordinary ability, but for his, his ability to capture two aspects of American life, one rooted in the African American experience in his genre scenes and another rooted in an experience that he knew as a kid and as a young adult in the church and that is, comes through in his biblical works. So clearly Henry Tanner is, I think, a model for anyone, not simply African American artists but period.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite work of his?
Speaker 2: Probably a work owned by Bill Cosby. It's called 'The Thankful Poor' [Henry Ossawa Tanner], and it's a painting of a grandfather and his grandchild sitting at a table giving thanks and while the subject is, is extremely powerful, it is the treatment that's I think more powerful. It's simply incredible symphony of lights and use of what Tanner called an inner light that, that makes that thing really radiate, and yeah, I would, yeah I guess that is maybe my favorite, but then there's so many.
Story_ID: 467658
Speaker 1: Describe another one of your favorite paintings, one you crafted yourself.
Speaker 2: Some years ago, I did a piece depicting two musicians, a cornet player, who happened to be on the right side of the painting, and another African musician playing his version of the xylophone, and the actual name of the instrument escapes me at the moment, but that was a work that allowed me not only to look at physiognomy, but it allowed me to look at these musical instruments and manipulate all kinds of modeling and shading effects as well. The unfortunate thing is that I did complete it and it was able to get into a major exhibit and I looked forward to getting it back, however it was purchased. And I really have mixed feelings about it, and you know it happens a lot with artists.
Speaker 1: What exhibit was it a part of?
Speaker 2: It was an exhibit at the J.B. Speed Art Museum [J.B. Speed Memorial Museum; Speed Art Museum] in Louisville, Kentucky. An exact title escapes me at the moment. But I think frequently artists are faced with this dilemma. Works of art become a part of you and you don't want to let go, but in the case of someone like, like myself, I don't produce work to sell it. I've never thought about it that way. I produce it because I like to do it. And, well that just happened to be a unique situation.
Speaker 1: Do you have any art that captures life in the South, either capturing relationships between white southerners and black southerners?
Speaker 2: I do not. I haven't really looked at that dynamic, but it's something that I plan to do. And I think I should say that one of the reasons I haven't done so is because I'm a bit of a hybrid, in that I'm doing curatorial work while trying to become a painter, and notice my expression, I'll still learning how to paint to the extent that some things have simply fallen through the cracks to coin the expression.
Story_ID: 467659
Speaker 1: Tell me about your work at University of Maryland.
Speaker 2: At the University of Maryland Eastern Shore [Princess Anne, Maryland], I was primarily responsible for the painting courses and art history, as well as providing curatorial assistance. So again I was a hybrid and it frequently happens at small institutions.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: I went to the University of Maryland Eastern Shore in 1977.
Speaker 1: And how long did you stay?
Speaker 2: Nineteen years.
Speaker 1: What are some of your major accomplishments?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to think that there were older students who came to appreciate that maybe I had something to offer because after the fourth or fifth year, my classes were primarily older students who wanted, who were seriously interested in learning how to paint. So I think one of the accomplishments was, you know, maybe having individuals learn that maybe I could offer something in that (unclear).
Speaker 1: Tell me one story. Do you remember if there was a specific student--
Speaker 2: There certainly is. I had a fellow come to me once and he said, "I'm interested in learning how to paint," and I said, "Sure, fine become enrolled in Painting One."
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: I don't remember his name, but what he then said startled me. He said, "I want to paint like the old masters though. I want to be able to do paintings in the manner of Rembrandt." And I said, "What kind of experiences do you bring to this?" He said, "None." Now that seems far-fetched. How do you move from a very minimal drawing experience to producing masterful works? In any case, I said, "Okay, well, we'll, well if you're willing to work, we'll see what we can do," and it was truly amazing what happened. He was extremely serious and he did have some innate ability and what he needed was some idea of how to do the nuances associated with the human figure, not only making relationships between eye, nose and mouth for example, work, but how to do drapery and how to simulate extras and that sort of thing. He actually had his wife make outfits. He studied the Baroque painters, had her recreate some of those outfits and I said, "We'll bring these to class, we'll put 'em on every day and we'll work again from life." So yeah, he is one of those figures, one of the guys that, that is memorable.
Story_ID: 467660
Speaker 1: And you mentioned your hybrid identity.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: We've talked about you as a painter and as a teacher, talk about your role as a, a curator.
Speaker 2: I guess my other fascination has always been with, not only discovering African American artists, but being able to tell their stories and a part of that comes out of my understanding that these artists struggled, many of them had died having devoted their lives to something that they simply had to do and got very little credit.
Speaker 1: Like who?
Speaker 2: The list is very long, almost all of the, in my opinion, Harlem Renaissance artists initially got some recognition, but it was short-lived. And so I've found that my calling, to coin an expression, to tell these stories as often as I can.
Speaker 1: What are some, give me one of the stories.
Speaker 2: Well, the, I can begin with maybe one of the first ones that I told here at North Carolina Central University [Durham, North Carolina]. My very first attempt to show a major artist was to develop a show around Robert Scott Duncanson. Now that show, unfortunately, didn't go as I had hoped. But the second show was I think a minor success. I--
Speaker 1: Describe the sights of that show.
Speaker 2: The second show was Edward Mitchell Bannister ['Edward Mitchell Bannister: American Landscape Artist'], a 19th century artist who has fallen into the cracks of history, been swept under the rug, but who actually won America's major award and America's major exhibit in 1876, the Centennial Exposition [Centennial International Exhibition] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], he won first place. And while there is certainly recognition of him on a national level, it is nowhere near, in my opinion, where it should have been, so Bannister was the artist that I wanted to showcase, to bring out into the open and, and in particular present to the triangle community with some measure of documentation, and we did do minor catalog and a part of that happened because we were able to identify works across the country. And a large part of what any curator does is they do detective work. They find the works when and where they can and then they try to convince lenders that it's important for you to let us have this work for the show. If you don't do this, then how will, you know, the rest of the world know, that these guys even existed? So the very--go ahead.
Speaker 1: Well I know that even before we come back down to North Carolina, you're up in Maryland and you're on this mission.
Speaker 2: But what I was gonna also say is I showed Bannister in Maryland and I, I know I shifted here, but my first significant show in Maryland was Edward Mitchell Bannister. We were fortunate to be able to get a large number of his drawings from the Amistad Research Center in New Orleans [Louisiana], and to the best of anybody's ability, that exhibit in Maryland was the first time they'd been shown in a quarter of a century.
Speaker 1: Help me see the texture of his, of his work. What's his work look like?
Speaker 2: Bannister was primarily a landscapist and drew his inspiration from his childhood experiences working on a farm, became fascinated with nature, atmospheric conditions and did, most of his life, works that depicted, you know this unusual relationship between the forces of nature and sprinkled in a little bit of impressionism along the way. So that, the opportunity to show his works in Maryland were certainly beneficial and contributed to our then showing him as the first show here in North Carolina.
Story_ID: 467661
Speaker 1: Was the shift moving from the South up north dramatic for you, and were you participating in the black aesthetic when you were at Maryland [University of Maryland Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Not really. The shift was not all that dramatic primarily, initially, because I left South Carolina [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] and went to Maryland, but to a rural part of Maryland, thirty miles from the ocean [Atlantic Ocean]. And, so, there wasn't that much difference.
Speaker 1: What was your life like in that part of Maryland? Describe your neighborhood.
Speaker 2: The neighborhood was an integrated neighborhood. As a matter of fact, we were the only African Americans on the street, a loving neighborhood that seem to be at odds with the rest of the state, quite honestly. It was certainly a very supportive neighborhood as I think back on it. People looked out for one another and you, actually you think you were back in North Carolina although we were on the Eastern Shore of Maryland.
Story_ID: 467662
Speaker 1: Well I know the 1980s black intellectuals like Houston Baker [Houston A. Baker, Jr.] and Skip Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] and Cornel West were interested in bringing African American forums into the main stream. Were you participating in that?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say that I was participating so much in bringing that into my environment at the University of Maryland Eastern Shore [Princess Anne, Maryland], but in my volunteer efforts I think that kind of happened because one of the pivotal activities in Maryland was with the Maryland Commission on African American History and Culture. And certainly that enabled myself and fellow commissioners to have an impact on a, primarily on a state level.
Speaker 1: What did you do?
Speaker 2: The commission was primarily for all of the State of Maryland's African American cultural programming. We were initially housed in a former church, Mount Moriah Church [Mount Moriah African Methodist Episcopal Church; Banneker-Douglass Museum, Annapolis, Maryland], that was saved from the wrecking ball initially, but then grew to have other support that extended to developing not only a commission but developing, to developing a kind of watch dog group for all of black Marylanders in the cultural arena. For example, there are a number of different components, one provided funding, individuals could apply to the commission for funding. For example, there was an old cemetery some place and it was about to be run over. You could apply and so on. We also did, for example, the Maryland's annual Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] celebration where we coordinated a concert and brought in guest conductors and so on. And again I think we were able to impact the presence of African Americans in Maryland in a very positive way.
Story_ID: 467663
Speaker 1: Did you have, while you were living in Maryland, did you have any of those moments of epiphany that you sort of had when you were very young at the circus, where the colors were so vibrant that it inspired you? Did you have those moments in your position as curator and professor and painter?
Speaker 2: Again, I wouldn't say that I had them so much as a, as an academic at the University of Maryland Eastern Shore [Princess Anne, Maryland], teaching painting and doing curatorial work. Again, they seemed to have come more from the experience provided by being able to look statewide at issues through this commission [Maryland Commission on African American History and Culture].
Speaker 1: Share one experience, the colors.
Speaker 2: Well, when I think of the colors, I really think of a memorial that we were able to have happen in Annapolis, Maryland, to honor Thurgood Marshall. It stands and is very vivid.
Speaker 1: Help me see what you see.
Speaker 2: The monument to Thurgood Marshall represented the efforts of obviously a number of people but we were able to have a hand in this fruition primarily because of carte blanche that the State of Maryland gave us to put a monument on these grounds because of, well, some political upheaval.
Speaker 1: Share with me the colors.
Speaker 2: The political upheaval essentially had to do with the fact that on the State House grounds in Maryland [Maryland State House, Annapolis, Maryland], there are a number of pioneering figures, one of whom happens to be a segregationist and a racist from the 19th century, an individual who described black Americans as not being human and so on.
Speaker 1: Who was that?
Speaker 2: His name just left me. It will come back. A group of school kids were out taking a field trip on the grounds of Annapolis and his name just came to me, Roger Taney [Roger B. Taney], and they came across the monument to Taney and they were going to do further research and, of course, individuals understood that Taney was this racist and we have to do something and, in any event, a ground (unclear) developed to remove the statue of Taney and then calmer people got involved and the decision was made, let's allow a statue of Thurgood Marshall, and actually we had an opportunity to place it anywhere we wanted. To my knowledge, it's the only statute of a prominent African American on state house grounds anywhere in America. They gave us carte blanche, you can move any of these to keep it quiet, because Roger Taney was there. So that is a broad color and it's very, very vivid. The winner, by the way, elected to give us a younger interpretation of Thurgood Marshall. Instead of presenting him at the age he was when he did Brown versus the Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], he gave a depiction of him when he was a little bit younger and it was, I must say, it was quite extraordinary. And, he did include the plaintiffs in the case. He actually was able to get three in one. Thurgood Marshall stands facing, presumably, a fictitious, a, a court, and then on the side are the children (unclear). So that is memorable.
Story_ID: 467664
Speaker 1: When you left Maryland, what year was that?
Speaker 2: I came to North Carolina in 1996.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: I came here primarily because I heard about North Carolina Central University [Durham, North Carolina] and the fact that they had an exhibition space that was larger than the one that I currently worked at [at the University of Maryland Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, Maryland]. So I came to North Carolina Central University as director of their art museum [North Carolina Central University Art Museum, Durham, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: And what's your first memory?
Speaker 2: My first memory is my meeting with my board of directors, and thinking about the challenges that I might have in terms of putting together a body of programming that would do justice to the university, of course, would satiate the board members, but that would also continue this notion that I always had of pulling these artists out from the shadows and presenting them. So that first memories was of that meeting was my first, my very first meeting of the board.
Speaker 1: What was your first accomplishment in that role?
Speaker 2: I think the first accomplishment, certainly from the board's perspective, was to ensure them that they had made the right decision in, in bringing me along, that I would be faithful to the mission of the university, of the university museum.
Speaker 1: What was the mission?
Speaker 2: To promote, conserve and present African American art.
Speaker 1: So what, tell me the artists and the paintings you provide.
Speaker 2: Well, we had already at the museum the nucleus of a broad section of African American artists that we could build on. Almost all of the major artists were there, minus one or two.
Speaker 1: Who were they?
Speaker 2: There were the 19th century icons, Edward Mitchell Bannister, Henry Tanner [Henry Ossawa Tanner], Robert Scott Duncanson. There was also a generous representation of WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] era artists. There were contemporary artists, including MacArthur winners [MacArthur Fellowship]. So the notion was to use these artists as a point of departure and to develop the (unclear) exhibits around what was already there. And I think we've probably been able to do that in, in some measure.
Speaker 1: What was the most startling experience for you?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the most startling experience might have been attempting to reconcile realistic acquisitions, plan and budget against what was in place because essentially there was not very much in place for acquisition so the, the first call of order is to add to the collection, and if you have the nucleus of, of works from various periods, how do you then add to those, and where do you, more importantly, get the monies from to do it?
Story_ID: 467665
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the highlights in terms of the art forms you were able to bring.
Speaker 2: The very first real challenge was to put together an exhibit of an artist that the students wanted to see, but that also would have some national resonance, and that first, I guess foray, was to try to develop a show around the work of Charles White [Charles Wilbert White], an artist that almost everybody has sought to emulate. Of course, we've all come to the conclusion that you can't do that, you can't replicate genius and I think he was certainly a genius. So we were able to first of all identify where his works were. We concluded that quite a number were in California, so it involved going out to California and essentially following leads, and we began at the Heritage Gallery [Pacific Palisades, California], formerly owned by Charles White's dealer, Benjamin Horowitz, who passed last year. Horowitz gave us leads of individuals who owned his work and, of course, I was going all through Beverly Hills [California] trying to identify people that had White's work. In any event, in the end we were able to bring the third largest exhibit ever of Charles White to North Carolina. We were also able to, again document that with a catalog. I did have an interview, fortunately, with Charles White's widow [Frances Barrett White], who was since, she passed, and there was again, an incredible interview. She shared with me footage, rare footage that not very many people have seen of Charles White, but also she shared with me works that almost nobody had seen that he produced expressly for her.
Speaker 1: Why was it so important for you, not only to bring him here, to North Carolina, but also to document it in a book?
Speaker 2: Primarily because he is one of the major African American artist and does not take backseat to very many American artists period. He has long been held in the highest esteem by American artists and in African American circles.
Speaker 1: Describe his aesthetic. What makes it genius?
Speaker 2: What makes it genius is that he looks at a slice of black Americana in a way that most of us would like to and he goes right through the visceral nature of really what black life is about. Sometimes along the way, looks at literary sources. For example, which brights work, might surface in some of his pieces. And I guess what I'm saying is he would maybe take one of those characters that he maybe was inspired by in one of those literary works and then give it life. The genius comes through in that he pulls these images from his mind's eye. If you can envision an artist being able to give life to an image, to a vision without any reference material, that's essentially what he does. He works exclusively from memory, yet when you look at his work, it is so powerful and credible that you might think that these people are sitting right there in front of you. So that is really at the essence of what his genius is all about.
Speaker 1: And that exhibit ['Charles White: American Draughtsman'] was in 1999?
Speaker 2: That was in 1999. We were also able to get works from a number of major lenders, private, primarily private lenders to do that show.
Speaker 1: How revolutionary was it for you to be sort of institution-building in that way, bringing these African American artists here?
Speaker 2: Well, I simply saw it and see it as, as a calling, as something that I was blessed to be able to have the opportunity to do and I don't know that I would actually approach it any differently than I have in the past. Certainly having the opportunity to tell these incredible stories to share them with people who knew nothing about, might just bring inspiration to, who knows, some fledging student who might be at Central [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] or at Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] or at Carolina [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] or NC State [North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina] and might say well you know I can do this too. I had not known about this artist and what he did and how he overcame some of the odds that he did.
Story_ID: 467666
Speaker 1: Tell me about the [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett exhibit ['Elizabeth Catlett: Master Printmaker'].
Speaker 2: Elizabeth Catlett is the premier African American female artist. I've often said she stands alone. We don't have another African American artist of her caliber. I had long wanted to do something with her and through, again, a bit of detective work, discovered someone in Maryland who had collected her over the years, over the decades, a fellow, a pretty prominent individual who I believe ran for mayor of Washington, D.C. at one point, a fellow by the name of Reverend Moore [Douglas E. Moore]. In any event, he had collected her over the decades, I discovered it, was able to talk with him and convince him that he should let us show the work and we were able to bring the show to North Carolina Central University [Durham, North Carolina], and once again it included all of her prints, that is extremely rare and coupled with bringing that show, we were able to bring her as well and the university recognized her with an honorable doctorate at, I guess, my urging.
Speaker 1: Describe her genius.
Speaker 2: Her genius I think is derived from this deep commitment to family, to womanhood and to giving a voice to the voiceless, to reaching out to the downtrodden and almost all of her imagery, not just in her prints, in her works on paper, but in her sculpture as well, reached to and speak to the heroism that I think was very much present, not only in her family, but that she exposed in almost everything that she, she does. It was this very special time for the university, not only did she come with the show, but the entire community turned out. We had Elizabeth Catlett Day in the City of Durham [North Carolina]. And we had individuals come bring greetings to her, and one special note, she began her career here in North Carolina. Actually she taught at Hillside High School [Durham, North Carolina] and a very unfortunate incident happened there. She was always an activist and was lobbying for equal pay for black teachers. They were not paid what white teachers were, and apparently on the day she was to appear before the colored board, someone had alerted the then president of NCCU [North Carolina Central University], James Shepard [James E. Shepard], who also ran the colored board, fearful of reprisals, he had security there when she came, and when she arrived, they quietly escorted her out. So for many years, she had some difficult feelings toward the university. When we brought her here though, I actually brought a member of the current board of the Durham School Arts Council [sic. Durham Arts Council] who apologized for this incident that happened in the '40s [1940s], so it was quite special time.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A womanist.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Story_ID: 467667
Speaker 1: Tell me about the, the 'Modern Art of Malvin' ['Climbing Up the Mountain: The Modern Art of Malvin Gray Johnson'] exhibit.
Speaker 2: Malvin Gray Johnson. I consider that to be one of the major accomplishments of my tenure here [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], primarily because, well, we never thought we'd be able to one, do a show on this unsung artist, and two, that we would be able to get support to do it, and it begins actually in Greensboro, North Carolina, with a visit to an aunt's home, my father's [Johnnie Rodgers, Jr.] sister. We, we'd go there frequently, and I'm seven or eight or so and I remember seeing a painting of a cowboy and horse on the wall and a tattered clipping. It didn't mean nothing to me. Also at that house is my aunt's husband, a person that I wasn't all that fond of, but he talks about his uncle being an artist and we didn't really put much stock in what he had to say. As I get older and begin to know a little bit more about artists, I discovered that he is factual and that he did have an uncle, Malvin Gray Johnson, and I set out to do the show. We were able to find almost sixty of the known seventy works produced by Malvin Gray Johnson. And they came from historically black colleges [HBCUs], but they also came from faraway places as San Francisco [California]. The San Francisco art musuem [Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco, San Francisco, California] lent a work. The Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] lent work, as did Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and so on, so it was a very significant show, of course, from a personal perspective, but also from an academic one, because no one had taken a serious look at Malvin Gray Johnson. I was greatly supported in the effort by Jacqueline Francis of the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], who did her dissertation on Malvin Gray Johnson and became a partner of sorts in piecing together a story and identifying works and so on.
Speaker 1: What's his genius?
Speaker 2: His genius was in his ability to quickly change stylistic direction and master that direction. He began at the National Academy of Design [National Academy Museum and School, New York, New York] in the traditional mode of realism, but then quickly embraced a kind of post-impressionism in the manner of Cezanne [Paul Cezanne] and began to then do works with this kind of cubist leaning and mastered it in almost no time. He only lived to be thirty-four, but in that short period of time did, left us an extraordinary legacy.
Story_ID: 467668
Speaker 1: Tell me about 'Raising Rents and Other Themes' [sic.].
Speaker 2: 'Raising Renee and Other Themes' ['Beverly McIver: Raising Renee and Other Themes']. Actually that exhibit just closed a little over a month ago. 'Raising Renee' was actually an exhibit produced by contemporary artist Beverly McIver. Beverly McIver is the professor at Arizona State [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona], hopefully she's going to be coming to North Carolina Central University [Durham, North Carolina], but Beverly has her, has a sister, Renee [Renee McIver], who is developmentally challenged and Beverly's mother [Ethel McIver], who took care of her sister, died about two years ago and with her death she had Beverly vow to take care of her sister. She says that I had no idea what my mother went through all those years caring for someone with a special need, and now all of a sudden here I am confronted with raising Renee. So the show was autobiographical and looked at the challenge of, on the one hand, raising Renee, caring for her and the real dilemma of continuing to be a focused artist. All through the show were works of not only Renee, but there were these self-portraits of Beverly in all of these manifestations as she's interacting with things that maybe happened as a child. For example, she had a painting in the show titled "My New Red Outfit" [sic. "My Pretty Red Outfit," Beverly McIver], but when you looked at the painting, all you saw was the countenance of Renee. And inherent in that presentation was the notion that Renee always overshadowed everything because of her special needs. I have a new outfit, but nobody sees it because Renee is, is first and foremost, front and center. So the show was a smashing success. We had a little more than fifty-one works that we drew from again, galleries in California and Arizona and New York as well as some local people who collected her before she ascended, before she became the, the figure that she is today.
Story_ID: 467669
Speaker 1: As you glance upon your body of work, and your academic contributions, what would you like your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: That's not an easy one. I simply would like for someone to notice that I've tried to tell these stories when few other people would tell them, that I had a profound passion for African American artists who didn't have the opportunity to get the recognition that they maybe should have during their, during their lifetimes, and if that can be recognized, then I guess I'll be, be happy.
Speaker 1: What is your genius?
Speaker 2: I don't know that I have any genius. I, I'm simply committed to what I do. I love telling the stories and, of course, I also love painting when time permits, and hopefully, I'm going to have an opportunity to do a little more of both.
Story_ID: 467670
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you one more question. What is your inspiration? We hear about slave narratives. They're inspired by the desire to find freedom. We hear about W.E.B. Du Bois who's writing about double consciousness and negotiating the conflict between being an American and an African American.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What is your inspiration?
Speaker 2: I think my inspiration is bound to this not- this notion that discovery, discovery of African American artists and the idea that again, someone can paint and can draw and can do these very basic things, is a reality. It still hasn't hit me yet that these things have happened. I'm just as wide-eyed today in my sixth decade as I was at four years of age. You know these people actually did this. They were able to make these incredible images. How did they do that? And although I know how they did it, I still approach it with the same sense of wonder and awe that I did all those many years ago. I don't know that I have a personal ethos. I simply have the notion that the stories have to continue to be told and I'm gonna do the best I can to you know to share 'em, that's it.
Story_ID: 467671
Speaker 1: This is my senior year photograph that I guess shows what I'd like to look like today (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, which (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's a typical photograph--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Is that high school or college?
Speaker 1: A photograph of high school [Chatham High School; Jordan-Matthews High School, Siler City, North Carolina], high school photograph.
Speaker 2: So you were seventeen or eighteen?
Speaker 1: Seventeen, yeah.
Speaker 2: This is a picture taken during the sixth grade. I was not actually included in an annual yearbook or anything. It was one of those stock photos that they, that they do.
Speaker 1: Who's that a picture of?
Speaker 2: That's a picture of myself.
Speaker 1: And what's your name?
Speaker 2: And I am, of course, Kenny Rodgers [HistoryMaker Kenneth G. Rodgers] (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is a photograph during my second year of graduate school at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro [Greensboro, North Carolina]. I am seated at the security desk inside the Weatherspoon Art Museum [Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: And who is that?
Speaker 1: And again this is Kenneth Rodgers (laughter).
Speaker 2: What year?
Speaker 1: This is 1973.
Speaker 2: Again this is Kenneth Rodgers and my wife Shielda [Shielda Glover Rodgers], during our thirtieth anniversary celebration.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: This is 2005.
Speaker 1: This is Kenneth Rodgers and wife, Shielda, at a commencement exercise at North Carolina Central University [Durham, North Carolina] in 2002.
Speaker 2: This is Kenneth Rodgers and family. From the left son, Shaun [Kenneth S. Rodgers], wife Shielda, and daughter Nia [Nia Rodgers]. This is my son's graduation at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] in 2003.
Speaker 1: This, I am Kenneth Rodgers again. This is my son Kenneth Shaun Rodgers during his senior year at Riverside High School in Durham, North Carolina.
Speaker 2: This is Kenneth Rodgers and wife, Shielda, fifteen minutes after their marriage in 1975.
Speaker 1: I am Kenneth Rodgers. This is my daughter Nia, and this is her graduation photograph from high school in Maryland in 1996.
Speaker 2: Eighteen-eighty [1888], I would guess, cause he's an older man.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, tell us about this.
Speaker 2: Again, I am Kenneth Rodgers. This is a photograph of my great-great-great-grandfather, Sampson Marsh [ph.], circa 1880, 1890.
Speaker 1: Where is he?
Speaker 2: He is on a farm some place in Chatham County, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: This is the cover of an exhibit by the same name as the catalog, 'Climbing Up the Mountain: The Modern Art of Malvin Gray Johnson.' It did receive the North Carolina Museums Council's top award for catalog, for best catalogue in 2002.
Speaker 2: Again, this is the catalog representing this show, 'William H. Johnson: Revisiting an African American Modernist' shown at the North Carolina Central University Art Museum [Durham, North Carolina] in 2006.
Speaker 1: This is a catalog representing and documenting the show that we had by the same title, 'Elizabeth Catlett: Master Printmaker' in 2001.
Speaker 2: This is a recently closed show of nationally known artist Beverly McIver, the show titled, 'Beverly McIver: Raising Renee and Other Themes' was among our most successful exhibits at, at the university museum.
