Story_ID: 19228
Speaker 1: Lisa Bass, interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Larry Crowe.  Sir, would you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: William Raspberry, R-A-S-P-B-E-R-R-Y.
Speaker 1: What is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: 10/12/35, [October 12, 1935].
Speaker 1: And the place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okolona, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Could you spell that?
Speaker 2: O-K-O-L-O-N-A.
Speaker 1: Spell it again for us just to--.
Speaker 2: O-K-O-L-O-N-A.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is September 27th, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we?
Speaker 2: We're in my home at 1301 Iris Street, Northwest Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 19229
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh boy, I don't know.  Can I come back to that one?
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: And what is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite--?
Speaker 1: Time of year?
Speaker 2: Oh, spring.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yeah, someplace where I wasn't last year.  Someplace new.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what about that favorite food?
Speaker 2: My wife [Sondra Raspberry] makes collard greens the way you've never had them made.  She chops them with garlic and olive oil and stuff.  My grandmother would be mortified but the result is just unbelievably good.  And I keep coming, asking her to do it again.
Story_ID: 19230
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family.  I'm going to ask you a series of questions about your family.  Let's start on your father's side.  How back can you trace your lineage on your father's side, your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Not, not terribly far.  I know about my father's grandfather.  I have personal knowledge only of my father's father and, and stepmother.  His, his, his mother died when he was a child so I know my, my father who's James Raspberry, who was James Raspberry.  We lost him in 1991.  He was eighty-nine.
Speaker 1: And his father, what was his name?
Speaker 2: His father was, his father was Dave Edward Thomas Eugene Raspberry.  They didn't have money but they had lots of names.  And--.
Speaker 1: Where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in--near Okolona, Mississippi as well.  He, he--.
Speaker 1: Do you know the year?
Speaker 2: My, my father's year or my--?
Speaker 1: Your grandfather.
Speaker 2: I don't know my grandfather's year.
Speaker 1: What about your father's year of birth?
Speaker 2: My father was born in 1902 and as I say he was born and grew up in, in the area around Okolona, Mississippi as, as I believe his, his father also grew up not far from there.  Now my father's grandfather who was Charlie Raspberry, I don't know what his origins were, but that's as far back as I can go on, on his side.
Speaker 1: Do you have any estimate of how old Charlie Raspberry was?
Speaker 2: I do not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your father then born in 1902, around the turn of the century, what was his profession and what did he tell you life was like for him?
Speaker 2: Dad was a teacher.  He was a shop teacher, industrial arts, trades, had a number of names.  And he grew up on a small family farm.  It goes without saying he grew up poor.  I don't, I think everybody, that, that was sort of standard.  But he, he managed to, to--he was smart and he managed to get educated.  He went to the little school on whose campus I was born actually.  And--.
Speaker 1: What's that school?
Speaker 2: But it was a--the school was called Okolona [Technical] College [Okolona, Mississippi].  It was in fact a junior college with a high school attached or a high school with a junior college attached cause there were four years of high school.  Dad went to that school, helped to build a number of the buildings on, on the campus before it closed around 1965, and was later faculty there for most of, virtually all of my life until his retirement.
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about growing up and what it was like being his son?
Speaker 2: Actually it's, it's one of the--I mean I, I think my father is absolutely the strongest influence on who I am and, and, and what I, how I am, what I believe, what I think and what I do.  He was quite an extraordinary man, good in almost a saintly kind of way if you could, if, if that doesn't sound too schmaltzy.  He was always the person the community called on to fix things cause he was good at it.  But whether the things were, were broken dressers or broken cars or broken relationships it was my father that, that was sort of expected to step in and, and put the pieces together a little bit.  I always thought he, he knew everything.  I mean it, he was--and, and a number of times daddy would have been an engineer I'm sure of it but he didn't have the educational opportunity.  I, I think he sort of, never told me but he sort of hoped I would become one.  But he, he couldn't do that so he, he became a, a building trades teacher.  He knew all about carpentry and brick masonry and, and those things.  He never developed, at least as far as I could see, as we could see, much of an interest in, in money.  I mean obviously he could have, he could have done better economically if he had moved away from the Deep South and from that small town where we grew up, but he seemed to, to have it in his head that this was his mission, that this was what he was supposed to do.  He was supposed to pass these skills along to the youngsters who were coming along behind him and be, although he would never put it that way, a pillar of this community.  So he was, he was always active that way and he was always teaching and he was always doing things for the community and he was active in, in his church.  Which some people are startled when I tell them it was an Episcopal church since you're not supposed to be from a small town in the Deep South and be an Episcopalian.  But it, as it happened it was the Episcopal church that, that ran the small junior college that I'm talking about and that's, that was kind of where all that came from.  Dad had, by the time he died, had become perhaps either, either the only or the one of two lifetime licensed lay readers in the church.  He was in effect the, the substitute pastor cause we didn't have a regular priest in our church.  So he, he, he ran, he ran [Mission of] St. Bernard's Church in Okolona for a lot of, lot, lot of years.
Speaker 1: I don't think you said, did you say his birth date?  What was his birth date?
Speaker 2: His birth date was September 12th.
Speaker 1: 1902?
Speaker 2: 1902, yes.
Story_ID: 19231
Speaker 1: What about your mother?  What was her name and what is her date of birth and where was she born?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Willie Mae Tucker, she, she was a Tucker.  She was born in 1907 in a little community called Smithville, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: What was her date of birth?
Speaker 2: February 13th.  This is, this is '03 [2003].  Next February 13th, she'll be ninety eight and she's doing well living alone.  But she, she grew up as I say in, in Smithville one of seven kids, met my father when he was teaching at what they describe to me as a Rosenwald School.  Julius Rosenwald [president of Sears, Roebuck and Co. department stores] gave a lot of money to, throughout the South to establish small schools and my father [James Raspberry] built one of these schools and was--while, while it was being built he taught school under a shade tree for a while he told me.  He later was principal of that little school and, which only had a staff of two or three.  And my mother became one of his teachers and that's how they met.  At the time they met they were both engaged to somebody else.  They met and it clicked and they, they had a terrific life together.
Story_ID: 19232
Speaker 1: How many children did they have?
Speaker 2: They had, they, they lost one, one stillborn but there were five of us.  I had three sisters then me, then a, then a younger brother.
Speaker 1: What was it like growing up (pauses) being the oldest boy in a family of five in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Well being--you grew up of course in a household, that was wonderful.  And we, we had a great time together although my sisters picked on me because they could.  They were all older and they all thought they were my mom.  But I got my revenge when my brother came along so I got to pick on him.  Growing up in our household was, was incredibly positive and pleasant and good and funny and all those things.  It's a cliché now when, when you talk to people of a certain age that they say they didn't remember, they didn't know they were poor.  But I understand what, what that means.  Poverty is such a relative thing and small town poverty in a place where nobody has much, you can be poor in, in sort of the objective sense and yet subjectively there's always food and always warm clothing and all those things, not always the, the fanciest of either food or clothing or housing but always, always there.  So that was, that was incredibly pleasant.  The house was obviously much smaller than I recall.
Speaker 1: Describe the house.
Speaker 2: It was a--the house I was born in was, was faculty housing on the campus of Okolona [Technical] College [Okolona, Mississippi].  It was a two bedroom house and there were at that point four of us.  Later there was a three bedroom house for five kids.  What I remember about those growing up years is that there was hardly a year where we didn't have somebody else living with us, some cousin or pseudo-cousin or daughter or son of a, son of a friend who came to Okolona to attend the college and, and lived with us.  I mean it, it, it never, it never felt crowded but it, it must have been.  It would have been, been impossible today I think you know when kids expect to have their own rooms and during those days there weren't many years when I had my own bed, let alone by own room.  But it got to be routine for somebody to be living with us all the time and it sort of opened, opened me up for later on to, to be more accepting, I think.  Perhaps more giving because my parents [James Raspberry and Willie Mae Tucker Raspberry] gave as it seemed to us without thinking about it.  There was room--another cup of water in the soup and another, another couple of biscuits in the oven and everybody ate.
Speaker 1: What did your mother do?  Did she stay at home?
Speaker 2: My mother was a teacher too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was librarian for a time but she was most importantly for me an English teacher.  She also taught me math at, at one year of my life but most important but she, she was an English teacher and she--I, I sometimes say that I owe to my mother one of her grace of expression I have.  She, she made me, she made me think about words and, and use words in a way that they carried their weight.  And she taught me a love of language.  My dad was--being a building phase instructor was more of the practical kind who, who thought not just you know end tables but ideas needed to rest on all four legs or they were hopelessly shaky.  So he, he, he gave me that sense of things what, which of course says, makes it, makes it too neat a division because my father also was a word person.  He--we talk still about some of his little sermonettes that he used to, to, to give during chapel services and later at the church.  And they were always short but excellently constructed.  And the joke in our house is that, in our family is that everybody sitting in that little congregation knew he was talking directly to him or her.  It only seemed that way.  And he was always so innocent about it you know.  He was making a general point.  But they were both, they, they both liked words.  My mom wrote poetry in addition to teaching English.  Never had anything published.  And I even came across a couple poems of my father's later on.  I wish I'd known this was coming up I would have had one or two available.  But that's who they were.  They, they, they found a way to, to keep us engaged in language and, and then in school--in, in, in learning I should say, language and learning, partly because of, of what they did.  They both were voracious readers and the, the games we played just you know in those pre-television days often had some academic usefulness although we weren't aware of it at the time.  I, I, I miss the days when you know it's--sitting around the fire because there was no central heat and in the, in the winters we'd sit in their room, mom and dad's room until it was time to run off into our cold beds and, and snuggle under all the covers we could find.  But you know we might spend an evening playing twenty questions or something which is just a terrific game to, to sharpen analytical skills and so on.  Or she might read poetry to us and it just seemed kind of a natural thing to do.  It was--.
Speaker 1: When would you do this?
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: In, in the time between dinner and bedtime.  Sitting around--it's a little too early to go to bed and you're sitting there and as I say there's no television.  Radio was not that great so that's, that's how we entertained ourselves or be entertained and some of that, some of that sticks with me.  I, I regret really that, that I didn't do more of that with my children.  I think when they were small I imagined that I could not compete with television and I think a lot of parents imagined that they could not compete with television and I think they're wrong.  I think what your parents do is much more memorable than anything you see on a, a sitcom.
Story_ID: 19233
Speaker 1: Tell me about the economic and social and cultural climate in the small town [Okolona] in Mississippi in which you had this wonderful life with your parents [James Raspberry and Willie Mae Tucker Raspberry]?
Speaker 2: The, the salient fact of life as I lived it growing up was absolute, utter, stark racial segregation.  It was just, it was the Deep South, that's what it was.  And one of, one of the more pleasant things about that period of my life is that Okolona [Technical] College [Okolona, Mississippi] became a sort of refuge from that.  It was quite, quite consciously an effort to establish a refuge for us to, to tell you know black boys and girls that you can, you can achieve, you can, you can do something with your lives and we're going to do what we can to fit you to do well in a hostile environment.  So that, that's, that's what it was.  And the effects of, of growing up and attending that little school which never had any geniuses its faculty and faculty were not particularly well educated.  But the school closed as I said the mid 1960s and still every two or three years, three to four years we will conspire to have a reunion of the school, not, not of a class there, that's too--the class, classes were never big enough, but of the school.  Anybody who went to the college or the high school ever is invited to come back.  And so you know there are a few dozen of us get together on these times and what, what we talk about is the difference that little place made for us.  I mean there were people you know I, as I say I grew up in a town of thirty five hundred people but we were townies.  There were people who were from you know the farms who'd never been to, into a two-story building in their lives who you know, and many of them didn't have electricity in their homes and it was, it was pretty, pretty basic stuff.  And, and schooling was not, was not terrific.  But their parents heard about Okolona, had heard some good things were going there and although the parents themselves were mostly unschooled, they thought the chance for their children to get schooled was just too good an opportunity to pass up and they, they sacrificed whatever was necessary to get their children into that school.  And surprisingly often the kids came through and they did well with their lives.
Story_ID: 19234
Speaker 1: What kind of youngster were you?
Speaker 2: Perfect of course.  I was, I was probably pretty, pretty average.  I was a happy kid, playful, a little bit mischievous.
Speaker 1: Tell us about some things you did.
Speaker 2: Oh, one of the things I, I, I didn't know about till later and it wasn't mischievous it was actually kind of sweet if you think about it.  My mom [Willie Mae Tucker Raspberry] had a little flower garden of which she was inordinately proud and I loved my mom and I must have been about three when I presented her with some flowers, a bouquet.  I just thought, I wanted her to know how much I cared for her.  And she accounts that I had gone out into her garden and picked off all her favorite flowers, destroying the garden and bringing them to her.  And she didn't know--she managed to make me think I'd done the sweetest thing in the world.  And I always thought that, that was so, so wonderful of her.  I mean it was, it was, I guess she figured I--she couldn't scotch tape them back.  But it, it must have hurt that I had wrecked her garden but she never let me know that I'd, that I'd done this.  And all she, all she saw was my intent and, and she honored the intent and that--it was a lesson for me.
Speaker 1: What was the lesson?
Speaker 2: That you can get, you can get hung up on things and forget, and forget what's, what lies behind what people do.  And if you can look at, if you can look at your children, if you can look at each other and pay more, a little more attention to the intent of what we do and not just its effect, we may, it doesn't make us like everything that's done but it does make us more forgiving and makes it easier to move on.
Story_ID: 19235
Speaker 1: You were born in the school, the college your father [James Raspberry] built, but where did you actually attend grammar school?
Speaker 2: The arrangement in Okolona [Mississippi] was not--there was, first remember everything was utterly segregated.  There was for us what we called the junior high which was everything from kindergarten, we called pre-primer, through tenth grade at the public school.  And after tenth grade if you, if you were to complete high school you went to Okolona [Technical] College-High School for at least the ninth and tenth grade--I mean I'm sorry, for at least eleventh and twelfth grade.  Many of the kids did it for all four high school years.  I did all four high school years there but my earlier years were at, at Meridian Street High School [Meridian High School, Okolona, Mississippi] which was, which was a junior high then.  I remember I didn't have to do the primer which is the kindergarten because that was basically a sort of a reading readiness thing.  And I'd learned to read already at home and had--was a little bit ahead because my mother [Willie Mae Tucker Raspberry] at the time was teaching not at the city school but in a series of one-room school houses out in the sticks.  And, and I would often ride out with her to, to those schools.  And so I was ahead of my classmates a little bit when it came time for the public school.
Story_ID: 19236
Speaker 1: I said I used to go with my mother [Willie Mae Tucker Raspberry] on, on at least the pretty days as we called it where, where she taught out in the rural as we said, in these one-room school houses.  I mean there's literally one room with a potbelly stove in the middle of it.  And it, it amazes me still that she taught eight grades--one teacher, nobody else, taught eight grades in that little one room school.  And kids coming from the local farms and sharecropper such and so on, and I don't know how she pulled it off.  She, she had the older, she taught, got the older kids teaching the younger ones, helping the younger ones with their work and so on.  I remember very well the, the chalkboards were black painted wood around the edge of a room.  So when--this is early 1940s and shortly after that they had the school consolidation movement in the state [of Mississippi] so that they shut down all these little rural schools and, and brought the big school into, into the county seats mostly and it was a major breakthrough.  Mom got a job you know in a, in a multi-room building, seemed huge at the time.  I'm trying to guess how many kids there must have been but I do remember pre-primer and first grade were in one room, another teacher had second and third grade, somebody else had third and fourth and fifth and sixth and so on, and seventh and eighth and that was the end of that school.  But I went to that, that school.  You had the same homeroom teacher for two years.  I, I went there through eighth grade.  They--I remember I, I got really confused because they agreed that I wouldn't have to do the pre-primer stuff but, that I would start off in first grade because I could already read.  And I remember finishing a book that would get us through the whole semester.  I got--it was a kind of a little mystery story and I got interested in it and finished it that night and they didn't know what to do with me.  And they--finally the, the principal came and told me that, that I would have to wait until October, my birth month, before he could do it but then he moved me to the second grade.  I had, had to wait till I was six before he would do it.  But then you know we, we all stayed together.  It was, there was never any sections of class as my whole elementary and secondary years.  Then came, I came up to the high school or the college [Okolana Technical College High School, Okolana, Mississippi] and, and did my four years there and then went away to college [Indiana Central College, later University of Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana].
Story_ID: 19237
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned earlier your brothers and sisters.  Can you tell me their names and the years--(unclear)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) My oldest sister is, is Jamesetta, Jackie we call her.  She lives in Fort Wayne, Indiana and she is nine years my senior.  I--my middle sister I lost March of this year [2003].  She, she was at the time of her death seventy-four.  My next sister is Hattie--Eunice is, is the middle sister.  My--Hattie is the youngest one who is three years my elder and then me, then my brother David is seven years my junior.  David lives in Cleveland [Ohio], Hattie lives in Indianapolis.  Eunice spent most of her life, adult life in Detroit [Michigan] and moved a few years ago back to Okolona [Mississippi] which is where she was when she died and my eldest sister Jackie lives in Fort Wayne, Indiana.
Story_ID: 19238
Speaker 1: When you went to high school what were some of your favorite subjects there?
Speaker 2: Probably my favorite subject was, was math, algebra because I adored Mr. Gardner who taught math.  He taught band, I was in the band, marching band and he taught math.  I, I started off in college [Indiana Central College, later University of Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana] as a math major because I took such a liking to it and I know that the reason is that I wanted Mr. Gardner to be proud of me.  I think about that a lot when I think about how he told children if they do well in this or that how it's going to enable them to make more money later on in their lives.  And I don't think, I don't think the economic benefits of scholarship are something children pay any attention at all.  I think we're more likely to do well in school because it pleases somebody we care about, our parents, a favorite teacher, somebody like that.  And that certainly was, was what made me want to do well in school.
Speaker 1: Why did this particular teacher and were there others who had an influence on you, have the influence on you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Lots of teachers had a strong influence on me, including my parents [James Raspberry and Willie Mae Tucker Raspberry].  Both of them taught me at various points in my, in my school career.  But I'm not quite sure--I, I ran into him a few years ago and I was not able to tell him then why it seemed so important to me that I do well in his class.  It was another teacher we had who taught me agriculture.  All, all of us had to take an agriculture course and Mr. Williams who was also my next door neighbor on the campus taught us agriculture.  And he was a favorite of mine not because he taught me about cover crops and that kind of thing but because he was the only teacher on the middle faculty there who understood that we needed to be told something about the facts of life.  And he would separate the boys from the girls and he'd sit down and just talk to us about what was up.  And, and my, my old classmates and I talk about that even as recently as this summer.  My parents were smart people, modest people.  I checked with my siblings, they never said a word to us about the birds and bees.  They, they would have been embarrassed to death to talk to us sex.  But what they did instead they, they knew we would read anything that was left lying around so they would get the appropriate literature and just leave it on the table in the living room absolutely confident that we'd find it and read it and we all did.  And we came out reasonably well aware of what was what.
Story_ID: 19239
Speaker 1: You went to college and majored in math.  What college was that?
Speaker 2: I went to, it was then Indiana Central College which was chosen by this exhausted method.  My sister [Hattie Raspberry] had a, had married at age seventeen and she married a guy from Indianapolis [Indiana].  And we were looking around for a place for me to go to school when I graduated.  And I think she sort of missed the family companionship and she said, "You can live with us if you can find a school, you know, that will take you."  So we went looking around for a small school.  I was not ready for a big university.  So we found Indiana Central College in Indianapolis, Indiana.  It's now grown a bit and it's the University of Indianapolis.  But that was the, the logic by which we chose that school and actually I was a math major only for a year.  Then I was an English major, a history major and a pre-seminarian.  I didn't know what I wanted to do so I kept changing majors to accommodate what other people sort of suggested to me or ought I considered doing.  And my last major was as a, as a pre-seminarian with the thought that I would go to seminary and become an Episcopal priest.  And that's, that's where I was when the summer between my junior and senior years I had trouble finding a job.  I had to work my way through college.  My recollection is I went--I did my freshman year then worked for a year then went back to school.  So this summer I hadn't been able to find a job, the summer of 1955.  And a friend who worked for a little weekly newspaper, the 'Indianapolis Recorder' called me one day in July and said, "The sports editor just quit.  If you can pass yourself off as a sports writer I think I can get you hired at the paper."  So I went down and told Mr. Stewart I was a sports writer and, and got hired and it was the first time I ever set foot in a newspaper office or gave any thought to news-papering as a career and I caught it.  It was just, it just clicked.  And I finally found a profession I'd been sort of floundering around looking for.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: That would be 1955.
Speaker 1: And what was happening in the country and in Indianapolis around that time?
Speaker 2: Whatever was happening in the country was happening a little slower in Indianapolis.  It, it--now this was, this was sort of the precursor of, of--well you know of, of the full fledged Civil Rights Movement.  We, we were, we were fighting even, even when I was a college student we were fighting segregation in, in Indianapolis, which I'd always thought was the North but it wasn't attitudally [sic, attitudinally] the North.  It was in many ways more confusing than the South because there was for example certain restaurants where you couldn't eat but there was no way of knowing which ones they were until you got there and got, got embarrassed and humiliated.  The, the local amusement park was segregated.  A sort of marvelous thing for me was that one of--there was a drive-in restaurant where you never left your car, it was called The Pole.  I, I still remember that, that refused to serve you if you were black and I thought, "Of all the absurdities."  But yeah, we, we were, we were fighting segregation at the time.  This was the run up to the full-fledged Civil Rights Movement which I sort of grew up in the business, in the newspaper business covering.  So those, those were really important years in, in my development I think.
Speaker 1: So you got the job at the paper in sports and--?
Speaker 2: I lasted about two weeks as a sports writer.  They found out that I, I did have some writing skills.  I had--I used to do you know, used to get good grades on my school themes and, and term papers and stuff, but they were not particularly well done because I, I was writing for an audience of one who had no choice but to read what I wrote.  And my, my journalistic skills, my writing skills development from the moment it dawned on me that nobody had to read what I wrote and if I could entice them into read--to starting it, they could turn me off by you know as easily as averting your eyes to another part of the page.  So I, I taught myself to, to write leads that would grab attention or to write headlines that would and then leads that would grab attention.  And then I used to play a game with myself you know, how do I write, once I got a good lead how do I write a second paragraph that will keep the reader for that much longer?  And then a third graph and how do I sneak in the, the more boring stuff like statistics and so on in a way that, that won't make the reader go away?  And, and I was very conscious of trying to hold onto the reader just another paragraph longer, taught me to write short paragraphs for one thing, usually one sentence paragraphs.  I used to play games with type faces.  I'd go from bold to italic and so on just to make it look interesting.  And to this day one of my favorite compliments is from, is, is for a reader to tell me that he or she liked the column I wrote and then to say, "I particularly like the way you ended it."  And that means I kept them all the way and it's, it's still a terrific compliment for me.
Speaker 1: Now you said when--you didn't do well as a sports writer.  Tell us about that chapter.
Speaker 2: Well--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) It was only two weeks so what makes you say that?
Speaker 2: Yeah I, I never, I never got to, to, to cover any games.  I was basically re-writing the wires on, on things like major league baseball.  We didn't have a major league team but you know that sort of thing.  But the boss discovered I--Mr. Stewart, Marcus Stewart discovered I was better used covering police headquarters and you know other things around town and it was a lot more fun for me too.
Speaker 1: What can you tell us about the, the newspaper owner Mr. Stewart?
Speaker 2: Mr. Stewart had a paper that actually his father [George Pheldon Stewart] started back in the eighteen, late 1800s, 1890s I recall, the 'Indianapolis Recorder', it was an African American weekly, still exists under different ownership now.  But it was--it turned out to be, turned out to have been my journalism school.  It was where I learned whatever I, the rudiments of journalism, how, how to write, how to, how to interview mainly by trial and error.  There was a, a man there, the same guy who talked me into applying for the job, his name was Richard Henderson.  He's, he and Mr. Stewart are both dead now.  But he sort of modeled good writing for me.  I learned to like the way you know words and ideas could be put in, in, in, in verbal form.  And it, it was as I say, by the time I--I stayed there four years.  I finished, I went back to school that fall.  Mr. Stewart told me that, "You go get your schedule and whatever hours you're not working you can work here."  So I, I did that and I stayed there four years until I got drafted in the [U.S.] Army and, and stationed in Washington [D.C.] which is how I wound up at the 'Washington Post'.
Story_ID: 19240
Speaker 1: I've never particularly planned my life.  My, my life has happened for me up to and including now in, in, in many quite strange and wonderful ways and better than I could plan.  I had no--I, I didn't intend to go in the military.  I got drafted and I had no choice.  They sent me to Washington, D.C., where I came to know and, and become very fond of the 'Washington Post' [newspaper].  After my two years in, in the service I thought, "Instead of going back to Indianapolis [Indiana] I think I'd like to get a job as a, as a reporter at the 'Washington Post'."  I did a little inquiry and found that my four years at the 'Indianapolis Recorder' counted as zero experience at the 'Washington Post'.  So I said, "Let me find out what job there is in the news room that I can get," because I was pretty sure that if I could get into the news room I could arrange to be discovered.  I found out they were looking for teletype operators.  They were just starting the 'Washington Post'-'L.A. [Los Angeles, California] Times' News Service--new wire service and they needed teletype operators so I went to personnel and told them I was a teletype operator.  And--as I told my kids--by the time they found that I wasn't, I was.  You know the keyboard is the same as a typewriter and I could type.  Now, but I found, I found we didn't have the word then but we'd call him a mentor now.  An Assistant Managing Editor who took an interest in me and discovered that I didn't intend a career as a teletypist and sort of nurtured me along and used to give me little things to re-write.  And after about six weeks he came to me one day and said, "Raspberry starting Monday you're going to be doing little bits," which meant I was in the news room.  I was writing.  I was a reporter.  And that's where I've been since then.
Speaker 2: What year was that?
Speaker 1: That was 1962.  I was drafted in 1960, I spent two years in the [U.S.] Army, got out in '62 [1962] and that's when I went to work for the '[Washington] Post'.  I, I did obituaries and general assignments and night police and all those things that, that rookie reporters do.  And then after a couple of years I got tapped by a new City Editor to be, become an Assistant City Editor which I didn't like.  I did, I was--I spent half a year as a Copy Editor which was a, a useful experience for me, checking other people's copy for style and accuracy and, and that sort of thing--taste.  And then the second half of that year as an assistant city--an Assignments Editor getting the city reporters out to their beats and so on, hated it.  I got sprung off that duty when the Watts [neighborhood in Los Angeles, California] Riots broke in, in August of 1965.  And, and I didn't have to go back to the desk and--.
Speaker 2: What happened?
Speaker 1: That I wouldn't have to go back?  The, the reason I didn't have to go back is that toward the end of that year after the August riots and so on, a colleague of mine at the 'Post' named George Lardner (ph.) had started a local column which he called 'Potomac Watch'.  And after a year of doing it he grew tired of it and wanted to go and cover Capitol Hill.  The 'Post' having discovered that you could say things in a column that you can't get into news stories very easily decided they wanted to keep a local column on, on the Metro page and they came to me and said, "We, we like the way you write.  Would you be interested in taking over that column?" And that's--George was writing five columns a week.  "I don't want to do that."  They said, "You only have to do four."  And I thought, "Well there are probably a dozen things I could really excited about to make good columns, but then what do I do for column ideas?"  He said, "Don't worry we'll keep you supplied with column ideas."  The next one they give me will be the first.  But I--they talked me into it and I did it and starting in 1966, January '66 [1966] I started writing a Metro front [page] column four days a week.  Then in the next year or so they said, "Well we'd like you to put one, write one of the columns for the Op-Ed [opinions and editorials] page.  Let's try that out."  And then they say, "Well just--want you to write three a week and we'll put a ball (ph.) on the Op-Ed page," and that's sort of where, where it--I'd say 1966 was my last promotion.  I became a columnist and that's what I am today.
Story_ID: 19241
Speaker 1: The Civil Rights Movement--the fledgling Civil Rights Movement was, was influencing on how, how I saw things.  The, the Watts [neighborhood in Los Angeles, California] Riots [1965] I think it's kind of--there, there was a protocol about, about the urban uprisings we had during that period that became more obvious later than, than, than it was at the time.  You didn't know how safe you could be, you, you were in those things.  You didn't know what the people who were protesting would think about, you know journalists or did they, would they identify me with the white establishment or you know, would they see me as a vehicle to tell their story?  It was all quite, quite up in the air and--but it was a terrific learning experience, learning how to deal with people, how to, how to take care of yourself in, in, in tricky situations where you couldn't call a supervisor or somebody and say get me out of here in a strange where you didn't have friends and other resources.  So you learned to develop a certain level of street smarts.  And those things served me well.  I, I suppose the counterpart would be to people who go off covering wars now except mine was not quite that dangerous.
Speaker 2: Tell us about that day when you got that assignment.  Can you--do you remember that?
Speaker 1: The, the day I got sent to Watts?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was at work doing something else when--what, what happened was that the 'Washington [D.C.] Post' and the 'L.A. [Los Angeles] Times' had a good working relationship.  As I said they, they had formed the news service together.  And they would depend on us for a lot of the coverage back east and we would look to them to tell us what was going on out there.  When the rioting broke out, we discovered something about the 'L.A. Times'.  They, they couldn't get inside the, the riot area because they had zero African American reporters.  They finally pressed into service some guy who had been an advertising salesman up to that moment.  But the '[Washington] Post' decided we're not getting what we need by having white reporters in effect follow the police around.  'Cause they're not, they're not telling us what is going on in the community, so they packed up two people, quickest I ever packed I think.  "Do you want to go out Monday morning?"  It was an older white reporter named Chalmers Roberts who was sent out to cover the political establishment out there and I was sent out to, to hit the streets and find out what was going on in, in Watts.  And didn't know how, how I would do that but you know you, you play it by ear.  You--I mean as it turns out if you follow your own curiosity it will take you to, to where you need to go with the news.  You know what are people saying, what are they angry about?  You know, is the anger real?  What, what triggered this stuff, how much of it is a lark, all those things.  And how scary is it?  I mean, that's what I wanted to know.  But I wanted to be in it, I wanted to be out there and so we stayed a week out there and it was, it--actually the, the reportage there won the, the [U.S.] Capitol Press Club's 'Journalist of the Year' award for that year.  So that was a plus for me.  But when I, when that was done I, as I said, I never went back to desk work.
Speaker 2: And after that how many other black reporters when you went out there were covering the riot, that particular event?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure that I found any out there.  This--we didn't have I mean, I mean America's newspapers had very few African American journalists at that point.  I mean a huge paper like the, like the 'L.A. Times' had, had none.  The 'Post' had a few.  The 'New York Times' had a few.  Papers around had a few but we used to make the joke that we could have a meeting of America's black journalists in the living room of any one of us.  And in part to cover--to, to be prepared for the next urban uprising, newspapers started some really serious recruiting.  A little awkwardly here and there we hired, the 'Post' hired what we used to call the 'Riot Babies'.  They basically went looking for people who were headed towards other kinds of careers but who seemed bright and amenable to trying journalism for a while.  Some stayed with it and, and are still with it.  Others tried it for a year or less and, and went on to do other things.  But we, we learned how, how to recruit a little bit.
Story_ID: 19242
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about how you made contact with other journalists at major newspapers in the country.
Speaker 2: In those early days and again we're talking early 1960s now, it's no exaggeration to say that the African American reporters on white dailies knew each other.  I mean Tom [Thomas A.] Johnson at the '[New York] Times', Paul Delaney at the '[Washington D.C.] Star' or Ernie Holtz (ph.) is at 'Dolph' (ph.), you know (pauses) Earl Caldwell, and we, we, we knew each other at, at the very least by name and reputation because there just weren't that many.  Then we, as I say the recruitment changed.  I mean up to that point you basically had people who were crazy enough to think that in this really still pretty much segregated business, it made sense to try to enter daily journalism. Then the major newspapers started recruiting and the numbers started to grow some largely I would say as insurance against the prospective, a prospective riot.  And then at some papers including the 'Washington [D.C.] Post', reporters found themselves, black reporters found themselves sort of on hold waiting for the riot, not really getting, being considered for promotions and not often being considered for other kinds of work that was not race specific.  And one of the, one of the major episodes was an uprising by some of the young reporters, the 'Metro Seven' we called them at the 'Washington Post' making a series of demands and some change came out of that.  But as the numbers started to grow it seemed important to, to begin a more formal kind of networking and, and so was born the National Association of Black Journalists.  And as a corollary of that some local, the Washington Association of Black Journalists and the Atlanta [Georgia] Association of Black--and so on.  But now I mean one, one of, one of the, the many heartening things now is to go to an NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] national convention and see one of the convention hotels teaming with young, bright, aggressive, confident journalists who, whose names you didn't hear before and who are going to be you know doing all kinds of things.  It's, I mean I, I think the future is in good hands.  We, we, we still complain that the numbers don't reflect our presence in, in the, in the, in the community but they're better by far than they were when I came along.  And, and the kids are so good that I, I'm, I'm confident that, that we're going to do well in the future.
Story_ID: 19243
Speaker 1: What stands out in your mind as the major historical events where you believe black journalists working for white newspapers made a difference?
Speaker 2: First and foremost the movement itself.  Although early on, it's getting kind of funny.  It was black journalists working for black publications, 'Jet' and 'Ebony' that, that, that paved the way in the Deep South and then the networks came down mostly with white reporters.  But when the movement hit the local towns and, and black reporters started being assigned to it, that, that was significant.  Made a difference covering, covering the LB--LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] Poverty Program [War on Poverty, 1964], made a difference covering any number of race specific stories.  And then we learned to bring maybe a broader different point of view to some other kinds of coverage.  The courts, police, all kinds of things are a little different, can be a little different if you, if, if--depending on whose viewing them.  Some stories don't change.  If you're covering an accident at an intersection, a white reporter or a black reporter are going to get pretty much the same story.  If you're covering, covering a clash between black youngsters and the police, you're likely to come away with different perspectives on, on the story.  And editors woke up to the fact that those different perspectives are important to get into the newspapers and subsequently on the air.  (Pauses) Even so I mean it was, it took some editors a while to, to, to believe that African American reporters had anything to say about stories that were not specifically racial.  I mean we used to talk about for instance when the reporters would be tapped to be on 'Face the Meat (ph.),' as I call those shows, unless it was, unless the subject was Jesse Jackson or the Civil Rights Movement or some specifically racial confrontation, we weren't expected to, to have anything to say.  So they would have entirely white panels.  That's, that's broken up to a considerable degree now and still some way to go.  But now we're writing about everything.  I mean a dear colleague of mine Warren Brown writes about cars.  I mean he, he loves cars, he test drives everything.  He's been to--around the world test-driving and, new cars.  He's been to Stuttgart [Germany] to drive the brand new zillion dollar Mercedes-Benz [automobile] and all those things and he writes, he writes humorously but knowledgeably about cars.  Other people do the [stock] market now and, and you know with actually zero racial content.  So things are, things are opening up.  Interestingly there was, there was some angst for a while among us whether it was in fact a good thing for us to cover stories that weren't about race.  You know you, you finally got somebody in, in, in the, in the building now.  Is it a, it is a form of betrayal to go and cover something that's not about race?  And, and as I said the different reporters had a, had different takes on that but now it's sort of settled down to the point where there are enough of us so that we don't all have to do the same story anymore.  If there's only, if there are only one or two African American reporters on a paper and there's--and, and in a, in a setting where there is still significant racial strife it's reasonable to ask whether, whether you can afford to go off and cover you know say the soulful scene or you know some other thing.  Maybe you think you need that black perspective on, on race stories.  But now as I say there, there, there are enough of us so we can do a little bit of everything.
Story_ID: 19244
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about how you met your wife [Sondra Raspberry], your personal life.
Speaker 2: At the intersection of journalism and the Civil Rights Movement as a matter of fact.  My wife had--was working for the [U.S.] State Department.  She had been assigned to Tokyo [Japan] for two years, came back to American in 1963 and the Civil Rights Movement was, was running full force including you know in all the local cities around the country, not just you know Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and so on.  And she felt really sort of out of it.  She needed to do some serious catching up to what was going on.  So she decided she would go to, with her girlfriends to a meeting of, of CORE, the Congress On Racial Equality under the late, great Julius Hobson.  She came to a meeting this Thursday night and I was there covering that meeting as a reporter and we sat near each other and the rest is history.  We, we, we met and we, we dated for a while, about, on and off for three years actually and got married three years after that.
Speaker 1: You were married in 1966?
Speaker 2: In 1966, 1966.
Speaker 1: What was the date?
Speaker 2: November 12, 1966 was the year I started the 'Washington Post' column and it was the year I married my wife.  It was a pretty damn good year.
Speaker 1: And you had children?
Speaker 2: Had three children.  Patricia was born three years into our marriage so you don't have to do any arithmetic and Angela and then Mark.  So we have, we have three children.
Speaker 1: Your son is the youngest?
Speaker 2: My son is the youngest.
Speaker 1: And how old are they now?
Speaker 2: Patricia is, what 1969, would be what, thirty-four?  They're thirty-four, thirty-one and thirty.  I tell people I have three children, two in advertising and two in psychology.  Patricia has, has a, who has a Doctorate in psychology from, from [University of ] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] does advertising research for a small firm in Chicago [Illinois].  Angela who has a Masters in communications, Masters Degree holder from Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York] has--is an advertising copywriter, and Mark who has his Bachelors and Masters from the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] is a psychological counselor working now with school kids.
Story_ID: 19245
Speaker 1: I want to return to the question of the highlights outside of the Civil Rights Movement in terms of your career, what other milestones would you identify?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I, I, I really think the, the big, the big switch for me in journalism was 1966 when, when I, when I launched a column.  The time since then has been trying to do that better.  I mean I, I think it's, it's grown and improved over the years but and nothing that I would consider truly a landmark.  And the next landmark probably has, is not journalistic at all.  But nine years ago, 19--1995 actually I was offered a teaching chair at Duke University [Durham, North Carolina] and I launched another career--I will have--I'm now in my ninth year as a professor at a wonderful university and I'm enjoying it as I never thought I might.  I always thought that in my retirement years I'd, I'd want to teach at some, you know wherever I happened to be at the local junior college or the community college or university or whatever.  But I've had the chance to do some teaching and not just in journalism and it's been, it's been a real, a real turn on for me to, to imagine that I'm getting inside the heads of a generation of kids who are going to be among America's leaders in the years to come.  So that, that's, that's a, a highlight for me.  And I must say that there's a third highlight that is just in the process of being born.  I talked to you earlier about the impact that Okolona [Technical] College [Okolona, Mississippi] and that situation had on my generation of, of young people.  And I told you that we talk about it whenever we get together and we do these incredible nostalgia trips.  But it slowly has dawned on me over the last two or three years that nostalgia is okay but it's, it's a waste of time if you only look back and think how wonderful it was and how good it was that those people did this for us without at some point saying, "Why can't we do something that will allow another generation to look back and say, 'I'm so glad those people came along in the year 2003."  And that, that got on my, on my mind and I couldn't make it go away.  And I, I have always had the notion that education is just incredibly important.  And it's also clear to me that too many of our children are not getting the education they need and that we're calling on schools to fix things that schools can't fix.  So I've taken into my head to, to return at least on a part-time basis to Okolona, not to reconstitute the college but to reach back to do what we can do for the little kids who are coming on.  And I've come up with the audacious idea of asking the community of Okolona to come together to embrace it's children, all it's children and to give specific content to that embrace by reaching out to the parents of young children before school age, we're talking zero to three [years old] and proceed on, on the assumption that the children, that the parents, these young parents love their children as much as any parents love their children and they want them to do well.  Second assumption is that they are the most powerful influences for academic well being in their children's lives.  The third assumption is they don't know this and don't know what to do about it.  So instead of chastising them we've undertaken a program to teach parents of small children what they can do to get their children ready for the school experience and, and indeed for life.  Not by helping them with their alphabet and that kind of stuff but by teaching them life skills, patience, perseverance, self-confidence, those things that, that lie before academic achievement.  And there's a woman in Washington [D.C.] named [Dr.] Dorothy Rich who's developed what she calls 'MegaSkills' around these, these great skills.  Said, "Dorothy you believe this, you got to come to Okolona and help me teach parents how to do this."  So what we've done is we've started with a, with a group of twenty-four parents to be leaders, sort of a leadership cadre, we teach them how to do these things and they teach their peers these skills that will get their children ready for the school experience.  And what we're driving home again and again in every way I can think of is that, "Even if you were not yourself successful in school, you can still be powerfully influential in your children's educational careers.  And we'll show you how to do it.  Stay with us."  And I'm, I'm, I'm so, so convinced that this is an important thing to do I tell them that, "I want you, not just parents, but the whole community, those of you who don't have children can read to groups of children or help, you know, supervise them in sports or be back up for parents who have got some, some issues they have trouble resolving or help with, you know fight budgets, you know whatever is--I want the whole community behind the children and I want you not to have to, to get concerned about fundraisers and stuff because it takes time away from the kids.  So here's, here's my deal.  If you, if you do the things I ask you to do for the children, I'll pay the costs of, of bringing in the experts and, and, and actually running a program."  I talked it over with my kids [Patricia, Angela and Mark Raspberry] and said, "Hey kids, dad's talking about maybe burning up some of your inheritance in this Okolona Project," and when I told them what I was interested in they said, "Go for it."  So I'm saying, "This will at least for the time being, it may get out of hand but for the time being it's important enough for me to do, to, to do it out of, out of my pocket."  I've done well.  I haven't gotten rich but I've done, I've done well and you know the 401k [retirement savings plan] has been okay.  And you know, I think we won't have to worry about eating so here's something to do rather than simply say you know, "How can I go and join the ranks of the multimillionaires?"  I--that, that's my dad [James Raspberry] coming out.  The getting rich just to say you're sitting on a pile of money does not interest me.  But doing something that will, that has a chance of making a difference in the lives of, of young people the way some other people set out and made a difference in our lives just seems to me the natural thing to do.  And, and what has been just incredibly rewarding for me is that everybody I say it to says yes.  I told--I was down in Okolona last month and I said to them, "You know what really pleases me is that nobody in this town has said 'No' to me.  Nobody's even said 'Maybe'."  When I say, "This is what I want you to do, they say, 'Yes'."  And it's, it, it's blowing me away.  But it, it's worth it.  It's got nothing to do with journalism, it's got nothing to do with making a living but it's got everything to do with, with who and what I am more than anybody has hoped I am.
Story_ID: 19246
Speaker 1: Going back to journalism a little bit, one of the highest honors in your field is the [Joseph] Pulitzer Prize [for Journalism].  Have you won that award?
Speaker 2: I did win the Pulitzer in 1994, the Pulitzer for Commentary and it, it was a highlight as, as, as they say.  Now if you--if later on you, you develop a cure for cancer and, and walk in the sun the lead of your obituary will say, "William Raspberry who won the Pulitzer Prize, yada, yada, yada."  So yeah it's, it's a highlight of--I wanted to keep doing it but I'm very, very grateful for having done it once.
Speaker 1: What was the column for?
Speaker 2: Actually it was a series, a selection of ten columns.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: About, sort of the gamut but we did--it--what, what's wonderful about Pulitzer is that it's a judgment made by journalists of the worth of your work and to, to have your colleagues in the business say you are one of the best in the business is, is always, always a nice thing.
Story_ID: 19247
Speaker 1: You are somewhat known in Washington [D.C.] for being an advocate for education.  And I would dare say that probably the majority of your columns deal with some aspect of the development of young people or education.  Are there other passions that you have besides that?
Speaker 2: Well they, they, they--most of my work I, I would guess, I try not to go back and count 'cause it messes your mind up.  But a lot of what I write about comes out of the news and I must have made some people tired of my, my talk about the war in Iraq for instance.  But it just seemed to me that somebody needed to stand up and say, "We're just making a hideous mistake here.  And let's, let's stop this thing before we get into a, get irretrievably into it."  Obviously they paid me a lot of attention.  We're irretrievably into it now and I don't know how, how we'll get out without finances and the psyche and our integrity in tact.  It's--but that's a force of--you know, you, you have to be passionate about the next generation of us.  It's, it's all we've got.  We got to save the seed and, and while that involves obviously dealing with the criminal justice system, it involves dealing with the economic health of the nation.  It profoundly includes being, being concerned about the education of our next generation.  And education's one of those really peculiar things.  We, we, we, we learned, we learned during the, the Civil Rights Movement some very important things and one is that if you make enough noise and if you're right about the noise you make, and the demands you make that sometimes those demands get delivered on.  And so we, we're right to demand the right to vote, the right to be served in places of public accommodation, to do all those things that, that we call civil rights.  We made the demand, the righteous demand and to a significant degree, America delivered.  Education is peculiar.  You can demand that they pave your street or put a traffic light or a stop sign at that dangerous intersection.  And you can wake up one morning and boom, there they are putting in the pavement or putting up the stop light.  You, you can, you demand education and they can't give you education in the dead of night.  You have to get the education.  I don't have to get the stop sign but my--I have to get the education.  I--no matter what they do, if I don't do what I must do, it won't happen.  And I, I think we have, we have perhaps to too great an extent fallen into a demand habit thinking that all we need is subject to delivery by demand.  Education is the one thing that you got to go out there and get.  You can insist upon the opportunity but we have to, we have to do what we have to do to get our children ready to receive education or it's all for naught.  And to too great an extent we are not getting our children ready to do that, poor children especially, but even middle-class children.
Story_ID: 19248
Speaker 1: There have been a number of journalism scandals if you will this century involving black journalists, most recent the Jayson Blair scandal at the 'New York Times' which led to a leading black editor at the 'New York Times' resigning.  Prior to that you had the 'Washington [D.C.] Post', I guess in the '80s [1980s] also somewhat embarrassed by the Janet Cooke scandal.  What is your take on the effects, I guess, that these incidents which obviously are you know minor in the scheme of things have on the credibility?  Do you think that you know it has any impact on the credibility of a black journalist?  And the question also begs that these were stories that came to light.  Are there stories--have you discussed among your colleagues issues where there may have been other transgressions by journalists of other hues that didn't come to light?
Speaker 2: Well the problem I guess is we only know about what we know about.  If they didn't come to light, if, if Jayson Blair's story hadn't, hadn't come to light we wouldn't have known about him.  If Janet Cooke--in fact if she hadn't won the [Joseph] Pulitzer Prize for that fabricated story we, we might not know about it today.  I, I do recall so much that, that when the Janet Cooke scandal broke at the '[Washington] Post' that one of the most frequent questions I would get from young journalists or young journalism students was whether this is going to knock us out of the box, the fact that a black reporter, young black reporter had been fired for fabricating a story and it turned out she lied on her resume, on her--when she, when she hired on at the 'Post', "Is this going to make it more difficult for us to get hired?"  I spent a lot of time then assuring them that I thought it would have negligible impact on their, on their prospects.  Janet was a one-of-a-kind, she would have gotten a job if she hadn't lied.  She just got in too big a hurry.  I don't see that--it didn't seem to me that the editors, editors saw this as a black problem but as a Janet problem.  My answer when they asked similar questions about Jayson Blair is a little different.  I, I think in part because the Jayson Blair business got conflated with, with the whole affirmative action question.  And it was--the question was not so much whether a young reporter could get hired but would, would that special kind of mentoring and protection and--the, the kind of mentoring I got when I was a teletype operator for the 'Washington Post' and somebody said, "I, I like this kid and I'm going to help him along."  The question is now whether there will be senior people white and black because Jayson cost really terrific jobs for the white [Executive] Editor [Howell Raines] of the, of the 'New York Times' and for the black Managing Editor of the 'New York Times'--.
Speaker 1: Whose name is?
Speaker 2: Gerald Boyd.  And the question is, is, is whether people in high positions now and of influence will be a little skittish about helping a kid.  And I'm afraid there will be some skittishness.  I think we're likely to think we are able to read our own so white, white editors may think they have a clearer way of judging the integrity of young whites and may think that they, those skills don't carry over to the judgment of young, black journalists.  And while black editors may think they've got this ability, they may be chastened by knowing that Gerald Boyd lost one of the best jobs in journalism to a kid who was (pauses), well, less than grateful for the breaks he got, let me put it that way.  So I'm, I'm, I'm a little concerned about, about how that will play off in the near term for young, unproven African American journalists.  Long time it will be a bump in the road but it could be a disturbing bump for a time I think.
Story_ID: 19249
Speaker 1: Talk about what he scenario was like at the '[Washington, D.C.] Post' and within the black journalism community when the 'Post' wrote the infamous "Hymie [town]" comment [racist reference to New York City's large Jewish population] from Jesse Jackson during his election, I believe it was 1984.
Speaker 2: Let me tell you what my take on that was.  Let me start off with another story that took place in this room.  Jesse Jackson called me and asked me to assemble a group of African American journalists 'cause he wanted to talk to them.  We had people coming down from Boston [Massachusetts], New York and Philly [Phildelphia, Pennsylvania] and all over Washington [D.C.] and so on.  We sat here and Jesse who hadn't yet declared for the presidency but we sort of thought he would.  And because he, he, he supposed, he was thought to be out there, we had young, black reporters for the first time on the presidential campaign trails.  He made a pitch to, to the journalists that, that they ought to get--that we ought to perhaps be a little protective of him, only he didn't put it that way.  He wanted us to come to him for explanations of things, for his take on things before they, that we went public with them.  And there were some other things he, he thought that (pauses) we as fellow African Americans ought to be able to work out.  And his part of the deal was that he would be, he would give us unusual access.  It all sounded very good and we, we, we thought about it, we talked about it and asked a lot of questions and talked about the pressures we--each of us had from our editors and so on and so on.  "Are you going to make this run for [U.S.] president?"  He's agonizing about it, he's thinking about it, he's not quite to the decision yet.  But he will give us a heads up when he does make the decision so we don't look bad before you know our bosses when we get back.  It turns out the following Sunday '60 Minutes' [television program] called him and said, "We'd like you to be on."  He said, "Great."  I mean, it's the greatest audience, I mean greatest, you know, exposure there is.  "Are you going to announce?"  And he, I gather, decided that, he said he didn't, he wasn't ready to do that.  And they said, "Well in that case, see ya."  And the upshot was he was on '60 Minutes' that Sunday announcing his candidacy.  Now my thing is that after, after his pitch here he might have called me and said, "Tell your colleagues that I'm under the gun and I got to announce tonight and I'm sorry," but he never said a word.  He has not yet said a word to me about that.  So I say that as, as a way of saying you need to be very cautious about supposing that there should be some 'special dispensation' between African American journalists and African American sources, it's a tricky business.  You talked about the "Hymie-town" thing.  And the reason I, I do all that build up is this--Jackson said to [National News Editor] Milton Coleman who was, who was--caught him at the airport and actually was delivering an invitation to come back for an editorial session at the 'Post'.  And he wanted to know you know, "What does "hymie" want," and you know he said something about "Hymie-town."  I forget exactly the, the--but, but he prefaced it by saying to Milton Coleman, "But they want me to come back--can, can we talk black for a minute?"  And Milton either nodded or gave some assent to that and then the remarks.  Milton said he thought--he took the remarks, he took the "Can we talk black?" as an invitation to go off the record.  That's how he read it.  And he said that it went back on the record after he learned that he had made similar remarks to other reporters.  I think Milton had no (pauses)--had, had--was under no pressure to protect Jesse Jackson, black candidate, black source.  The only journalistic ethical issue for me was the, the, the thing we're all under which is to honor the ground rules we agree to.  If it was off the record it was off the record.  And if you--it's off the record, it stays--with me it stays off the record until you put it back on or until you publicly, publicly say the same thing to somebody else.  So I saw it as, as more of a lapse of journalistic ethics than a failure of any racial loyalty.  You get, you get in nothing but trouble if, if the expectation is that you will be, that you will help and cover up and, and be in the service of black sources because black sources can use you as much as any other sources can use you.  And your best recourse is to be a journalist.  I, I've walked away from people who wanted to tell me stuff off the record.  I don't want to hear it.  If you don't want to say it, if you don't want to read it, don't tell me.  You know, why would you, why would you tell me off the record?  If I find it out from somebody else, I can't use it.  But no, I don't, I don't think there is any racial loyalty thing that black reporters need to, to fall into.
Story_ID: 19250
Speaker 1: What do you think your legacy is?
Speaker 2: That's a thing we were--it's very difficult to talk about because we always pretend we don't think about it.  We, we do think about it.  And I think the older we are the, the more we think about it.  I think I will, I will be remembered as, as, as a journalist who, who did his level best to, to get as much truth out there as was possible.  I think I will be remembered as somebody who if he made mistakes, he made mistakes because he thought what he was saying was correct and true.  I hope I've made it possible perhaps even easier for other people who wanted to come behind me and do what I did.  I hope I've helped some young people now in the business to, to develop their skills and, and, and their self-confidence.  But in some ways I think my legacy may have, may not be concerned with journalism distinctly.  I think the, the thing that I'm trying to do for children in Okolona [Mississippi] may be as important a part of my legacy as, as I can imagine.  It won't bring me fame and it won't make me a dime for sure, but it will, it will let me go to sleep at night with a smile on my face thinking, "Yeah, you did good."
Speaker 1: And this may seem similar but maybe not.  How would you like to be remembered perhaps as a person?  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I suppose the same way.  I, I, I would, I would really like people to think--I don't get to write my own eulogy but if, if they think he, he really tried to make a positive difference wherever he was, in his church, in his profession, in his community, in his family, in his hometown, if I could be thought of somebody who, who didn't spend major time trying to get over on somebody or get ahead of somebody but simply tried to make, make people glad and passed through, that will be enough.  That would be more than enough.
Story_ID: 19251
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the black community in the United States?
Speaker 2: Oh boy. (pauses)  I hope we will get a, a little clearer that we are, that we are talking about at least two black communities, both with problems but one whose problems are quite manageable.  I'm talking about people like us.  I've got problems, we all have.  I've got racial problems but nothing that I can't manage.  We need to separate, get clear in our heads I think, the distinction between the problems confronting successful African Americans who in a fairer world might be yet more successful, and those problems confronting unsuccessful black America whose situation is desperate and worsening.  And as long as we, as long as we refuse to make the separation we may find ourselves proposing remedies for the black plight that principally benefits those of us who have been least damaged by racism and leave in the lurch those who have been severely crippled by it.  I would--I don't have any problems that I would not willingly put on the back burner in favor of the problems for low incomes, underclass, inner city poor blacks who are suffering in dreadful schools, poor job opportunities, who, who despair because they don't even know what opportunity is there.  They can't, they can't see it, I mean they can't have the opportunity because they can't see it and we haven't helped them enough to see what their possibilities are.  Somebody did that for my generation and somebody needs to do it for this generation.  And my, my great hope is that we will achieve some success, will take it not as an accusation against white people but as a personal project of ours to spread opportunity to those who have had too little of it.
Speaker 1: Do you see barriers to being able to do that?  I mean I talked to a number of people in your generation, in my generation who bemoan the current media and the plethora of media that young people focus on rather than some of these encouraging things that you're talking about.
Speaker 2: Well let me say yes and no.  The, the media both news and entertainment and, and, and the rest clearly have impact on, on people and what they're able to see and, and their, their ideas about what's happening out there.  But no, there's nothing in the media that keeps any one of us or any small group of us from reaching out to individuals and small groups who need help.  I, I just, I can't lay that on the media even, anymore than I can lay it on white people or any--we as I said earlier we, we, we've become very good at making demands and I'm a great believer in making the right, righteous demand.  But there are some things that we have to do for us and there's no, it's no good pointing fingers and assigning blame to other people.  If we don't do them they don't get it done and people suffer if they don't get done and we know it.
