Story_ID: 83046
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My birth name is James Wheeler, J-A-M-E-S, and last name is Wheeler, W-H-E-E-L-E-R.  And my ak-, aka is (laughter) is Piano C. Red.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It was September 14, 1933.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was born in a little town called Montevallo, Alabama, M-O-N-T-E-V-A-L-L-O, A-L-A, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Montevallo?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Larry, I need to ask whether he wants his tapes labeled James Wheeler or Piano C. Red.
Speaker 1: Piano C. Red.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Sir, let me ask you about your name on some level.  Now, your given name is James Wheeler.  And now, first of all, you're--what is your occupation?  You're a--
Speaker 1: My occupation is a musician and also public transportation.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, I want to ask you about your name in, in this context 'cause you're a musician, and you're, you're famous in, in your own right as Piano C. Red.  But there, there was another Piano Red, right?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Can you explain this to us?  What, what happened?
Speaker 1: Well, what happened on, it's like that was that it was an albino.  He [Willie Lee Perryman] lived in Atlanta, Georgia, and he used to go by the name of Pianist Red.  So I was in Atlanta, Georgia for maybe about, when I was very young for maybe three or four years.  And I left here and I arrived in Chicago [Illinois].  And I arrived in Chicago, they started calling me Red because when we didn't have electronic pianos at that time.  And a lot of clubs, nightclubs, they had baby grands and so on, but they didn't have the elec-, electronic pianos.  So, when they would have a baby grand piano in there, I would tell them to get some red paper and decorate it in red.  And so, and I would, I would have a red suit and white shoes and a white shirt and tie.  And I'd come on the bandstand, I come out on the stage or whatever, and I do my show.  So somebody, a lot of peoples come up, go Red, go Piano Red, go Piano Red.  I said--I didn't say, I didn't tell them to stop calling me that, you know.  I said, well, I'll just let it keep going like that, you know.  And then I said, well, why, they won't get me confused with the other Red, I will put Piano Cecil Red, and I would use that for Piano C. Red.  So when I recorded with Chess and most, I, I, I would go out playing in different clubs, I would have signs up and say, having up there, Piano C. Red.  And everybody would ask me, what that "C" for?  I say, come and see what's going on (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now, sir, now, your, your given name is James Wheeler.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But there's another musician in the Chicago area who plays a guitar named James Wheeler.
Speaker 1: Right.  I'm no, I'm no relation, not relation to him, not whatsoever.
Speaker 2: But he plays the blues, too.
Speaker 1: Right.  He played guitar and I play piano.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So I just wanted to clarify, you know, I want--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Today's date is, this is the fourth month [April].  Today is the 4th, '03 [2003].
Speaker 2: That's right.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: We're at Delmark Records Studio.
Speaker 2: In Chicago?
Speaker 1: Right, Chicago.
Story_ID: 83047
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Now before we get into depth, there are five "People-Magazine"-ish type questions that we always ask, and they just require a short answer basically.  The first one is sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food would be, I would say, fish, salmon, salmon, what they used to call them, like the old folks, salmon croquettes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, sir, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It has to be red (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I would say summer time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, I would go and see my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that, that, that's in Alabama?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A favorite phrase?
Speaker 1: Phrase or, or saying, something that you'd like to say all the time or something that--
Speaker 2: Yes, I would say, you know, we like, you, especially when you're greeting a person where a lot of times you say, hello, how your feel, whatever.  But I think and, and you can create something like, what's up, what's happening, you know.  So it's, it's a little bit more this.  We, we, know the correct speaker, you know, correct English of the issue, but it's the idea you want to create some type of a phrase yourself, I would say, you know.  That's what I do sometimes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you, you use different creative ways to greet people?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --what's going on?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 83048
Speaker 1: Now, sir, I'm going to ask you about your family tree.  And can, can you tell me how far you can trace your family back, you know, how far back can you go?
Speaker 2: Well, I can go back when I was real small.  I think I was about four or five years old, three or four years old.  And my great-grandmother, she was--her mommy was like a preacher, so her name was brought up in the or in the Church of God.  I mean, in other words, it was, it was real strict religion people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you, you can trace, I mean how far back can, can you--
Speaker 2: I can go all the way back to my--I would say about, about in '33 [1933], I would say in 1937.
Speaker 1: No, I mean, how far, how--what, what do you know about your ancestors?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: How far back can--I mean, do, did, did you know your, for, for instance, your--
Speaker 2: My grandmother, my great-grandmother?
Speaker 1: Your great-grandmother, great-grand, great, great--
Speaker 2: Great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: --do you know the names or that, I mean (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, can you tell us about what you know about it?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, it's like I said from the school.  My, my great-grandmother, she was, her name was Emma Evans.  And she, she will, she birthed--I can't exactly tell how many daughters was, she birthed in the world, but it was only my auntie, in other words.  And she had about, maybe about seven, about six daughters, and maybe about four or five sons, I believe.  And I've lost track of most of them (laughter), but, you know, and--
Speaker 1: And she--
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: Do, do you know where she was born?
Speaker 2: No, no, I can't, can't (unclear) that.  I don't know exactly when she was born because she was up in age when I--she died when I, she was about 65, about 70 or 80 years old when she died and I was very young.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So she was born in the 19th century, I guess.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, sure.
Speaker 1: Are, are there any stories in your family about what the family was doing in, in the 19th century?  I mean, where you lived and what was going on--
Speaker 2: Uh--
Speaker 1: --during reconstruction or during slavery or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't no slavery at that time.  Maybe it was just mostly, maybe people was farming.  They, they wasn't no sharecroppers at that time.  They was like in--I can't remember my people being on the, you know, working on the plantation or working on the, as a--well, my, one of my uncles now, he owned, he owned about, almost a thousand or 2,000 acres of land.  He, matter of fact, he owned a little small village.  They call it Evansville, Evansville.  And, and then, I don't, I think they still is today, they still have the name now.  And he was a hardworking person, you know.  I don't know how he managed to (laughter) own all that land, but he owned it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So a good story about how and that, that you know of?
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: Is there--there's no story about how they got it or--
Speaker 2: No, he, he, he just worked hard, I guess.  And he owned a lot, I mean, a lot of land (laughter).  And also, and I had my others, my, my other uncles, they--one, he was, he, he was, he was in the [U.S.] Army.  And his name was--I call Samuel, Uncle Samuel, and he was, he was a carpenter at the--was discharged from the Army.  And I was very small then, you know, and he, he go around building houses.  Also, he could play the piano, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, did, did he teach you how to play?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't get a chance to even teach me how to play.  No, he didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, are there any stories that are passed down through your family about, you know, what life was like way, way, back when?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we had, you know, you, you know, living in the Southern states, there's a long story, you know.  It's be aware that you had to stay in your place, in other words, you know.  That's about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: Any stories about any of that?
Speaker 2: No, I can't--I've, I, I don't have any, you know, it wasn't no, I, I never did see no tragic or anything happening.  And that was, you know, violence, or anybody get killed or nothing like that.  I never did, I never did experience anything like that.
Speaker 1: But you never heard about it either?
Speaker 2: Not, well, it, we, you know, when this, when this Civil Right Movement come into the picture, you know, then we heard about the one in Birmingham [Alabama], and that's about thirty miles from, from Montevallo [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 83049
Speaker 1: All right.  Sir, can, can you give us the name of your father and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: My father was named, my father was named Robert.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Robert Wheeler?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and what was he like?  And, well, when was he born, first of all, and where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in, he was born in Montevallo [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And about what time was he born?  Do you know when?
Speaker 2: No, I can't, I have forgotten.  I have it all written down, and I can't recall exactly about--I, I know my mother was born in, in 1915 and I had, I forgot exactly what, let me see.  I think he was born probably in 1901.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, now, what was he like and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, he was, he, he was mostly, he was a chauffeur, a chauffeur.  And he drove a gentlemen around that was selling shoes to the (unclear).  They covered different little towns and they sell shoes.  And they were, they, I think they called him a drummer or something like that.  He was in the shoe business.  That's what it was and my father drive for him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I haven't heard that term in a long time, a drummer, you know.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, that's what they used to call salesmen way back then.
Speaker 2: Right (laughter), right.
Speaker 1: So your father used to drive this man around--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and he would sell shoes?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So he'd drive--how far did he range?  How far did he drive around?
Speaker 2: Anywhere from maybe from 25 to 50, 75, a hundred miles from, from Montevallo, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: So was your father home a lot or did he--was he always on the road?
Speaker 2: Well, he was on the road until he, he, he, (unclear).  I think he, he got a better job.  And he, he got a job driving a log truck in the, in the city.  And so he just walked away from that, the salesman job, chauffeuring, in other words.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what kind of personality did he have?
Speaker 2: He had a, he had a pretty good personality.  He got where he loved to drink, and he was like, he loved to shoot dice (laughter).  So, when he was okay, you know, he did but he did, you know, he was taking care of us best, about the best he could, you know, so.  There's, you know, he was, he was a wonderful, wonderful person.
Speaker 1: Now, what, did, did he play an instrument, too, or anything?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Any memories you have about him you want to share with us?
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: Any, any specific memories about him you want to share with us?
Speaker 2: No.  Well, I know he rushed to the, to the doctor.  I think I was about 12 years old.  And my appendix, appendix, they almost burst on me, so he raced me there just in time.  They told me that if it'd been maybe 10 or 15 minutes late, I, I would have died.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He saved my life.
Speaker 1: Now did you, were, were you involved in activities with your father a lot?  I mean, doing different things with him?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, he, he wasn't around that much?
Speaker 2: No, I, I left when I was about 16.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I left from, from there, I left from there, Montevallo, when I was about 16.
Story_ID: 83050
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you about your mother.  Can, can you give us her name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother name is Lucille, L-U-C-I-C-L-E [sic], Evans.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is the--was she the sister of the uncle that, that had Evansville down there or--
Speaker 2: No, that was, that was, that was her uncle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Her uncle?
Speaker 2: Right, it was her uncle.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  The Evans-, the Evansville comes from that name, Evansville?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was Evansville like a black town or something or, or--
Speaker 2: He, he, yes, it were.
Speaker 1: Well, that's, that's interesting.  Did, did he start it himself--the uncle?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.  He, he found our--I never did get the correct information on how he, or he accomplished all of it.  But he managed to, he got, I think he could--about, if I'm not mistaken, I think he was working.  They was working, he was working in the coal mines.  And he saved his money and started buying some--buying up the land.  That's what, that's what happened.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was it actually a little town, or was it just where he, he and his people lived or what?
Speaker 2: Well, about three or four miles from Alabama.  And he, and he started building houses on--in that, in there.  He was building the house, and he would sell them out, then he would rent them out.
Speaker 1: Ohh, okay.  So he was a contractor.  He built the house, and people would, would buy them, and he called the place Evansville that he--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that he developed?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Sure, what else?
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when was your mother born again?
Speaker 2: It's Montevallo [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Yeah, but when?
Speaker 2: What year?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: 1915.
Speaker 1: 1915, all right.  Now, now what was your mother like and what did she do?
Speaker 2: She was, she was religion, and she liked to sing.  And she, she didn't start playing the piano until she, she, she was, I think, was about, when she, she got in the late 40's, but she had start learning how to play the piano.
Speaker 1: Could she play pretty good?
Speaker 2: Yes, she could play pretty good, you know.  It wasn't professional but she could play.  She played a lot of spiritual numbers, you know.
Story_ID: 83051
Speaker 1: --Well, was there a school in Montevallo [Alabama] for, that, that, that your mother [Lucille Evans] and father [Robert Wheeler] attended when they, they were coming up?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, but I can't recall it now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is, is there a story about how your mother and father met?
Speaker 2: No, I can't, I can't recall a time.  I had, you know, like I can't recall any, any, you know, how they met together.  It's--started going together, you know, far as I know, and that was it.  Next thing you know, they was married.
Speaker 1: And they were both from the same little town so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, was there, was there a church in town?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  I mean it had three or four churches there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, you know, which one, did, did they belong in the same church?  Is that how they met or--
Speaker 2: Well, he, he was a Methodist, and, and she was a Church, she was in the Church of God.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother or father have a chance to, to, to go to school very long at all?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I can't recall.  I don't think my father had a chance to finish, finish high school.  And I don't think she fin-, my other finished high school.
Speaker 1: All right.  Tell me, can you, how many people were, were in your household when you were brought up?
Speaker 2: Just me and my brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's just you and your brother and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and who was there mostly, you and your brother, your mother, your father?  Did you have any grandparents living with you?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 83052
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay.  I want you to kind of reflect back and tell us a little bit about how you grew up.  And tell, tell us something about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: Well, we lived close to the little, like the little, little river, it was like--they called it a creek.  And we lived by on, and on the creek.  And I used to go swimming all the time and go fishing.  And when the (unclear) or the circus come in town, I would take, go in, you know, I always liked to work.  So we would--myself and four or five other fellows, we'd go and, and then help them out, putting up the tents and the rise, and all that thing.  And we used to love to ride bicycles.  And we would ride, maybe about four or five of us, we'd take off.  And we would ride, travel for, oh, I'd say, when, a lot of time, we would leave and travel for about 45 or 50 miles.  That was from Montevallo [Alabama] to Birmingham [Alabama].  And then we'd come back.  And a lot of fellows, they, they didn't have the guts to do that.  They, they would, they could--a lot of people riding in Montevallo, they couldn't believe that we did it.  But it was about four or five of us, and we would take off.  And we would ride for 45 or 50 miles, and turn around and come back in in one day.
Story_ID: 83053
Speaker 1: So how early would, would, would you start on a day?
Speaker 2: Oh, we would start about, maybe about 6:00 in the morning.
Speaker 1: And how long would it take you to drive to--
Speaker 2: You figure we would be, probably be doing anywhere from 15 to 20 miles an hour.  So, you know, that was, that was really good.  It, it'd take almost about six hours, I believe, may, may not, because sometimes we could do 30 or 40 miles an hour maybe, going on the hills there.  So, turn around, and we'd pedal all the way back.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have regular bikes, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had, we had regular bikes.
Speaker 1: You didn't have any 10-speed or anything or--
Speaker 2: We didn't have no 10-speed, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you had to take those hills, huh?  Hardly, uh?
Speaker 2: Right.  I don't see how we did it but we did it.  We take chances, we take a lot of chances.  And, you know, like all kids, they take chances on different issues, you know.  We used to get on the, on a, a bridge, you know, and walk on the, on the rails, you know, when they would be maybe about 70 to 80 feet down, you know.  And we would just walk, like you're walking a tight rope.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're talking about those train trestles--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --those things that go across?
Speaker 2: Right, retro bridges, you know, when they have the, have the cement rails on each side of it.
Speaker 1: You would walk on the rail?
Speaker 2: Right, on the, on the ce-, cement walls there that keep you from falling over.  We'd get on top of it and walk across and see who was, who would, who would chicken out.
Speaker 1: Did anybody ever fall in?
Speaker 2: No, no, didn't nobody for--it was a long ways down there.  You'd better not fall.  It'd be all over.  It was just like getting up on top of the Sears, Sears Tower (laughter), looking down, and walking on the edge, like the Spiderman, you know, recall (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum, we were taking some chances.  You get on the bikes, I used to get on my bike, and get up on the hill, come off that, come off the, of the little--it was, I mean it was a very steep hill like, you know, get up and come there.  And, and I would stand on top of this--the, the seat on the bike and put one leg, had one leg on the seat, and one on the hand bar, and come down that hill--be doing about 10 or 15 miles an hour or more.  Sometimes I'd fall or sometime I didn't.  It was a lot, a lot of nerve in us.  I look back on the, on deals like that.  I would never (laughter) do a thing like that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, now did your mother [Lucille Evans] ever wonder where you were?
Speaker 2: Oh, she used to call us all the time.  She would just give me no--she see us doing some things so she know me--something like that, she would, we would get a whipping, you know.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: What would you do in Birmingham [Alabama] when you got there?
Speaker 2: Oh, we were stopping.  They have a place called--on 4th Avenue, and they had (unclear), what you call real good ole down home soul food.  And all us had, you know, we didn't have money and, you know, have enough money now in the pocket, you know.  We'd go in there, you'd go in there, and get your, just get some greens, and couple of ham hocks (laughter), black-eyed peas, you know, cornbread.  We used to have a hell of a nice dinner, like we ate, we traveling, you know.  It was like the bikes we riding, and select all of the motorcycle, you load on the car--somebody know.  We, we out, from out of town, you know, and (unclear) (laughter).
Story_ID: 85597
Speaker 1: Yeah, was, was there any entertainment in Birmingham [Alabama] when you all got there?
Speaker 2: You ready now?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, they had, let me see, they had--what was the name of that theater?  It had--but they have stage shows.  That's where Louis Jordan would come there.  And he would have his band on the, on the bandstand at this theater.  I think it was, I think it was, Trolley Theater.  It was on 4th Avenue.  I can't recall the name, the correct name of it, but anyway, they used to have, like Pigmeat Markham, and Little Esther.  She would be singing there, and so many other different recording stars and comedy, you know.  And it was, it was every--that was the place everybody come from little small towns would come or go to the--they would go to Birmingham on the weekend, you know.
Speaker 1: So you all would drive there on your bikes.  Did you ever get a chance to see any of these people perform or anything?
Speaker 2: Sure.  We would (unclear) those show, you know.  We would--what we'd do mostly, we would find a place that would--and find somebody that would keep all the bikes for us, you know what I mean, where nobody wouldn't steal them, you know, and leave them all there.  Then we'd go to the show.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Who do you remember seeing on, on the stage?
Speaker 2: Well, I remem-, I remember, recall seeing, it was Louis Jordan, and he'd be riding a horse singing, "Let the Good Times Roll" (laughter).  And we would see Pigmeat Markham.  I remember seeing him.
Speaker 1: Would it be on the stage riding a horse singing "Good--
Speaker 2: No, no, (unclear), they had the movies.
Speaker 1: Oh, it was a movie?
Speaker 2: Right.  And in a movie--of him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the other ones would be on the stage--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --but Louis Jordan.  Well, he, sometimes he, then he, then he would be, then sometime he would have--he'll be doing a show, and doing a stage show, too.  But most times, I think they had the movies in.  But most time, you would go see him, it would be in a auditorium or something like that, you know, either at--be at some school or whatever you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, did you, was it dangerous going down to Birmingham on bikes, you know?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure 'cause, yes, the mountains--I mean, taller than the Sears Tower [now Willis Tower], three times taller than the Sears Tower.
Story_ID: 85598
Speaker 1: Okay. What other kind of dangers, I mean, did you face?  I mean, I know there, the South was segregated then, and a lot, but did, did you ever have any, any trouble, you know, riding your bikes down --
Speaker 2: No, I didn't have any trouble.  We never did run into trouble but I, I know I faced one time that I went back home and I stayed for a little while there.  And we would--I had bought, I bought a car, and we would be driving back and forward to Birmingham [Alabama].  And one night, I let my brother drive.  And he had gotten--when, when he was about eight years old, he got shot, and shot him in his eye, left eye, and he lost it so--
Speaker 1: What, in, in an accident?
Speaker 2: No, no, he playing with one, one of my, one of his friends.  And he won't tell his friends he--I bet you can't--he had a BB gun and told them, I bet you can't, I bet you can't shoot me and but you can't hit me, in other words.  And when he looked back, it's a little BB ball hit him right in the eye, in the left eye.  And they had to rush him to the hospital and they couldn't save it.  So, when I let him drive one night, and I think he had a few drinks, you know, and we got close to this mountain.  It was a long ways down, too.  And he cut, he turned too, too, too soon.  And, in other words what happened, he got too close to this, this, the shoulder of there, of the, of the, 'cause it was a dirt road, and he got too close to it.  And, and I said, hold, wait, I said, stop, stop!  And he stopped just in time and we was--mount-, car was almost to go over the mountain.  And, and we had some young ladies with us, you know, and I'd gotten out.  And I said, don't move, everybody ease on out of here, and we eased out of there.  And the car looked like it was just gonna tilt right on over, but we managed to get out of there.  And we walked for about half a mile until I find somebody with a truck or something.  And we found someone and with a truck.  And he got a chain and everything--came up and hooked the chain onto the rear bumper and pulled us up, pulled us out, pulled the car off the right shoulder of that, 'cause it was, it was tilting, getting ready to fall over.  And we looked, I looked down there and it was--I mean, you know, it was a long ways down there, there.  The houses looked like a little match box.
Speaker 1: That sounds, it sounds scary.
Speaker 2: That's right.  And so, that was one, that one, one feel that.  I think God was just with us.  That was, that was a blessing.
Story_ID: 85599
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell me about school now.  Where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: I went to Mont-, Montevallo High [School, Montevallo, Alabama]].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was that the name of the--that's, that was the grade school and high school--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --altogether?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, how did you like school and, and--
Speaker 2: Well, school was, school was okay.  It was wonderful, you know.  I mean, I didn't get a chance to finish, I didn't get a chance to finish high school, but I was taking a few courses after that.  And, but I always would, you know, socialize with people that, older than I were, and things that I didn't know, I would ask them.  And, you know, and it would help me gain a whole lot of knowledge.
Story_ID: 85600
Speaker 1: Now, what were your favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: I believe my favorite subject was music because when I used to hear one of my good friends--his name was, his name was Fat Lily, and he used to play the piano.  And he was doing a lot of boogie-woogie on the piano, you know.  And at that time, I wasn't--I didn't--I couldn't play.  So he would ask me--I would him (unclear)?  Would it be possible that he could teach me how to play?  He would tell me and said, huh, I don't have time.  I said, if you don't have time, I said, I said, man, I's, I wish you had some time, like I want to learn how to play the boogie-woogie, you know.  And he said, boy, I don't want to be, I don't have time, I don't want to be bothered, you know.  I'll play this for you and let you see, listen to it, but I don't have time to teach you.  I said yeah.  And he loved that moonshine, so I said, well, I'll tell you what.  I said, now, you, you, you like to drink, you like your whiskey, right?  He said, what are you talking about, boy?  I said, you like, you like to drink?  Uh-hum.  I said, you play better when you drink, right?  You don't know what you're talking about (laughter).  I said, I'll tell you what you do.  We'll make it, work out a deal.  And I said, if you teach how to play the boogie-woogie on the piano, and I'll make sure--'cause my old man [Robert Wheeler], he kept some money.  I mean, he kept some liquor stashed away in, like a little (unclear).  It wasn't a steel, but he sold a little on the side, too, you know so.  I have to get a pint.  And I said, I'll tell you what.  I'm gonna to bring you some, bring you a present.  I said, you know, if you teach me how, I'm gonna give you, if you teach me for about an hour, I'll give you a pint.  And my, my father, he didn't, he couldn't miss it anyway 'cause he (laughter).  So I gave him the half pint and he would teach me.  He would stay sometime--he spent two or three hours with me, you know, teach me for like the, the notes in there, the chord structure of playing the boogie, you know.  So, from then on, I, I just got interested.  And when I would hear one of the fellow, he was called "Sugar Chile" Robinson.  He was about, he was about 10 years old and he could play the boogie-woogie.  He was famous.
Speaker 1: Now, by the boogie-woogie, can, can, can you hum a little bit out of the (unclear)?  I think I know what you mean but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was just a regular seven or seven-bar, and 12-bar is 12-bar blues number like [humming].  Then you use your right hand.  You want, you know, put the type of melody in there.  Then they doing the, you know.  It was just like [humming], like that, you know.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, I know that a lot of little black kids can play the boogie-woogie on the piano.  And I mean it's something that I don't know why, how it got, got started, but, but they, they could at least play the first part of it--not the whole thing.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: [Humming], you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Like it--
Speaker 2: Right.  Then you go from there, you know.  And then they, as you learn that, you know, that way, you know.  And I'd taken up music for about two years.  And I got in the--it's named the front mills (ph.) of, you know, the valuable all-in notes, and staff line and treble clef, and all that, you know, and bass clef in there, you know, and at least learn all your chord structure.  Then I--I'd gotten, then I started getting out of the book, and that covered--I could listen to a song that you know anything that the average person would play.  I don't know if I could execute it in all the keys or not because you got--we all are (unclear) shop sometime.  It would be a problem (laughter), you know, to execute, you know.  But, anyway, I, I got where I could hear something and I could just about sit there and play it.
Story_ID: 85601
Speaker 1: Now, sir, how old were you when you first started to play the piano, when you first started to learn how to play?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll say about 14.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, and you got pretty, you know, mastered, mastered on some level, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean I--still at day and night sometime, right, you know, rehearsing, going over, and trying to figure out, 'cause I--well, when I, when I--Fats Domino, I actually liked him.  And I rehearsed a lot of his numbers.  I feel as I got Cec-, Cecil Gant.  I used to like his numbers.  There was a Memphis Slim.  Sunnyland Slim, he helped me out a little bit, you know, lots, you know.  And now, who else?  Well, like, like, well, Little, Little Richie [Little Richard], he first started out, I picked up on some of his style, too, Little Richie.  And Jerry Lee Lewis, a "Whole Lotta Shakin' Goin' On".  Yeah.  Then Erskine Hawkins come out with a "After Hours".  I had to learn how to get that one.  That's the masterpiece.  They call that the African American--what do you call it--the--if--I forget that name for it.  It like, like when they, when, when the flag is flying?
Speaker 1: Anthem?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  There we go.
Speaker 1: Erskine Hawkins' piece is the African American anthem?
Speaker 2: That's right.  And the "After Hours" was those to be the (unclear), that number will be popular for the many, many years to come.
Speaker 1: Now, how does that go?  I want to ask you to hum that for us just because it's so, you know, I think it's important to what you're talking about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was like [humming].  You know, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 85602
Speaker 1: Now I wanted to backtrack a little bit and, and ask you about--now we had you in school at one point in high school.  What, what was the name of the high school again?  It was at--
Speaker 2: It was Montevallo High School [Montevallo, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, now, now, why is that that you stopped going to school at a certain point?  And, and, and when did you stop?
Speaker 2: Well, I can't recall exactly what, what year it was that I stopped.  And with our--I know I was, and, and nothing else, I started working.  I know I was--I think I start working on there, you know, I was doing, and some, you know, which are not, you know, a lot--back in those days, a lot of time you stopped working.  And I would help my mother [Lucille Evans] out, you know, and--
Speaker 1: So you basically just started working and just kind of--I mean, nobody is really pushing you to stay in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --or was it, I don't know.
Speaker 2: No, when they, right.  You know, a lot of time you're coming, and back in those days, you get to (unclear), to the ninth, 10th grade, to something like that, you know.  And a lot of time, you, you know, like it's, it's stop, you know, you stopped going, I guess.  It's like they do now, you know.  But I, I really, you know, I, I always, I always hated that I stopped (laughter), you know.  I went, you know, I always have, you know, but it's too late now.  It's water over the bridge.  That's why I'm not, I'm not, but I made sure my kids, my (unclear), I have a son now.  And he's, he's a preacher, and he's going for his bachelor.  And then, one of my, my daughter, she just finished her, getting her master degree.  She had a bachelor already and she got a master now.  That was six months ago and she got it from Greenville, Mississippi.  And I have two other daughters--well, they're my step-daughters, I would say.  And they are in special education and, and they have master degree.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum, okay, that's good.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Story_ID: 85603
Speaker 1: Tell me now, when, when you were coming up, were there, were there a lot of opportunities for young black men in, in Montevallo [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  No, it wasn't--wasn't too many, no, when, when--there were no opportunity.
Speaker 1: What, what kind of jobs, do you know, that people had?
Speaker 2: Well, they would be working, pardon me.  They would be working mostly in our, working at the, you know, like saw mill, construction work.  They had line pits where they worked.  They working in coal mines, working an ice truck.  They had factories in Birmingham [Alabama].  They could go to Birmingham to work there.  But mostly, a lot of people's work, if they had coal mines there in, out from Montevallo, like 10 or 15 minutes from there, then there's where most everybody was--they would drop out of school at the age about 18, 19 years ago, you know, and they would start work.  Well, absolutely, it was mostly in, all over the South then.  You only had mostly like, maybe about, I would say, maybe about 30 percent of African Americans at that time would have a chance to finish high school or, you know, go to college, about 30 percents [sic].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And most everybody else kind of dropped out and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, most of them would, would drop out.  And now, when you drop out, and most of them, and they get up late, they would (unclear), leave, and they was, and, and when the (unclear) factory was blooming in Birmingham, Detroit [Michigan], New York, Cleveland [Ohio], Chicago [Illinois].  And I remember the time the [U.S.] Army, and come to here in Chicago, you could go out to that Armory, and come to Swift or Agar (ph.), or any of the factories here.  And I seen many fellows go out there, and they sign or put an "X" on their name.  And, and, and as, you know, a lot of them, they, they couldn't, they, they, they couldn't read or write.  I already seen a lot of fellows like that.  They just come to the big city, but then, but are--I recall one time here in the city, and I used to out there 'cause I'm--and they were paying real good money.  And that was unloading the ships and the, the foreman, he, he'd say, everybody line up here.  He said, well, said I need a strong, I need some strong backs and a weak mind (laughter).  You didn't have to read or write (laughter).
Speaker 1: He actually say that, huh?
Speaker 2: That's right (laughter).
Story_ID: 85604
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you started playing the piano when you were 14.  Now, at that time, were the, were, did you, did you want to be a musician at that time or did, did you really think--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I said, well, I said, one day I'm going to be a big star, you know, I always, I said that was, that was my dream.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous).
Speaker 2: When I, when I, when I was 21, when I was 21, I said, I'll, I said, that's the only way I, that's the only way I'll be--I would be able to get rich.  And I mean that's, and then, no, and I come close so many times, you know, real, really getting into the big time, you know.  But it, it is show businesses, like what, what was happening is that when you go to studio and, and you, if you got something real hot, or you get the right person in your corner to record you, and if, if that person really believe in that, that, that your sound gonna get out there, and you, you gonna make a big hit, they would--fair statement is they'll stick by you.  They'll stay by you.  In other ways, like, hey, you know.  But here comes somebody else, maybe a little bit hotter than you are.  And they'll take your material and set it up on the shelf, and you just--and, and get this other person. Right.
Story_ID: 85605
Speaker 1: I want to get to that but I wanted to like follow up on like you're a teenager, and you're still in Alabama.  You, you learn how to play the piano.  When did you start performing, you know?  Did you start down there or did you move from--
Speaker 2: I started, I didn't, I didn't start down there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-uh.
Speaker 1: Did--so, right after--well, after, after you quit high school, you started working.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And did you have to go the [U.S.] Army or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You, no, okay, all right.  So, what, what happened then after you dropped out of high school?  I mean, what did you do?  How long was it before you came to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, I worked, I worked for a while there.  I worked on the ice truck.  And, let's see, I, I told you I worked in, when the (unclear) or the circus come in town, we would--also, I would work keeping the, like landscaping.  It would be a lot of landscaping, including, you know, cutting the grass, mowing the grass for--to people that live close to the college there.  It was a college town, see, and then, you know, they would pay pretty good for that.  And so, that's what I would, you know, 'cause I loved, loved--I liked to wear, I just loved to wear nice clothes.  And, and a lot of time, my father [Robert Wheeler], he, he wouldn't, he wouldn't buy me a brand new bike.  And I'd say, well, I'll get me a bike.  I gotta have work for one, save my money up.  I saved my money up and went and bought my brand new bike.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now, now, how long was it before you moved to Chicago?  I mean, what, what, what happened--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm, I left there [Montevallo, Alabama] when I was about 17.  And I stayed in Atlanta, Georgia for about three or four years.  I went back and stayed for about six months, and then I left there, I come straight on to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have relatives in Atlanta, or did you have friends there, or why did you go to Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Well, one of my friends, he, he, he had a--his sister was living there 'cause we had, had got a job before I left.  I think I was working at this, those steel mill for--not, not a steel mill, but it was a machine shop.  And he was working at the machine shop.  So he decided he wanted to go to Atlanta, Georgia, and he asked me or he said, well, you could stay with my, my sister, you know, until you get you a job.  We got there, and about a week later, we had a job there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is in the, in the late '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, in early, you know, it was in the early '50s. [1950s].
Speaker 1: Early '50s, okay.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Then you came back to Birm--Montevallo, and then you moved to Chicago.
Speaker 2: Stayed, right, right.
Story_ID: 85606
Speaker 1: Now, when was it when you moved to Chicago [Illinois]?  What year was it?
Speaker 2: I would say about '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, you know, why did you decide to move to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well, it, there was so many musicians here.  And I, and then, and, and, you know, Muddy Waters, B.B. King, and all of them, you know.  And so, I was just, I was dying to meet them, you know.  I just saying, hey, that's--they may, I'm making, get front of the--they may, can help me out, you know.  So, when I arrived here, I got me a job.  And I was working at Armour and Company, and I would get off in the evening.  And I would stop at this club called Cadillac Bob, Cadillac Baby's, in other words.  There was two of them, Cadillac Bob and Cadillac Baby, both of them had night clubs.  But Cadillac Baby had a blues club on 47th and Dearborn.
Speaker 1: You can keep going (laughter).
Speaker 2: And so, anyway, we would, I would stop in there.  And a fellow called Eddie, Eddie Wilk (ph.), May (ph.), I was--no, Willie Mae Burns, he would be playing there.  And some Memphis, Memphis men would be playing there and they, they, they wouldn't be the same night, you know.  So they, both of them played piano.  One fellow called Eddie Boyd, he played piano, and he would be there, play and there.  And they'd be playing in other different clubs, too.  So I would stop by there, and like on a, on a, like on a Sunday afternoon, they would have a jam session.  And I stopped by there and sit in with them and, and before I could live in (unclear), I'll be and rehearsed some of the numbers that I, that I would do, you know.  And so, just kept on going from there.  Then, what I did, I organized some fellows.  We got together, we created a little band.  And so, we would go out and try to get, get booked in some clubs.  So, we had one fellow named George Beau-, Beauford (ph.).  He played harmonica.  Had one, the drummer, it, they called him, we called him the Savage (ph.) (unclear).  He played drums.  And then, and, and they played lead guitar.  And we had a bass player named Bob.  So we rehearsed and rehearsed, and we just--there wasn't no individual at that time to say who was the leader of the band.  It was a group.
Story_ID: 83064
Speaker 1: All right, now, sir, now, now where, where did you rehearse because I know piano players need a piano, right?
Speaker 2: Like I said, from (unclear) is I would wait 'til the club get ready to close up.  And I just, I would, I would help the, like Cadillac Baby's, I would tell them, I said, is it okay if I go back in and do a little rehearsing on the piano?  And, not only I had my little different clubs, too, then I had one fellow.  He lived on 47th and Lake Park, and I would go over to his house.  He had one in his house, and that's where we were, that's where all of us were rehearsing.  But I would go over there sometime when, when nobody be there, you know [coughing], pardon me.  And he had, he had the piano in the basement, so I wouldn't disturb nobody.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 83065
Speaker 1: All right. I was asking you, who were some of the other musicians that performed with you when you first started?
Speaker 2: Okay.  We started out as a group.  And we started--we got to where, where we could really go in the clubs and make a little money, you know.  And a lot of time, we wouldn't make anything, you know.  It, it was a few beers and some little trinkets, some, you know.  So we got where we, could get where we could hold the crowds, you know, and so, this last for about a year.  So, well, I was working and, but he was--I think I got laid off from work [Armour and Company], but we were playing about three nights a week, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday.  So, pardon me, so I would go, like I would depend on, you know, those three nights to survive, pay my rent, food, and whatever.  And so one night, I went to the club.  And the lady, the proprietor told me say, well, sorry, but we don't need the piano player tonight.  And the harmonica player, he would always turn his amplifier real high that would drown me out.  But I would have a mike inside of the back of the upright piano, where, and, and a little speaker where they can hear.  And, but he would turn it up so loud that you couldn't hear the piano.  And, so she said, I won't be able to use the piano 'cause, you know.  And I said why?  Well, we can't all hear you anyway, you know, I mean, it's like that.  I said, well, he turning it up too loud.  But I had been telling him all the time to cut it down real low, you know, and not turn his amplifier up so high that it would drown me out.  And so, that night, I told him, I said, when we almost got there, I said, look here, we had agreed upon, where if they tell us if we wasn't going, let nobody break us up.  I said, if the owner come up and say, well, we don't want but three pieces or two pieces about whatever, you understand, all us gonna stick together.  So they told me, said, well, she said she don't want the piano player.  I said, that's not for we're talking about.  We're talking about what we had agreed upon.  And so, she said, well, if you're playing, you're not going to get paid.  I said, let's all us go then.  Let's all of us walk out of here.  They wouldn't do it, so I left.  And I, I went to 61st, and I'll never forget it, 61st and Calumet.  The fellow had a piano in, in the club there.  And he had a mike, and he was, he was spinning records, too, and he had an amplifier in there.  And I'm sitting at the bar and drinking a beer and everything.  And I told him, I said, let me--there's a few numbers on the piano, I said, make, making and keep, keep people at the bar drinking.  He said, go ahead, Red, like that.  So I got on, I got on the piano, and I start playing.  And everybody start walking up and dancing.  And they'd go back there giving me tips, putting dollars in a (unclear) glass and everything, you know.  And that night, I walked out of the place with about $50 in my pocket.  And that's, and that being, so I've be playing professionally ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I said--
Speaker 1: So, did your group ever want you back and they, they want you back?
Speaker 2: I--no, no, they come and let, and they wanted to play with me then.
Speaker 1: On it, okay.
Speaker 2: They would--and I told them, no, I said, then we gotta--yeah, I will never trust you anymore.  I said, go ahead on.  I, I have my own band.
Story_ID: 83066
Speaker 1: And the following week, I got, went and got me a drummer, I got my bass player, and a guitar player.  And I, and then after that, we got a mix-up.  I had the saxophone player after, about the third week.  And I stayed there, I stayed there for about six months, about almost a year, and I've been going ever since.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And now, now, what did you call your group?
Speaker 1: Well, I had changed names with, I had changed name or, or two or three times.  My other was Piano C. Red and the, and the Boogie Blues Band.  But I changed it, I changed the name later, later on to Piano C. Red and the Flat Foot Boogie Blues Band.
Speaker 2: Flat Foot Boogie Blues Band?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: All right now, what was a Flat Foot Boogie?  Now, what was that?
Speaker 1: Well, it was, it was one of the songs that I wrote, "Flat Foot Boogie", see.  "Up, up in Illinois where everything's fine, all those casters (ph.) drinking they wine, doing the Flat Foot Boogie".
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum (laughter).
Speaker 2: You say, now, you, you write your lyrics, too.  You write all (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: And how do your lyrics come to you?  How do--
Speaker 1: Well, I, I believe there would--it's like a dream.  And when they come, you better hurry up and write them down because you, you, when you forget it, if you don't write it down, and, and, and it, it would, 'cause you could feel it.  It's something that, that, that the public want to hear, or they want to read about it, whatever it is, like writing a book, I could be.  And if you don't write it down, it would get away from you.  It's like a dream, you can dream at night time, and sometimes you can memorize that dream the next day.  Sometime you cannot.  You say, (unclear), what did I dream about?  Well, it (laughter) fades away.  See, now, like I can, like I have one song on this CD.  It's like, I can recall our, you know, seeing like fellows used the hobo on the train and everything.  And so, it's just like I had a dream that night.  And I said, well, like they called, they called me, "Hobo Sam, please give me a glass of water, and thank you, ma'am.  I said, they called me, Hobo Sam, please give me a glass of water, and thank you, ma'am.  I've been eating peanut butter, oatmeal cookies, and candy yams.  Please give me a glass of water, and thank you, ma'am".  That's it (laughter), you know.  And so, and, and I didn't let her know, why do they, why do they call me Hobo Sam?  And, and I guess you want to know.  You see, I was living down in Mississippi, and they throwed me in this ole, they throw me in this jailhouse slim.  And then, all the, all the, all my, all the fellows started to calling me Hobo Sam.  Then, one moment, and then after they let us, after they turned us loose, I caught the freight train to Birmingham (laughter), you know.  And I was ready to go in there while I was walking down the streets.  And this old lady walked up to me.  She said, hello, son, say, here's some oatmeal cookies and some candy yams.  I said, thank you, ma'am (laughter).  And then I walks on back down to the train.  And hobo can get on and hitchhike another ride on the train.  So (laughter), and then I wrote this, another one about a "Cab Drivin' Man" 'cause I've been in the, in the cab business for, almost, just as almost as long as I have been playing music.
Story_ID: 83067
Speaker 1: When, when you first started out as a musician, were you trying to be a full time musician?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah. And well, just tell us about your career.  Now, how did it go and how did you, how did you start driving a cab, too, and, and perform 'cause you're doing both, you know, are you still doing, you know?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, well, it's--I, I think it was a lot of us.  I mean, you know, we was playing these clubs.  And, and few--didn't have your good road manager booking agent.  You just couldn't--you wouldn't survive.  I mean, you can't.  So it would, you can't, because you're not getting in the right clubs where you can make the right type of money to survive.  And sometimes, I'll make, I'll make--well, I would make, I have, I have seen myself, I would earn, but we, just, just--this engagement was, was at the Hilton Hotel, Conrad Hilton.  And, and I was booked there.  It was three months in advance.  And Mayor [Jane] Byrne, she was the mayor.  And our state senator was [George] [W.] Collins.  And so, Collins, he wanted me, he hired my band.  As a matter of fact, I had to use two bands.  I had a jazz band and my band, blues band.
Speaker 1: That's George Collins, right?
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: That's George Collins?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He was over in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] and he was, I think he was a senator.  You re-, recall him?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I believe he was.  But anyway, I was booked in there, booked in there for a large sum of money.  And it was a lot, you know, politicians showed up and, you know, it was a big deal there.  And they treated me like I was a, like I was Ray Charles or somebody (laughter).  Yeah, and so it, it paid big money.  And, but you don't get them, get them, you know.  I think, you know, you, you, that's, like I say a few moments ago, you gotta have somebody out there really, you know, that, that gonna get you booked in these big places.  And you gonna, when you're there, you gotta put on a big show good show, you know.  But, as far as, as being able to survive in, in music where you can be able to have money to, you know, buy you a home or pay your bills, take care of your family, and all that stuff, a lot of fellows that wasn't able to do that.
Story_ID: 83068
Speaker 1: Now, you did a lot of playing--on Maxwell Street, right?
Speaker 2: Sure did.
Speaker 1: Maxwell Street is a famous part of Chicago [Illinois]--was commonly called the black community Jew Town--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --a long time ago.  And more properly called Maxwell Street, but that's, it's an area where, where there are a lot of--well, tell us about, about that area.  What, what's it like 'cause it's not like any other part of town?
Speaker 2: Well, Maxwell Street, you go all the back to the 1940s.  And it was place where you could go over there, and you could buy just about anything you wanted to buy real cheap.  And the reason why they called it Jew Town because a lot of Jews--that's where it was like an open front market.  And they had vendors and they had stores and everything.  And you would, you would go there, and you end up, if you bought a suit, it wasn't a real type of material that you, that you think it would be, you know.  And I recall when I first started going over there (laughter), I bought a suit.  And I was playing on Madison Street (unclear) Elmore James, and so I, I was playing with Elmore James.  He wanted me to play, play with him for a while, you know.  And so, I bought this suit.  And the fellow that owned the store, he told me, he said, well, tell you what.  You buy this suit, and I'm gonna give you one free.  And so, I wondered how--why was he being so kind and nice by giving me one free for.  It was, it was $80, but the suit, one suit was supposed to have been $100.  See, so if you bought, bought two of them, you'd get it for $80.  I bought the suit.  Oh, it was looking sharp and clean.  I walked in the club that night.  Everybody just talking and, oh, man, you sure looking sharp, man, you gotta a beautiful suit on.  Gotdog-it.  I say, yeah.  So, I'm up there playing and everything, and we taking an intermission.  It was raining outside.  So, I go outside and I, I had my little bottle in the--stashed away in the car, you know, because I didn't want to be, be spending all that extra, buying the shots in the place because it would cost too much, and I wasn't making that much money.  I go running outside, and it's raining, just coming down like a (laughter), like a ton or something.  And I make--get back inside, and so we had about 15 more minutes to get on the bandstand.  And all of a sudden, I some--feel, something's like getting tight, and that suit sleeve ran all the way up to my elbow.  And the pants leg came all the up to my knees just about.  And it looked, there on the side here, rolled up like potato chips (laughter).  I said, what is this (laughter)?  The reason he gave me two suits, yeah.  So, and that's, that's why they called it Jew Town because they would do--do a lot of times.  They'll--you, you go in some of the stores, and they ever give you a coat and you put the coat on, and said, button it up.  But we gonna take all the slack out the back here--hold it, take it, you know, pull it for the slack (laughter), and take all the slack out.  Oh, that fits you just right (laughter), you know, make it look like it's fitting you, you know.  But anyway, they had--you could go there and you'd get anything you want to.
Story_ID: 83069
Speaker 1: Now, the Polish sausage was the famous place over there.  You heard about that, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir, I have.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And--
Speaker 2: Were they good?  Are they (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: They, they were about--they, they say the best Polish sausage in the world.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They know about the Polish sausage there all over the world on Maxwell and Halsted.  So, that's where, Sonny Boy Williamson, he would get up there and play on the streets with his guitar and had a bucket.  People come by and drop money in his bucket.  If I'm not mistaken, I think, Muddy Waters played over there.  We had Elmore James, played on the streets over there.  We had Little Walter, he used to play over there on the streets.  And we had so many others--Hound Dog Taylor played over there.  Lefty Dizz, one of my good friends, he, he, he would play over there.  And it would be just noth-, wouldn't, wouldn't be anything, but a drum and a guitar and bass, I mean, harmonica.  That was all.  And they would go there and they would play.  But when you are--everybody on, on a--everybody, it's, it's like you wanted to get your, your, now, you know the right place to go and get different clothes that night that would be, you know, wouldn't, wouldn't be a reject--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but a lot of stuff were reject clothes.  That's what it was, you know.
Speaker 2: So some of the stores, you, you could get--
Speaker 1: You could get a good deal, right, right, see, see.  So, as the years passed, what I did, I went over there and Johnnie Dolly (ph.), he had a big store over there, and he would, he would sell everything.  And he did a big barbecue little trailer out front, that little hot dog stand like, you know.  And so I got to talking with him one--it was back in '89 [1989], I believe.  I said, you know what, I said, you should, I said, we should build a big bandstand out here and where we could--and set up a band here.  And I could have it just like we was, we would, we would be a nightclub or something, you know.  Be--we'd have people dancing the streets and buying, they'd be buying all your merchandise in the store, and buying your barbecue and everything.  I said, they're selling Polish sausage over there.  And there was another Polish sausage next to where we were gonna set the, the bandstand up.  We built it--put, put the bandstand up.  I said, now I gotta figure out some kind of way to pay the musicians.  So, I said, well, with, with this live entertainment, we should attract a lot of peoples in this area here when they'll be buying from the vendors and find Polish sausage.  They'll be buying from your stores and everything.  And I said, and also, too, I had a big ole, I had, no, I had a couple of fellows to go around with a tip bucket, too, you know.  So, went around to all the stores and I told them, I said, well, what, what we would like for everybody to own the, you know, you have a store, you have a vendor.  I said, we'd like for you to donate so much money every week to support the band.  And I managed to get about 10 or 15 stores.  And every week, they would give me so much money, and I had some of the best musicians playing with me.  And I could, I could be able to pay them, plus I was getting the tip money, too.  And that's how I managed to survive over there for about 12 years or more.
Speaker 2: Yep.  That sounds like a pretty ingenious way of, of doing it.  I mean, you, it takes a lot of enterprise to do that.
Speaker 1: That's right.  I got some deals in here or, is in the, in the deal.  I brought them here where you could see the advertisement I used.  I could show it to you later then.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 83070
Speaker 1: Now, can you tell us about your, your deal with Chess Records now?  You, you had some association with Chess records at one time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1963.  In 1963, I had went, pardon me, I went to this studio on Wabash.  I think it was Monroe and Wa-, Wabash.  It was a musical store there.  It was upstairs, and I carried some fellows with me and we went up there.  They called them duds at that time.  And so we record, I recorded about 12 numbers or more.  And, and I, and I--that's what, I think Willie Dixon had told me that's what he wanted me to bring, for that to bring some duds down there where they could hear what I sound like.  And so, Chess had told them, maybe, told me the same thing, too, Leonard Chess.  So, I carried them down there, and we get upstairs like, it was like a studio, like this here.  And they put them duds on and we sit up there and I could tell Leonard, Phil Chess and Willie Dixon.  They was all this--said no, that's, really, I can't use, we can't use that.  You sound too much like Ray Charles.  And they played a little--no, can't use that, sound too much like Little Richard.  They played another one.  No, no, no, you sound too much like Jerry Lee Lewis on that one.  And played another one, I had on there.  They listened to it for a little while, and kept on listening, and they did play it all the way through.  Yeah.  Put that one over to the side there, hold on that a few minutes.  And then they said, played another one.  No, sound too much like--who is that--oh, yeah, Memphis Slim, sound too much like him, 'cause I had been rehearsing on all these fellows (laughter).  But I, I had the lyrics to my own lyrics, but I was using some of their music a little bit, you know.  And the one he had put over to the side there, he came back.  He said, this, this, and he kept on playing it.  And he said okay.  I said, you know, we're, yeah, okay, man, we're--we may, can get something with this here.  And I had lyrics with it, and he told me they didn't want my lyrics, like they, they would like, like my, my, would like the way I was--the sound and the chord changes and everything, you know, melody and all that stuff (unclear).  It was different, different type of sound on the piano.  And they wrote down the lyrics, and told me to go home and rehearse on it for about two weeks, and we'd come back.  That's what I did.  So, on the lyrics part, it was monkey wobble groove (ph.) and I didn't, I don't know what happened to that, my part on that tape, but I managed to get the part where it slowed down and code it.  And so, they was playing it on WVON and when they--we let them pass.  We had a heart attack going to the radio station that morning, and about a week later, they closed up the whole company.  And they, they put a lot of fellows' tapes on the shelf.  But it was, but, no (unclear), it was--they--Ed Cooks had been playing it.  And he told he, he said, I had, he told, he said, look out, Count Basie, he said, Red has got you.  Red is on your trail.  He used to play it all the time on the radio.  And that number should have been--come out of, it should have been something like "After Hours" [Erskine Hawkins].  But see, that, when they know they, when they take it off the, when they put it on the shelf and they stop plugging it.  They, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so when Leonard Chess died, they kind of (unclear), kind of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of fellows, a lot of very--a lot of fellows sounds, says the sound wasn't, it wasn't, wasn't on the, on the, on the market anymore.  And I believe what happened is that they released them overseas.
Speaker 1: Now, you, you think so pretty much?  Did you, how did you, I mean, tell me about it.  Did, did you find out that's what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, we didn't know.  We didn't (unclear), you know, as long as this one, well, that's what a lot of fellows were telling in there, you know, they was coming here from, they, they have lived, come here.  And we record the fellows and, and their sound, and go back and release them overseas.  Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, you know, that during this--let me ask you to pause and change tape here.  This leads into a good question.
Story_ID: 83071
Speaker 1: We were talking--I, I, I--well, you raised an interesting point 'cause we, we know from watching television the history of rock and roll that in England in the '60s [1960s] and the late '50s [1950s], early '60s, that the blues from the United States was the most popular music.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and a lot of the musicians were inspired by the blues to, you know, do their own pieces.
Speaker 2: Well, the big, the big ones, they tried, they, they recorded it with Chess [Records].
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: I don't know what happened to that--what number that they recorded with Chess.  The Rolling Stones recorded with Chess.  And they, but they went and got on their own, you know, after they learnt, learnt certain, that style of the music.  And they changed around a little bit, you know, but the Rolling Stones, they, they making big time money.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Eric Burdon, you know, with the Animals, he was, he was one.  I mean, quite a few, I guess.  We, we could name them all day, I guess.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Or, or inspired or, you know, by the music.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: So, do you have any, any interaction with any of the Eng-, English performers when they come over here?  Do they, I know--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Mick Jagger always comes to the Checkerboard when he comes to town or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  And I had to had four or five good friends of mine--they used to write, or, or back and far, I was in the head.  Mag-, they used to release magazines over there, and they had, they had a write-up about me all over there in England.  And especially--well, actually, I was with Van Otren (ph.) there for, my first LP was released at, in Amsterdam--Van Otren, and he was, I was on Trapp (ph) label.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know about that?  I mean, that's, that's something you knew about?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, uh-hum, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So--
Speaker 2: And he sent me a contract and everything, but he, when he over there, he over there, and I'm here.  You don't know what's going on.  They can tell you anything.
Speaker 1: Well, they had write-ups about you in the papers and stuff over there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was in the--I used to be in the, in, in magazines all the time over there.  I have some of the old magazine at home, you know.
Story_ID: 83072
Speaker 1: Now, now why is that you suppose that the blues in the United States has not been as lucrative maybe as, as it has been outside of the United States?  Or, or it hasn't been as, I don't know, I mean it's, it's got a presence.  I mean, we have our Blues Fest every year and all that.  But in, in the black community, it seem like the blues is, is, though it has some popularity, but it's not the most popular music anymore.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, what happened--the blues was when you was about, I would say, when you was about 15 years old, and when I was about 16 or 17 years old, like I mentioned a few minutes ago about the boogie-woogie.  Oh, it was very popular, and the blues go all the way back, and then I would say in the 1900s, you know.  And the blues have stayed so popular for so many years.  Now, the young generation now, like your son or your daughter, and my son, my daughter, they'd have changed.  It changed into something like--it, it, you, it's hard to describe the sound that they liking now.  Like, this hip hop, you understand, and, and as they, they are, you know, they're taking, taking, taking a record and turning it back, and make a scratch, you know, you know.  And, and what, and, and our generation right now, you know, what, lot of peoples that love the blues that would come and pay to hear you sing the blues, especially an African American, they fade--they have faded out.  And the ones that are--I'll say from 65, 50, I'll say 56 to 70 years old, they don't come too much like they used to and patronize.  Now, you got a few people from 30 years old, between 30 and 50, but it's a small percentage in our neighborhood that would come out and support the blues.  And, actually, the, the, the blues, it's changing.  The 12-bar, eight-bar blues is changing, you know.  And, and it's not that real down home blues, like it used to be.
Story_ID: 83073
Speaker 1: Can you give us an example of what you mean by twelve-bar and eight-bar blues?  Can, can you hum a little bit of each, you know, let us, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, well, I would say like, like Fats Domino deal, he would say [humming].  That would be eight-bar blues.  And 12-bar blues is like [humming], come back [humming], (unclear) [humming], and right back, that's 12-bar, see.
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: So, are, are, you know.  What a lot of the hip hops, what they doing, they just get in one key, and they'll there for about 20 bars.  They may stay off 30 bars and they'll go into, they may go into a minor.  And if they're playing in major, they go into a minor and, and change it all around, and come back two bars.  And they go back to the, to the, to the, to the--what that would be the, to the, tonic, I believe.  And then they stay there for another eight, 16 bars, or whatever.  You understand?  So, so you have, and it's a, you got it all, you know, and it's not like Dixieland.  Now Dixieland blues is, is a, it's a, it's, it's almost like reggae.  And I'll tell you something else, too--a lot of people is getting into the reggae now, too.
Speaker 1: Now, a lot of diverse music out here now, it--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --it has to be true.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It has to be true.
Speaker 2: Right.  But if you got, if you got a good, if you got a good sound, and if you got a good sound, peoples gonna--now, when I'm, when I'm playing in the clubs.  And when I showed them my CD, "Cab Driving Man", peoples say, oh, yeah.  And when I'm in the, in the, in the cab, and I tell them I have a CD, I go, "Cab Driving", a lot of them say, hey, can I buy that?  Where can I find that?  And never heard it before.
Speaker 1: You can play it for them in the cab.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I have did it, sure.  And, and I'm playing in one club one night and I'm, and I playing the same thing.  It was at Lilly's on Lincoln Avenue.  And I sold about, I sold about a hundred CDs.
Speaker 1: [Off Camera Interruption]
Story_ID: 83074
Speaker 1: Okay, let's see.  Now, is it, is it easy for you to find places to play?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's easy, but (laughter), you know, you, you, you, I wouldn't, you know, if you're not in the clique, you're not gonna get in the club, so they gonna pay you the right money.  And on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], it only maybe about two places, three places out there that you can, you can play in where you make, make a decent piece of money.  Now we, I was at Checkerboard about a month ago.  I mean, Willie Buck, he, he sounds like Muddy Waters.  Him and I did a show there and we had a big nice crowd.  And he got Blues, Unleaded Blues, that's on South Chicago.  And, and Janet Drummer (ph.), he used to play for me.  He plays, stays, he stayed with me about two years playing drums.  And he got his own band now, so he always play.  It was a pretty good crowd out there.  But some of my friends, they played over at Bob Place.  They, they tried to get a Sunday night going over there and there was for the last, for the last month.  And they couldn't draw nobody.  People didn't, just, just wouldn't show up.  I mean, he had--the first night, they played there, he had maybe about 25 or 30 people.  Second week, they didn't have too many people there.  And a lot of the clubs, they said, maybe it was the economy, the economy, or maybe the war going on and everything.  But it--they don't come out, the people don't come out.  I think what a lot of people laid off from work, too--not only show business is hurting, I think a lot of other business is hurting.
Story_ID: 83075
Speaker 1: Now, now do you ever go back down South and play?
Speaker 2: Well, I was at B.B. King Club, about three months ago.
Speaker 1: And, and where is that?
Speaker 2: It's in Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee.  Now, I have some or one agent down there.  He was going to try book me in the casinos down there, so I'm looking to hear from them any time now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Chicago's [Illinois] probably, I guess, one of the blues capitals of the world.
Speaker 2: Well, see, only, only, only, the only clubs, the only clubs you can work in now is on the North side (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's true, I mean.
Speaker 2: You, you, you're not gonna, you'll starve to death on the South Side trying to find a gig to play (laughter), you know.  And, and in, in, in the clubs on the North Side, well, it's special musician, musician that have--are recorded, and once they've been playing in these clubs on the North Side for the last five years or 10 years or whatever, they rotate them in all the clubs.  And it's a clique, so if you're not in that clique and you go there and ask for, ask for a, a, a gig, you know.  And, and they twice say, well, I'm sorry, we're booked up for six months.  Well, what about booking me out to six months?  Well, you call me and then by that time, we let you know.  And we don't, when you go back there to talk to them about it, oh, we, we booked already (laughter), you know.  But I, you know, I, I don't (unclear).  That's the reason why I keep me, that's one of the reasons why, that I keep my business going on.
Story_ID: 83076
Speaker 1: What do you think is special about the blues?
Speaker 2: What I think about special is the blues is that when you have lost someone that you really love, or you've been out of work for a long time and all of a sudden, you got, you got a good job.  Now you, you can pay your bills and be able to eat, pay your rent.  Or someone can pass away, like spiritually, you know, what I mean, somebody pass away in, in your family, you know.  And, again, you have--feels where you get lucky and you get (unclear), you win some money, you're happy, you want to shout, you know what I mean.  You, you meet an old friend that you haven't seen for a long time, you know, you're so glad to see him, you know what I mean.  C'mon, let's go out and party, man, you know.  Or you're walking down the street and see a beautiful young lady, and you may have your, your wife or your girlfriend at home.  But you see a beautiful young lady out there and you say, whoa, lordy, she sure looks good and (laughter).  You be, you may walk up and say, hello, young lady, how--you can be, walk up and say, do I know you from some place or haven't I seen you before?  She may look at you and say, I don't think so.  Yes, I do, you know, I know you.  No, you don't know me (laughter), you know.  So all that have to do with the blues.
Speaker 1: And so, those are all the themes of, that are associated with the blues?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Some of the themes (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Some of them, right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: If the blues is, you got happy blues, you got sad blues, you got weeping and moaning blues.
Speaker 1: That's worse than sad, right?
Speaker 2: That's right (laughter).  Like Howlin' Wolf.  Howlin' Wolf used to get off on his knees and, and would do just like my grandmother and my mother would do in the Sanctified Church, Church of God.  Your Howlin' Wolf used to get down on the knees.  And they got one fellow called Tail Dragon now--he do the same thing.  Get on the knees in the club and start humming [humming], good (unclear) [humming] (laughter)--be crying (laughter).
Speaker 1: And this is stuff that comes right, right out of the experience of people that--
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: See, like you get laid off your job.  And you don't, you just went out and purchased you a brand new car.  Or you just borrow, sign a, sign a mortgage papers on a brand new home, and, and you go to work.  The boss tells you, say, I'm sorry, but I gotta lay you off.  And you're making, say, if you're making big money, and you got lay you off from work, you're gonna lose your car, and you lose your home, and also maybe you end up, you're losing your whole family.  Then, that's the blues 'cause you're gonna be hurt.  And like think (unclear) had one song out a long time ago.  He said, my shoes fallen--no, let's see--my clothes falling off of my back, can't you hear me, baby?  Won't you come on back?  You know.  And like Muddy Waters, you know, he had, he had so many of my, like "Rock Me", baby, rock me all night long, you know.  And he, he, one part in there, he said, c'mon and sit down on your daddy knees and look at me, and I want you to say, pretty, please (laughter), you know.  So I mean, that's, that's the blues.  And, and, what, what makes it so 'cause I know right now, I can listen to a lot of my fellow musicians.  And I could sit up and I can listen to them all night.  And the blues will never, the blues will never fade away.  The young, I think, I, I have come in contact with a lot of young fellows.  Your son age, my son age, and they love the blues.  But it, but that, you know, I think what we have to do, what, a lot you have to do is just create more lyrics and sound to keep them loving the blues.
Story_ID: 83077
Speaker 1: So do you ever speak in schools or anything about the blues or did you ever had a (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I haven't had a chance to--when I was doing the Blues Fest [Chicago Blues Festival], I did, when I did the Blues Fest, Blues Fest, out there in Grant Park [Chicago, Illinois], you know.  See, and I got one song on there and you're gonna hear on the, on the CD about New York and Chicago ["New York and Chicago"].  And it's like this fellow, he, he worked very hard.  He come home with his pay and his, his wife, she's not treating him right.  And he tell her, he say, well, say, don't know--I don't care what I do for you.  You're not happy.  You don't treat me right like you should.  And he tell her, say, well, I got bad news for you.  I'm going to Chicago.  Sorry, but I take, can't take you.  And when he get, when he get to Chicago, he said, I want all you Chicago women to raise your window high 'cause this New York daddy gonna be creeping by (laughter), you know, see.  And I'll be doing that and I would (unclear).  If I do that in Chicago, I won't be on the stage and I'll be singing that number here in Chicago, you know.  I'll, I'll sing it that way.  Now, if I'm in New York, I'm going to change it around (laughter) 'cause I'll get in trouble with the (unclear) in New York, you know, see.  Yeah, so they're say, you know, hey, you know what, that, what it makes what, what I guess I like about creating my own songs, writing my own song, is because I want to have something that--the meaning to everybody, where when you hear it, you can, you can really or you could say, well, it makes a lot of sense, see.  Now, when the one I kept with the one that they're going to release here, is what left, left the (unclear) on it.  It's entitled "Miss Annie Lou", talk to your daughter.  It's on there, too, you know.  And it's like if you're going with a young lady or you just marry this young lady, and she, and, and you marry, you've been married for about a month, two months, you know.  And all of a sudden, she goes out, and she--you, you get off from work and she say, I want to go to my girlfriend house.  I want to go out and, and, and, or play cards with my girlfriend.  I went out.  But she out there running the streets.  And so, Miss Ann Lou, and then not Miss Ann Lou is her mother.  So she say, Miss Ann Lou, please talk to your daughter for me.  She's a mean mistreator.  She just won't let me be, you know (laughter), you know, let her go on with that.  But when you hear all of them, you know, you'll say yeah.  And it, it's very exciting, though, when you can express yourself because it happened, one, once in your life are sung, it's almost like somebody reading your mail.  Something have happened in your life is what you're hearing in that song.
Speaker 1: So are your, your songs mostly about your life experiences or--
Speaker 2: Yes, to a certain extent.
Story_ID: 83078
Speaker 1: What, tell me now about some of the, your colleagues here and people that you played with.  And, and you knew Willie Dixon fairly well, right?  What was he like and how did you like to play with him?
Speaker 2: Willie Dixon was a, he was a, he's a legend.  But he, he got into the right clique where he would write, he write, he, he wrote a lot of songs.  He wrote songs for Muddy Waters.  He wrote songs for Jimmy Reed.  He wrote songs for Chuck Berry.  He wrote songs for Sonny Boy Williamson.  Who--so many of them.  Oh, yeah, KoKo Taylor was the main one.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: He wrote that "Wang Dang Doodle", yeah.  And, so he wrote some numbers that the Rolling Stones, if I'm not mistaken, or somebody went ahead and recorded some of them.  And he had a big lawsuit then, and he left Chicago [Illinois] with about almost a million dollars 'cause all he, he would sent all his sons into the Washington, D.C. Library of Congress, have them all copyrighted (laughter).
Speaker 1: So he was one of the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he's what you call the, he would, he, he's the creative, he's the creator, in other words.  He's the creator of, of the blues in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was Howlin' Wolf.  He wrote, wrote all the songs of Howlin' Wolf, Little Walter, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: So, so you're saying Willie Dixon is a lot more important than some people think.  I mean, he's, he's a--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he, he's, you know, that's, that's his place on 22nd and, and, and Michigan [Chess Records].
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.  I mean, it, it's Shirley Dixon[-Nelson], that's his daughter.  And out there, you know, they got, he, he received big time.  And, matter of fact, I think he's, they probably receiving royalties or, you know, heavy money or so often of all the songs that he wrote.  And he, he arranged them and, and different artists recorded them.  But, but you know, he was, he, he was all for himself because see, a lot of fellows went down there with those songs.  And they had their song, but he would change, he wouldn't let them record their song.  He would write the song, and they, a lot of fellows be having some good lyrics, good songs, you know, and, and, let somebody else--they, they pushed you over and take yours and ball up that piece of paper and throw it in the trash can.  And he'll (laughter), you know, and he, he didn't--you don't get the credit for nothing.
Speaker 1: Well, it's a tough business, it sounds like.
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: Yeah, sounds--
Speaker 2: Crooked business.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, you'd be surprised how many people have gotten over on somebody else, you know.  That, that--look at him, they say, Jackie Wilson, you mean that, that Jackie Wilson, he didn't or, or he was very popular, you know.  I mean he sounded good.  You remember Jackie Wilson.  And they owed him a lot of money and, no, I think was, he wouldn't sign another contract 'cause they had beat him out of a lot of money.
Story_ID: 83079
Speaker 1: Sir, so, what's your, what, what's been your most rewarding experience as a blues musician?
Speaker 2: My, my reward now is, is when I can get in front of an audience about 20, 30,000 people and get a standing ovation.  And that's my reward.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's just like [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], "I have been to the mountains, it's the top" [sic, "I've been to the mountaintop"].  And that's the reward you get.  That's what I, that's, that's my reward.  I don't know about the other fellows.
Story_ID: 83602
Speaker 1: Just, just following up on what you just said when we were rolling last time.  Where was it that you had the big ovation and can, can you talk about--
Speaker 2: It was in Grant Park [Chicago, Illinois], one of them, Grant Park.  And it was so hot in that tent.  We were playing in this tent and it was so hot, but the tent was packed full.  And I have the tape on it, too, for, for the whole Fest [Chicago Blues Festival].  And people was almost wringing wet, but they didn't walk out.  They sit there and they, they loved every minute of it.  They got up and applaud and after we finished, you know, and that was, that was just wonderful.  I mean, I, I felt, I guess I felt like a preacher--had preached a good sermon (laughter), you know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And the other one was when I was at the Conrad Hilton.  Remember, if you recall, when I told you, first beginning, that I played for Mayor [Jane] Byrne and, and it was Taylor, I think it was Taylor, his name, it was, I believe
Speaker 1: James Taylor?
Speaker 2: James Taylor, that's who it were, 'cause he had a club there at 63rd and Ashland, upstairs there, and he, he had a club there.  And, but he had booked me to play for the big election.  I believe that's what it was.  And I think it was over, maybe about 1,500 people showed up that night or more.  They had been selling tickets and everything, you know, and, so Mayor Byrne was there.  And I, I got up and did my numbers and everything.  I, I got standing ovation and that was, that made me feel great.
Story_ID: 83603
Speaker 1: Now you got a new CD out now, right?  And with "Cab Driving Man"--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  How, how's it going with it?  Are you really--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we, we, we working with it.  We can--it's on, it's on the internet website and the download.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.  And we getting ready to release this.  Some, some of this are, some more that we gonna get it together here at Delmark Records and they're gonna release on this label, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what--are you still producing music for the future and everything?  Still, you have some plans?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I got it coming.  I got, I got to really work hard because I want to try to get some hit sounds out.  You can't make up what you have lost.  And we are speaking, what I mean, I, I mean I should be more, I should be financially in good shape.  So what I want to do is come out with something, something so great that I can be able to leave something back here for my grandkids, for my, my, my sons and daughters, you know, and for their ed-, education purpose.  The main thing is I didn't realize when I was going to school how important it was to get a good education because knowledge is the powerful, knowledge is the power of all power.
Story_ID: 83604
Speaker 1: Okay.  That leads me to a question that we usually ask people.  And that, that is like, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: We need, we need some strong leaders.  We need some strong, strong leaders to, especially the preachers.  The preachers go in the pulpit and recite the Bible every, every Sunday.  And I told my son, he's a preacher, I said, but you got to get out of here and demonstrate and march and let--and go the prison camps, go in the neighborhood, and let these kids know that there's hope.  And they got to get a education.  Without an education, they gonna end up three places.  They're going to end up in prison, they end up in the graveyard, or they end up as a tramp and a bum on the streets.  And if they don't, and, and if they don't, it's gotta be, it's gotta be some kind of way to keep, keep the percentage, a large percentage out of prison.  And that large percentage is African Americans locked up in prison.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And then we got that, that (unclear).  I mean, you know, I don't want to see nobody--I don't care who you are, you know.  I don't want to see nobody be going to prison.  But when a person is, you know, it's gotta be some kind of, we gotta have somebody to really can pound something in these--the, when a kid get to, from, I'll say from, from 12 years old.  It, it's gotta be a way that we can keep them from getting out there--start smoking marijuana, or start drinking at 14 or 15 years old.  And that, that happened or I believe, I believe what, it, yeah, I, I don't know it was a conspiracy, but I really do believe it was a conspiracy right after [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] passed away to make sure that a lot of popu-, population of a large percentage, in other words, of African Americans would, would receive--you start diluting the brain cells, you don't want to learn nothing.  You gonna, you gonna, you gonna end up dropping out of school, and when you drop out of school, what kind of job can you get?  You're out of it.
Story_ID: 83605
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, sir, I know you're still working and everything, but, but at this point, what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Would, would I consider, you mean, what kind of goal would I want reach for?
Speaker 1: No, what, what do you think you left behind?
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I didn't, I, I, think what happened is that I didn't work as hard as I should have.  I should have worked, I should have worked real hard.  I should, in other words, I had ideas that, that would be unbelievable.  I, I had the nicest--I should stand up on, I should stand up on top of the piano, play it backwards and, and I almost tried to flip on it playing.  And I said, my, my legacy was, I said, I want to be so great where, where, where the angels will come from, from the sky, and come down here and want to do the boogie.  I want to be so great where (laughter), where, where a (unclear) will come up and wouldn't touch me (laughter).  You understand?  See, and, and, and I had those dreams.  And I, you know, and when I, when I was--you, you can, you can ask a lot of people that, that seen me back in the early 60s [1960s].  I mean, you know, like I was--then a lot of them said that I was better than, than Little Richard, Jerry Lee Lewis, any of them.  But I didn't get the breaks, and maybe I didn't work hard enough but I sure tried.
Story_ID: 83606
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a, as a blues piano man that did the, did the best he could to become a big star.  And that was my goal when the best--I wasn't even, tried to learn how to play the piano if I, if I hadn't wanted to dream.  That was my dream, to become a big star.
Story_ID: 83607
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  So he talked about Willie Dixon, though, we--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, well, yeah, you want to, yeah, list of some other people here, some of the folks you mentioned.  Maybe you can give us a quick kind of hit on them, you know.
Speaker 1: What's that?
Speaker 2: Like kind of quick hit on them, a quick--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Larry is going to give you some (unclear) of some musicians.
Speaker 2: A quick analysis of some musicians.  Yeah.  I'm going to give you some of the names of these guys and--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And just so if you have some incident from your past where you ran into any of them that comes to mind.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You'll do a quick analysis.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We're rolling?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  How about Muddy Waters?
Speaker 2: Muddy Waters, he was outstanding.  Muddy Waters told me one night we were leaving, leaving from Smithers (ph.) Corners.  He had a station wagon.  And I was riding with him and he told me, he said, Red, he said, don't give up, said I liked the way you was--come up and played the piano, and, and was singing and everything.  You did a pretty good job tonight--said, but don't give up.  So one day, you'll be, you'll be up there like I am.  And I taking his advice, but, you know, I'm working, still working with him (laughter).
Speaker 1: What about Junior Wells?
Speaker 2: Junior Wells, him and I struggled a lot (unclear) this city.  I recall when Junior Wells, he was a, he was just getting started, walking around with tennis shoes on.  And he was trying to, you know, make it, and, but he started hanging out with Little Walter.  And Little Walter taught him about the harmonica, chromatic scale, then also, too, that after he learned how to play the harmonica from the real good, he, he had--Muddy Waters let him play with him a couple of times.  And then, Howlin' Wolf let him blow with him.  Then all of a sudden, he got on this--he went, went out there on his own, and so, you know, he, he made a name for himself.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about Hound Dog Taylor?
Speaker 2: Hound Dog Taylor, we was real good friends.  And I told Hound Dog Taylor.  He was playing over there on 55th and Princeton.  We used to go out on a Sunday afternoon and be jamming and partying and everything.  He be there playing and he see me coming in--(unclear), come on over here, goddammit.  And I had, I had a little electronic piano then.  And I set it up and I get in there and we jam together.  And I told Hound Dog, I said, after we take admission, we go outside, and he would have a pint of--I think it was over Ole Rocking Chair or either a Granddad.  And I told him I said, look here, man, I said, don't pack the food down, and turn that bottom up--and drank all of it at one time.  He said, Red, you, I'm a man, whatcha talking about?  Man, I can do this and he turned that (unclear) up and drank, drank that whiskey down like it was water.  I said, man, that's gonna kill you man, what's wrong with you?  He said, you, you, you ain't nothin', but a little ole boy.  You can't drink, you don't know how to drink no way.  I said, I'm not going to drink like that.  And, a few years later, it killed him.
Speaker 1: What about Elmore James?
Speaker 2: Elmore James, that was the one that whether he, I was, I played with him that one night.  And that's when I had bought that suit from Jew Town (laughter).  That suit, suit that rolled up like a meat (ph.) scale on me (laughter).  Elmore James looked at me and said, well, where, said, where'd you get the suit from?  (Laughter).  I said I got it from Jew Town, yeah.  Well you better carry it back--tell you, so (laughter).  Yeah.
Speaker 1: What about Lefty Dizz?
Speaker 2: Lefty Dizz, he on, he, he's playing lead guitar on, on "Miss Annie Lou", talk to your daughter.  He playing lead guitar on, let's see, what's--about two or three or four or five numbers, he playing lead guitar.  I can't recall them right now.  But him and I was real good friends.  And I had, Lefty Dizz play with me for about three or four years.  And he, him and I both, we started clowning, like he see me standing up on the stool on the piano playing, or turning, turning flips and all that stuff.  And he, he would take his guitar and throw it out, like T-Bone Walker's do, and the guitar come walking back to him and all that.  He was an outstanding showman. Him and I used to put on some real good shows together.
Story_ID: 83608
Speaker 1: What about Buddy Guy?
Speaker 2: Buddy Guy, or Buddy Guy, when he first come to Chicago [Illinois], he told everybody, he said, I'm going to tell you something, he said.  I'm, I'm gonna sit here all of you down, he said, because I'm going to be one of the greatest doggone guitar players in the City of Chicago and, but he, he struggled around the city for a while.  And then, all of a sudden, he, he had a chance to get the Checkerboard [Lounge] going, and he been going ever since.
Speaker 1: What about Sam Lay?
Speaker 2: Sam Lay, he was a good friend of mine.  He played--I think he's on drums here.  And he used to come around, and he wanted me to go on the road with him a couple of times.  But he wanted me to be a side man and I told him, I said, what, let's, let's work together on this here.  I'll be what you call attractive guest star and, and he didn't like that too much.  So, (laughter) I didn't want, I didn't want to be no side man (laughter).  I want to be, I want to be a star, too, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: And B.B. King?
Speaker 2: B.B. King, B.B. King used to come in and sit all the time.  And when he was doing the big shows and everything, and I go back in the back, Rick, come on back here.  Whatcha want you drink?  And he'd have scotch and gin, vodka, beer and everything back there, all kind of food and everything.  Him and Little Milton, they always would do that and I'd go back there and just sit down and have, and have a feast with them, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I got one last one.  We got only a couple of minutes on this roll.  Just talk for a minute about the Chicago style or the Chicago sound, as distinct from Memphis or Delta Blues, you know, what makes the Chicago sound unique?
Speaker 2: Well, most all the, most all the fellows that have passed away, they really made Chicago stand out.  Howlin' Wolf, he made Chicago become, he helped Chicago become the start of blues.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  You know what, sir?  Could you just look at Larry 'cause I--start over and look at Larry, 'cause I was getting the light when you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Oh, sorry, okay.  Howlin' Wolf, he, he had it where, that he was playing on the West Side, South Side, and he would be hollering, so it seemed like you could hear, hear his voice all over Chicago (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You know what I mean?  And then, then like I was speaking about Little Walter a few minutes ago.  You know, Walter come out with that chromatic scale on the harmonica with Muddy Waters.  He was playing behind Muddy Waters.  And that was one of the greatest sounds that you could hear in blues.  And it become, it, it, I think they made millions off of that harmonica 'cause it was a creative sound.  It's something that it sounded better than an organ did.  And that what really picked up Chicago.  I remember at that time if every club on the South Side, you had a band in there.  And we had Earl Hooker and he was, he was famous for making in Chicago.  And little Junior Parker.  And then we had the Regal Theatre and they used to book a lot, a lot of the blues.  B.B. King would be at the Regal Theatre, and would be so many of them if, if, I mean.  And, and, and B.B. King, when B.B. King would come to Chicago, the place would be packed--three or 4,000 people would turn out to hear.  Then we had Abba Kane (ph.).  Abba Kane made Chicago real popular.  And we had Elmore James and or so because there used to be a lot of blues clubs on the West Side.  And I recall the time that if I wasn't playing anywhere, I couldn't, I couldn't just stay at home on a Friday night or Saturday night, or Sunday night.  I had to get there where they playing and, and people coming.  And that's one of the reason why now that when I pick, when I pick people up in the cab, and they would come--first time they say when they get in, in, in the cab and coming from O'Hare field or coming from Midway, where's the blues club?  What, what's the, the best blues club it is in the city?  I say, you can go to, you can go to the Kingston Mines, Blue Chicago, Buddy Guy Legend, Checkerboard, you know.  And I said, there's a few clubs on the South Side there, Unleaded Blues.  I said, but this is the right place for the blues.  And from what all our, what, what the past have did, that's what built Chicago and made it this, the King of the Blues.
Story_ID: 83609
Speaker 1: Now, now did your parents get a chance to hear, to hear you play (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, sure.  My mother [Lucille Evans], she used to, she used to love, of all the numbers I recorded, and, and, I got one deal where I have a picture with me sitting at a big baby grand like the one over there.  It's white, you know.  I was, I don't think I have one with me but I, I was intended to get you one, well, give you one, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 83610
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  We're rolling.  Go ahead.  Just tell us when and where this was taken.
Speaker 2: Oh, that was taken at one of my good friends--he's a manager and also, he a booking agent.  And we taking it at his apartment.  And he had (unclear), it's type of equipment that you have here.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  It's a nice shot.
Speaker 2: About what year is this?
Speaker 1: Pardon me?
Speaker 2: This is recently?
Speaker 1: Yes.  It's about a month ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next, same session.
Speaker 1: Yep, same session.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Same person.  The lights, I like that.  Yeah, you said I want to hear albums or--
Speaker 1: Pardon me?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, you said, I want to hear--
Speaker 1: Right, that was probably we use on--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Good-looking.  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Same chairs.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, okay, next.
Speaker 1: Same chairs.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  We just do this as a flip book, Larry.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  That's enough of those.  Okay.  (Unclear).  Okay, what about this photo, sir?
Speaker 1: Oh, that was taken at Checkerboard [Lounge].  That is me and Otis Blue Boy White was together.  And that was at the Checkerboard Lounge, 43rd and King Drive.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And was this a, a particular occasion and how long (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: That was about a year ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, all right.  And next shot.  Okay, go ahead, tell, tell us about this.
Speaker 1: That was taken about, I would say maybe about five or six years ago.  And I used that on, out of my files when I'm getting ready to go and appear in different clubs, and use that for booking engagements.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next, please.  That one could be regular size.
Speaker 1: I, I actually--that was an accident (unclear). (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, okay.  Tell us about this image.
Speaker 2: Well, we, that was taken--I was doing a Blues Fest, if I'm not mistaken--no, I was playing on Maxwell Street, right.  And we, and I had it in color up there and--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  It's very (unclear).  Okay, how long ago was that?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's even about three or four years ago.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's the blues bus.  That was in, in Jew Town for about 20 years or more.  And he sold the whole, all, he'd had it every year, a blues recording out his, cassette tapes and also LP's, 45's, and CD's.
