Story_ID: 84819
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Sure, Don Richards, D-O-N, R-I-C-H-A-R-D-S.  Now, my given name is really Donald.  That's what my family still calls me, but all my friends have always called me Don, so that's what I use now.
Speaker 1: Now your middle name is C, right?
Speaker 2: Charles.
Speaker 1: Charles.
Speaker 2: Yes, after my father.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 24, 1938, born in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Now, I'm executive with the Screen Actors Guild, I'm the Associate National Director of Affirmative Action and Diversity.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is April the 20th.
Speaker 1: Twenty-first.
Speaker 2: Sorry, April 21, 2003.
Speaker 1: That's the toughest question, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at the Headquarters of the Screen Actors Guild in New York and we are on 45th and Madison.
Story_ID: 84820
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now before we get into depth, there are five People Magazine-ish type questions we always ask, and they just require a short answer.  The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, that--you caught me on that one.  I really enjoy a good baked turkey with dressing and cranberry sauce.  I guess the kind of Christmas, Thanksgiving dinner fare.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my favorite formal food.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summertime, late summer, late summer, early fall, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's hard to say, "a favorite" because I go to the Caribbean a lot, but my favorite is Italy and I go to Italy a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Long ago my father gave me one.  It wasn't his, it's not original and many people have used it, but "A long journey begins with one step," is something that I've always held dear to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 84821
Speaker 1: Now can you tell me about your family history, as much as you can.  How far can you trace your family back?
Speaker 2: I can trace it back on my father's side, back to about 1847.  This would be my grandmother's grandmother.  And her name was Ellen Burwell(ph).  And she was really the concubine for a Mr. Burwell who had the plantation in Meridian, Mississippi.  And Mr. Burwell and Emma, did I say Emma or Ellen, I think I said Ellen, had five children.  And my grandmother comes from, you know, one of those girls.  And my grandmother is from Meridian, Mississippi, and she married my grandfather there.  And then they came to Chicago in 1916.  My father [Charles Bernard Richards], at that time, was three or four years old, and he was the youngest of three brothers.  And the other two brothers were slightly older.  That's my father's side.  My mother's side, I can only go back to my grandfather's parents, and they're from Montgomery, Alabama.  And he and my mother [Alice Laura Burns] and her sister came to Chicago in 1922 or 1923.  That's about as far back as I can go.
Speaker 1: Now are there any stories that are passed down about the days of slavery or reconstruction or anything?
Speaker 2: Not so much slavery, but in the days that came after slavery, just some stories about life in the Meridian and Mississippi.  My grandmother was a school teacher there.  But really things were not very good and so when World War I came, there was some opportunity to come north to work in the factories, etc., so that's why they came here.  And so most of the stories are from the time they got to Chicago, where they lived, how they all had to live right around the 35th Street area, very difficult to get jobs.  My grandmother, although she had been a teacher back then became a domestic really.  And my grandfather also worked at odd jobs, worked at the Chicago Theater just doing odd jobs.  So those are the kind of stories from my grandparents.  And then my grandfather, on my mother's side, went to I guess Alabama State College [Montgomery, Alabama], moved to Arkansas, was always interested in insurance and accounting and was always very, very interested in spending money in the black community and always pushed for black business.  Went to Arkansas from Alabama and then came to Chicago, ended up working in the post office.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were any of your ancestors members of any black organizations back in those days?
Speaker 2: My grandfather, on my mother's side, was part of, not any of the national organization, but was part of a credit union out in Morgan Park, which was an area far south of Chicago where a lot of blacks grew up, build their own homes, had a very close-knit society.  But as far as being part of like the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or any of those things, I don't ever recall that.  They were all in unions, either the, you know, Teacher's Union or the postal union, stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 84822
Speaker 1: Well, can you tell us about your father?  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us and his date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Sure his name is, Charles Bernard Richards, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, Bernard, B-E-R-N-A-R-D, and Richards, R-I-C-H-A-R-D-S, born in Meridian, Mississippi, as I mentioned in 1912.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us about him, what was he like and what did he do?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, I didn't catch up with him until he was in his twenties but from a lot of pictures and a lot of conversations, he grew up around the 35th Street area, went to Philips High School, played a lot of sports in those days, you know, basketball in the community.  I don't know much about--much more about that.  I see his year book from [Wendell] Phillips High School [Chicago, Illinois] and he was involved in some theatrical things in High School and some clubs in high school.  Married my mother [Alice Laura Burns] and when I caught up with him, when I was born in 1938, he was working.  He had been in the post office since 1936, and we lived in--we lived with my grandmother.  And he was a guy that was--had a lot of friends.  I remember they used to come over our house and play cards, and my mother and father used to go out to certain night clubs.  I remember he always would read to me and push me.  I was reading pretty well by the age of four and I started school at the age of four, because he was always reading and kept pushing that whole thing.  Very family-oriented kind of guy.  We lived with his mother for a while, my grandmother, and so we all lived as one big happy family.  We finally got our own house out at 93rd Street and Forest Avenue in 1945 and he was a hard worker, a no-nonsense kind of father.  He didn't ask a lot of questions, if he said something, you didn't ask a lot of why, like we do today.  Of course I had a sister so he--pushed us a lot in school, wanted us to excel.  I remember he worked nights a lot.  And then when we had children, he was a very good grandparent. And then he died in 1984 at the age of seventy-two.
Story_ID: 84823
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your mother and father met?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were both students at Wright Junior College [currently Wilbur Wright College, Chicago, Illinois] when they met, and I'm not quite sure about all the intricacies of their dating, but that's where they met.  Actually, he went to University of Wisconsin for a year, which was very rare back then, and my mother went to the University of Minnesota for a year and then the Depression caught up with them and they came back here, and I think it was then that they went to Wright and that's when they met.
Story_ID: 84824
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about your mother [Alice Laura Burns].  Give us her full name and spell it for us and her date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Alice Laura, her maiden name was Burns, and obviously Richards.  A-L-I-C-E, L-A-U-R-A, B-U-R-N-S.  As I said, she came to Chicago in 1922 or 1923, I think she was nine or ten years old.  She was born in 1913.
Speaker 1: In Meridian, I guess?
Speaker 2: No, no, she's from Montgomery, Alabama, right, right.  And then they went to Arkansas when she was a little girl, so she came here from Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She came with her father.  Her mother had died when she was very, very young.  So she came here with her father and a sister--and her sister.  Then her father remarried and so she had a stepmom and then they had two more children several years later.  They lived in the Woodlawn area a long time and my mother went to Englewood High School [Englewood Technical Prep Academy, Chicago, Illinois].  And, you know, I've seen her pictures in the yearbook.  Only a very few African Americans were in Englewood at that time.  So they kind of stood out in the yearbook.  Again, another--when I caught up with her, very anxious to have her children excel in school, pushed us a lot.  She worked all her life, as I remember.  Most of it was spent as a school secretary, school clerk, they used to call em, at Carver [High School, Chicago, Illinois] out in Altgeld Gardens for many, many, many years.  And she had has some jobs before that, but that's the job I remember mostly.  Very loving mother, always wanted her kids to do well, and again, she was one who read to my sister and I and pushed us in school, kind of spoiled all of us because my mother cooked every meal, my father [Charles Bernard Richards] never cooked, and I really never cooked growing up.  So she worked and cooked and did all the washing and typical--what a black working woman had to do in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother is still alive and she, as we speak, she will be ninety this year.
Story_ID: 84825
Speaker 1: I want you to reflect back and give us a sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Okay, good.  I grew up--started my life down in around 3341 South Park, which is now King Drive.  And this was in an apartment building, living with my grandmother and grandfather and my mother [Alice Laura Burns] and father [Charles Bernard Richards].  My sister was born and she's two years younger than I am, she was born 1940.  And until I was seven and she was five, we lived there with my grandparents.  And my recollection is just fun, I had a cousin who lived around the corner and used to visit him, very loving family.  My grandmother was kind of the matriarch of the whole deal and just very, very loving.  I remember we lived on South Park and the double-decked busses used to run along that street.  And I remember--my mother remembers when I was fascinated by the busses.  And I ran out in the street one day as a real little boy, trying to get on one of those busses and you know had to be grabbed back, so I mean and this was you know. I remember climbing on the back porch, I just remember just everything, my grandmother's cooking and all those kind of smells, used to cook good rolls and cakes and things like that.  So I remember all those until I was about seven.  I also remember that where we lived, there was a very famous gospel singer later, Cleveland, oh, what was his first name?
Speaker 1: James Cleveland?
Speaker 2: James Cleveland.  He was just a little older, a few years older than I, and there are pictures when he used to kind of be holding me and that was a real little boy then.  I mean I don't really ever remember him, but we have those pictures.  Also in those days, our doctor lived right around the corner from us, Dr. Shaw.  So it was one of those communities where you know doctors, teachers, working people, all lived together and didn't mean much to me then, but that was just part of what it was.  And then we moved.  And we bought a house out on 93rd and Forest, which is in the West Chesterfield neighborhood, and I remember a lot about that.  I remember my first friends.  We had coal furnace.  And I remember we had to go out and pick up little sticks to start the fire in the furnace and that was a big deal for me, never did that before.  I don't know who did it in our apartment building, but we didn't do that.  And we would go out every day and get little sticks and you know build a fire.  My job was to haul the ashes out at night.  We had a coal bin, the coal man used to deliver coal.  It was our first house, so we were, you know, had two bedrooms, only two bedrooms in those days, so my mother [Alice Laura Burns] and father [Charles Bernard Richards] in one bedroom and my sister and I in another bedroom growing up.  All our neighbors who lived on top of a hill on Forest, so I used to sled in the winter and ride our bicycles.
Story_ID: 84826
Speaker 1: And this was the first time I ever ran into the race issue, because when I lived on 35th Street, and I was in first grade, I was in school with obviously all African American kids.  I mean I never thought anything about it, that's just the way I grew up.  But when we moved out to West Chesterfield, we had to transfer to an elementary school, Burnside. And Burnside Elementary School until that time was basically all white.  And so that's the first time I was ever called a nigger when I was seven years old.  I was shocked, I didn't--I mean all that was just so brand new to me, it was very--
Speaker 2: Did you know what it meant?
Speaker 1: I guess, I don't quite remember and I knew it was ugly, so I guess I knew what it meant then.  And so a lot of my memories had to do with Burnside and that whole situation, and we lived on one side of the rail road tracks.  There was a viaduct at 91st Street and we had to cross the viaduct to go to that school, and I remember the white boys used to stand on the viaduct and throw rocks at us when we were coming home from school.  There was a big park, Tuley Park, and we really couldn't go to Tuley Park.  The library was in Tuley Park, so we were able to go in the library and get out books and get out of there, but we could never really do anything recreational in Tuley Park at that time.  And there was a very famous magician show that we all--oh, our classmates went to the magician show at Tuley Park and it was just one day.  And there was a big fight afterwards, the white boys jumped us and that always sticks out in my memory from those days.  So that was the Burnside Elementary School, the start of that.  But we weathered that and got to love Burnside and had some great teachers.  But I mean that was the first time I really ran into this whole race issue in Chicago and this is in the '50s [1950s], actually the late '40s [1940s].
Story_ID: 84827
Speaker 1: But my social life, our social life at that time, was back in our neighborhood, we had a big park also called, we called it State Park, it's now called Abbott Park, right at 95th between Michigan and State.  And I grew up in that park, swimming, learned to swim there, learned to play ping pong there, played baseball every day, played football in the fall.  And my whole social life, growing up as a kid, was in State Park.  Had a couple of people that was very instrumental in my life up there, all our lives, a Mr. Whitlow, who was, I guess, head of the park.  A guy who's name is Foche Marshall Knox, we'll never forget Foche.  A guy who later became a teacher at Dunbar [Vocational] High School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: How do you spell Foche?
Speaker 1: Well I think F-O-C-H-E.  I mean that was his nickname, Foche.  His name is Marshall, but we called him Foch.  I don't know why, everybody did.  But they coached us, baseball, football, basketball, so that's where a lot of my boyhood life.  Where we lived was very different from the inner city, a lot of open fields, vacant lots, lot of it hadn't been built up, pheasant were still there, snakes, we used to camp out, my sister and I and a couple of my friends, Jimmy Dawson, in the vacant lot and roast marshmallows and hot dogs.  So it was a very different kind of life, almost suburban, if you will.
Story_ID: 84828
Speaker 1: And then growing up, you know, obviously went to Fenger High School [Chicago, Illinois] and it was a whole nother episode.  We had to get on the bus to go out to Fenger, which was in Roseland.  And of course Roseland was a white community, largely Dutch at that time.  And we of course had our incidents at Fenger High School.  I was a pretty good student.  My sister and I were always pretty good students, at both elementary school and high school, so.  Just coincidentally, I gave the graduation speeches when I graduated from high school and also gave the graduation speech when I graduated from elementary school.  So I always wanted to be a public speaker.  I don't know how you become a public speaker, but that's what I wanted to do.  But I mean I can tell you all kind of stories about my memories of Fenger High School and all those things.
Speaker 2: Well, what's the most outstanding story from Fenger?
Speaker 1: Probably I sang in a choir, and I used to go around a lot and that was quite a good experience.  I was in the small ensemble of the choir.  And we would give concerts all around the Roseland area and places.  I also, along with a friend of mine, we were the only African Americans in the German Club.  That was--so I learned to speak German and along with my friend, my best friend at that point, Clyde White, who is now an associate minister at Trinity Church.  But we were in the German Club together.  So those kind of experiences were kind of nice.  And then I had a favorite teacher in the social sciences, Donetta Yates and she pushed me a lot, and I eventually got an academic scholarship to the University of Chicago, largely through her prodding and pushing and teaching.  But you know the prom, that's always a big memory of high school, had a wonderful you know prom experience.  And earliest, it's the guys I grew up with in the neighborhood that I really remember and we have too many stories to get into.  That's where I learned to play bid whist and all those kind of things.
Speaker 2: Well you know you're at Fenger, you say there were how many black students?
Speaker 1: A handful.  Well it probably was in the less than ten percent.  My high school graduating class had 412, and I believe there were probably ten or twelve of us at that point.
Speaker 2: Okay now with an event like the prom, did you go to the general prom?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.  Yeah, it was only one prom.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was downtown.
Speaker 2: I heard some of the schools had a separate prom for the black students.  They were told they couldn't come to the prom.
Speaker 1: No, no, we never had that issue.  There were some interesting little things though.  There was a skating rink way out south and it was not a law, it was not a rule, but it was just known that there was a day when the black kids went skating, that was our day.  How that came about, I don't even know.  But we generally didn't skate there anyway.  We went down to what's called Park City on 63rd Street to skate, which is a whole nother story.
Story_ID: 84829
Speaker 1: So, when you were--now through all this time of growing up, were you involved in the church at all or any other outside activities other than the school?
Speaker 2: Well, I was in Junior Achievement, which was a very big deal when I was in high school.  That was my first brush with, I guess, capitalism, if you will.  We made salt shakers and plastic salt shakers and I had to make em and then we sold them and things like that.  Actually, I grew up in the Catholic Church, which changes as I become an adult.  But I grew up in a Catholic Church at a church in the community called Saint Joachim.  Again one of the very few African Americans that went to that church, and when I did my communion and confirmation at two o'clock every Wednesday, the bell would ring in the public school, and the public school kids would go do our catechism, it was right across the street.  And there was some bias there.  I remember when I made my confirmation, I was one of the shortest kids in the class, and at that point, they lined them up according to height, but I was the last one to be confirmed, which was kind of interesting.  But as far as other groups, we played a lot of sports in those days.  I mean it's--you know I was in clubs in school, I was in the German Club, I was in the choir, those were the two basic things that I was in.
Speaker 1: And you said you--
Speaker 2: But I didn't grow up in the you know the church, the black church, although now I belong to a black church. And I can give you that story a little later on.
Speaker 1: What denomination are you in now?
Speaker 2: Well, it's the Spiritualist Churches, the Metropolitan Spiritualist Churches, Incorporated, or Church Incorporated.  And there--it's a conference of churches, the mother church is in Kansas City as a matter of fact.  And I belong to a church called the First Church of Deliverance in Chicago, a very famous church in Chicago's history.
Story_ID: 84830
Speaker 1: Alright, now you gave a graduation speech in--
Speaker 2: Yes, in high school [Fenger High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: --In high school?
Speaker 2: Which I still have a copy of at home, type written, I typed--there were no computers in those days, no PCs [personal computers], had to type it up with carbon paper.
Speaker 1: What was the speech about?
Speaker 2: It was about democracy and how we all need to be, you know, we're all part of the constitution, although we weren't, and we all should have the same rights and you know.  I was exhorting my fellow students to pursue those rights and to make sure that you know we took every step we could to make sure we had those rights.  That was a long time ago, I'm trying to remember.
Speaker 1: So you basically concentrated on social studies.  Was social studies your focus in high school, or--?
Speaker 2: Well both social studies--well in high school, you're kind of all over the place.  I mean languages, social studies and the math and sciences. I mean those were--I was pretty good in all of those.  When I went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], I actually was having dreams of maybe being a doctor, but I drifted more into the social sciences, had some very good teachers. And I actually got my degree in anthropology.
Speaker 1: Did you declare that as a major in the beginning?
Speaker 2: Well, you know at the University of Chicago it's kind of difficult to declare a major, particularly in those days.  It's a different kind of school.  I didn't declare that as a major until probably my junior year.  You take the liberal arts at the U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], at least then.  I'm not quite sure how it works now.  And everybody in the college of the university started out with taking the 14 liberal arts courses and then you kind of you know by the time you got to be junior you began to kind of specialize.  My favorite courses at that time were history of western civilization, and then Soc[iocology] I, Soc[iocology] II, the humanities, those were some of my favorite subjects.
Story_ID: 86177
Speaker 1: I was asking about some of the professors at the University of Chicago, asked about William McNeill--
Speaker 2: William McNeill, Louis Gottschalk, these were some of the real world renowned professors in history, they all had their specialties.  And we were very lucky, that as a kid eighteen, nineteen, to be sitting in these lecture halls listening to these guys.  Also anthropology is Sol Tax.  Sol Tax another world famous anthropologist, took courses from him, also took some you know chemistry and physics courses also.  But the key was that most of my instructors were these researchers and world renowned and didn't have any text--well we had text books in the sciences, but in the social sciences, we had these syllabi that were written by and edited by the McNeills and these guys, a lot of original readings.  We had courses with names like Natural Science Three OMP Organization Methods and Principles, Soc. I, Soc. II, Sociology, Psychology were embedded in those names to the courses, the Humanities, where we got the literature--they weren't called literature, they were just under the Humanities I, Humanities II, Humanities III.  And that's where I read you know Aristotle and Plato and these kinds of people.  I have to say that the emphasis was on western civilization, got very little to do with African civilization or anything in the east.  Also, although when I studied anthropology, we got much more into the Mideast of course because with the archeology that was going on and the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] had an Oriental Museum, still has an Oriental Museum, were real forerunners in the archeology of the Near East.  So I did study a lot of that, not much about the Far East, though.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Or in those (unclear) I think they focused on really, what they called it, the middle east?
Speaker 2: The middle east, right, right, right, yes.  In fact as we speak this is a time when we went to War with Iraq and there's been a lot of looting of the Iraqi treasures.  And at one time northern Iraq was called Assyria and the University of Chicago, of course, was very instrumental in digging in Assyria and a lot of the people on the faculty who could speak the various dialects and etc., so.
Story_ID: 86178
Speaker 1: But history really then became my favorite subject.
Speaker 2: You said there were like, there was one black professor?
Speaker 1: Yes.  When I was there, there was only one black professor on the faculty and that was [William Boyd] Allison Davis.  And Allison Davis was in the school of--I think Allison was in the School of Education at that point.  I know his son whose name is Allison Davis also, who's a lawyer in Chicago now.  In fact, except for the year when I was in first grade, when I was growing up down in the 35th Street area, I went through school and never had a black teacher, which was kind of a sad commentary.  I eventually became a black teacher, but never had one in elementary school, never had one in high school, never had one in college, never had one in graduate school, just kind of an interesting time when I grew up.
Story_ID: 86179
Speaker 1: Now how was the atmosphere at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] to you as a student, were there many other black students.  I know there is a minority, but how minor a minority was it?
Speaker 2: Pretty minor minority.  The college at that time of the University had maybe I think about 1200 students in the whole college and we probably had less than I'd say less than thirty-five students, certainly less than fifty students in the whole college.  But we were a tight-knit group.  We obviously knew all each other and some of those students had gone to the high school of the University called University High.  I didn't come out of University High and so some of them had been in the campus environment for a while.  So there was a good mixture of those that had gone to University High and those of us who had gone to other high schools.  And then of course most of the students in the college, although the school is located in Chicago, the vast, vast majority of students were from outside of Chicago.  So there was some of the African American students from outside of Chicago.  So I met a lot of people.  And this was good for me because I had grown up in Chicago, gone to high school in Chicago, had been really never traveled outside Chicago, so I met all these students who were from other places and there was a big strong New York contingent at the University of Chicago.  So I got to meet a lot of New Yorkers and hear the New Yauk(ph) accent which was good.  So it was quite an interesting time for me.
Speaker 1: Did you live on campus?
Speaker 2: I didn't live on campus.  We were called associate members of Matthews House which is one of the dormitories.  At that time, if I had to study for an exam or something, I could stay at Matthews' House, I could stay in the fraternity houses with some friends.  Now I was--I'm a member of Kappa Alpha Psi.  We have a chapter at the University of Chicago, one of the earliest chapters, it's the Iota Chapter.  So in the Greek alphabet, you know, Iota is not very far from the beginning.  But there weren't ever enough black men at the University of Chicago to have our own--Iota Chapter had to include black men from some of the other Universities in the Chicago area, and Iota Chapter included men from Loyola University, DePaul University and I believe, the Chicago Teachers College at that time.
Speaker 1: Which later became Chicago State.
Speaker 2: Later became Chicago State, yeah.  But my experience there was quite different.  The University of Chicago as you know is quite an intellectual community.  A lot of early entrance, meaning they had gone to high school for a couple of years, very bright then went to the college.  So I was running into a lot of different kinds of people from different parts of the country.  I was running into intellectual kinds of arguments that I didn't really get into in my high school, about the existence or non-existence of God, I mean, I never even considered some of those things when I was in high school, about the non-existence of God, atheism.  At that time it was a very liberal leaning leftist, if you will, campus on one hand, so God involved in the liberal traditions quite a bit.
Speaker 1: What were the years that you were at the university?
Speaker 2: I was there from 1955 through 19--I graduated in 1959 and then I spent another year there getting my--getting more history and more teaching classes in the School of Education.  And then I got my master's degree in 1962, so it was during that 1955 through '62 [1962] period.
Story_ID: 86180
Speaker 1: So those were the days of the, I guess the McCarthy hearings and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the McCarthy hearings had just ended.
Speaker 1: Yeah just ended really--
Speaker 2: Civil right stuff?
Speaker 1: The real civil rights stuff, Martin Luther King [Jr.] starting down in Birmingham.  There were a lot of fair housing kinds of issues going on in Chicago, a lot of the riots were going on that accompanied the black movement out into the city and to other areas.  A friend of mine wrote a book called "Trumble Park".  And "Trumble Park" was a Chicago housing project that was now--blacks were moving into on the far southeast side.  So actually a lot of activity.
Speaker 2: What's the name of the author?
Speaker 1: His name is Frank London Brown.  Frank has passed away now, but Frank wrote that book.  And Frank was in the graduate school at the University when I was an undergraduate, so.  Another thing that happened at the University, the college was a very small part of the University [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], so I was thrown in with a lot of older, sophisticated graduate students.  It was a very graduate student-oriented campus.  So that was I thought a real benefit.  I also was in school with Greenlee.
Speaker 2: Sam Greenlee [HM]?
Speaker 1: Sam Greenlee who wrote "The Spook Who Sat By the Door".  Sam and I actually ran on the same track team.  So I was--I was involved with all these older you know people and people in the graduate schools when I was eighteen years old, I mean it was a very exhilarating experience.  So those were some of the things that I really enjoyed about the University--
Story_ID: 86181
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you decided to major in anthropology?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And why?
Speaker 2: And then--
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'd been taking some courses with Sol Tax.  As I said Sol Tax is really a world renowned anthropologist, and I just got very interested in anthropology, cultural anthropology, read a lot of Margaret Mead and those kinds of books.  It had some kind of an international aspect to it, you know, it studied cultures around the world, and I was very interested in all that.  I really didn't think of what I was going to do beyond I mean you really--if you're going to go into anthropology, you really need to get a doctorate in anthropology to be a professional anthropologist.  I really never thought about that, I was just very interested in it.  I got my bachelor's degree in it.  And then at the time I had to start thinking about a job.  And at that time the jobs that black college graduates really thought about were in the social sciences, I mean, we were either teachers, social workers, if you went to medical school, you could be a doctor, but I mean those were the kind of jobs we took, nothing in corporate America or anything like that.  So that's why I spent, after I graduated that year, getting more and more of the history cause I decided I was going to teach history.  So I didn't become a professional anthropologist.
Story_ID: 86182
Speaker 1: So did you, after that year out of school, did you start studying or did you start teaching after that or did you get your master's first?
Speaker 2: I was teaching at that time.  I started teaching, and then I was pursuing my master's.  Well, actually I--yeah, in 1960, I just was in school, yeah, I was just pursuing some courses toward my master's degree, and I actually started teaching in September of 1960.  So from the time I graduated in 1959 until September, I was just in school, yes, just taking courses.  And then once I started teaching, I then continued to take courses to my master's degree and then--
Speaker 1: So when did you--
Speaker 2: --Which I got in 1962.
Speaker 1: Sixty-two?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me about teaching.  Where did you teach?
Speaker 2: I taught at DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois], which to most Chicagoans would be familiar.  To most people outside of Chicago, it's not--DuSable was a school located at 49th and Wabash, and the population was primarily African American students, but had a long history of outstanding African Americans who attended DuSable High School.  A succession of people who went into the arts, singers and those people who played instruments came through there.  John Johnson [HM], who founded Ebony [Magazine], came through DuSable High School, so a whole group of African Americans came through DuSable High School.  So I began teaching there and taught history, World History, American History, Civics, you know, those kinds of subjects.  Met several people that are very famous today, Anderson Thompson is one of them.  He taught with me and Harold Pates [HM] used to be the president of a college here, taught with me, so.  Margaret Burroughs [HM], the world famous artist, was teaching art at that time.  There was a Captain Walter Dyett, we called him Captain Dyett, he was the one who taught the band, and through that band came a lot of jazz artists, so a school with a real tradition.
Speaker 1: You weren't there when they had the big basketball, that was (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well when I was in high school is when the first DuSable High School team went down state, in 1954.  And we were all followers of that team, obviously, in black Chicago.  And when I taught at the school, we also had very good basketball team, didn't go down state though, but it came close to winning the city championship, it didn't quite do it.  Marshall beat us one year.  But yes, in fact, one of the coaches in the NBA [National Basketball Association] now is from DuSable, he came a little after I was gone, but Maurice Cheeks, who now teaches the Portland Trailblazers was a terrific basketball player at DuSable High School.  So there's a tradition of DuSable in the basketball arena.  Jim Brown was a coach and we were all staunch DuSable followers as a teacher, went to all the games.  In fact I was head of the--I was the faculty head of the pep squad, so got very involved with the students, etc.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how long did you teach at DuSable?
Speaker 2: I taught three years.
Story_ID: 86183
Speaker 1: And then I made a major change in my life.  As I said, I came along during the time when college students, African American college students, generally went into the social sciences or teaching or the administrator, things like that.  The Kennedy era came along when I had gotten out of college and Kennedy--this was the first push for the inclusion of African Americans in corporate America.  And I went to a seminar while I was teaching that IBM [International Business Machines] was giving, and they were encouraging African Americans to take a look at IBM as a place of employment, big corporation, big computer, you know the beginnings of the big computer era.  And so I left teaching my social studies and went to become a systems engineer, which was a major shift in my whole life.
Speaker 2: Now, what does it mean to be a systems engineer?
Speaker 1: A systems engineer was the person who designed, not the hardware, but the actual systems for processing data and information.  And I eventually worked in what was called the hospital information systems, and those were the computer systems where the payroll and accounts payable and accounts receivable and eventually even the storing of medical records, and the ordering of pharmaceuticals, you know they were all put on big computer systems.  So at that time I was designing a system, the work flow, writing the programs, learning programs, those are the times we had the cards, the computer cards where you had to key punch your programs into the cards and put your cards into the computer reader that read the program into the computer and that's how you did your--
Speaker 2: So did you get your master's degree in--?
Speaker 1: --No.  My master's degree is in the history. IBM [International Business Machines] teaches you everything you need to know.  Now at that time several of us left the Chicago Board of Education and went with some of the corporations, with IBM.  Now most of those were guys who were teaching math and science.  I had some skills in that area, although I wasn't teaching it so I was able to use those skills.
Speaker 2: It's unusual for someone from a history background--
Speaker 1: Yeah, totally, I mean it totally changed my life.  I went into a whole nother field, a field that was fairly new.
Story_ID: 86184
Speaker 1: Computers had been around for a while, but using in the commercial processes, fairly new.  IBM [International Business Machines] of course was the huge manufacturer and also the marketer of computer hardware and software, so.
Speaker 2: --Did you have to learn COBOL?
Speaker 1: COBOL [common business-oriented language], FORTRAN [Formula Translating System], something called Autocoder, yes, I had to learn all those programming languages.  So obviously I spent a lot of time sitting in rooms learning how to program, which was different from my teaching days where I was in front of students and on the blackboard and teaching a lot of students.  And once we learned how to program, we were sitting in very cold rooms because in those days, you had to keep rooms at a certain temperature for the big mainframe computers and sitting there all day, writing programs, working with customers, helping them write programs, helping them decide what modules and equipment they needed, you know, all that kind of technical stuff so very different.
Speaker 2: For those watching this tape that are not familiar with this technology, can you describe what a computer looked like in 1963
Speaker 1: In those days.  Well, it would be probably about six feet or six and a half feet high.  The mainframe, the central processing unit, the CPU, with a lot of lights flashing, and on each side there would either be these giant tape drives where the data was stored and you could always see the tape drives going round and round, or the big disk drives, a big disk about this big around where data was being accessed, you know, big consoles where you sat and big card readers where you would put your cards in to punch cards with the program in em.  And that's what--and then these big glass rooms where people could look in, that's what computers looked like.  There were no such things as these personal computers or the PCs on everybody's desk.
Speaker 2: Couldn't sit on your desk.
Speaker 1: Right.  Obviously--
Speaker 2: It would be more like you'd sit the desk on the computer.
Speaker 1: --Right.  Obviously it evolves from those big mainframes to what we have today where everybody has a computer now.  There are only a special few that know how to you know program computers back in those days.  So after three years, I stayed there three years.  I really, although I felt like a pioneer, that wasn't really as fulfilling to me, I mean I think I had to--my social science roots were taking over.  But I stayed there three years.
Story_ID: 86185
Speaker 1: I then changed life totally again and went into the advertising agency business.  Again, one of those industries that most people are familiar with the output of advertising agencies.  We all have seen ads and commercials but really didn't know what went on behind the scenes, what an advertising agency was.  I didn't know what an advertising agency was when I was in college.  I had never known anybody that worked in an advertising agency.  But once again, being inquisitive, I went to a seminar given by a Dr. Seymour Banks, who was--had been a professor at the University of Chicago Business School, but also was the head of Leo Burnett, which was a big, big advertising agency.  He was head of their market research area.  And I went to a seminar where they were talking about computers and marketing and I had this computer background and this whole marketing thing sounded very interesting.  And he explained you know what the advertising agency was about, what market research was about, how computers were used, how data was used, how all this information was used to make ads and commercials and it sounded extremely interesting to me, sounded awfully glamorous.  And so I talked to him afterwards and I talked to him for about three months, off and on.  And finally I was offered a job at Leo Burnett, which at the time was one of the top three largest advertising agencies in the United States.  And I joined them in 1966 as a market research analyst and that's how I got into the advertising business.
Story_ID: 86186
Speaker 1: I then actually was slated to go into something called account management recline service.  Now this was an area that there weren't any African Americans in, and when you went into that area, you either--you spent a year either in research or in what we call media.  And I spent my year in research.  And then eventually became an assistant account executive and account executive and account supervisor, running pieces of business for an advertising agency.  Now this I really liked.  I mean this was kind of a combination of all the social sciences and all the collection of data and the analysis of data that I learned at IBM just kind of put together.  Because now we were dealing with communicating to people about products and services and this is something that was totally new in the black community.  So my life changed again.  Now that one I stayed in for years and years and years and years and years.
Speaker 2: So now did Leo Burnett like study the black community to find out what the trends were?
Speaker 1: Initially, back when I joined in 1966, there wasn't a lot of that going on.  Obviously, they were just part of the overall market place, that's the way they kind of looked at it, there wasn't really this specialization.  There were some clients, the liquors, the soft drinks, the cigarettes, who always marketed to specific audiences because they had store and outlets in those areas and they had black salesmen.  And they would run ads and--I mean that's how Ebony [Magazine] really got started because some of those companies would run ads in Ebony, target it at the black community, so in some instances that was going on, but that was mostly beer, cigarettes, alcohol.  The other food products hadn't really done too much of that, but that was the beginning.  I got in in 1966 and by the '70s' (1970s), this was big business, segmenting audiences then you saw the advent of the African American-owned advertising agencies, so there's a lot of marketing turmoil going on, starting about the mid-sixties.
Speaker 2: Okay. All right.  Well, how was the atmosphere at Leo Burnett were you, were you the first black?
Speaker 1: No, I wasn't the first black.  As I mentioned to your earlier, Tom Burrell [HM] actually was there as a writer before I got there.  But when I got there, Tom was there.  But I was the first black in what we call account management.  Basically four areas in an ad agency, at least at that time, creative, account management, media and research.  And very few blacks were in any of those areas, in the professional areas.  I believe when I got there there were nine African Americans, that included probably six secretaries and--yeah, that was about it.  So one guy in research, Tom was in creative and I was in client service.
Story_ID: 84841
Speaker 1: Well tell us about the advertising business. What--?
Speaker 2: Well the advertising agency business really started back in the last part of the nineteenth century out in Philadelphia, New York, and it really was a different business than it is today.  Basically, they were publishers' representatives.  You know they could get some business for the publications, and that's what an advertising guy did.  The publications would actually do the ads.  But it evolved into an industry where the advertising agency became the specialist in actually doing the ads, doing the market research, finding out what consumers wanted, what they wanted to hear about a product.  But really was big in the 1920s, I mean, I think that was really where people really started talking about the advertising business was a big, big business and it was primarily out east in New York, primarily a rich boy's business.  And I say boy, man, because women weren't really that involved at the beginning.  And it was a rich boy's business because if you graduated from the ivy league schools and your father had some contacts in business, you would use those contacts to bring business to your advertising agency, so that was--that's kind of the connection that I went on.  The heyday of advertising initially was in the '20s' (1920s) when industry was really booming and the building was going on and products were being developed, and the consumers, after World War I you know were beginning to have money and during the '20s' (1920s).  So advertising agencies sold or helped these companies sell their products to people.  African Americans are nowhere near this business obviously since it was conducted at the highest levels and at that time, African Americans weren't considered worthy enough to be involved in that.  So when I got involved in the business in the '60s' (1960s), we were kind of pioneers.  Ebony Magazine had started back in the late '40s' (1940s), advertisers had gone to them and placed ads for liquors and cigarettes and other businesses for black consumers, people who made products for black people like hair pomades.  Of course they advertised in those publications.  But there really weren't any African Americans in these big advertising agencies.
Story_ID: 84842
Speaker 1: I joined in 1966. Leo Burnett, which is an international agency, small internationally at that point, but today is in probably close to a hundred offices around the world.  And when I joined, I joined in the market research area, which was good.  I learned that advertising just isn't running around and making ads, it's finding out who your customer base is, what they like, what they don't like and trying to tailor your message to particular targets.  And I was the first African American in client service or account management at Leo Burnett.  I was Leo Burnett's first African American vice president and so forth.  Still a business that I considered to be still segregated in that there are agencies that are owned by African Americans, there are agencies that are owned by Hispanics who do work against those markets and then there are the big general market agencies who are now buying up those agencies and then making them parts of their big agency.  But the advertising agency business is very interesting business, it's very arcane.  I don't people--I don't think the general public knows much about what goes on in that business.  I'm glad to have worked in it because that's really my--well my biggest brush with capitalism, I mean, that's where it all is, it's all in making products, selling products, competition, developing brand images, one product competing against another, I mean that's what this country is all about, and I was happy that I learned a lot of the intricacies of what goes on in the marketplace by working in the advertising agency.  And the first account that I worked on was Pillsbury, the Pillsbury Doughboy.  And so I learned a lot about, you know, marketing food products.  In fact the first time I ever went to California was when I went out in the winter time to the Pillsbury bake off.  And left Chicago in February at ten below zero and got to California at eighty-five degrees and thought I had--I was now in heaven.  I'd never been out to California before.  So that was an interesting aspect and it afforded me the opportunity to travel really half way around the world, shooting commercials and things like that, so.
Story_ID: 84843
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were involved in the--you were an account--
Speaker 2: Account executive.
Speaker 1: --Executive.  So you would--well what would you do as account executive?
Speaker 2: Well we were really in those days the contact or the conduit to the client.  So we met with the client, we had to understand the client's business, we tried to understand it as well as he did.  I should say, "they" cause they're "shes" now.  But we would sit with the client and develop the marketing strategy for the brand, we would work with the client to develop what the marketing budget was going to be for that year, how much of that marketing budget was going to be for advertising, how much was going to be for sales promotions and things like that.  So we really worked hand-in-hand with the client to develop a lot of the strategical framework.  Then when all of that was developed, we would then meet with the people, our creative people, our media people and we would talk about our budgets, what the strategy was, what our target audience was, what kind of ideas we wanted to communicate, etc., etc., etc..  So we were kind of that conduit between the agency and the client.  Now a lot of that, it's a little different now, but that's the way it was then.  So client contact was really the big, big deal, and knowing the strategies behind what was being advertised, so that's what I did.  I mean you started as an assistant account executive you know doing budgets and learning all that and you gradually progressed up to where you're actually running that piece of business at the agency and responsible for the P and L for that piece of business at the agency.
Speaker 1: Okay, how long did you do that?
Speaker 2: Thirty-five years.
Speaker 1: Well in terms of that, what were some of the more interesting clients that you had?
Speaker 2: Well I worked at, by the way, I worked at three--most people in advertising don't stay at the same agency for a long time.  Leo Burnett had a history of people staying there longer than most other agencies.  I was with Leo Burnett for about twenty-two, twenty-three years of that thirty-five and then I spent--I spent the remaining time with two other agencies, DDB Needham, Doyle Dane Bernbach Needham, in Chicago and an agency in New York called The Marshaw (ph.) Company.  So that--I did want to tell you that I did work for three agencies, but Leo Burnett was probably the main agency.
Story_ID: 84844
Speaker 1: I'm sorry what was your question?
Speaker 2: No, what were some of the more interesting accounts you had, and--?
Speaker 1: Pillsbury, United Airlines, the "Fly the Friendly Skies" thing, Schlitz Beer when Schlitz was a huge national brand, it's not so big anymore, some Heublein company products, Arrow Cordials, Smirnoff Vodka, some food products at Smirnoff, also worked for the Coca Cola Company, I mean, did business with the Coca Cola with many of the Coca Cola products, so those were all very interesting products for me.  Probably the most fun I had was with beer products, Anheuser Busch, we did a lot of Anheuser Busch products with the DDB [Doyle Dane Bernbach] Needham, Bud Lite, when that first started, Michelob, Michelob Lite, Busch Beer, also Schlitz Beer took me around the world because the campaign was the "Men of the Sea" campaign, so I was able to go to places like the North Sea and Denmark and places like that to shoot commercials.  So those were very interesting. To learn how the [Pillsbury] Doughboy was actually filmed was very interesting.  In those days a very painstaking--you had to shoot it, him doing this and then him doing this and then him doing this and then put it all together.
Speaker 2: Stop action.
Speaker 1: Stop action.
Speaker 2: Animation.
Speaker 1: Animation, had an animation stand where we shot the Doughboy, so it was just very interesting to understand the intricacies of all of that.  So those were very, very interesting.
Story_ID: 84845
Speaker 1: Big issues though in the advertising business, particularly where it concerned African Americans.  Although African Americans are big consumers of a lot of those product categories, there wasn't much African American presence in the advertising agencies.  There was very little presence in those companies that actually put, paired and shot the commercials, photographed the ads.  And so starting in the early '70s' [1970s] there was a lot of controversy about a quid pro quo, if African Americans are gonna spend so much money behind these consumer products, shouldn't African Americans be sharing in some of the money that's generated by the manufacture, sale and marketing of these products.  That issue continues today.  There isn't as much presence in the advertising agency business as there should be with African Americans, also with Hispanics, you know, a whole nother ethnic group that was never very involved in the preparation of the marketing and the ads.  But a lot of that is changing now to evolving.  There are a lot of successful African American-owned advertising agencies, you know, multimillionaires have come out of that, mainly because their agencies have been bought by larger agencies and many of them made a--many of the owners made a lot of money in that respect.  There is still some independently-owned African American agencies, and this is mirrored on the Hispanic side as well.  So a lot more involvement, a lot more awareness by African American consumers that there is a lot of money being made in this whole marketing and advertising arena, and we should be participating in that arena.
Story_ID: 84846
Speaker 1: Are there any trends of in terms of marketing to black people, advertising to black people that they come out and research, what's the best way to sell the product to a black community-
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --or did you worry about that at Leo Burnett so much?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah we worried about that.  In fact Leo Burnett was one of those agencies that bought an African American agency.  But even before we did that, and I was working there before that ever happened, yes, there were concerns.  Our clients, obviously had clients, I mean, I'm sorry, had customers, so they always wanted us to make sure we knew how to target market.  The big question was, did you have to do something different, or did you not have to do anything different.
Speaker 1: I think just to set this up, you know, I guess past times there didn't seem to be much concern for you know whether black people, given what they thought about the advertising--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --In fact, some of the advertising people were insulting the black people--
Speaker 2: That correct.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) had to be attacked by the civil rights movement.
Speaker 2: That's absolutely correct.  The black people were--
Speaker 1: General-marketitis.
Speaker 2: --And black people were an afterthought and really were cliched into any advertising.  I mean the early advertising, I mean going back to the '30s' (1930s) and the '40s' (1940s) was abominable, you know with the Gold Dust Twins and the Aunt Jemima kind of imagery.  That was the only way we got into advertising.  Very few were into commercials, because advertisers, not the agencies, but the clients, did not want to offend their white consumers in the south, particularly, by showing affluent African Americans or African Americans in context with white consumers.  So all of that was going on in the '40s' (1940s), the '50s' (1950s), the '60s' (1960s), and it wasn't really until the mid-sixties and beyond that it began to really start changing some of those kinds of things.  But obviously black people responded to advertisements where they saw other black people, particularly in different kinds of roles, not subservient roles, but in roles of you know respect and leadership and so a lot of that started happening in the late '60s' (1960s), early '70s' (1970s).  A lot of advertising agencies, and clients didn't think you had to do anything different, all you had to do was stick maybe a black face in the commercial and that was good enough, and obviously we have found out that, no, you have to do more than just that token kind of thing.  So there's been a lot of money spent on how to make your brand a preferred brand among all different kinds of consumers, including African American consumers.  And it's all about building your brand image among all of those consumers.  It's about marketing to different consumers, and yes, I think the African American-owned agencies led the way, because they primarily did business with clients trying to market to African Americans.  So they developed techniques and styles and language and looks that the general market agencies were a little slow to bring into their fold.  But I think if you look at television now, you'll see commercials, it's very hard for you to tell who produced that commercial, was it an African American-owned agency or was it a general market-owned African American agency, and then sometimes was it a general market agency.  Rap music has become kind of universal, so you see rap music in all kinds of commercials.  So the influence of African Americans in marketing and advertising is very evident, the music and those kinds of things, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 84847
Speaker 1: Now when you were in the advertising business, did you, I think it was the early '70s [1970s], I want to talk about different advertising tricks like subliminal seduction, how much truth was in some of that?
Speaker 2: Well, I never thought that there was much--well I mean, obviously, there were a lot of subliminal things that go on, I mean, you know, you repeat a brand name a certain amount of times so people begin to internalize it, but I mean there were little tricks with photography.  People were talking about that ice cube and a soft drink ad had the appearance of something.  That wasn't really true, that was coincidental, believe me.  I've been on enough photo shoots to know what happens there.  But obviously there was a lot of subliminal things.  I mean there are things that you want people to remember and there are ways that you highlight those things in your commercial.  I mean the idea, the concept the commercial really highlights those things, but not some of the little criminal kinds of things that were going on.  Now there were other things that went on that weren't quite right.  I mean, they would make food look better than it really was by the way they lit it or putting pearls into--I forget that story, so I don't want to go there, but there were certain things that were done that you can't do anymore, I mean, you can't make things--you can't do things artificially, inject you know certain color in a meat that you're gonna photograph to make it look better, you can't do that.  So generally speaking now, there's so much imagery going on, I mean there is hyperbole going on, I mean people are extremely happy after using certain kinds of detergent, I mean people don't really act that way, but that's okay, that's in the creative realm, I guess.
Speaker 1: They're not quite as happy now on television about their detergents as they used to be in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: That's correct, I mean they used to sing and dance about it and do flips.  Now it's--it's a little more contained.
Story_ID: 84848
Speaker 1: But there's you know the whole key to advertising, the whole reason we have advertising agencies is because of the competitive nature of the capitalist system.  You don't have one brand of toilet paper or one brand of detergent, you have many, many.  So the advertising really is designed to build that brand image among consumers so the consumers think of your brand as opposed to another brand.  I mean Coca Cola, there's not much you can tell people about Coca Cola and so they don't tell people much about Coca Cola.  What you see is a lot of imagery, music, photography, incredible you know animation  or other kinds of things you can do, I mean, just to get the type, that imagery and those things are done all the time, but again it's the competition, apply brand and not that other person's brand, and it a real art.  I mean the people that--I have to say that the people that work in advertising are very, very hard working people who devote a lot of hours a day, it's not a nine to five job, and I think people think it's a very glamorous job, but it really isn't.  And many people get into advertising because they think it's glamorous and they get out of it really quickly because it's a lot of work, a lot of dull work.  Even the commercials that we shoot, I mean you start at six in the morning and you don't finish till maybe eight at night on a set.  That's a lot of shooting for a thirty second commercial.  A lot of takes and retakes and takes and retakes and--
Speaker 2: The commercials almost universally look better than the shows (unclear) what with photography (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 2: --Well produced.
Speaker 1: Well I think on a dollar per minute basis there's more money spent on a commercial than on a show on a dollar per minute basis.  So it's a very--I mean it's a legitimate industry, it's not just a bunch of people running around having a lot of fun, everything is very well thought out and you got some talented people creating these commercials, very talented people.  And I had always admired the creatives.
Speaker 2: So after about thirty-five of years--
Speaker 1: Yeah, about thirty-five, well that includes a couple of years I had my own consultant company in the business, but yeah about 35 years in this business.  So I've seen a lot of this business.  I would like to say that it's evolving as we speak.  The internet was not a big deal during most of my career in advertising and now the internet, you see commercials on the internet, digital was not a big part of the business when I was in the business, now digital, everything is being shot digitally.  It's a very--it's an evolving business, communicating with consumers, just evolves.  The technology is getting better, our children are raised in this video age, and you have to get better with your video techniques and you just have to--you just have to keep getting better to attract these consumers.
Story_ID: 84849
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, you mentioned music before, I know there was a time when black-oriented music was never used in the commercials on television.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I grew up as a kid, it was called race music.  And when I was in high school, the white parents didn't let their kids listen to the same radio stations that I listened to.  Elvis legitimized race music for whites and then it became popular that they could then listen to it.  And now, of course, everybody listens to--I mean, most rap records are bought by white kids and the biggest rap star in America as we speak is a white young man, Eminem, which is interesting.  I lived out east when this whole rap thing started back in about 1977 or '78 (1978) with the Sugar Hill Gang and that has evolved now into something totally different.  But rap is here, the whole hip hop generation is here.  It has now gone from being exclusively black to now encompassing everybody worldwide, so there's a huge influence of the African American in the music, but they're not those same concerns today as there were.  I mean you hear black music, if you will, Gospel music, R and B and all kinds of commercials now.
Speaker 1: For a while it was in every car (unclear) hand another R and B songs, the Temptations, the Four Tops--
Speaker 2: Or Aretha.
Speaker 1: --Aretha Franklin.
Speaker 2: Well that music of the '60s (1960s) and '70s (1970s) and the disco era became very popular.  If I could make a social commentary, I'm one of those people you know the glass is either half full or half empty and I'm one of those half full people.  I see a lot of things that I grew up with changing very slowly, but I see things that have changed quite a bit.  And as far as being separate, this separate, we have come a lot closer together, there's a lot more intermarriage, there's a lot more sharing of musical ideas, there's a lot more of learning of cultures.  There's still some inequities built into the system but I see things progressing.  I think 250 years from now--and you can't prove me wrong because you won't be here either--I think we will see a totally different society in the United States in terms of the whole racial bias situation, totally different.  I'm very hopeful in other words.
Speaker 1: I see.
Story_ID: 84850
Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell me about how you'd get involved with the Screen Actors Guild [SAG]?
Speaker 2: Ah-ha. Actually it's kind of a--it's part of the advertising milieu, if you will.  When I was in the advertising agency business, obviously we used actors and actresses in commercials, but we were on the other side of the table, we were the employer.  As a consultant in my later years in the business, I got concerned about a lot of issues in the business, particularly behind the scene, etc.  I also met somebody in the business who worked in our business who was going to work for the Screen Actors Guild and asked me to come over.  And I wasn't that interested in doing it, but the more I talked to him, the more I got interested, and I thought it was an aspect that I'd like to do the other side.  I had actually retired from the advertising agency business and I thought I could use a lot of my experiences to do this specific job.  He became the national director of affirmative action and diversity, and asked me to become the associate national director.  Basically, he runs LA [Los Angeles], I run New York.  And so I thought it would be fine and I'd lived in New York before so that wasn't that intimidating.  I still have my home in Chicago, my wife is still in Chicago, I have an apartment here in the New York area and I go to Chicago every weekend.  But I spend all of my weekdays working for the Screen Actors Guild in that position.  Now that position is interesting because what we're trying to do is get certain groups of actors more in front of camera, more into the casting sessions, more into the TV programs, more into the commercials and that's what appealed to me.  I've always been involved in trying to get more of the minorities into these positions, behind the camera, in front of the camera.  So I really work with four groups--four committees of the Screen Actors Guild, quite a bit.  I work with seniors, I work with the performers with disabilities.  Many actors and actresses are disabled.  I work with the ethnic groups that have been under-represented in the business, African Americans, Latinos, Asians and Native Americans.  And I also work with the Women's Committee.  After the age of about thirty-five or forty, women have a tough time in this business.  So it's a broader job than just the racial minorities, but it involves talking to producers, monitoring data on casting data and audition data, looking at the TV series, talking to casting directors, taking initiatives, coming up with ideas on how to get the story of those groups in front of producers and casting people, screen writers, writers in the advertising agency business so that they can consider these groups more.
Story_ID: 86187
Speaker 1: How did SAG [Screen Actors Guild] get started working on equal opportunity?
Speaker 2: Actually it started back in the--as far back as the '30s (1930s), if you can believe it.  It was primarily in the film industry.  As you know in the film industry, many of the African American actors and actresses were complaining about the roles they were getting, they always had subservient kinds of roles, shuffling, etc., etc.  And so people like Paul Robeson and some of those actors were very instrumental in saying, listen we've got to get better roles, we've got to have more roles.  And so it actually started back then, strictly as a movie kind of move, and gradually as we got into the '50s (1950s) and '60s (1960s), it obviously expanded in the television era, because back then the TV shows, again we were subservient in those TV shows, we were either maids or butlers or handymen or you had the Amos and Andy kind of situations.  Very popular shows but--
Speaker 1: Rochester did everything.
Speaker 2: Rochester with Jack Benny, I'm old enough to remember those things.  So there was a movement to move into the television era, better roles, more prestigious roles.  And then as we moved into you know the commercial age, it began to encompass commercials also.  So there's been this movement for a long time.  I don't think it was a very loud movement, if you will.  And now with my role, with Angel Riviera's role in Los Angeles, I think we're putting a lot more emphasis on all these areas, the screen, commercials, television.  And this is something that we talk about quite a bit.  We do a lot of research in this area, we keep a lot of data, we monitor this data on how many people are casted by--casted--cast, sorry, by which ethnic group, women, performers with disabilities, etc., etc.  So it has really, I think, accelerated during the last few years.  And now we're really working extremely hard in this area.  And I think you've seen changes over the years.  And I think you see on prime time television, you see many more people of color, if you will, in some leading roles, Law and Order and Oz and some of the other TV series, still not exactly where we would want to be, still there's a lot of comedy, but that's good too.
Story_ID: 86188
Speaker 1: Okay. How do minorities increase their visibility in these--in--you know--
Speaker 2: Well, I think it comes from a couple of sources, I think the viewing public has to put pressure on and has to let advertisers know in the commercial business that they want to see more people of color represented in commercials, in the movie business, I think people vote with their feet, you know, they support movies.  As you know African Americans go to movies more than most other ethnic groups, and it's very important to keep getting that dollar.  I think African Americans who go to the movies have to let their opinions be voiced.  I think from our side of the fence we have to make sure that, you know, we represent all these actors, so we have to make sure that these actors are people of color and performers with disability are their cause if you will is taken forward, that we are in front of producers, that we are in front of casting people, that we are telling them you know why they have to cast more people.  We have to be in front of the screen writers, we have to show them that there is a marketability aspect to this also, which is very, very important, not just a moral, if you will, purpose, but there is a marketability purpose and the fact that we want to really see the American scene as it really is portrayed in all areas of communication.  So there are all kinds of--the actors themselves have to get very involved in the Screen Actors Guild and use the Guild to propel themselves.  The Guild itself has the conservatory where we teach actors how to get better and prepare these conversation nights where members can go and hear successful people of color in front of this camera and behind the camera, talk about how they got there, you know, all these kinds of things.  So it's a multi-faceted kind of push that has to happen.  But I think you can see a lot of it, I mean, you see the directorial debut of a Denzel Washington, he's become a superstar.  You see other people--other people who are becoming stars now.  And it's not all about the stars, don't get me wrong, it's really about the hardcore actor and actress, not the one that are making twenty million a picture, but you know the vast majority of people aren't doing that, so it's about all the actors and really pushing that American scene concept forward.
Story_ID: 86189
Speaker 1: What about the quality of a role?  We talked off camera about the increased number of black people you see in films, but the quality of their roles is still a concern, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think there's a hierarchy, or a chronology, if you will.  I think you're gonna get the number first, which is the quantity and then you get the quality follows the quantity.  I would agree with you, I think we're seeing more and more quantity of people of color in front of the camera and shows.  I think now the quality of the that performer or that performance has to get better, you're gonna to have to have more leading actors and actresses, you're going to have to have more series written about people of color so that they will have these leading roles and it reflects the lifestyle and all of this, it has to happen.  I think that's what we're working on now and it evolves, quantity first, quality second, it's just kind of the way it goes.  And I've seen some real good indications lately, you know about some of the primetime series where people of color are in some of the prominent roles.  Hispanics have to be in some of these roles more.  They're very under-represented in the network television.  African Americans have got to get more than just a comedic role, you can get some more serious roles and that's all--a lot of pressure to do that.  You got to get more people who are African American people of color directors, screenwriters, commercial writers, people behind the scenes, the cinematographers, you know, the directors, the assistant directors, the producers, so all of this goes hand-in-hand with making that happen.
Story_ID: 86190
Speaker 1: What's the biggest challenge in doing this do you think? It's--is the conservative nature of the industry (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think would say that.  This is a business that prides itself on the creativity of its work and the people who write it, write the episodes, you know, our creative people and their first thought in their minds is the creativity of it all and they don't think too much about the ethnicity of the actors or people like that, I mean, they write out of their own experience basically, and I think that's the biggest challenge, is to get people who come out of different experiences to be writing and producing these shows.  I mean that's where it all comes from and when people write out of their experience, and if they're all non-white, you're gonna see more non-white--I'm sorry if they're all white, you gonna see more white kinds of things portrayed.  As more people of color get involved there, I think that's the challenge.  And to me that's a big, big challenge.
Story_ID: 86191
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask people this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, I grew up in an era when you know segregation was rampant.  You know, we like to think that it wasn't in the north, but obviously we know it was.  But it was de jure segregation in the south.  So I've seen those things.  So if I think about the hope, my hope is that all of the things that divide us and all of the things that make us second class citizens and all of the things that prevent us from enjoying all the constitutional rights that everybody enjoys, it is my hope of course that through many areas, legislation, through social activism, through just common sense, those things are--those barriers are being removed and we are becoming much more a part of the American scene and much more we will have all the rights and we will exercise those rights, and that's the thing that I think we have to talk about also.  You know we have the right to vote, but we don't always necessarily vote in the numbers that we would like, I mean these are rights once we get them we have to exercise them.  So it is my hope that this will happen at an even faster pace than it is happening now.  I see signs of it, I mean, I see, you know, when you look at census numbers from years and years ago, you see the educational levels and the gaps between whites and non-whites and those gaps have gradually come down to be somewhat narrow.  I'm very concerned about the unemployment data.  The unemployment data is always, we always have twice the unemployment rate as anybody else.  I mean those are the things that concern me.  It used to be three times, but now it's just twice.  So as we go along I want to see those gaps narrowed.  The educational gap has narrowed.  If you look at certain sub-segments of the population and you look at what percent of--had high school diplomas and beyond, that gap has narrowed considerably.  When you look at who've had bachelor's degrees and beyond, there's still a big gap, so that's a gap I'd like to see narrowed.  I'd like to see all these gaps narrowed.  A thing that really concerns me is the whole incarceration situation in the United States today.  And a few there, some figures that say in some age groups something like a third of that age group is going to be or is in the penal system, to me that's very, very disturbing.  That's one of the most disturbing things I can think of.  So it's my hope that we're going to do things that are going to change that considerably.  If I had the answer of course I'd be a billionaire, I don't have the answer.  But I think every--there are many people who are professionals in this field who are activist in this field, who are working to change a lot of those inequities in our society.  If you look at our society while we have an increasingly large black middle class, which was not there even forty years ago, but now that middle class has grown considerably.  As that middle class grows, that middle class puts more and more pressure, political pressure, economic pressure, educational pressure on the system and in hoping we bring all those elements together to narrow all of those gaps.  The whole drug use in our community is something that is disturbing as you know, particularly, crack cocaine and I guess now heroin again.  So these are some things--and you know that the money is not made at the--with the little neighborhood guy running around as a look out, the money is made at the top and somehow we have got to control that and get at that, it's very tough because of the money aspect.  So those are a lot of, and these are just kind of general things I'm talking about.  It's my hope that my children, my grandchildren will not be in the same situation that the people of my generation were in as we came through.  And I think a lot of that is changing, I think the whole digital divide, if you will, is something that is being narrowed now.  I mean blacks have got to get much more involved in the internet in that whole area, and that is happening to a certain extent.  So those are my hopes.  Health care, we've seen the infant mortality rates, the gaps narrow considerably there and things are narrowing, but we still have too much diabetes, we still have too much high blood pressure, we still have higher cancer rates so, we still have less medical insurance, so all of these things, I mean I could go on and on about the social ills, but it's my hope that we are working on all of these things and that magic 250 years from now, which is a very slow pace to a lot of people, and that's a very slow pace to me also, but I'm just saying at the end of 250 years, I think if I were to come back, I think this would be a totally, totally different situation, that's my hope.
Story_ID: 86192
Speaker 1: Now, at this stage, what would you consider is your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess I will never be a famous person, but I think just my work in the advertising, marketing area and then some of the pioneer efforts there, my work really changed from just being a marketer and worrying about marketing and those things more into the arena of getting people of color more involved in the business or to be benefactors of the business to get a lot of that money that's in the business to be trained in all those areas and just to be a bigger part of the whole economy, I mean, that's kind of where I would like to see my legacy, that I helped in that arena.  I will never be a major league basketball star or movie star, or anything like that, and my name will probably never be in any history book, but just the fact that I was a part of that struggle, if you will, particularly in the economic front to get people of color more involved in that arena.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That would be my legacy.
Story_ID: 86193
Speaker 1: Then this is slightly different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to be remembered, not just for that, I mean, I'd like to be remembered as a person who was a good family person, who raised a couple of children who became successful, not necessarily just monetarily, but just successful people and raised their families.  I'd like to be remembered as a person who people could come to and allow me to share my experiences with them, to help benefit them.  I would like to be remembered as a person who personally who came out of a situation, I didn't come out of a you know a dire situation, I don't have one of those stories, but a situation that was rather parochial in the sense that you know one neighborhood that was kind of fenced in and just grew exponentially, internationally it came to grips with what's going on in the world, had opinions about what's going on in the world, understood a lot of the cultures around the world, traveled to many places on the planet and just grew and hopefully would leave that legacy then to my children and grandchildren.  That I really enjoy, if you will, just learning how--I mean, I'm an avid reader, I read everything, I must have you know, 500 books at home, I read every day all kinds of things.  I'm even on the board of the Ernest Hemingway Society in Chicago and some people consider Ernest Hemingway maybe somewhat of a racist, and they might consider that kind of weird, but just the whole literature and how he changed literature and I--you know Richard Wright, and James Baldwin, and I mean, just to read all this, that's what turns me on.  I can't get enough of that and I never will.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: So, broadening as a person is what I'd like to be remembered as.
Speaker 1: Alright. Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Well, thank you.
