Story_ID: 244847
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My name is [HistoryMaker] Elsie Rumford, E-L-S-I-E, R-U-M-F-O-R-D.
Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Rebecca.
Speaker 1: And, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Berkeley, California, on January 15, 1945.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a psychiatric social worker with School Mental Health, Los Angeles Unified School District [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is April 2, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  You don't have to give your address, but, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.  We're in Los Angeles, California, at my home (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Now--okay.
Story_ID: 244848
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: This is interesting to me, because I ask this to kids every day.  As a matter of fact, yesterday I asked it to kids; it's a kind of getting-to-know-you question.  I don't know, I, right now, gumbo comes to mind.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: And this might change, too, from week to week or month to month.  Right now, blue, kind of a light blue is a favorite color of mine.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer, summer.  I love summer.  I like the warm weather.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I like Jamaica.  I like where it's warm and where there is water.  I also more locally like Palm Springs [California]; not so much water, but I like the desert.  I really like desert, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: You know, I really--you'd probably have to ask my children about that, (laughter) because they always remember better than I do what I say, but I do really like the phrases that I was raised with that my mother [Elsie Carrington Rumford] used to say, "Don't count your chickens before they're hatched."  "A rolling stone--" you know, and so forth.  I like that kind of thing, but I can't think of a favorite one at this point.
Story_ID: 244849
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [William Byron Rumford] side.  And I'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother is also Elsie; Elsie Rebecca Rumford.  She was Elsie Rebecca Carrington [ph.].  She was born Elsie Rebecca Carrington, and then married my father and became Rumford.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born October 18, 1908, in Oakland, California.
Speaker 1: What do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Can I pull my cheat sheet?
Speaker 1: I guess.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Pull my cheat sheet.  Because actually when I was attending Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], they asked us to look back and go as far back as we could and so I made these notes and I find them helpful but sometimes I forget the names of the people.  Actually, we can go back to my great-great-grandmother on my mother's side.  You know what?  That was my great-grandmother's mother and somehow her name is lost.
Speaker 1: You know where she lived and what she did?
Speaker 2: She was--New Orleans [Louisiana].  She was a African American woman and she had my, she was the mother of my great-grandmother, who was Elizabeth Scott Randolph [ph.].  Her husband, or the father of Elizabeth Scott Randolph, was a person in New Orleans and a white male.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about what your ancestors were doing?  If they were slaves, or free, or if they--
Speaker 2: No.  They, no, no.  I had heard that the white male was a mayor and then I heard, I read in a book that he was sheriff, so I don't know.
Speaker 1: The mayor of New Orleans?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was what I had heard, yeah, and they produced Elizabeth Scott Randolph, my great-grandmother, and then she came to--.
Speaker 1: When was she born?
Speaker 2: There's no date on that, but she came to California when she was very young, she was in arms, and settled in San Francisco [California]. She met Henry Randolph [ph.], who was from Richmond, Virginia.
Story_ID: 244850
Speaker 1: Randolph?  Now, is he [Rumford's maternal great-grandfather, Henry Randolph (ph.)] related to the Randolphs?  You know there was a John Randolph, who freed all his slaves and who gave him the will, provided land for them in Ohio, and they all left on a big wagon train from the plantation to Ohio, and when they got there the local whites told everybody to keep going.  (Laughter) They didn't care what the will said, and some settled all over Ohio, in Piqua [Ohio], Chillicothe [Ohio], and Xenia [Ohio] and different any of those Randolphs?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I just knew that he was from Richmond, Virginia, so I'm not sure if he's related to those other Randolphs.  There were some stories about him that he was a doorman in San Francisco [California], and at one of the better hotels.  You know, now it's a shame, I'm forgetting if it was the Fairmont [San Francisco, San Francisco, California], but it was one of those old hotels and, you know, my family had a lot of pride in work.  They were real workers.  They believed in work, they believed in hard work, and they took pride in their work, and so the story goes that he was one of the best, you know.  He got big tips because of his relationship with people, his ability to provide good service.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is your grandfather, or--
Speaker 2: This is my great-grandfather, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: About what time was he born, do you know?
Speaker 2: This, well, you know since they produced children born in the late 1800s, I assume, you know, that this would have been mid-1800s.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it would have to be.
Speaker 2: Umm-hmm. Early 1800s to mid-1800s.
Speaker 1: When were the offspring born?
Speaker 2: Well, the offspring were my grandmother [Rebecca Carrington] and her sister and her brother, and that is a shame but I really don't know the exact date of my grandmother's birth, but I would assume that it was around 1880 or 1875, because she had, I know my mother's [Elsie Carrington Rumford] birthdate, etcetera, and I think she was a fairly young woman when she had her children, her three kids.
Speaker 1: Your great-grandfather was probably a doorman in the original hotels in San Francisco.
Speaker 2: San Francisco.
Speaker 1: San Francisco, from what I understand, was developed in the 1840s and '50s [1850s] after they discovered gold and things really started developing.
Speaker 2: Could have been.
Story_ID: 244851
Speaker 1: Do you know much about your grandparents?
Speaker 2: I do.  I knew my grandmother, my mother's [Elsie Carrington Rumford] mother, very well.  She was a very interesting person.  They describe her as an elocutionist, and in fact they have a picture of her in here, and she died when I was eleven, but she is--
Speaker 1: We'll show those, but which one?  On the left?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Rebecca.  Rebecca Carrington.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she was quite a lady.  You can see she has on her hat and her gloves and her shoes that are dressy, and she was, you know, a very proud person, very dignified and although my people worked--she ironed.  She worked in a laundry, you know, but like a lot of black people, you had more menial jobs but then you had the other side of you and she delivered a James Weldon Johnson poem at the Oakland auditorium [Henry J. Kaiser Convention Center, Oakland, California], and my mother remarked on how wonderful she was and how, you know, that she was outstanding.  She married William Carrington, who was actually from Barbados, and so he was, he travelled.  He was on the water all the time, and then he died when my mother was eight, so I never knew him, and my mother knew very little of him because he was frequently gone, but my grandmother was a pillar of the community and the Carringtons were known, that was my grandmother and my three, my two aunts and my mother, her three daughters, were considered the Carrington girls (laughter) and they were pillars of the community.  They settled, they moved from San Francisco [California] to Oakland [California] because of the earthquake and fire, and that as a result my mother was born in Oakland, her oldest sister was born in San Francisco, and they settled in Oakland and my mother, we used to drive by the house at Oakland, where she was born, and she had a lot of fond memories of that.  She lived with not just her mother but her grandmother and her uncle there.  And they died in the house, that kind of thing, and there were a lot of memories attached to that. And then when my aunts and my mother became older and they were working, et cetera because they went to school in Oakland, Oakland Technical High School [Oakland, California], which is still there, they moved to Berkeley [California].  They settled in Berkeley and my aunts bought a house for my grandmother in Berkeley, and all three, my mother and her two sisters and my grandmother, well three girls and my grandmother, lived in the house in Berkeley until my mother got married and then she moved, you know.
Story_ID: 244852
Speaker 1: About when was it that they moved to Berkeley [California]?
Speaker 2: They moved to Berkeley, it was in the late '20s [1920s] I think they moved to Berkeley.  They were working and able to accumulate enough money to come to Berkeley.  My aunts did all kinds of work.  They worked as waitresses, they worked as secretaries, in laundries, and my mother [Elsie Carrington Rumford] too, and all to put themselves through college, and so they all three went to college and finished college and my aunt was the, my oldest aunt was the third black teacher in Oakland [California].  They weren't hiring black teachers in Oakland in those days.
Speaker 1: Did they all go to the same school?
Speaker 2: They all went to San Francisco [State] Teachers College [San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], it was called then.  It's now San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California].  And there weren't a lot of opportunities, as you can imagine, for African Americans in those days. And so teaching was an option, although they weren't even hiring teachers (laughter) in Berkeley or Oakland, and--.
Speaker 1: Oh, black teachers, right?
Speaker 2: Black teachers, I'm sorry, black teachers, and so they--
Speaker 1: They were like--kinda crashed through the color barrier.
Speaker 2: They, I remember my aunt used to tell me that they would throw her application in the trash can just, I mean almost in front of her, and she persevered.  She kept after it and she kept after it until they hired her.  And, I also knew the first African American teacher in Berkeley, and I have a little article on her, Ruth Acty.  I don't know if she's still alive, but she, you know, this is the kind of people, these are the kind of people I grew up with.  They were the fighters, the civil rights activists, or fighters.  They persevered, and proud people, wouldn't give up, felt entitled.  Worked hard and I was telling my son recently that my mother did domestic work, and he couldn't believe it, you know, 'cuz he's only seen her as the wife of, you know, and [William] Byron Rumford, who was a state assemblyman and so forth, and I said you have to get through college.  She did domestic work, and so, but proud, you know, never ashamed.  All work was good.
Story_ID: 244853
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My father is William Byron Rumford. William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, B-Y-R-O-N, R-U-M-F-O-R-D, and he went by Byron instead of William.  He always used the name Byron.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was February 2, 1908, and he was born in Courtland, Arizona.
Speaker 1: Courtland?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a little mining town that probably no longer exists.
Speaker 1: Well, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Well, Louise Alice Johnson was his grandmother on his mother's side, and she was the daughter of an African, so I'm presuming African slave, African woman, and a white Scottish male.
Speaker 1: Where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born--she hailed from that same, kind of that same area of Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: And it kind of bordered Arizona.  It was near Arizona, and so they ended up moving to Phoenix [Arizona] and she was kind of a, you know he described her as kind of a tough lady.  She was really, didn't believe in segregation and was real concerned about her family not being exposed to so much segregation and so she moved about to better their life.  They went to Phoenix and her daughter, who was my father's mother, was Margaret Lee [Williams], and she married Chauncey Rumford, who was my father's father, and they settled in the Southwest area, they kind of moved around in there. But my father's father, Chauncey Rumford, Senior, abandoned the family at a very early age.  I think my father was just like in arms or maybe two, at the most, which my father had a lot of resentment about, and that, then she just did the best she could doing domestic work, et cetera trying to make it and she ended up remarrying and she married Mr. [Elmer J.] Williams, who was a barber, and he said he was okay with her having the two children, my father and his older brother, who was two years older.  His name is Chauncey [Rumford], Jr.  He said that they could live there, but they have to kind of take care of themselves, so from an early age, you know, like eight years old, my father started his own newspapers and shining shoes, and earning money that way.
Speaker 1: That would be a tough kind of a situation.  I mean, it sounded like they could stay there (laughter).
Speaker 2: He could stay there and he would, you know, but they had to kind of fend for themselves in terms of extra money, and so both my father and his brother, you know, really hustled.  They worked, they did everything they could to make money and for a while they moved to Los Angeles [California], the whole family, but my grandmother and Mr. Williams, we always called him Mr. Williams.  He, they had some more children.  They had three additional children, too, and so they were the five children and so maybe that was the thing.  He was a barber and he didn't make it so well in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  He decided to go back to Arizona and that was where my father graduated from high school. Phoenix High for colored people [Phoenix Colored High School, Phoenix, Arizona].
Story_ID: 244854
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Elsie Carrington Rumford and William Byron Rumford] met?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Yes, my parents met, oh, I guess I have pictures of all that, and a courtship and stuff. And my parents were married for fifty-three years until my father died, and if there's one thing I can say about my parents is that they had a good marriage.  There's no marriage, I think, that's perfect but they were so well suited for each other, it was just amazing, and the love and the respect--amazing.  They met when he, my father finished high school [Phoenix Colored High School, Phoenix, Arizona] and his high school teacher told him, his high school teacher called Cal Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] and told him that he needed to go to college and he needed to, you know, go to Cal Berkeley, so my father came up to California, but he went to Sacramento City College [Sacramento, California].  He didn't have, you know, money.  Again, he parked cars, he did all kinds of things to earn money and he went to Sacramento City College for a year and then he came down to San Francisco School of Pharmacy [San Francisco College of Pharmacy] and University of California [San Francisco Medical Center; University of California, San Francisco] School of Pharmacy [San Francisco, California].  When he was in Sacramento City College, he had some friends.  He is kind of an outgoing, friendly man, and he always had lots of friends.  He had friends who said, well, you can meet girls if you go to this Berkeley [California] San Pablo Park area.  Well, my mother lived very close to that area and they met through a mutual friend, and he asked, she asked him to escort her in her debut.  My grandmother [Rebecca Carrington] had coming out parties for her three daughters, which was kind of, you know, unusual in those days, I would think, but especially since they were not really wealthy people, you know.
Speaker 1: Does that hearken back to this Louisiana background, maybe?
Speaker 2: I have no idea where they got this from, but they even have a party, you know, at a place, not the home, but at some maybe hotel, and every girl had a part, a debut, and got a diamond ring, and so he was asked, my father was asked to escort her.  She had just met him and she liked him, and so they started courting and she's a similar kind of person in the sense that she was a people person, loved people, and they hit it off and in 1932, they were married and he had just--. Isn't that a cute picture?  I thought that was such a cute picture (laughter).
Speaker 1: We'll get 'em all at the end.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  I'm sorry--deviating to the pictures.
Speaker 1: But I, I do, you know, I did think it's a good story, 'cuz he had just come, let me see, he came to Sacramento [California] in '27 [1927] and then he went to UC Pharmacy School in '28 [1928], so they had, they met probably in '27 [1927] and then they married in '32 [1932].
Story_ID: 244855
Speaker 1: Now tell us more about your father [William Byron Rumford] and his career now.  He's really a history maker in California, so it'd be a good time to catch up on that before we start talking about how you grew up.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yes, he was the first black elected official in Northern California.  Some people kind of confuse him and think that he was the first assemblyman from California, black assemblyman from California, but no.  He was the third, because there were already two from Southern California.  But at the time, in 1948 when he was elected, there were no black mayors, city councilmen, supervisors, et cetera.  So, he was distinguished in that manner.  He was part of a group of people, who were working to get someone elected because, you know, this, they were really, he was a civil rights advocate.  He just believed.  He just didn't believe in segregation, didn't believe in all the covenants that--.
Speaker 1: Was he a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at that time, or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Or was it through primarily the NAACP or some other organization?
Speaker 2: No.  Well, they had a group and it wasn't the NAACP, although they were members; my grandmother [Rebecca Carrington] was a member.  The whole family, as far back as I can remember, were members of the NAACP.  There was just a lot of pride and a lot of connection with African American organizations, civil rights, you know, not just with my father, but with my mother's [Elsie Carrington Rumford] side too, and he was part of a small group of people, maybe twenty or whatever, who met and were trying to get some of the covenants broken down.  There were no African American bus drivers.  I remember the first African American policeman in Berkeley [California].  You know, there was just so much that they were trying to break down the barriers.
Story_ID: 244856
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell us about the Appomattox Club [Oakland, California].  Let's see, D.G. Gibson was one of the men that worked with your father [William Byron Rumford] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, D.G. Gibson, Frances Albrier.  There were so many people that, let's see, Evelio Grillo is still around.
Speaker 1: Evelio Grillo?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that (laughter)?
Speaker 2: E-V-E-L-I-O.
Speaker 1: Evelio, okay.
Speaker 2: Evelio Grillo, G-R-I-L-L-O.  As a matter of fact, I think he wrote the foreword, didn't he write the foreword for this book ['William Byron Rumford, The Life and Public Services of a California Legislator: A Biography,' Lawrence P. Crouchett]?  But he--.
Speaker 1: Now, is he an African American?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think that, you know I can't remember if it was Puerto Rican or Cuban descent, but he certainly identified and I don't know, you know, he was a light brown person and-- (laughter).
Speaker 1: He probably, I don't know, I'm thinking a lot of times, you know, anybody brown was discriminated against, you know, in terms of if you weren't white, you know, so--they tried to break down these covenants that restricted blacks from (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Right, right, and one of the main things they were trying to do is to get somebody to run for office, and Tom [L.] Berkley, who died, let's see, he died in 2001, but he was major, major in the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California] as well.  He's an attorney and he was part of that group.  There was, they used to meet and get together to try to see how they could break down the barriers, and they were considering Tom Berkley because, you know, he had been very active but then he declined to run for office, this assembly seat that was vacant, and so my aunt, my mother's [Elsie Carrington Rumford] sister, who was, actually she ended up being a teacher in Berkeley [California], she wasn't a teacher at the time, but she nominated my father and he ran for the seat and he won the seat.
Speaker 1: What year is this when he wins the seat?
Speaker 2: He--1948.  He was elected into the [California State] Assembly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a pharmacist, I should mention too.  He was a pharmacist and had a drug store in Berkeley and I think that's real important because while he was an assemblyman, he never gave up his career as a pharmacist.  When he was in Sacramento [California], he was working the drug store (laughter).
Speaker 1: What was the name of his drug store?
Speaker 2: Rumford Pharmacy. (Laughter)  And it's still there, but they changed it to a health center and they named it after him.  The building is still there.  But actually, when he first opened, what happened he worked as a pharmacist for someone else in the early years, and then they retired and he bought the drug store from them, and then several years later, I guess 1950, he, it was a small store so he moved across the street and had a much bigger drug store, and that was where he could be found.  (Laughter)  That's where you found your assemblyman, in the drug store.  And people would come down, you know, you want to talk to your assemblyperson, you just go to the drug store.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so you were three years old when he was elected?
Speaker 2: See, that's it.  I was three years old when he was elected, so all of my life that, all my memory from the time I was three to the time I was a young adult in '66 [1966], he was in the assembly, and my whole recollection of him was as an assemblyman.
Story_ID: 244857
Speaker 1: Now let's go back to your beginnings and stuff and let's talk about it.  Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well, my earliest childhood memories are of the local elementary school [Longfellow School, Berkeley, California] that I went to--.
Speaker 1: An earliest one, can you remember the first thing you ever, that you recall remembering?
Speaker 2: Oh, the first thing I recall, oh my goodness (laughter)!
Speaker 1: It's okay.  Some people can't remember--
Speaker 2: I don't really, I just don't have an earliest that I can remember.  No.  I don't have anything in particular that stands out.  It's just all in the family and school.
Speaker 1: Describe, now who do you think you take after the most, your mother [Elsie Carrington Rumford] or your father [William Byron Rumford]?
Speaker 2: Well--. (Laughter) Actually, I don't know, I'm probably pretty much of a combination.  I think, you know, my father was a very, kind of a caring person.  I mean, he was an assemblyman, but he worked at the drugstore.  If people needed their medicine, he would deliver to their house, you know.  My mother was also a caring person too.  She would take things to the sick, and she would take people who couldn't go to church.  She'd drive 'em to church and, you know, I think the both of them, I have that kind of--I think that's why I became a social worker, because I like that caring thing for people, and I think my sense of humor tends to be more like my father.  My father was, he was funny.  That's one of the things that, you know, we joke about my niece and my nephew and we all get together and laugh about the things he used to say in the drugstore.
Speaker 1: Can you give us an example of what he might say?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, he was hilarious.  He, people would walk in the drugstore and he would, you know, just kind of know their faces and he said, "Hometown." He'd call 'em Hometown, and he said, "Where you from now?"  And the guy would say, "Oh, I'm from Tulsa [Oklahoma]."  He said, "Oh, yeah.  When we goin' back to Greenwood and Archer?"  Now, my father probably knew very little about Greenwood [Avenue] and Archer [Street], but I grew up hearing him say that so that I don't even know if I've ever been to Greenwood and Archer, and then he'd say, "When we goin' back?"  You know, and stuff like that. He'd tease-- and a woman would come in and he'd say, "Have you gotten married yet?"  And she'd say, "Well, no.  I'm lookin' though."  And he'd say, "Well, I got a good man.  He just needs, he doesn't have a job but he's a good man."  Kinda teasing and joke about stuff like that, and he kinda teased with my mother and messed with my mother sometimes and embarrass her, 'cuz she was a lady.  I never heard my mother say a curse word.  She was, you know, not just out.  She was truly a lady, and he'd say, "Well, do you want a drink?"  And, "Oh, she takes a double."  You know, and she'd be so embarrassed, you know, just joke, and he'd call her Rose and her sisters Lily and Violet, and he'd call himself Brown, Andrew, W. Brown.  He'd say, "This is Andrew W. Brown speaking."  You know--and just--
Speaker 1: Andy Brown from 'Amos 'n' Andy'!
Speaker 2: Is that where he?  Oh!! You know, I never put that together.  And so that my niece used to always call my mother Ms. Brown, 'cuz, you know she was married to Andrew W.--Ms. Brown, how you doing?  You know, and when he would come down here and visit with us, he would, he was playful.  He was just playful.  When my kids were little, he'd do, "cock-a-doodle-doo!" early in the morning and to let them know he was awake and they just, you know, thought that was funny!  He was just playful with 'em, sense of humor, liked to joke, tease, and tell stories, you know.  And, I think the joking, the teasing, and that kind of stuff I got from my father.
Story_ID: 244858
Speaker 1: Probably the combination of my mother [Elsie Carrington Rumford] in terms of the domestic thing and, you know, like I had to drop my old flowers.  I bought some new flowers.  I got a lot of flowers in the house like my mother did.  I have a career and, you know, she kind of, although she finished college, she, it was very hard to get work in those days and teaching and stuff, and she ended up doing a lot of other things and she was the, I think she was the first African American hired to work in clerical at the Oakland [California], at the naval base, the naval base [Naval Air Station Alameda] in Oakland--in Alameda [California] actually, and so she had worked but she didn't have a career as such, but she was the wife of, and she took care of the home because he [Rumford's father, William Byron Rumford] was gone a lot.  He was busy at speaking engagements all the time.  She made sure everything was smooth with us and, you know, the dinner was always there for him and for us, and she'd go out with him to all his engagements where his wife would be expected, and she did it with pleasure because she was social, too, and I think I'm not as social as they are.  I mean, I like people, but they both belonged to so many organizations, I, you know, millions--I mean, you know, fraternity, not just fraternity, I mean but just many, many organizations; of course, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and he was going to meetings all the time, and he loved it, he loved it.  They were both very religious people, very religious people, and that was--they didn't wear it on their sleeves, so to speak.  You know, you wouldn't have known it but every night they both got on their knees and prayed, every night until they couldn't, they could no longer get on their knees and my mother read the Bible every night, but you know, she went to church but she never made references.  You know, how some people make references all the time, God this, God that--but very, very religious people. And how am I like--well--I don't know how else I'm like them.  My father wanted me to be a pharmacist, but I didn't like science, I didn't do well in science, so you know, he was always looking for somebody in the family to take over the drug store (laughter).
Story_ID: 244859
Speaker 1: Now, did he [Rumford's father, William Byron Rumford] ever talk about trying to become a pharmacist, because he must have been one of the first, or was he--
Speaker 2: Black pharmacist?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, he was the first black hired at Highland Hospital [Oakland, California] and he broke the barrier in Oakland [California]. Highland Hospital was the public hospital in Oakland, and they were not hiring black pharmacists.  I don't know how many pharmacists were before him, black pharmacists, in the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California], but I know that about, you know, the Highland Hospital, and he had a lot of pride in being a pharmacist.  He enjoyed being a pharmacist.  He never let that go.  He, well after he finished with the [California State] Assembly, he went to Washington [D.C.], Caspar Weinberger invited him.  He was a friend of his, invited him back to work for the Federal Trade Commission and be a director there, and then after he retired from that, he came back to the Bay Area and worked the drugstore [Rumford Pharmacy] again.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think he just also liked being among the people, 'cause everybody came in the drugstore.  (Laughter) It was in the heart of the community there.
Story_ID: 244860
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.  You know, what was your neighborhood like and the atmosphere around your home?
Speaker 2: Well, the sights and sounds and smells--we lived, we lived in a neighborhood that was just about three blocks from the drugstore, and that was a commercial neighborhood.  The drugstore was--there was a drugstore, there was a liquor store, there was a grocery store, there was a hardware store, down a little further there was a bar.  There was a, you know, a pool hall.  We lived right near the community, and we just, the community business area.  Black business area.  And, we lived right near the railroad track.  My recollection is the railroad track. (Laughter)  I could just see it from the window.  You know, you could see the railroad cars running by and the trains going by and, so a lot of trains all the time and a modest house, you know. And because of his [Rumford's father, William Byron Rumford] achievements and so forth, there was a social strata with professional people, boxers, lawyers, and at that point African Americans in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s] started moving into bigger and better homes, because they could afford it and because they were allowed to.  And, but we stayed in the community and, like I said, a modest, modest house, walking to school, walking to the elementary school [Longfellow School, Berkeley, California], black community, walking to the middle school [Burbank Junior High School, Berkeley, California], black community, walking to high school [Berkeley High School, Berkeley, California]; only one high school in Berkeley [California], so it was integrated.
Speaker 1: So, you mean--back to the house, you said it was a modest house.  It was like a one-story house, two-story house, a wooden house, a brick house--.
Speaker 2: It was a wooden house.  It had a bedroom upstairs and a bedroom downstairs; two bedrooms and one bathroom.  There was no foyer or anything.  You walk right into the living room and there were couches and then you, the dining room, but it was just almost a continuous living room, dining room, and then a very modest kitchen for the times, and the stove had legs on it (laughter), and then they added on to the house.  They had it, there was a big back yard so they decided to add on to the house, probably in the '50s [1950s] and because then that gave my brother and I separate bedrooms and also they added a bathroom and an office for my father downstairs because he needed some place, so, but it was right there in the blue collar community. And, well at first, in Berkeley everybody lived in the community; whether their collars were blue or white, but then, you know, slowly the doctors, and so forth, and the professional people start moving into bigger homes or into the hill area, but we stayed. And that was one of the things that my niece and I always talk about, is how they weren't--they were just people who liked people and not, they didn't feel that you had to be of a certain strata to associate with them, and they were just, they were people who felt good about themselves and pride in themselves, but they didn't to put anybody else down.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you had a pretty nice community there--inevitably.
Speaker 2: It was, yeah, it was a nice community, hard-working people all up and down the block people were working and, you know, there was a-[HistoryMaker Leola] "Roscoe" Dellums grew up around a few blocks away and I knew all her family and, yeah, it was a nice community and it was a, I think because, see I was three years old when he was in the [California State] Assembly and because I grew up with him and my mother [Elsie Carrington Rumford], who were active in the community, there was a lot of respect.  I grew up in a family where the community just held a lot of respect for the family.
Story_ID: 244861
Speaker 1: --Well, in your household, it's you and your brother and your mother [Elsie Carrington Rumford] and father [William Byron Rumford], is that it?
Speaker 2: Well, I had two brothers.  My oldest brother [William Byron Rumford, Jr.] had asthma and he came to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] of all places, I don't know. Now we kind of think of this as a small capital. But at the time the doctors were saying that he needed a warmer climate, so he came down to L.A. and lived with my grandmother [Margaret Williams], my father's mother in Los Angeles, and graduated from high school here. And my other brother, let's see now, my oldest brother is eleven years older, and my next oldest was seven years older, and he grew up in Berkeley [California] and he died a tragic death.  He drowned when he was twenty-one and I was fourteen, I was younger so--but, so there were three of us, actually, but because my older brother moved out to go to Los Angeles, you know, when I was very young.
Story_ID: 244862
Speaker 1: Now, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah; oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: What church did you go to?
Speaker 2: First AME Church [First African Methodist Episcopal Church, FAME] in Oakland [California].  Oh, my mother [Elsie Carrington Rumford] was raised in that church and it used to be on 15th Street in Oakland, so I used to call it 15th Street Church, but then it moved.  They moved to a larger location and First AME, and she always maintained her membership in that church until she died.  You know, some people change churches.  She just, ministers change but she said it's not the minister, it's the belief, and we went every Sunday and I must say when I was in college [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], there were many times I did not want to get up the next morning and go to church because I was tired, and she said, "Oh, no.  If you can party at night, you can get up and go to church for the Lord in the morning."  (Laughter) And so I taught Sunday school and, oh, my gosh, and my aunts were active in church too.  My aunt was a Sunday school teacher and so we dyed eggs for church, Easter eggs, and you know, just the whole thing.  I grew up in church, definitely grew up in the church.  My father [William Byron Rumford] was raised Baptist, but you know, he was part of the AME Church.  As a matter of fact, when he died, because of, you know, they felt so many people might attend the service, they didn't have it at their church, the First AME Church.  They had it, my brother [William Byron Rumford, Jr.]  said, "Well why don't you have it at, you know, like at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]," because he had a big association with Cal Berkeley, but my mother said, "Oh no, no, no.  He'll be buried out of the church," and he was buried out of the church, Beebe Memorial [Cathedral, Oakland, California], which, you know, and I didn't put this together until I was reviewing the book ['William Byron Rumford, The Life and Public Services of a California Legislator: A Biography,' Lawrence P. Crouchett], where actually he was nominated in 1948, to run for the [California State] Assembly.  You know, this club nominated him, chose him, and so he was buried out of that church and, oh, my mother was just, belief in God, and my father but he was very quiet about it.  You wouldn't know it, but I saw him on his knees so I know they were both very religious.
Story_ID: 244863
Speaker 1: Now, was music a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, it was for me (laughter).
Speaker 1: I see the piano is here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know my grandmother [Rebecca Carrington], that's my grandmother's piano, and my aunt played piano very well.  She really played.  My mother [Elsie Carrington Rumford] took lessons.  I guess they all took lessons.  My grandmother really tried to give them a, you know, a well-balanced beginning but only one, and that was my aunt, really played; but she could, she could play!  The other piano was from when I grew up and I took piano.  (Laughter)  I was forced to take piano but I never really took to it, but you know, actually, I think actually the music, my father [William Byron Rumford] loved music and he used to play it on the radio all the time and he had records.  That's what we had back in those days, records. (Laughter) And I think I really took more of my love of music from my father because I love music.
Speaker 1: So, what kind of music did your father like and what kind did you like?
Speaker 2: And they both liked to dance.  My father loved to dance and my mother did too.  They would get out and dance, and I love to dance.  My father, well, he loved a lot of the big band sounds, and the crooners and the, you know, the--Perry Como, and the--tryin' to remember what records he had, but he'd, you know, he'd just play the radio a lot and when we were driving he'd always have music on, and I grew up with Motown and that kind of sound, although I really love also show tunes and I fell in love with Jose Feliciano and Barbra Streisand early on, and so, I like a lot of different kind of music.  I also like blues and I like salsa, I like the Afro-Cuban sounds and then I went to Jamaica and I fell in love with Jamaican music.
Speaker 1: But when you were growing up--
Speaker 2: Okay, oh, growing up?  Oh, Motown, or, yeah, the earlier Fats Domino, even before Motown, Fats Domino, 'cuz my brother [William Byron Rumford, Jr.] played Fats Domino, and, you know, those early and then I moved into Aretha [Franklin] and all that, and yes, I know the words to all the songs (laughter).
Speaker 1: What about, did you like television and movies then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I liked television and movies, and I watched quite a bit of television growing up.  You know, television was kind of new.  I came of age when--I remember when we got the first television.  It was a big deal, oh, watching this television and Ed Sullivan ['The Ed Sullivan Show'] and, oh, my goodness, '[The] Howdy Doody [Show]' and, I mean, I, yeah.  I really did.  I enjoyed watching television and, much more than I do now.  I watch very little television.  I just--and movies, I did.  I like movies.  I don't really remember going to that many movie theaters.  You know, when I was, before I became a young adult, but I do remember going to the drive-in with my family.  They would go to the drive-in and we saw [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte and, oh my gosh, now I can't remember the name of the movie.  Something in the sun or something--.
Speaker 1: Oh, 'Island in the Sun'.
Speaker 2: Was 'Island in the Sun' where he sang the song, was it Dorothy Dandridge?
Speaker 1: Dorothy Dandridge, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we used to love to go.  My family loved to go to the drive-in movies and my family were eaters, and as you see the pictures, you will know why.  They were eaters (laughter).
Story_ID: 244864
Speaker 1: Can you remember what the issues were?  You know, the political issues your father [William Byron Rumford] had to deal with when you were growing up, and what were you thinking about him at that time?  Or, were you kind of kept away from what your father was doing?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  He talked about it all the time and my mother [Elsie Carrington Rumford] talked about him.  I mean, they were very close and they discussed things very openly in front of me, and then he had people come into the house all the time.  All of these people who were aspiring, you know, lawyers or judges or people who wanted to learn about, you know, how to get into politics, or people who just wanted to confer with him to get somebody else elected, or to confer with him about some particular issue. They just met right in the living room. And there's no, there was only--we didn't have all these dens.  You know, we just had that one room, so he would have the meeting right there and later he started using his office when they built an office downstairs, but, and also he met him at the drugstore [Rumford Pharmacy].  People just, a couple people would come from the drugstore and they'd have a little meeting right there at the drugstore, and so now the political issues were really civil rights, mainly civil rights issues; people not able to get hired.
Speaker 1: I think you mentioned earlier there were no black bus drivers.
Speaker 2: Bus drivers, teachers, restricted covenants, housing, yeah, restricted covenants and housing.  There were, I remember when my father died, a lady came to the house and I knew her, but she told me and I was really surprised that he had gotten her a position as the first black registered nurse at the County Hospital [Highland Hospital] in Oakland [California].  There are millions of stories like that, because the barriers were just so severe.  I remember the first black policeman in Berkeley [California].  I knew him.  You know, it was just, there were so many barriers.
Speaker 1: What was his name?  I'm not trying to put you on the spot, but I thought it might be--.
Speaker 2: Russell, oh boy, Russell [sic. Walter Arthur Gordon], I can picture him.  Oh, my gosh.  It may come to me.
Speaker 1: Well, Russell puts us in the ballpark.
Speaker 2: He isn't--I don't think I ran across his name in the book ['William Byron Rumford, The Life and Public Services of a California Legislator: A Biography,' Lawrence P. Crouchett].  My niece might remember if I called her (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But who were some--
Story_ID: 244865
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of the names of the people?  Any people that we might know today?  Did you meet them as a kid in the household?
Speaker 2: Yes, people that you might know?
Speaker 1: Or who were you the most impressed with?
Speaker 2: Well, there were so many people it's hard to even, and reading through the book ['William Byron Rumford, The Life and Public Services of a California Legislator: A Biography,' Lawrence P. Crouchett] it really brought them back to mind, but there were so many people.  Don McCallum [ph.], he was an attorney and later became a judge, [Allan E.] Broussard, oh, my God, his name escapes me--chief justice-they were all-let's see, Broussard, (unclear), Lionel Wilson.  Lionel Wilson was the first black mayor of Oakland [California], and he was very close with my father [William Byron Rumford].  You know, a lot of these guys came as young attorneys and they wanted to move forward, and, you know, my father was very good.  He was astute as a politician, and he tried to help them and to teach them.  You know, many of these people are now deceased.  They died even before my father.  It was, to me, astounding.  Allen Broussard, yes, who became a judge, Nathaniel [S.] Colley, Sherman [W.] Smith [Sr.], he was a judge down here.  There were so many that were very important in breaking barriers, and they moved on to hold high positions and to continue to break barriers.  I'm thinking specifically of some people who may still be in the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California].
Speaker 1: Well, people, I guess [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus"] Hawkins and--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, see Gus Hawkins is one of the few that is still alive that I think was during that era.  My father was friends with Pat Brown [Edmund Gerald "Pat" Brown, Sr.], Governor Brown, and --
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mervyn [M.] Dymally?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Mervyn Dymally was there.  He was around, yes.  Because he's from Southern California, he wasn't part of that Northern California coalition, but he certainly was in the [California State] Assembly at the time that my father was there, and you know he was the mayor--Bradley; Mayor [Tom] Bradley from Los Angeles [California].  He gave him credit and attended his funeral.  [HistoryMaker] Congresswoman Maxine Waters was around during that time when he was in assembly and [HistoryMaker] Diane [E.] Watson, Senator Diane Watson, she attended his funeral.  You know, I think that a lot of the people, even if they, whether they knew him from the assembly or actually from the district, you know, I said it included Oakland, Berkeley [California], and Alameda [California] and into San Leandro [California].  They appreciated what he stood for and the fight they had to lead when they were in the assembly.  Gus Hawkins and my father would introduce the fair housing bill every year.  One would introduce it one year, and the other one would introduce the next, until it finally passed, and, so you know my father credits Gus Hawkins for, you know, it wasn't just his bill.  He credits Gus Hawkins for also sticking with it too, and fighting the fight for that.  The fair employment commission, that was big when that [California Fair Employment Practices Act (FEPA)] passed in '59 [1959], because it provided a vehicle where people who were discriminated against in employment could go and had a commission to go to and the employers would have to pay fines or have jail time for discriminating against people for employment.  Let's see, policemen, bus drivers, nurses.  You know, it was very hard to get into just a lot of fields.
Story_ID: 244866
Speaker 1: I'll just say this.  Although his [Rumford's father, William Byron Rumford]--civil rights was one of his major concerns, it probably--it was his major concern, he was also very interested in public health, and he was chairman of the public health committee for twelve years while he was a legislator [in the California State Assembly] and passed a bill that allowed for a free polio vaccine and he was very proud of that.
Speaker 2: That is important, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So there were a lot of other things.  It was just that civil rights did seem to dominate.
Story_ID: 244867
Speaker 1: What school did you attend?  What was your elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to Longfellow Elementary School [Longfellow School, Berkeley, California], which was one block from my house.  I walked, and it was primarily African American with Asians and a few whites.  At that time, Asians lived in the community.  I grew up with a lot of Asians who were born in internment camps.
Speaker 1: Did they ever talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and my mother [Elsie Carrington Rumford] really talked about that because the family up the street had to move out, you know, and relocate during the internment, and of course, a lot of the focus was on civil rights for African Americans.  My family was kind of across the board in terms of all people deserving rights and civil rights and they thought that was horrible, that their Japanese neighbors had to leave and then my father [William Byron Rumford] was also friends with Cesar Chavez, and so, I mean, there was a whole connection there that he related to the plight of the Mexican American.
Speaker 1: That was really quite a struggle they had, the United Farm Workers [of America], Cesar Chavez.
Speaker 2: That's right. Yeah.  They had quite a struggle and there was a lot of communication between the two, because of the, my father and Cesar Chavez and because of all the things that were going on within the farm workers.  But anyway, I grew up, yeah, somewhat in a creative community and we had--some of the teachers at the school were friends of the family.  One of them was actually, along with my brother [William Byron Rumford, Jr.], I said he was eleven years older, so I had to learn to not call her Rowena [sic. Ramona Maples], (laughter), she said, "Please call me Miss Maples," you know because I knew her as my brother's friend. And another one was Mrs. Pittman [ph.]; Mrs. France [ph.], her maiden name was Pittman.  My mother always slipped into the maiden name, but anyway, it felt kind of homey because it was close and because I knew, you know, some of the teachers and I enjoyed my time in elementary school, had friends and was in Girl Scouts [of the United States of America] and my mother was the leader of the scout troop for a while and--
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: In elementary school--I might have liked math.  It might have been the beginning of my interest in math.  I really liked math in elementary school.  There were lots of kids in the neighborhood, especially my grandmother [Rebecca Carrington] lived two blocks away.  There were a lot of kids on her block and I used to play a lot out on the block.  I have fond memories of running up and down the block playing and lots of kids.
Speaker 1: So you say the neighborhood was mostly black with Japanese and some Chicanos maybe?
Speaker 2: Not so much Chicanos.  I don't think we had--we had a couple whites, a few Asians, and I could show you my pictures from elementary school.  I still have my class pictures from first grade and sixth grade and so forth, and, but it was basically a working class black neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher in school?
Speaker 2: In elementary school, I guess Miss Lazarus [ph.] probably, who was my sixth grade teacher.  I liked her.
Story_ID: 244868
Speaker 1: I know for some people teachers are just really instrumental in developing, you know, the kids identify with them or whatever. But I think quite frankly because I had so many role models around me and people--and I think like my two aunts were perhaps--you know I was saying I'm somewhat like my mother [Elsie Carrington Rumford], because I'm somewhat domestic.  I used to really love to cook and all that.  But, I think my aunts were never married, no kids.  One was a vice principal and one was a teacher, and I think, and they did everything around the house.  They could paint.  They could paint walls.  They could--(Laughter). I grew up with the idea that women could do everything and they could have a career and they could do stuff around the house. And so I really don't think I looked to my teachers as some people do, you know, because these were educated women, you know. And they were very different, so one was kind of primish, you know, and the other one was kind of not so.  I think I had a balance of women around me that I could take from, take parts from.
Story_ID: 244869
Speaker 1: Where'd you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Okay.  After elementary [Longfellow School, Berkeley, California], I went to middle school and the middle school was--there were three middle schools in Berkeley [California].  One was white, one was black, and one was integrated (laughter) and the one that was white was really white, I think, 'cuz I had a girlfriend, matter of fact, she was in my wedding.  She was Tom Berkley's [Thomas L. Berkley] daughter, and Tom Berkley was an attorney, you know, that I mentioned in Oakland [California], a very prominent man, and they, her mother moved to the hills and stuff, and poor thing, she said that she was like the only one and she kind of caught in middle school.  It was kind of hard for her.  Then there was an integrated one, and I have--another girl who was in my wedding went there. And that was kind of a little balanced so, you know, but mine was predominantly black, although there were white people living in--I mean, who did attend and those were lower income white folks.
Speaker 1: What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: Burbank.  Burbank Junior High School [Berkeley, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was another thing.  My parents [Elsie Carrington Rumford and William Byron Rumford] could have gotten me into any middle school, or junior high, we called them then, but I went to my community middle school and junior high, and it was a fun experience.  It was a good experience, 'cuz I developed more, was growing up, and I don't have a lot of outstanding memories.  I just remember playing volleyball and taking Latin because my father wanted me to take Latin because he wanted me to be a pharmacist and, you know, but just really enjoying junior high school.
Story_ID: 244870
Speaker 1: Then I went to Berkeley High School [Berkeley, California], which was the only high school, so it brought us all together, everybody.  All economic groups, all races, everybody came together, which was kind of neat too, and because of the university [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] influence, the standards were high and there wasn't--. You know, nowadays, people send their kids to private schools a lot, and I think now, as a matter of fact, I walked up to Berkeley High, I don't know, maybe ten years ago, from where my mother [Elsie Carrington Rumford] was living and, you know, there was graffiti and stuff all over my high school, but at the time it was, I thought, a really good place to go to high school, and it, because you could get a real solid education.  A lot of the kids who went to Berkeley High School, who didn't have the family background that I had in terms of, you know, helping them to like do their homework or helping them to get into college, did go on though, because they could get a real solid education and by that time, by the time I was in high school, the counselors were not counseling you into vocational stuff and, you know, like it was a good place and I was, Bithynians, which was a social club.
Speaker 2: Now what'd you call that?
Speaker 1: Bithynians.
Speaker 2: Bathenians?
Speaker 1: Bithynians.  B-I-T-H-Y-N-I-A-N-S.  It was just, kind of like a sorority but in high school.  It was just in high school.  And we had a lot of fun.  It was good and I'd, you know, go to parties and it was a very good time.
Speaker 2: Did everybody go to the same prom?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, um-hum.  Yeah, we had a senior prom and everybody went to the same prom, and yeah, this was a time when, you know, you really could, you really were exposed to a variety of people, variety of races.  I mean, you could be on the college track, if you know, were not, you could take more of a clerical kind of course, or the guys could have shop, they had shop then, but of course, I think that's what put me on the college track and I did okay, I guess, in that.
Speaker 2: So you were a good student in high school?
Speaker 1: I was a good student in high school.  I won't say I was a wonderful student in high school, but I was a pretty good student.  I mean, well they had a lot of competition in high school.  It was a wide spectrum of kids there in terms, I mean, you know, you had a lot of professor's kids and you had the really, really bright, bright and that study, study, study.  I was not a student that just was driven to study.  I was also kind of a social person (laughter) and my parents never, you know--they said, "Well, you need to take college prep courses," that kind of thing, but they never pushed me, got me tutors, and you know, nowadays, I know my friends, there's a great deal of pressure for kids to excel, make sure they get in the right college, you know, tutors or whatever it takes, and they just, they just take the courses, you know, and they didn't put a lot of pressure. And when I chose to go to San Francisco State [College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], my dad said, "Well, why don't you apply to Cal Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]," you know, and I said, "Well, I don't think my grades are good enough."  But I hadn't really ever focused on oh, I need these grades to get into this school or that one, so I didn't even apply and I just went to San Francisco School State Teachers College [sic.], which is now San Francisco State, what do they call it, San Francisco, Cal State San Francisco [sic.]!
Speaker 2: Is that what it is?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they changed the name a little bit, but that was basically, that was where my mother had gone to school and it was different then.  It was a teachers college, but basically that was where my mother had gone to school and it was different then.  It was a teachers college, San Francisco Teachers College.
Speaker 2: Then it became San Francisco State?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's the same as San Francisco State University?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 244871
Speaker 1: Now when you were a senior in high school [Berkeley High School, Berkeley, California], what had you projected as a career, when you got to that point where you were projecting?
Speaker 2: I had not a clue.  I had not a clue what I wanted to do.  I really, you know, in those days, and I talked to some of my peers; in those days, it was like go to college, you know, just go to college and get a college degree and you could get a job with the state or you could apply for a lot of jobs just with a B.A.  And so, I had no idea.  I just took a variety of courses [at San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] and what I ended up liking was sociology, because I liked the study of people and groups of people, and I liked Spanish.  I had taken some high school Spanish and I just loved languages.  As a matter of fact, I wanted to take French too, but when I took French I kept confusing the French and the Spanish and so I ended up just sticking with Spanish.  I came out with a double major in college of Spanish and sociology--and for no practical use at all.
Story_ID: 244872
Speaker 1: You graduated from high school [Berkeley High School, Berkeley, California] in '63 [1963]--.
Speaker 2: Two [1962].
Speaker 1: Two [1962], '62 [1962].  Okay, and when you were at San Francisco State [College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] and, I mean, I guess all the campus activity hadn't really started up yet, I guess.  There wasn't a lot of--.
Speaker 2: Not a lot.  It wasn't a lot.  It really started a little later.  We did some protesting.  I do remember marching, doing some protesting.
Speaker 1: What were you protesting?
Speaker 2: We were trying to get a more, I think it was, gosh, marching for, it had to do with civil rights and something that the campus was not allowing to happen in terms of teachers or coursework and, you know, some of that, but it was, we didn't do a lot of that 'cuz when everything started, I had really finished college and I was working when they started the major protests in Berkeley [California] and the Panthers [Black Panther Party] and all of that, although I knew Huey [P.] Newton.  I remember him, 'cuz he'd come over to San Francisco State and, so it really was, I guess the beginnings of it.
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah.  'Cuz you were there from '62 [1962] I guess to--
Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967].  Actually I graduated in January '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Yeah, so the Black Panther probably was actually formed in Oakland [California] during the time, in '65 [1965] or '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were started.  They were getting going there.
Speaker 1: Was Huey Newton a student, you say?
Speaker 2: You know what, he'd come over to San Francisco State, but I don't know if he was actually involved there or not.  Now, I have a friend in Oakland, or actually she is now in El Sereno [Los Angeles, California], who went to high school with him and she saw him at their high school reunion; you know, this was like, right before he died, interesting.  So, he is actually, that means he was three years older than I am, yeah, 'cuz she's three years older.  I knew him in high school and everything, but I didn't know him that well.  I just remember him talking in San Francisco [California], and I, you know, things were starting and there was a whole black identity thing was really becoming strong.  The black pride, things really getting more and more established, and people were, I don't quite think the naturals had quite come out yet, but the feeling, the feeling of black identity and black pride in the identity was taking hold in the '60s [1960s].
Story_ID: 244873
Speaker 1: I was asking you off-camera about Huey P. Newton and what he looked like and what he was doing when you actually remember seeing him on campus [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California].
Speaker 2: Well, he was talking to people.  There was a certain section in the cafeteria where all the African Americans congregate and I would see him in there and he would be talking to people, not necessarily to me; you know, just to people in general, and you know, he was a nice looking brother (laughter) so I remembered him but I didn't really know him.  It was the early days and there was another man that, oh--I can't think of his name, but he did become, they said he became a Panther too, Marvin [X], Marvin, I think his name is Marvin.  And, I knew him a little better.  I think he did attend State.
Speaker 1: What about Bobby Seale?
Speaker 2: I didn't really know Bobby Seale, but I knew Bobby Seale's wife [Leslie M. Johnson-Seale], whose name escapes me now.  I knew his wife.
Speaker 1: What about some of the other people? Ericka Huggins, or I don't know, there's a lot of different names, David Hilliard, and the other members of the [Black] Panther Party, Eldridge Cleaver.
Speaker 2: You know, I didn't know David Hilliard, I didn't know, there were some people who I heard later became Panthers; you know, the people I had gone to college with that had become Panthers that I was told later, but at the time I really didn't know anybody that well personally, and the Panthers were kind of getting off the ground.  I think they really took off more in like '67 [1967], '68 [1968], and at that point I was working and then I started working in West Oakland [California], and so I did see when [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis came to speak down there. I went down to DeFremery Park [Oakland, California] and I heard her speak and that kind of thing, but I was at that point working for the City of Oakland, kind of enjoying the establishment of nine to five [o'clock] (laughter) but I did go in and see them when they'd come down to speak at the park.  I think, definitely Angela Davis, and I think also Eldridge Cleaver.
Speaker 1: You started to mention something about David Hilliard too, but I broke--.
Speaker 2: David Hilliard.  You know, no, I didn't know him.  I was just wondering if he was related to some other Hilliards that I know, but, I don't--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 244874
Speaker 1: All right, so when you were in school [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] you majored in sociology and Spanish, okay, and were there any professors at school that made a big impression on you--in college?
Speaker 2: I don't think so much the professors, but the coursework.  I think, I really loved like anthropology and sociology and social psychology, and I think that was just so broadening for me.  It kind of opened me up to think more about those areas, and I just really loved it.  I loved it, as a matter of fact there was a book found recently.  I've been boxing up all my books and I thought, you know, I'd have my kids read this book.  It was a book called 'Stigma[: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity,' Erving Goffman] and it's about any stigma, but it was meaningful to me because in terms of civil rights and, but you could take any stigma say--
Speaker 1: Is that about (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Is that still, don't tell me that book is still around.
Speaker 1: Is it Rose [ph.]?
Speaker 2: You know what?  I don't remember but I know I've got that book.
Speaker 1: I had it in college.
Speaker 2: Did you?
Speaker 1: I think so.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  For some reason, that book just really was meaningful to me.  So there was coursework, the books, and the teachings that were meaningful to me and I entirely enjoyed my time, and I enjoyed it both socially, but my parents [Elsie Carrington Rumford and William Byron Rumford] were very strict and they didn't let me out too much in high school [Berkeley High School, Berkeley, California]. (Laughter)  I had to be in at a certain time--
Story_ID: 244875
Speaker 1: There are a lot of popular culture things going on in the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California] these days.  I'm just going to run some names by you and see what you recognize.  Did you know Sly, Sly and the Family Stone?  I know he was a disc jockey in the Bay Area, before he started in the--
Speaker 2: Oh, in San Francisco [California], yeah.  You knew, I knew--I mean I didn't know him, no.  I knew of him, I have his album, I danced to it a lot, but I didn't know him personally.
Speaker 1: I think the group that Jim Jones was in, still in Indiana in those days, I think.  They hadn't moved to San Francisco yet, that big church [Peoples Temple of the Disciples of Christ] of Jim Jones.  I had some things on my mind, they escape it as soon as they pop up--a lot of--oh, Timothy Leary and the LSD craze.  That started up here in the Bay Area too in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it did.  Quite frankly--
Speaker 1: And the whole hippie movement, actually.
Speaker 2: Quite frankly, yeah.  And when I went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], after I left the Bay Area and went to Howard, and people kind of expected me to be, you know part of that whole--but you know, in the Bay Area, there weren't a lot of African American hippies. (Laughter)  I don't know how else to put it.  I know the stereotypes, but no; as a matter of fact, I knew maybe two, and but no, I think, 'cuz most of it's, these parents--no, no, no.  Very traditional, very traditional black families were raised in the Bay Area.  Now, people came from other areas and attended school and maybe they loosened up a little bit, but we who were raised there and who lived at home, we were, you know, commuted to college.  No, we were not allowed to--no, no, no.
Speaker 1: In terms of on the conventional scene, more conventional, but someone mystical is Howard Thurman.  He was here in San Francisco, I think, when you were in college [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California].  He's a great black theologian.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know I've heard of Howard--
Speaker 1: From Howard, he's from Howard originally.
Speaker 2: When was he--
Speaker 1: He showed up in San Francisco in I think the mid-'60s [1960s] and he lived the balance of his life here.  He had a church [The Church for the Fellowship of All Peoples, San Francisco, California] here and taught theology in some of the universities.  He's written several books.
Speaker 2: I know I've heard of Howard Thurman, but I really did not know him.  Hmm--no, I didn't know him.  But you know, getting back to Timothy Leary, you know most folks were not doing, maybe I'm just older, because maybe it's the next generation that got off into drugs but most of the people I know may have smoked some weed [marijuana] or may have not, and it was really--oh, no, drop acid, no, no, no.  What I ran into was later when I was working here at L.A. [Los Angeles, California], where coworkers who were a little younger and white, who told me about that scene, but I never even knew anybody who was (unclear).
Speaker 1: Did you ever hear of Jimi Hendrix playing in this area?  I think he spent a lot of time here too.
Speaker 2: Well, yes, Jimi Hendrix was--you know, but I really wasn't, I wasn't into so much Jimi Hendrix then or, what's the woman's name, I can't think of this.  His white counterpart--Janis Joplin.  I'm Motown, [The] Supremes. No, no.  (Laughter) And I don't know if that came after me or I just didn't--no.
Story_ID: 244876
Speaker 1: When you graduated from San Francisco State [College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) San Francisco State. January '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: --in January '67 [1967], okay, and you went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] for grad school?
Speaker 2: Well, no, actually I worked--.
Speaker 1: You worked for the City--.
Speaker 2: I worked for the City of Oakland--I worked for the California state--State of California for a while, and the department of employment, where I ran across discrimination, and was naive enough to be surprised that employers were requesting white only, and I reported it to my--I was a minority rep [representative] and reported it to my minority rep boss who was based out of San Francisco [California], and they had a big investigation of the City of Oakland [California] department of employment and confiscated files and it was a real big thing, a real big thing. And, but, I think, I always look back on that now and I think, oh, my gosh, that was because I grew up in that whole civil rights thing where, you know, this is wrong, you can't do--and I didn't even try to smoothly talk to my supervisor and say well, you know, can we do something about--I was like indignant and youthful, you know, right out of college.
Speaker 1: That is something to be indignant about, if you look back at it.  They've been doing that since they started it.
Speaker 2: But my boss later told me, my local boss in Oakland said, "[HistoryMaker] Elsie [Rumford], why didn't you come to me and say something to me?"  I went to the minority employment rep in San Francisco, who was also my boss in a way, but I guess they wanted to handle it in house, and my minority employment rep boss in San Francisco reported to Sacramento [California].  I mean, it was just a problem to file.  It was a big deal and my, the chief of the department of employment in Oakland ended up resigning early and I was so naive I went to his retirement dinner, you know, 'cuz I was like, I don't know, stuff just kinda, I didn't really see how I think it affected so much in my tunnel vision of like wrong, that's it, they shouldn't do this, and you know--.
Speaker 1: Well, you know that's by the same token they should have known it was wrong.
Speaker 2: Well, they did.
Speaker 1: It's a policy that was wrong from the time of its inception until we showed up and when we showed up it should have been a signal, hey, maybe we should change some of this before somebody blows a whistle (laughter).
Speaker 2: Like me.  And then I was kind of, at that point, I was pretty much untouchable because of my dad [William Byron Rumford], you know, although I wasn't doing it for--it was wrong.  People stopped speaking to me.  Oh, my gosh.  There was a lot of pressure.  It was a really difficult time.  Even my mother [Elsie Carrington Rumford] said something to me.  She said, you know--these are peoples' livelihoods.  They're gonna have to--you know, she was worried people were gonna get fired and what they might do to me.  You be careful, is what she said.
Speaker 1: But is there really an unrisky way to create a social change of that kind?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know.  In hind sight, you know, maybe I could have gone to the local Oakland people and tried to work it out, but--
Speaker 1: You know, the usual mantra is be patient.
Speaker 2: No, but I wasn't--and the only thing, the young people, there were about three or four young people who worked in the office, it was a big office, and they kinda stuck with me through it, but it was, it was difficult.  It was some real, real difficult times.  I ended up moving to a different office, but I wasn't gonna move out till I was ready.  They didn't move me out.  I just waited, but there was a lot of pressure, lots and lots of pressure.
Story_ID: 244877
Speaker 1: Well, how long were you with the State [of California, department of employment]?
Speaker 2: I was with them from '67 [1967] to '70 [1970] and then I went to the City of Oakland [California] and worked there for just briefly in personnel.  The best job I ever had and the most money I ever made, but I had applied to graduate school and they accepted me at graduate school in Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California].
Speaker 1: Okay, now.  You were at the City of Oakland from '70 [1970] to, was it about a year?
Speaker 2: No, no, from '67 [1967] to '70 [1970]; Oh, oh, I'm sorry, City of Oakland.  No, no, no.  I was there for like two months.  Let me see.  I might have been there for three weeks.  I maybe should not even have mentioned that.  But, it was, to me, it was one of the most traumatic years of my life, because I changed jobs and I'll tell you the rest later, but it was that--I changed jobs, got accepted by the City of Oakland, making more money than I ever made in my life.  It was probably eight hundred dollars a month, and then I got accepted to grad school and I quit.
Story_ID: 244878
Speaker 1: Now, grad school where, where were you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) UC Berkeley [University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, California], social work, social welfare, social welfare.  And--.
Speaker 1: Now, why did you quit?
Speaker 2: Well, I had applied to grad school, but I hadn't gotten in.  I finally--I got a late acceptance to grad school so I quit the job, and that was hard--.
Speaker 1: Oh, and not grad school.
Speaker 2: I quit the City of Oakland [California].
Speaker 1: Okay, so what degree were you pursuing in grad school?
Speaker 2: Master's in Social Work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were there from 1970 to--
Speaker 2: I was there from 1970, October 1970 to December of '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's a short period of time (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's right.  Well, what happened, meanwhile, my ex-husband had come on the scene.  He, I had met him and then he went to Vietnam, and then--
Speaker 1: When did you meet him?
Speaker 2: Oh, I met him in '68 [1968] and he was living in Maryland at the time.
Speaker 1: When did you get married?
Speaker 2: In '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, what happened was I had just got into grad school.  He was being released from Vietnam, going back to Maryland and he said, "Let's get married."  So, I withdrew from UC Berkeley and moved to Maryland, where I went to Howard [University] in [Washington] D.C.  Transferred to Howard in D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you finished your degree at Howard?
Speaker 2: No.  So then, that's why I said this is the craziest year of my life.  So, I got into Howard.  I started in '71 [1971]. I started Howard.  And then Bert [ph.] got out of the [U.S.] military in '72 [1972] and got a, I wanted to stay back there, but he got a job out here in Los Angeles [California], so I transferred to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I went to three graduate schools for social work.
Speaker 1: So you finally finished up at UCLA?
Speaker 2: I finished at UCLA.
Speaker 1: And you got a master's in social work.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 244879
Speaker 1: What was your thesis on?
Speaker 2: My thesis was on black suicide.  Suicide among blacks, and it was, I guess a very interesting topic to a lot of people at that time, so I got involved with the local [Los Angeles] Suicide Prevention Center here [Los Angeles, California], 'cuz I actually had used them to access files at the coroner's office to do my study, and so I got to know the Litmans and Farberows who headed up the Suicide Prevention Center, and Heilig, [Sam] Mickey Heilig.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: Heilig?  H-E-I-L-I-G.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Mickey Heilig.  And  Bob Litman [Dr. Robert Litman] and  Norm Farberow [Dr. Norman Farberow], and they were impressed with my study and I presented to them, and then I was asked to present to the National Association of Suicidality [sic. American Association of Suicidology (AAS)] and the, I was also asked to present to the National Association of Black Social Workers [NABSW] on it at their convention and asked to write a chapter for a book that was to be used at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] on suicide prevention and health issues, and I did that and I spoke a lot around and did a few TV shows, TV interviews, and--because it was a very interesting topic, I think, because I was dispelling the myth that African Americans don't commit suicide and the rates among young people were even higher, young black males were higher than their white counterparts.
Speaker 2: Now, this is important because black people used to say all the time, and some still say that black folks don't kill themselves, they were killing white people or each other, because they were definitely not killing themselves, you know, but I think the challenge to that around, in the late '60s [1960s] or early '70s [1970s], there was a book on black rage ['Black Rage'] that came out by [HistoryMaker Dr. Price] Cobbs and [William] Grier, and they, in the book they cited at least a couple cases of black people in such psychological despair that they committed suicide.  These were like educated black people that had reached the glass ceiling, or people that just weren't allowed to achieve the goals that they set for themselves because of discrimination and they kill themselves.  Now, what was the folks of your study in and what you found?
Speaker 1: Well, what I found, I just, I looked at the black suicides in L.A. County [Los Angeles County, California] for a period of time, and both and female, and what I found was that--I found some of what you say in terms of that syndrome where the older people who couldn't cope with the fact that they couldn't go beyond their dream, that they had reached a glass ceiling, but more often what I found was young people, male and female, who had lost a love relationship and had committed suicide as a result of the loss of a love relationship.  "Baby, I can't live without you" syndrome.  And, the males you know, usually, they very often use firearms, women used pills or drugs, but it seemed to me that, and most of these people were not the affluent, actually they were right across the board but, you know, some were in poverty and some were middle. But it seemed that the love relationship was the primary thing that kind of put them over the edge, and some of them left notes and so forth. And that also, what I see as, or what I saw at the time, was that there are other ways that people just kind of slowly kill themselves.  You know, for instance using drugs and alcohol so that, you know, a lot of people may not have killed themselves, but they were abusing substances to try to cope with the pain of life.
Story_ID: 244880
Speaker 1: That's something you don't hear a lot about.  It doesn't seem--well, but people say it, you know, I've heard people say you're trying to kill yourself, and they kind of glibly say it, but you're saying this is actually true on some level.  People are--sort of--
Speaker 2: I think so, I think so, yeah, and then you see it sometimes the way people set themselves up in terms of the police.  They'll shoot.  We recently had somebody that shot into a police station.  You know, just kind of things that will bring it on, that will bring on their death.  So, I really saw a lot of despair in these people and not, and most of them weren't old enough to have reached that ceiling.  I mean, these were younger people who were just really--.
Speaker 1: It's love--love relationships more than anything else?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum.  Very significant to them, love relationships.  Um-hum.  They call it the "Baby, I can't live without you" syndrome.  And it's very sad, you know, but they didn't seem to have good coping skills.  They didn't know how to cope with the loss in a more appropriate way.  I took a course in suicide at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], and that's what got me interested in this, because the teacher said that, you know, young blacks were committing suicide at a higher rate and I was like, ohhh, like you thought, oh no, black people don't commit suicide, you know.  But, you know, then with the research I found that it was really true and it was very disturbing to me and that's why I kind of got all into it and wanted to learn more and do my thesis on it.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us something about what rate black people in your study are committing suicide?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  I think it was, let's see, it was about 11, 11 point--it's been a while and I really hate to misquote the rate, but I think it's about 11.1 per hundred thousand.  I used to know this stuff like the back of my hand.  I just, as many speeches as I gave on this.  I could go pull out a speech (laughter).
Speaker 1: That would be like--
Speaker 2: You know, I can't remember what the white rate was.  I need to be able to commit the--
Speaker 1: Boil it down to maybe one out of every how many black people?
Speaker 2: Well, no, they do it by per hundred thousand, and that's how they compared the black rate with the white rate, the counterpart.  Oh, shoot.
Speaker 1: Well, compared to white people, are we, black people committing suicide at a higher rate or lower rate?
Speaker 2: Among the young people, especially young black males.
Speaker 1: They're committing suicide at a higher rate? Than black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At a higher rate than white people, than their white counterparts.
Story_ID: 244881
Speaker 1: Well, we were discussing your thesis on black suicide, suicide of young African Americans versus suicide of European Americans of the same age group, and just some general findings.
Speaker 2: Well, you know--actually a black psychoanalyst at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] back in 1938, noted that blacks attempted suicide as frequently as whites but did not complete it as often, and I think a lot of the attempts were just not counted, you know.  A lot of attempts especially in that period of time, a lot of black people lived in rural areas and they just didn't have a sophistication, sophisticated ways of counting suicides then and then in New York City [New York, New York], Hendon [ph.] noted later that his book in 1971, that blacks had a higher suicide rate than whites in New York City since 1920, but he's specifically talking about black youth, fifteen to twenty-four, so I think that's the--
Speaker 1: Is that the time period or the age group that's more susceptible to suicide?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Young males especially, young black males, and young being fifteen to twenty-four.
Speaker 1: And there is a motivation usually like a lovelorn type of a situation.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what has been found to be.  I think, you know, for young people there's a lot of, well, it's a period that all people, you know, bonding during that youth, not just black people but all people are looking for that bonding, that closeness of the mate to, that cares about them, and I think for African Americans who may not have a lot of other things in their lives, they may not have possessions or they didn't see education as a way out, they put a lot of emphasis on these love relationships, and when there was a loss of a love relationship, this was devastating to them and humiliating to them, and they saw suicide as a way out of the pain.  So, I know this dispels that blacks don't commit suicide, but, and the rates are lower when you compare older African Americans with white people, the rates are lower with suicide, but when you're looking at youth the rates are significantly higher and apparently it's been this way for a long time.
Speaker 1: Is there a reason for it, do you think?  You think the reason has to do with the support system for youth, which people are criticizing.  A lot of people say we don't have enough support for our youth; that's why they're in a lot of trouble.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  I think, noting that one study was done in New York, I think a lot of this can be related to, right, the lack of support, the lack of extended family support.  I think when you live in crowded areas, urban areas, and, you know, the family may be in the South, I think it's harder to get that kind of support that you need.
Speaker 1: With all the single mothers, no father now--some of the mothers work most of the time you're being raised by a grandmother and gotten down to (unclear), there may not be anybody there, period.
Speaker 2: Very often it does seem to be like that, but these people didn't seem to have hope that their future was, could be better.  They didn't have job possibilities or educational possibilities and, like you say, the extended family.  They may be living with the grandmother, but very often when people are living with the grandmother, it's because the mother isn't around.  In the old days, there was the grandmother that was around as well as the mother that was around.  There were more people, relatives, to turn to, and I think that puts more pressure on the love relationship when you don't have a lot of other people surrounding you with love, people to turn to.  Also, you know a love relationship is a status symbol to a lot of young people, and that loss, you know, just like a loss of a high position, you know, for an older white male.  It's devastating, you know.  It's a major loss.
Story_ID: 244882
Speaker 1: For this study now you gained a little bit of notoriety.  You said you appeared on some--can you tell us about that and some of the notoriety you gained as a result of this study?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I spoke to the, a few national conventions, and I spoke at Cal State LA [California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], and UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] I presented. And I was invited to assist with 'The Jeffersons' television show when they did an episode on the suicide that the--I believe it was the maid was considering suicide, and they bought my thesis, and I was just asked to write a proposal for further study by both UCLA, the professor up there was [Leonard] Schneiderman, who was very well known in the field of suicide, and also by the [Los Angeles] Suicide Prevention Center [Los Angeles, California].  They requested I do further study, but what happened is I kind of got off into having children and my family (laughter) and I never pursued that.  But it is an interest of mine and it certainly was something I had wanted to do and maybe even go back and get a Ph.D. in the area or a DSW [doctor of social work] in the area and focus on the area of suicide.
Story_ID: 244883
Speaker 1: Can you kind of walk us through your career now, to where you are today?
Speaker 2: All right.  I finished UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] in '73, 1973, and I took a job at the [Los Angeles] Suicide Prevention Center [Los Angeles, California].  They offered me a job, you know, kind of hoping that we could still have opportunity to do more research, and I worked there until 1975, when my first child was born. And then I worked--I went back to work in a marriage and family child agency [El Nido Family Center] where I did counseling of kids, working with families, and had an opportunity to work, doing some work in the schools, doing groups, seeing groups of children in schools, kids who were having problems adjusting to school for one reason or another. And then I had my second child in 1978, and I continued to work in that field, I mean for that agency until I had my third child, actually, in 1981, and then I didn't work for a couple of years.  Then I went to the Los Angeles Unified School District, where I became a psychiatric social worker, and worked in a project called Carson Child Guidance Program, where we worked with children at the school site, children who were having difficulties, just a myriad of problems anywhere from adjusting to a divorce, parental substance abuse, aggressive behavior, and I really enjoyed working with kids in the schools and so I've maintained.  I've stayed with the school system ever since 1985, when I joined the school system.  I work now in two schools that are located closer to my home, and I work as a consultant to teachers and administrators and see children individually and in group and work with parents assisting them to find resources as well as providing them with counseling regarding parenting.
Story_ID: 244884
Speaker 1: So, there are so many, I guess, parenting, yeah, and children becoming parents themselves and, as a, probably, a concern in schools.
Speaker 2: Well, there are many young, yes, there are many young parents who really haven't kind of developed themselves, so they're kind of developing themselves, so they're kind of developing as they're parenting. But what I found as a parent myself is there's no cookbook to parenting, and it's a very hard thing to do and I think people kind of take it for granted, see it as something very simple, you know, you just have a baby and then you feed the baby.  But parenting is not that easy.  It's very hard, it's very demanding and I think we all could, perhaps, use some parenting assistance, even as an older mother, I was in my thirties when I had my children, and I read books on parenting, because I feel it is very difficult and each child is very different and each different personality requires different techniques to deal with them, and so, yes, I do give advice to parents and parents come in requesting help.  They don't know how to deal with situations.  The child won't do this, won't do that.  Children arguing, children fighting, all kinds of different behaviors that we're seeing, as well as the special education services that we provide with children who are autistic and so forth, and parents come in looking for assistance with that type of child as well.
Story_ID: 244885
Speaker 1: What's the most common, I guess, psychological problem you have to deal with in your position?  Or is there one?
Speaker 2: Well, if we're talking about disorders, I think we see a lot of children with an attention deficit disorder frequently, and those are--with hyperactivity very often, and those are the kids that have trouble paying attention, have trouble sitting still, have trouble being in class because they're very difficult for the teacher to deal with because they're constantly getting up, talking out, impulsive, and I think that would probably be the most common disorder.  We see a lot more kids who are autistic, many of them mildly so, but we do see a lot more kids that are autistic.  But, with the attention deficit disorder, child gets, it's usually very, very difficult for the teacher and also difficult for the parent because the parent is the one that is being called daily (laughter) about the child's behavior.  At home, it's not as hard because the child is not required to sit in a desk, or sit at a desk, or sit in a chair for a long period of time, and we can frequently assist parents more easily with helping this kind of a child at home, because the kids are active and you can get them involved in a lot of physical activities, even vacuuming, for instance, you know, which a lot of the kids really like to do because they're just always needing to be in motion, as well as things like sports and that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 244886
Speaker 1: What are your future plans?  Are you satisfied doing what you're doing now [psychiatric work, School Mental Health program, Los Angeles Unified School District] or do you--?
Speaker 2: Well, I really do like, I really do like what I'm doing now.  I was in a supervisory position a couple of years ago, where I was actually training social workers and supervising social workers and I think I really, although I enjoyed it for a period of time, I kind of, I really think I prefer actually seeing the kids at this point, and doing the direct service.  I think, I just really get a lot of joy from working with children and seeing the light go on in their eyes when they're feeling better, you know, and a lot of kids are in a lot of pain and I like to be able to provide that light for them and, you know, of course the pain is from various, for various reasons, for no fault of their own mostly, but for kids who can't learn easily and they're called stupid, by their peers and sometimes even by their parents, and you know, to begin to help them identify other parts of themselves, the artistic part or the athletic part or the, you know, some creativity that they have that other kids don't have, and to let them know they can learn.  People learn at different paces.  I think it's--I get a lot of joy out of that.
Story_ID: 244887
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, working at the school sites--I work at two school sites and both of them have significant population, African American population, and I am concerned, I am concerned about the hopelessness of many of the parents I see, and that this hopelessness is kind of being passed down to the children.  The, many of the kids just--having girls see babies as their future, boys see sports as their future, rappers, they want to be rappers or athletes and, of course, we know there can only be so many musicians and there can only be so many athletes who make it to the top. And but they don't look at trades, so they don't look at college.  As a matter of fact, I had some kids ask me the other day, "What is college?"  I was shocked.  I couldn't even believe, you know, because we do have career days at school, and I don't know what happened.  I know they weren't joking with me.  So, I don't--and I don't think everybody has to go to college.  I don't feel that that's a necessity and for some it would be very difficult, as many of the children I work with are having trouble reading and they're in fifth grade, so I don't, you know, I don't necessarily see college as the way out for everybody, or the way to, you know, the land of opportunity, but I do see finding your niche in terms of a trade maybe, because we still do need people to be beauticians.  We need people to be carpenters.  We need, you know--there are other opportunities to repair cars, and there are skills that can be developed, but I don't know that they had exposure, these kids have enough exposure to the variety of trades available, as well as colleges available, and so my concern is for, yeah, the future generation.  I don't feel there is the hope that there was in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s] and I talked to my friends who grew up in the South and, you know, many of the, they said they wanted to get out and go to the land of opportunity, and many of those that didn't even leave, still, you know, there was a feeling of hope. And I think, even when I grew up in Berkeley [California], I think a lot of the people who, a lot of the young people my age growing up in Berkeley had role models such as my father [William Byron Rumford].  You know, their parents may not have gone to college or they, you know, but they had role models right there in the community, and I don't think that many of our urban areas have the role models so accessible.  Maybe teachers, but not the variety that we had, you know, when I was growing up in the community.
Story_ID: 244888
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you'd do differently?
Speaker 2: Hm.  (Laughter) At this point in my life, I don't think there is anything that I would do differently right now, no.  I can't think of anything.  I kind of wish I had been able to do more in the area of, research in the area of suicide.  I really wanted to stick with it, because it was, I was kind of taking off with it and I was enjoying it, but I'm kind of a focused person, and I really had a hard time focusing on that and doing the child rearing.  I found it much easier to work, you know, with an agency and kind of come home and be mom, work with an agency doing the--and work with the school district [Los Angeles Unified School District] doing the counseling and then come home and be mom, whereas my research, when I was doing the research it was just consuming. (Laughter)  I wasn't able to cut it off and I did much, and most of it I did before I had kids, so it was easier for me to be consumed by that.  But--that's the only thing I was--and that's not a real strong regret, you know.
Story_ID: 244889
Speaker 1: Likewise, I guess, just looking back over everything you've done to this point, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy. Well, you know I would like to think that I made a difference in the lives of children. And I feel that I have.  I'm in contact with some people that I supervised years ago, actually in the, I guess it would have been the mid-'80s [1980s] and, who--because I think that, you know perhaps they found something--. We had a connection and I was training them to connect with kids and I think, I just think that that's kind of my calling is, you know, the connecting; connecting with kids and connecting with people. And I would like to think that I, you know, had given kids hope and that they would, as they got older, be able to look for a therapist or counselors when needed, and utilized help as needed and trust people in the profession.  A lot of people don't like social workers (laughter) but I'd like to think that they would utilize our assistance when needed, or the assistance of somebody in the kind of helping profession.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And also, I'd like my legacy, I'd like to think I raised three African American male children who are thoughtful, kind, responsible, loving individuals.
Story_ID: 244890
Speaker 1: Now they're all grown now, right?  They're young but they're grown, right? You have three boys?
Speaker 2: Three boys, three young men, right, and they're all good people, good people.  Never had a problem out of anybody.  Never had, you know, no police activity, no never.  Never had suspension, nothing.  Good kids, they were good kids and now they're good young adults, and are caring, bright, young men who I think are up for the challenges of the day.  I'd like to think that I gave them a sense of positive identity about being African American, as I was raised.  That was one of the things that, you know, there's a lot of people you come across, I have come across anyway, throughout my whole lifetime, who apply negative adjectives to African Americans.  You know, we can't this and we're not--.  I never got that at home.  Never, never, and even it wasn't just those who were educated were okay, but that never--. We were all okay.  Some may not have utilized their potential.
Speaker 1: How did your parents [Elsie Carrington Rumford and William Byron Rumford] feel about your career?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, they were okay.  My mother wanted me to be a teacher.  She said don't you want to be a teacher and get your summers off and, you know, and you're going into social work and I don't think she thought--. I think she was concerned that I might run into maybe some unsavory characters in my field and I have, you know, 'cause I've worked in a drug abuse program and, you know, but basically it was okay.  It was just she preferred teaching and dad wanted me to a pharmacist so I could take over the drugstore [Rumford Pharmacy], but like I said, I'm not, I wasn't very good in science, so that was kind of a problem, and I don't know, for some reason I never wanted to teach.  My mother was a teacher, my aunts were teachers, but I never wanted to teach, so I think, you know there was some concern, concern for my safety.  They knew, you know, what I might have to do sometimes, to go into sometimes, to go into homes and so forth and so on, where they weren't sure whether it was the best thing to do, but I was kind of bent on doing it, and it didn't, you know--they accepted it.
Story_ID: 244891
Speaker 1: Now, we have one last question, but before I ask it, is there anything else that we have not asked you?  Is there something that you want to address that we have not asked about?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you get your values usually from your parents, right?  Sometimes your values become, you get as a result of not wanting to be like your parents, or you know, repelling what they're about, rejecting what they're about but, you know, I was thinking a lot, this has really been very interesting to me to go through old pictures, to go through all this newspaper articles and the books and just read all this about my family and, as a matter of fact, it's been a very emotional catharsis for me, it's really been--. Because it's just, most everybody is deceased and, you know, I got in touch with missing them and what they meant to me, and I came across values and I think, as something I thought I should discuss and I referred to it earlier but I think that the value I got from my family was that success is both personal and professional fulfillment. And both my--well especially my father [William Byron Rumford] had professional fulfillment, but he also had personal fulfillment.  I don't think all, you know, he's a successful politician, but certainly all successful politicians do not have personal fulfillment, and I think the personal fulfillment came from picking the right woman to be by his side because she was there good and bad days, and she kept the family together so that we were there for him and he was there for us.  And I think that is success.  He wasn't, my dad wasn't materialistic, and my mother [Elsie Carrington Rumford] wasn't really materialistic either, although I, you know, I think she might have wanted a more beautiful house and she said it, you know, but they weren't able to move out of the district and for some one reason or another, she never got it.  But, they were happy with the friends, the family, striving, and achieving; that fulfillment that you get when you accomplish.  And I don't know, I wanted to say that, and I think, as I think of both of them, really, I think of kindness, humor, especially my father with the humor, although my mother loved to laugh, but my father was funny, so of course he provided that vehicle for her. (Laughter)  But, kindness, humor, compassion, pride, a lot of pride.  People feeling very proud about being who we are, African American folks, having survived, humble, humility, not better than the other person because you have achieved, so let's help bring them along.  I think that kind of sums up what I was thinking about as I went through all the photos and the book and all the newspaper articles.  The community loved them, but I think they loved the community just as much, and so--. That's really pretty much what I want to share with you.
Story_ID: 244892
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to the legacy, but a little bit different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to be remembered for, you know--I kind of hesitate to say this but, for being a good mother because I know, you know, that I have faults like everybody else and I didn't always do the right thing or say the right thing at the right time, but I--. Mothering was very important to me and for working up to my capacity on my job, you know, doing the best I could.  Again, those were the values, my family values, hard work, and no work was too menial.  If you're going to be a street sweeper, you be the best street sweeper, that kind of thing.  So, and being a good friend.
Story_ID: 244893
Speaker 1: Well, on the left is, I'm sitting there next to my mother, Elsie [Carrington] Rumford, and seated next to my mother is my brother, William Byron Rumford, Jr., and then his wife, Margaret [ph.], and then my husband at the time, Bert Christian [ph.].  Standing are my sons, Kareem [ph.] Christian, Hassan [ph.] Christian, and then is my nephew, my niece's husband, Glenn Colbert [ph.], my niece, Joanie Colbert [ph.], and my youngest son, Omarius [ph.]; oh, and then Brandon, their oldest son, Brandon, is next to my son, Omari [ph.].
Speaker 2: A school picture of me and my classmates, and, I--
Speaker 1: You need to skip to the left or (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry.  This is an elementary school picture of me when I was in second grade.  Those are my classmates.
Speaker 1: And where are you?
Speaker 2: This is Longfellow Elementary School [Longfellow School] in Berkeley, California.
Speaker 1: Where are--
Speaker 2: Oh, where am I in the picture.  (Laughter)  I'm two--
Speaker 1: Just point.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Taken in San Francisco [California], and it was taken by her good friend, Winnie Young [ph.], and I love this picture.  I really and truly love this picture of her, because it's an older picture of her; you know, it shows her age but it also just kind of shows the essence of her with her matching red purse and shoes and blouse (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, once again, that's your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me when I was about two years old, and it was taken in Berkeley, California.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me when I was about three, and again, it's taken in Berkeley, California.  I was the first girl after two boys so, you know, they were anxious to take pictures (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my parents, taken the year they got married, and it was actually given to a friend, and I guess when the friend passed, they got the picture back and I love this picture.
Speaker 2: Dedicated to our friend Isaac--Isiah.
Speaker 1: Isaiah, um-hum.  Yeah, Isiah Fletcher was a close family friend.  I grew up knowing him; as a matter of fact, he tutored me in math and was one of those people that was just a math genius but then they weren't hiring African Americans to do a lot of work with math and so he wasn't able to utilize his skills on his job, but he was a college graduate and majored in math.
Speaker 2: That was, that's a picture of me and my family at my cotillion.  I was presented by The Links [Incorporated] cotillion, at The Links cotillion in 1963, I'm sorry, '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: That's my uncle, Chauncey [Rumford, Jr.], my father's brother on the left, and my father is on the other side of me, and then my mother and my father's uncle, Clarence Johnson.
Speaker 2: Well, you just can't imagine my surprise when I saw myself on the cover of Jet magazine in 1962.  I was completely shocked.  This again was when I was a debutante in The Links cotillion, and I was very pleasantly surprised to see myself on the cover of Jet.
Speaker 1: You'd be surprised to see yourself in the center-- (laughter).
Speaker 2: In the centerfold?  (Laughter)  Well, I would, do you sync pictures to the centerfold?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah--.
Speaker 2: He asked me to do--maybe two or three years after that.  I think so.  I think it was--by the way what was his name--it might have been.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And this is a picture of me taken in Sacramento [California].  I used to go to Sacramento during Easter break when the legislature [California State Assembly] was still in session actually, but it was my Easter break from school and I used to go up there and work as a page of the legislature, and my father was really proud to bring me up there, and I had fun (laughter).
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my grandmother.  That's the picture on the program from her funeral service.  This is my father's mother, Margaret Williams.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me on a horse, taken in (unclear), I can't read the date.  Can you read the date?  19--
Speaker 2: Forty-seven [1947], I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I was two.  It was taken in 1947.  I was two years old.  You're going to do a lot of editing on all this, huh?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture taken of my father, a little earlier than actually--actually the freeway [State Route 24] was named after him.  They named a portion of the freeway the William Byron Rumford freeway and that happened in 1981.  It was really nice that they did it while he was alive and could enjoy accolades.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my parents' wedding, it was in the newspaper.  They married October 5, 1932.  They were married for fifty-three years.
Speaker 1: And the top one is--
Speaker 2: The top one is a picture of my brother when he was running for city councilman, and he ran twice for city council and was successful in getting that position.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Top left is a picture of my father, holding my oldest son and he was about three at that time, and he's thirty now, so this picture's twenty-seven years old, and my father really loved children and he really enjoyed that.
Speaker 1: The picture next is my middle son when he was an achiever.  He was presented by The Links as one of those that were honored for their achievements and that picture is taken in 1996, when he graduated from high school.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Well, but that year they didn't.  They just called it the achiever event, and he graduated from Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], and he's now working for Congressman--Congresswoman [Juanita] Millender-McDonald.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of Hassan, my middle son, and Kareem, my older son.  Kareem is now working at Raytheon [Company] and has his master's [degree] in computer science and is a software engineer.
Speaker 1: It's a picture of my brother blowing out his candles on his cake.  I believe that was his sixtieth birthday and we were all celebrating.
Speaker 2: That's when my oldest son was honored as a Links achiever, and we have here his godparents, Yvette and Richard Townsend [ph.], his girlfriend, my son's girlfriend at the time, my ex-husband's mother, Bernice Christian [ph.], my mother, Elsie Rumford, my son's godmother, Sandra Robinson [ph.], Hassan Christian, and Bert Christian.
Speaker 1: My parents when they lived in Washington, D.C.  My father worked for the Federal Trade Commission back in D.C. from 1970 to 1975, and you see they're adjusting to the snow there (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a baby picture of my oldest son, Kareem, and he was about six months there.
Speaker 1: That's a young, a picture of my youngest son, Omari, and he was about seven there.  That was a Halloween picture.
Speaker 2: All three boys seeing the Easter bunny (laughter) and they looked to be about, let's see, Hassan's about three, Omari's about six months, and Kareem is six.
Speaker 1: Those are my nephews.  Those are my great-nephews, my niece's sons, Brandon and Bryan Colbert [ph.].
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my oldest son when he was at Morehouse College, on the right, and my youngest son as he holds his soccer ball.  He loved soccer, Omari.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me with my mother and my niece, and I think my mother was eighty there.  I think that was a picture when she turned eighty, and my niece, Joanie Colbert, and I was helping her celebrate.
Speaker 2: Omari's picture when he was in preschool.  He was about four.
Speaker 1: This is my nephew, Byron, William Byron Rumford, III.  We call him Byron, and his daughter, Tiana [ph.].
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my middle son, Hassan, when he graduated from eighth grade, and me (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my oldest son, Kareem, when he finished Morehouse College.
Speaker 2: All right, that's the cover of a book ['William Byron Rumford, The Life and Public Services of a California Legislator: A Biography'] written by Lawrence [P.] Crouchett. He did a biography on my father in 1984, and it was, it's a wonderful book because it gives the history of the family as well as insight into the political arena of the day.  It takes him all the way from birth until 1984, which was really getting toward the end of his life and a lot of his accomplishments are noted in there as well as a lot of wonderful pictures of the family and his political associates as well. That's a baby picture of my father.  He was five months old at the time.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, this is a picture of my father as he graduated from UC School of Pharmacy, University of California School of Pharmacy [San Francisco College of Pharmacy, University of California San Francisco Medical Center, San Francisco, California] in 1931.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my parents and it kind of, it really does give the essence (laughter) of my parents, as they were still courting, I believe, at that time.  Mother has her hat on, which is kind of typical.  My father had his hat on, kind of typical of him, and I just love the pose.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my family on the steps of the church [First AME Church (FAME), Oakland, California], and starting on the left is my Aunt Amy [ph.], my mother's sister; my mother, Elsie; my father, William Byron [Rumford]; my grandmother, Rebecca [Carrington]; my Aunt Caroline [ph.]; a cousin, Louise [ph.]; my brother, Randy; and then I'm in the center.  Do I have to name all these people?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is the signing of the Fair Employment Practices Commission bill [California Fair Employment Practices Act of 1959], which allowed for people in California to have a place to take their complaints regarding discrimination and employment.  All these people were involved in the development of the bill.  [HistoryMaker Augustus F.] "Gus" Hawkins, you might see on the right there, the far right with the glasses, and he was instrumental in getting the bill passed as well.  He used to submit the bill one year, my father would submit it the alternate year, and they both worked together on this kind of thing.  Also, some of these people were not legislators, but they were people who were working with the legislature on the passage of the bill.
