Story_ID: 12265
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  And, sir, would you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sanford T. Roach, S-A-N-F-O-R-D, T., which is for Thomas, R-O-A-C-H, Roach.
Speaker 1: All right, and now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth, February 26, 1916, Frankfort, Kentucky, which is the capital city of Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Presently retired.
Speaker 1: And you were?
Speaker 2: I was a, an athletic coach and science teacher in the high schools of Danville, Kentucky and Lexington, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: And you've also been working as a state--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I've, my--and also in the state government.  I worked, when I retired from public school system, I worked in state government.  And then I also worked in the mayor's office in Lexington, Kentucky.  And at present I am working for my wife.
Speaker 1: But you're also on a commission.  It's not a job, but it's a position that you're on the--?
Speaker 2: At the present time, I'm serving on the transition team here in Lexington, Kentucky which we just had a mayoral election, election so I'm serving on that team.  But I do serve some other positions in the city, such as vice chairman for the Housing Authority and chairman of the black and--of Robert H. Williams Cultural Center [Lexington, Kentucky].  I'm on the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky] Athletic Board and the Lexington Public Cemetery.  So I keep busy, along with my church, church affiliation.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: This is December the--what is it?
Speaker 1: The tenth.
Speaker 2: Tenth, yes, (laughter)--
Speaker 1: 2002.
Speaker 2: 2000, right.
Speaker 1: 2002.
Speaker 2: Okay, 2002.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Lexington, Kentucky at the Urban League Office on Dewey Street.  I don't know the address, but it is the Lexington--Urban League Office on Dewey Street.  The CEO is P. G. Peeples.
Story_ID: 12266
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chicken, doesn't matter whether it's broiled, fried or what.  It's chicken.  That's my favorite meat.  My favorite vegetable will be cabbage, broccoli.
Speaker 1: All right.  Can you tell us what your favorite time of the year is?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year.  It would be somewhere between September and March.  I'm saying that because of the athletic season is between September--we're playing football.  And that goes through until some times after December.  Then we pick up with basketball.  That goes to the end of March.  So that's my favorite seasons.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.  My favorite color is blue, and I sometimes go for purple or lavender, but blue is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: All right, and do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, the sunny Pacific [Ocean] Hawaii is my favorite destination.  I've been there several times.  I love it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have, sir, a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite--well, it'll be biblical, but it's favorite.  "Do unto others as you have others do unto you."  That's my favorite.
Story_ID: 12267
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family background, and how much do you know about the origins of your family.  And how far can you go back?
Speaker 2: Well, I can go back, I guess on my--let's see on my father's side, I can go back to my--our grand, my grandfather.  And I could go back a little further with a family called the Roaches.  They were Caucasians, and they come on through to my grandfather who is the father of my father.  And then I, naturally, I had my father.  And his mother, which would be my grandmother, and that's on my father's side.  That's it.
Speaker 1: Now, can you tell me about the Roaches, these Caucasians?  Were they like slave owners or something?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  No, they were just--and the only thing I can say is it came up through, from my grandfather.  They were very close friends who helped raise him.  That's where he got his name.  So, but he was not a slave.  And they were just friends, I guess of the--
Speaker 1: But they weren't related to him?
Speaker 2: And, no, they just, but he got his name from them, right, now so I don't--that's about as far as I can go with that.
Speaker 1: But was he free?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right.  He's never been a slave.  He was free.  And that's the reason I'm saying they weren't slave owners.  But they were very, I'll say, moderately rich whites in the, in the area.
Speaker 1: And this would have been in the nineteenth century, right?
Speaker 2: The eighteenth.
Speaker 1: That's the nineteenth century.
Speaker 2: 1800s, yes.
Speaker 1: That would be the nineteenth century.
Speaker 2: Nineteenth century.  So, but--that's, no, there weren't no--they had no slaves in our family to my knowledge.  And as I mentioned back and on my mother's side, coming through my mother, I can go far as my grandfather, once again, who was married to my mother's mother.  And they had two children, my mother and her brother.
Story_ID: 12268
Speaker 1: My mother married Thomas Roach, which is my father.  His name was Thomas Washington Roach.
Speaker 2: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 1: T-H-O-M-A-S, Thomas, W-A-S-H-I-N-G-T-O-N, Washington, Roach, R-O-A-C-H.
Speaker 2: The reason why we do that because there's a trans--what do you call it?  Mixer, somebody does transcription.
Speaker 1: Yes, transcription.  And we have mother's whose name was Jessie Pendleton Jackson.
Speaker 2: Can you spell that for us, sir?
Speaker 1: J-E-S-S-I-E, P-E-N-D-L-E-T-O-N, J-A-C-K-S-O-N, Jackson.  And--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  What was your father's birth date and what was your mother's birth date and where were they born?
Speaker 1: Oh, man, I can't--offhand I cannot tell you my father's birthday nor my mother's birthday.  I just can't give you those, I'm sorry, I can't.
Speaker 2: Okay, and where they born?
Speaker 1: Oh, my father was born in Mercer County, Harrodsburg, Kentucky.  My mother was born in Frankfort, Kentucky, as the place my birth.
Speaker 2: Now, did they have a story that they passed down to you about how they met?
Speaker 1: Well, the only story I've heard, they met at a place called Kentucky States--well, it's called Kentucky State University [Frankfort, Kentucky].  Back when they met, it was called Kentucky State Industrial College.  And that's where they met.  And, of course, the Kentucky State's name has evolved from Kentucky State University, up, until Kentucky State University now.  When they were in school, the young men and young ladies walked on different sides of the street.  But, so they were able to get together anyway (laughter).  They lived--they didn't live on the, in the dormitories on the so-called campus at that--they lived in the downtown part of Frankfort, which is called.  And it's called Craw because of the fact that when the Kentucky River would rise during flooding times, that the crawfish or crayfish would come up out of the sewer and flood the streets.  And therefore, they called the place Craw.  That's where they--and I think their sweetheart courtship carried from Craw to the college and so forth.
Speaker 2: Okay, can you tell us about your father's life, as much as you can and what kind of person was he?  Where did he go to school, and what did he do?
Speaker 1: Of course, I mentioned the fact my father was born in, in Mercer County, which is Harrodsburg, Kentucky, attended a school called West Side High School in Harrodsburg; somewhat a farm life young fellow.  And his father wanted him to, didn't want him to be a farmer.  He wanted him to be a dentist or a doctor.  So he, fortunately, he was, his father was able to send him to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] where he finished in dentistry.  A great individual.  I was fortunate enough to know him for about seventeen years cause he passed during my seventeenth year.  He wanted me to, to be a dentist.  And, frankly, I was on my way to be a dentist when my first wife took very ill, could not, couldn't see myself leaving her to go to matriculating college, which was in, at Howard.  So my fee for my initial was lost because I didn't, I didn't go.  So I stayed home with her because she stayed ill for about eight weeks, and I didn't want to leave her.  She had a serious operation.  That was the story of my life so far as my father is concerned.
Speaker 2: And what about your mother, you know, what did she like to do?
Speaker 1: Okay, my wife--my mother grew up in Frankfort, Kentucky.  And that's where she met my dad.  Her life, I can't tell too much about that, other than the fact that she became a school teacher later.  And she taught in two rural schools, one in Mercer County and to one in Garrett County.  And then later in life, she was able to go to Danville, Kentucky where my father was practicing dentistry.  And there she taught in a school called Bate High School [Danville, Kentucky].  She taught third grade in Bate High School.  And my father, being, was a dentist in that town, and had a very--I don't say lucrative practice, but it was a decent practice because I can remember sometimes that he would come home with chickens or eggs and things like this where his patients would pay him with these commodities to pull their teeth.  They wouldn't have the dollar, so they'd pay him with, with food and this type thing.  And he was a [Free] Mason.  In fact, he became the Grandmaster of Kentucky there, and which was the highest ranking I guess of the Masonics in the, in the state at that time.  My father bought a restaurant along with his dad.  They bought a restaurant called the Royal Palm.  It was a very large, very beautiful place there in Danville.  In fact, it was one of the most popular places in Danville.  And it was a beautiful restaurant.  They served, which they don't do now, home meals for people who, bachelors, who were bachelors, and they had no other meals.  So they'd come to the restaurant and have their breakfast and their lunches and so forth.  My father and during that particular time, he--we made our own ice cream.  And unfortunately, while, one day while he was making the ice cream, his sleeve was caught a machinery, the cogs of the machinery, and it just pulled his arm into a machine and really grind the lower part of his arm off.  So consequently, he was rushed to the hospital, and they had amputate his arm.  Fortunately, it was his left arm, and not his right because that was the arm--the right arm, he was right handed.  But after that incident--
Speaker 2: So he had a machine to make ice cream?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we used to have this big machine made ice cream, and these cogs were turning.  And while he was leaning over, his sleeve was caught in a wheel there, and it just pulled his--he couldn't get the shirt off, and it just pulled him on in.  And it was quite a tragedy at that time.  And, and I was--at that time, I was sixteen.  And he, he died one year later, I guess from worry and complications and so forth.  But he, he just succumbed one year later, my senior, I was a senior in high school at seventeen.
Speaker 2: Now, how old was he when he died?
Speaker 1: Forty-two.  So, I didn't want to go to college, but my mother made me go on--cause I wanted to stay home and take care of her.  But she said, she can do it by herself.  So she made (laughter)--I won't say made or forced, but she just encouraged me to go on to school.  And that's what I did.  I went on to K-State, which was Kentucky State College then.  And I stayed there my four years.
Story_ID: 12269
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Frankfort, [Kentucky] and the other place is Bates?
Speaker 2: Bates--Danville, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Danville.
Speaker 2: Danville, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  I actually grew up in Danville, Kentucky.  I know that because my parents moved there when I was five years of age.  I entered into the first grade at five and finished high school in Danville, in Danville.  But every summer, and every time I could, every vacation we had or holiday or whatever it was, I would always go back to Frankfort to stay with my grandmother.  I was just crazy about my grandmother, I was crazy--I loved Frankfort because we didn't have any parks at that time.  We just didn't have--as a black, we didn't have parks.  We'd play out in the middle of the street, and we'd always have, what you call--we called it "Batter-Up", two base, just two bases.  And we enjoyed that very, very much.  And I just loved going to Frankfort.  And back, of course, Danville, I have the school.  I went from, what?  First through twelfth with our--my mother was a school teacher, and, of course, she was a third grade teacher.  And, and I took part in the athletics at Bate High School [Danville, Kentucky].  I played football, basketball and track.
Speaker 1: What did Danville look like?  I mean what did it look like in terms of the community?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Danville was, well, Danville was a--well, Danville right now is a very pretty town.  It's very quiet, light industry.  It's the home of Centre College [Danville, Kentucky].  That's one of the more elite schools in the State of Kentucky.  And it's a private institution.  And they're mostly famous for the time they play Harvard.  Of course, maybe you wasn't born then.  They beat Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] six to nothing, and for a little ole college out of Kentucky--
Speaker 1: Football?
Speaker 2: Football--to go up there and beat Harvard, oh, that was quite something, you know.
Speaker 1: Centre College.
Speaker 2: Centre College.
Speaker 1: In Danville, Kentucky.
Speaker 2: In Danville, Kentucky.  And right now, that's--it's a very prestigious school here in Kentucky.  It's a private institution.  At one time, they had two campuses, one for boys and one for girls.  And the girls would be educated--back in those days, everything was segregated some way or another, either black or white or--
Speaker 1: Male or female.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Male or female, anyway, Centre College really and truly was our salvation at Bate for our athletic equipment, football equipment, particularly, because we didn't have any money to purchase all that expensive gear.  And the--not coach, but the athletic trainer, which was a black fellow, individual who saw to it that we got a lot of our equipment.  Of course, it was handed down equipment, it wasn't anything new, and, but we were glad to get it because it was sufficient for us to play in.  And nevertheless, back in those days, you'd be surprised, in a small town like that, there was a, a racial divide.  But people got along.  People got along, and see, on Sundays, we would, we would have our biggest games between the black youngsters and the white youngsters.  And we'd all go out in some field and play football or baseball or something like that.  And then after the game was over, we'd all go back to our parts of town.  And so, as you say, we knew where to go when it all over.  But I enjoyed my stay in Danville, Kentucky.  We went to the movies and things like this.  We--and you could take fifty cents and your girlfriend and have a good time going to the movies, popcorn or soda water or whatever you want to have, and take your girlfriend up to, to a movie.  So I enjoyed my stay in Danville.  As I mentioned, I finished high school in Danville.  I was salutatorian of my class.
Story_ID: 12270
Speaker 1: What kind of a little boy were you?  What did you like to do as a little boy?
Speaker 2: Shucks, I liked to play.  I, I was very competitive.  I liked to play, particularly, baseball.  I got off on Bate--but I liked football.  But baseball, I believe, was my interest.  And then we played a lot of cowboy and Indians.  I don't think they do that today--we always have certain group to be Indians, a certain group would be cowboys.  And we'd have little rubber slingshots, and we'd put--at the end of the sling, we'd put some paper, wad of paper, and we'd shoot each other.  And once--if you're hit, you know, you're dead.  And (laughter) this type thing.  But I don't think the youngsters don't play that game anymore.  That's too, (laughter) that's too, after all, too elementary, I guess.  And that's about it.  Now, I love--I didn't do any hunting, but my father [Thomas Roach] was a--he wasn't a, he didn't care that much about it--I don't want to say he didn't care, he didn't have time to hunt.  And so I didn't do that.  I just--
Speaker 1: Did you like to read?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, sure.  Yes, sir, particularly, 'Rover Boys'.  I never, the 'Rover Boys' series, 'Zane Gray', which was a cowboy series.  I loved it, loved it.  And so, yes, indeedy.  'Cause what did we do? And then we had, we had a number of plays back then, operettas and things like that.  So we'd always have a part in one of these plays.
Speaker 1: Now, were those staged by the people in town?
Speaker 2: Yeah, by the people in town, schoolteachers.  We called them operettas.  And they, they would perform about three nights, once they started, about three nights because the things we used to--were very popular.  And the auditorium, sometimes the parents would see all three shows, they'd come back and see all three of them.  But--and I never shall forget some of those good ole plays we used to have.  One particular was called, 'A Bella Barcelona'.  I never will forget that, 'Bella Barcelona'.
Speaker 1: What was it about?
Speaker 2: It was a Spanish play.  And the young girl or girls were playing in these Spanish costumes and do all this funny dancing, you know.  And the boys would wear these--I call them Mexican hats, big hats with tassles--on them, tassels or whatever.  And we'd have our tambourines.  Oh, we'd just have a good time.
Story_ID: 12271
Speaker 1: Tell me about school.  What school did you attend there?
Speaker 2: It was Bate High School [Danville, Kentucky], and it was a segregated school, that all schools in Kentucky in that time was segregated.  Bate High School went from the first through twelfth grade, and I, I finished, as I mentioned I finished and I played athlete--took part in the football and basketball, track.  My mother [Jessie Pendleton Jackson] was teaching in the school, with--at third grade.  She taught third grade in school.  And one--and believe it or not, after I finished college, that was my first job, back at my school.  I, I was somewhat apprehensive at first about going back there to teach because I, after all, I grew up right there.  And a lot of times you--children don't like to be taught by somebody that's coming back.  But I, I received a lot of respect going back to my hometown to teach.
Speaker 1: Now, I would think you probably would because as I've read, when you were in high school, you did about everything?
Speaker 2: Well, yes (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) You were editor of paper--
Speaker 2: Yes, I was a lot of things, yeah, president--.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) And what else did you do?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I don't know, I mean I, right at the present time, that's about it I guess, if you read that.  And then that followed through, as I went on to college, I became Editor of the paper in college.
Speaker 1: You're editor of the paper, you were salutatorian in class--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What, you played football, basketball--?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Football, basketball and track.
Speaker 1: Track, and track--
Speaker 2: Yeah, football, basketball and track.
Speaker 1: And it seemed like there were some other things too, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, Lord, I don't know.  What else?  I guess that's about it.  If you read something (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, it sounds you were a pretty--you were a fairly popular individual--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--.
Speaker 1: --and busy individual.
Speaker 2: Busy--I was very busy, and maybe my popularity came from my father [Thomas Roach] being a dentist, I don't know.  But my backyard was filled with youngsters all the time.  And I never--and we'd play basketball or when we got of age, we started playing basketball, but when I was youngster, we were playing Indians and cowboys, as I mentioned.  And we used to, we used to get a lot of kick out of building roads and running little play automobiles on these roads and this type of things.  We, just a lot of, I don't know, things to entertain us.  And we weren't thinking about girls, you know, that wasn't--they weren't on our mind at all.
Speaker 1: But in high school, I suppose there were a lot of girls--?
Speaker 2: Oh, in high school, I met my first girlfriend in high school, oh, yeah, got up in high school.  And that we enjoyed too.  So this young lady became a basketball player in high school.  And I was a basketball player.  And we became good friends.
Speaker 1: So tell me about the teachers in high school.  I mean did any particular teachers in grade school or high school take a special interest in your development and--?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, one--I'll, let's see, let's go to high school.  In fact, I must say, not only in my development, but our teachers were interested in the development of all the youngsters in the school.  I don't know whether they had so-called, "pets" or not, but from my knowledge, the teachers then took interests in all students, don't care what--whether they had monies or didn't have the money.  And fortunately, because of my father's position, I may have had just a few more dollars than somebody else, but, but that didn't have anything to do with the teachers taking interest.  I had one incident that happened to me.  I guess I must have been quite mischievous too.  Another good friend and myself, our teacher, we were in high school, a sophomore in high school; teacher left the room, and we had all--we had gotten hold of some sneezing powder.  And we put this sneezing powder in the flower, the teacher's roses on the desk.  And, of course, when she got back, the girls and boys, they were just sneezing up a breeze in that room because we put the sneezing powder on it.  And she looked at me and she looked at the other, the friend of mine, she said, "I know who did it, I know who did it; couldn't have been nobody but Sanford and Harry"--that was my friend's name.  And we acknowledged the fact we did it.  She said, "come up here, boy, and get across my lap".  Now, here I am a sophomore in high school (laughter), and I did 'cause I knew if I didn't, I was gonna get one at home anyway.  So I, I went on and laid across her lap, and she took a ruler--it wasn't nothing, you know.  It was all right.  I--it's okay, but I did get a spanking in high school because of our, this mischievous prank we played, putting the sneezing powder in the roses.  I never will forget that.  But we had some interesting times at, at high school.  I know one thing, when I was practicing for football one day, I, I tackled a fellow who ran kind of high in our practices.  I don't remember a thing after I hit him until I got home in bed.  So evidently, he must have given me a concussion some way or another.
Speaker 1: Maybe you ran into knees--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, trying to tackle him.
Speaker 1: Trying to tackle him?
Speaker 2: And 'cause when I woke up, I was home in bed.  And how I got there or what, I don't remember (laughter).  But I do know the young man who I tackled, who is deceased now, you know, he was a good friend of mine, but he was a hard runner, and always ran with his knees up high.  So I must have caught one of those knees, I guess.
Speaker 1: Now, and what position did you play in football?
Speaker 2: In football, I, I was the--now, we had to go both ways.  We didn't have any two-tier things now--like we do now.  So I played end on the defense and I did the punting on offense.  So, but--and we used to, we had some strong, very strong football teams and basketball teams in Danville, Kentucky.
Story_ID: 12272
Speaker 1: We were talking about school, in high school, in your multi-faceted high school career, you did almost everything.  But because of your fame as a coach, I want to ask you about basketball in particular.  I mean you played basketball in high school, right?
Speaker 2: I played basketball in high school, and my coach was William H. Goodman, Jr.  In fact, he was my football coach also.  I enjoyed my participation on the high school basketball team because it carried us around the state of Kentucky, and, of course, we--as you know, the segregated--everything was segregated back then.  And we, and we traveled in automobiles when we traveled.  We had one of the best facilities for playing basketball--black, in the state of Kentucky at that time.  We had a regulation gymnasium, where a lot of the communities in Kentucky had make, makeshift places, maybe barns or rooms or things like that.  But we had a first-class gymnasium.  There were three in Kentucky--Bate [High School, Danville, Kentucky], Lexington-Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Lexington, Kentucky], and Louisville Central [High School, Louisville, Kentucky].  Those were the three regulation-sized gymnasiums.
Speaker 1: And the rest of them could be any size?
Speaker 2: Anything, just anything.
Speaker 1: You know, people don't, I don't think people today realize that because I, I know it's probably true because I went to a grade school that had a, kind of a make-shift gym, before somebody remade it.  And that is probably--
Speaker 2: Back in those--I, see I--we played in gymnasiums, so-called gymnasiums, where there were posts in the middle of the floor, and you had to go around these posts, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Let the posts try to pick--?
Speaker 2: Pick for you, see.  And we played in gymnasiums, so-called gymnasiums, where they had no out-of-bounds.  And the referees would tell you that, if you--play these walls if you want to.  That means you could bounce a ball off a wall and this type thing, which we'd go in some of these places, and until you caught on to what they were doing, they'd wear you out, 'cause they'd play three corners on you, you know, and then make a basket (laughter) and those type thing.  And the flooring in some of these places were just rough.  The only thing that would keep the splinters down was maybe some kind of motor oil or something, you know.  And this basket from the ceiling was maybe about the, about two feet, which means the only you're gonna make a basket is go up there and lay it in cause you couldn't shoot a field, field goal.  Ah, we had some bad places to play.
Speaker 1: So the baskets were not the same height everywhere?  They were-?
Speaker 2: Ah, no, well, wasn't anything regulation.  As I mentioned we--the only regulation places were Lexington, Danville-Bate and, and Louisville.
Speaker 1: So you'd actually go to a place that has a twelve-foot basket or something or fifteen foot basket, or--?
Speaker 2: Well, now, I won't say they were twelve, but they were never any higher--they may have been lower than the standard, but never any higher.  But, of course, they didn't have ceilings.  But, yeah, cause I know we went to one place and (laughter), you couldn't shoot a free throw.  You could just barely shoot a free throw, if you had the skills to get it in between the ceiling and the basket.
Speaker 1: Oh, the ceiling was too short?
Speaker 2: Too short, too low.
Speaker 1: And it may hit the--?
Speaker 2: And right, the ceiling was too low.  And this places I was talking about with the posts, we went there and when we first got there that afternoon, we said, what is this?  Yeah, this where we gonna play tonight (laughter), Okay, this is where we're gonna play.  And then we went into a place, the people sat up in the balcony, as such, and the flooring--no out-of-bounds, and the people were up there with, behind wire because sometimes--I guess they were afraid the balls would go up there and hit the people.  So, but they were behind chicken wire, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: And this basketball (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I'm telling you, some of the places.  And then we've had places where the youngsters, they could walk up a wall.  You know, the basket was on a fall, but if they knew how to do it, they could take one foot, hit the wall and put the ball in the basket.  Can you imagine?
Speaker 1: No.  That's something.  That's really amazing.
Speaker 2: I mean that's the way they used to do it, until you caught on.  When you caught on, you could do it too, but, you know, it would take you some time catching on.
Speaker 1: Yes, and knowing your home court was more important then than it is now.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, like if you go--oh, sure.  You're talking about home court advantage, they really had a home court advantage.  And they, and, and a lot of these places, the auditorium was the gymnasium, see.  They took out the chairs and maybe have a play.  Well, the stage was right, almost under the basket.  And the only thing protecting you from the stage was a big, big mattress.  And you'd get in there and go and you shoot for a crip shot, if you wasn't careful, you could be carried onto one of their mattresses.  See, if it wasn't for the mattress, you'd hit the stage.  And so that made you kind of leery about going up.  Then we--a place not too far from here, about twenty miles from here, I guess, they would have a great, potbelly stoves.  Now, you (laughter), potbelly stoves at each ends of the floor, where the basket's up there.  And every time, --I'll say we, the opposing team, would go toward a basket, well, they would heat the stove, make it red hot.  And, you know, after all, you see all that red hot stove, you ain't going close to it--if you're not careful, you had to be very, very careful.  And when they got ready to go to it, they'd take the coals out.
Speaker 1: Now, I've heard about the strategy of the Boston Celtics.  They used to heat the court up, I mean they would turn the heat up real high because they practiced when the heat was high.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And when somebody else would come up, they'd turn up the heat, and then let the air out of the ball, you know.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, well, but see, now, you talking about some experiences.  You could go to this gymnasium, you know what you gonna run into when you got down there 'cause if you'd been down there before, you know what they gonna do with that coal stove.  They gonna burn it up when you come that way.  And you have to, all the kids--they didn't want to get burned.  So, so you have to beware.  See, that was, those were, the stove--oh, and we played on the second floor, this place.  And this place, the floor was rough, splintered wood, but it'd been smoothed out somewhat with motor oil.  I mentioned the fact--and the backboards were, weren't substantial because we were driving for a board one night, and hit the dat gone board, and the board fell down, fell down on the floor (laughter).
Speaker 1: And you were just driving, you weren't dunking?
Speaker 2: No, no, dunk, we, no, no.
Speaker 1: Nobody knew anything about dunking?
Speaker 2: No, we wasn't thinking about dunking.  No, just driving, and hit the ball--shoot the long shot, hit the--fall on the floor.  But, quite an experience back in those days.
Speaker 1: This brings another question to mind. What kind of equipment and uniforms did you all wear?
Speaker 2: Now, we, we had, at--now, 'cause I coached in two places.  Then I'd go, back to Bate School.  We had first-class uniforms.  We'd always get uniforms from one of the reputable sporting good homes, houses.  And so we never did go for uniforms.  Now, when I moved over here to Lexington, now we had traveling uniform, home uniform and we had, we gave all our boys two pairs of shoes, a pair to play in and a pair to practice in.
Speaker 1: What kinds of shoes did you give?
Speaker 2: Back in those days, they were, let's see, what was the best tennis shoe back in those--not Keds, I forget the name of the shoe.  But it wasn't one of these Adidas or anything like that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Tennis shoes themselves, I mean basket--I mean, my, my--I know the older generation calls all of them tennis shoes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But they, when that--?
Speaker 2: They were just tennis shoes--came out it was tennis shoes.
Speaker 1: But the first athletic shoe was--?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) It's a tennis shoe, wasn't--didn't things--played golf--tennis in it and golf in it or anything else.  But they were--so, but, over at Dunbar, we gave all our boys two pairs of shoes.  The only they had to buy on gear was the athletic support.  We furnished everything else.  And we'd, well, I'll jump the gun, but we traveled with jackets and nice gray trousers, of course, our colors were green and white.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, I was just, but, sir, I just want to talk about, I guess, I want you to describe the kind of the stuff that you played in when you were playing ball?
Speaker 2: Oh, when we played, we had--
Speaker 1: We don't want to go too far ahead on--
Speaker 2: Well, we had first-class uniforms and warm-up suits.  We had warm-up suits back in those days too.  We didn't want for anything.  We were well dressed, at Danville, when I played, and went back--when I went back to coach, we were well dressed.
Speaker 1: But the facilities I guess were the toughest thing, and--?
Speaker 2: The toughest thing, and we had, as I said, mentioned before, Bate School had one of the best in town, in, in the state, along with Lexington-Dunbar and Louisville Central.  And outside of those, you could run into anything.
Story_ID: 12273
Speaker 1: What position did you play on--
Speaker 2: College, in college?  I--or high school, forward.  In college, I played forward-guard.
Speaker 1: And were there--how tall would the players get when you were in school?  Would you have any ?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, when I was--in, in my high school, I guess we had about a six [feet], two [inches].
Speaker 1: That was the tallest--?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and when I went to college, they maybe grew a little taller, like [unclear] Sykes.  And, of course, you wouldn't find that height all along, but let me tell you one incident that happened to me when I was in high school.  We were going to a state tournament, and that's when you had to bring your ball back to jump it in the center, you don't--we remember.  Every time you'd make a basket, you got to bring it back, and jump it in the center, yeah, (laughter), bring it back and have a tip-off again.  Anyway, I drove in for a crip, which was when our tournament was held at Kentucky State College [now Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky] which is Kentucky State University now.  I drove in for one of these fast crips cause I was all cute, you know.  And I made the crip and turned around, looking at the ball go in the basket, all that kind of stuff.  Then when I turned around, the brick wall met me, boom, hit me right in the mouth, broke out all these teeth up in front.  I didn't feel it.  Of course, I was too proud, you know, after all.  I walked back out on the floor to get in position for this jump ball.  The next thing I remember, I was in the dressing room.  That wall had knocked my socks off, and my father, being a dentist was fortunate enough to be able to put in--I just lost that plate about three years ago, that he put in for me, back when I was a--I was a senior in high school then.  That was 1933, '34 [1934].  That's when it happened to me, and about four years ago, I lost those plates.  And I had to get some new dentures, but nevertheless, that--they were broken out playing foot--basketball.  So there were two times in my life I was unconscious, once playing football, as I mentioned, and once playing basketball.
Story_ID: 12274
Speaker 1: So how did your team do in high school [Bate High School, Danville, Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: The one that I played on?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: We did real well.  We went to state tournament, I mentioned, but we didn't win a state tournament, but we went.  So--
Speaker 1: This is in the whole state of Kentucky?
Speaker 2: The whole state of Kentucky.
Speaker 1: All of the black schools?
Speaker 2: Just black schools only, only black schools.  See, we didn't get into integration until 1957, see.  But all of this was prior to, and all black schools.  And our state tournament was always held at Kentucky State College [now Kentucky State University] in Frankfort [Kentucky].  That was it.  They had the best facility for a tournament, and even that wasn't hot, but nevertheless, it was all right.
Story_ID: 12275
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduation from high school, you said that you thought you'd probably become a dentist, right, or did you go to school to become a dentist?
Speaker 2: Well, not, not--
Speaker 1: Not at that time.
Speaker 2: But during that period while I was, just prior to my graduation, see, I mentioned the fact that I lost my father [Thomas Roach] that Christmas of the year I was to graduate, but all in all, we had planned to go to, to be a dentist.  But after he passed, well, I guess I changed my mind for some reason.  Not--well, I guess it was good reason.
Speaker 1: Now, did that really kind of shake you up, I guess--
Speaker 2: After my father died?
Speaker 1: Yes, I guess your father died, your senior year in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, because--senior in high school.  Yeah, it shook me up a little bit. I knew it would be, be a financial strain for my mother [Jessie Pendleton Jackson] to try to send me to school.  I was--would have wanted--I wanted to go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], but--am I getting ahead of myself?  I believe--not out of high school, no.  Not out--I couldn't have been in high school 'cause--
Speaker 1: Yeah, you were just, you went to Kentucky State [College, now Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky] first before and thought you'd go on to Howard--
Speaker 2: First, yeah, I went to Kentucky State, yeah going to Howard, yeah, that was Kentucky State.
Story_ID: 12276
Speaker 1: I neglected to ask you if you had any brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: No, sir.  No brothers and sisters, and that's what I always told my mother [Jessie Pendleton Jackson].  The one thing I had against her, she wouldn't have any, any brothers and sisters.  She said, well, you're enough (laughter).  I'll never forget that.  So that's okay.  I enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: So the household was just the three of you?
Speaker 2: Three, my mother, my father [Thomas Roach], myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, and we lived in Danville, Kentucky, as I mentioned.  And I tell you this, back in those days, my father was the Grandmaster of the state of Kentucky in the Masonic Lodge [Free Masons].  We had this state, I guess they called it, I just say State Grand Lodge met, whatever you call it, a state meeting, I'll say State meeting of the Masons, something like that.  So my father had a beer party in the backyard.  It was a party where they served beer, I guess you call it a beer party, but anyway.  Well, it was a nice quiet party.  But that following Monday my mother was called into the superintendent's office and told her she lost her job, 'cause my father had a beer party--had a party in his backyard, served beer.
Speaker 1: Well, did it stick or was overturned?
Speaker 2: Oh, it stuck.  It stuck (laughter).  Yeah, and, after all, we were quite shocked, you know.  Anyway had somebody been, been arrested or been, the loud noises or something like, but now, here she is an innocent, really victim cause it was my father giving the party.  Of course, she--after all she was married, but nevertheless, she lost her job.
Speaker 1: And they never reinstated her?
Speaker 2: No, sir, never.  And I was--here I am, when I went back there to teach, I could always remember that.  But--.
Speaker 1: What did she do after then?
Speaker 2: Well, she left, left that county and went to another school.  She went down to a place called Unity, Kentucky, (laughter), Unity, as in Mercer County, Unity, Kentucky.  And there was a little black settlement there where, ah, well, enough to have a school.  She actually taught one through eighth in a--you've heard of one-room school houses?  You don't have too many of them now, but back then, they had one-room school house--so she taught one through eighth.  And she'd get there early in the morning and make fires and things like that.  And, of course, it was kind of rough for a while, but she got used to it.  That was--.
Speaker 1: Would she drive there?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: She drove a car?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  But, so, once, once, getting used to it, it wasn't, wasn't too bad.  I imagine it was quite a, quite a change though.
Story_ID: 12277
Speaker 1: Tell me about Kentucky State [College, now Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky].  Now, Kentucky State's a state-supported school for, for black--?
Speaker 2: Blacks, that's right.  Kentucky State, Kentucky State School for blacks, it wasn't for, it said Kentucky State College.  We knew it was for blacks, and it had black faculty, black student body, black everything.
Speaker 1: Who was the President of Kentucky State when you were there?
Speaker 2: When I was there, R. B. Atwood, R. B. Atwood, who passed in Cincinnati [Ohio], after he left K-State [Kentucky State University], great president, a great president.  He had a chance, I guess, to send me away from school one time.
Speaker 1: What did you do--?
Speaker 2: Well, well, I--during, what about thirty--early part of '37 [1937], there was a big flood in, in the state of Kentucky.  Ohio, oh, not Ohio River, but the Kentucky River just--which was backed up by the Ohio, flooded Frankfort, Louisville [Kentucky], certain areas.  And we had a lot of refugees that came from Louisville and Frankfort and stayed up on our campus.  Food supply was real short.  So the farmhands, people had farms then for the student--not for, for the students learning how to be a farmer and this type thing.  They missed the mule.  They couldn't find the mule.  The mule was named Maude.  Well, here I am with my wit, I guess, I'm the Editor of the school paper.  So I write in the school paper an editorial about Maude and how we were enjoying Maude during the (laughter), during the flood, feeding the student body.  I didn't know what, where Maude was, you know, but here I am smart, I'm a smart guy.
Speaker 1: So (laughter) you insinuated that the students ate, I mean--
Speaker 2: We'd eaten Maude.  (Laughter)  Man, the President Edward called me in, and I will never forget this.  He was mad as a six shooter, and he said, I'll never forget, he says--he called me Roach.  "Roach, if I didn't know your mother so well and your daddy, I knew him too, but your mother, I'm crazy about her, I would send you away from here in a minute."  You retract that statement in your paper.  Well, there was nothing for me to do but--'cause I didn't know what I was talking about anyway (laughter).  So I did, I retracted the statement.  But they still didn't find Maude.  And they, no, nobody knows what happened to that mule.  Maybe it got drowned, I don't know.  But here I was, I was a smart aleck, you know, and that's what happened.  Well, it was, well, I guess that was the most eventful thing that happened to me when I was at Kentucky State.
Story_ID: 12278
Speaker 1: Now, you played basketball there [at Kentucky State College, now Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky] too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I played basketball and ran track.
Speaker 1: Ran track, okay.  What did you run in track?
Speaker 2: Mile.
Speaker 1: Mile?
Speaker 2: Mile, uh-huh.  I called myself running a mile.  After we--I was the pacesetter more or less and then the other young man by the name of George Edwards who was from Chicago, [Illinois] incidentally.  We called him Big Bertha Edwards.  And he was an All-American at K-State, a basketball player and football player.  And so I, I ran track and I played basketball.  And I was fortunate enough to be captain of the basketball team for two years, and I made the All-Midwestern Conference Guard for two years.
Speaker 1: You played mostly point guard or--?
Speaker 2: Oh, point?  What's that?  Back in those days (laughter).  You just played guard (laughter).  No, it--they didn't have no point guard.  You had a buddy, but, you see, you--
Speaker 1: Okay, so either guard?
Speaker 2: Either guard, oh, yeah, either guard bring it up or whatever.  No, no such thing as point guards and all this kind of--
Speaker 1: In fact, if you had a tip off after every--were you all still playing like that when you were in college?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, in college, yeah, we had to tip, but we were--
Speaker 1: You had to tip off every, after?
Speaker 2: No, no, not after every basket then.  You didn't have a tip off.  I think they discontinued that about, let's '37 [1937], about '42 [1942], somewhere along in there.  Yeah, it must have been about along that time.
Speaker 1: So I guess then the development of a guard to bring the ball up was probably a question then because you didn't--before you just had a tip off, and anybody could get it.  But--
Speaker 2: Well, everybody--well, for, anybody could get it.  But now, by George, it's thrown up now, if the center or jumper gauges his opponents from where they are, you can tip it that way too, see.  So--
Speaker 1: But what I'm getting at is that a play, a normal play would start with the guard passing the ball (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and then bringing it up.
Speaker 2: Bring it up, that's right.  But--
Speaker 1: Well, this kind of changes things--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, but--so I did play basketball and I was a captain for those two years.  And my coach was Henry Arthur King, who was a great coach.  He left K-State, went to Tennessee State [University Nashville, Tennessee] was a great coach there.  He was a brother of a fellow in Louisville, [Kentucky] called Henry--Willie Lee King, Willie Lee King, I guess was the winning-est black coach in the history of Kentucky.  He is the grandfather of Allan Houston, plays for the [New York] Knicks.
Speaker 1: Oh, plays with the New York Knicks, right.
Speaker 2: Grandfather of him.  And his, his daughter married a young man by the name of Houston.  And they had this child, a great family there in Louisville.  Anyway, I was back to my days at Kentucky State as a basketball player.  Track, I could run fairly well, but my job as a--track, was to pace set, to, you know, start out fast and then peter out a little later on.  But anyway, that's the way it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did the team do?  Did the team win many games?
Speaker 2: In basketball games?  We did fairly well.  I never shall forget one incident.  We went to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee].  I guess you've heard of Fisk down in Nashville.  It was, at that time, it was quite an elite school, you know.  We, (laughter), we, and our country ways, we went down there, and didn't have on any coats to go to the, to the dinner.  They wouldn't let us in the dining room until we put on a coat or a sweater.  You couldn't come in the dining room in shirt sleeves, not at Fisk.  So, but we, we, we defeated them in basketball.  And I guess one of the greatest experiences we had on a trip, like we went on, we went on to Tuskegee [College, Tuskegee, Alabama].  And that's where I first ran into what you call an honor system.  They lock no doors.  No doors were locked on that campus.  And I thought that was quite remarkable, and you left your things, and you expected to find them when you got back.  And we did.
Speaker 1: Do you think that would have worked at Kentucky State?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't know.  That was something that was drilled into these people through ages, I can imagine.  It wouldn't have worked in Kentucky, unless, unless it was something that we had done over a period of years.
Speaker 1: Now, here's a question that just popped into my head because I knew a member of this team, but did you ever play the Xavier Ambassadors from New Orleans?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, no.  Basketball team, we're in Kentucky State now.  We didn't--as far as, we went into Lincoln, Missouri outside of Jefferson City, [Missouri].  Then we went to Knoxville, [Tennessee]--I'm just trying to think.  Mostly, our experience was throughout the South.  We didn't go East too much.  We didn't go East at all.
Speaker 1: Now here's a question that just popped into my head, because I remember this team, but did you ever play the Xavier [University of Louisiana] Ambassadors from New Orleans, [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: New Orleans, we didn't, we didn't go that far, no.
Speaker 1: Well, they traveled a lot too, and I know that they played Tuskegee--
Speaker 2: Tuskegee?
Speaker 1: They kind of barnstormed around--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now, did you learn quite a bit about basketball when you were--I mean it seems like this sort of formation, this formative period, I guess.
Speaker 2: I was--playing basketball you gain certain knowledges and skills and this type of thing.  But I, I must say I had a, when I was in high school, I gained the most of my fundamentals of basketball through my high school coach.  And I find that's the way it is now.  If a youngster goes to college now and doesn't have fundamentals, he's not gonna get them.  I--see, the college coach don't teach too many fundamentals.  I don't think, what my experience is now.  I watch them each and every day.  But in high school, we got the fundamentals of pivoting and passing and guarding and things like that.  And that's where I gained the most of my, really training.  Plus, books that I read in schools I went to, such as I went to several basketball camps and this type thing.
Story_ID: 12279
Speaker 1: At Kentucky State [College, Frankfort, Kentucky, now Kentucky State University], what did you major in at Kentucky State?
Speaker 2: Natural science, that included biology, which I was very much interested in.  I, of course, we had to have chemistry and physics and all of that stuff.  I wasn't interested in those things.  I was interested in biological sciences.  And that's what I was--after I left college, I taught biological sciences in high school.
Speaker 1: So you left--you got a teaching degree in natural sciences?
Speaker 2: Well, when I, when I--my degree from Kentucky State College was B.S., Bachelor of Science.  And, but so, and then, that's what I left college with, a Bachelor of Science degree.  And I left there and taught in the--well, I taught at a school called Kentucky Housing Reform for one year.  That's a school for unruly boys and girls in the State of Kentucky.  The school's right here now.  It's called Blackburn, Blackburn Institute [now Blackburn Correctional Complex, Lexington, Kentucky].  It's kind of a reformatory for convicts now.  But back in those days, it was a institution for children who couldn't be handled, I guess at home or didn't have any parents and this type thing.
Speaker 1: But just for black children, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was just for blacks.  This was just for blacks.  Now, on one--I'll, I'll say it like this, it was such a large place.  On one side, it was whites and one side, it was blacks.
Speaker 1: So they segregated the prison--the reformatory too?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, everything was segregated.  Yeah, they were segregated.  So--
Speaker 1: In those days, were the prisons segregated too?
Speaker 2: Well, oh, prison, oh, yeah, yeah.  I mean the state reformatory was in Frankfort, Kentucky.  Yeah, it was segregated.  It's just a question that comes to mind because people don't ask about that.  It's hard to imagine all aspects of life being segregated.
Speaker 1: Yep.  And during the flood, I mentioned the flood of '37 [1937], because of neglect, I supposed, the guards didn't open the gates early and didn't want the prisoners to get out.  So a lot of the prisoners lost their lives in that flood.
Speaker 2: They drowned in--
Speaker 1: Drowned.
Speaker 2: --in their cells.
Story_ID: 12280
Speaker 1: At the [Kentucky state] Reformatory [Frankfort, Kentucky, now Blackburn Correctional Facility, Lexington, Kentucky], how did you like that?
Speaker 2: I--that was one of the most rewarding jobs I had.  We found there were youngsters there who were, they were just victims of circumstances because they had no parents or if they had parents, they didn't give them any guidance.  And these children were there because of stealing or maybe fighting and cutting somebody or this type thing.  And in some cases, maybe they murdered their parents.  But we found that some of the many youngsters there just needed a chance, just needed a chance and somebody to take care--to love them, you know.  My mother [Jessie Pendleton Jackson] used to tell me, said--'cause I would always carry them up to the gymnasium, and we'd have basketball, and practice at night.  She used to always tell me, said, "These boys gonna get up there one of these nights and kill you."  I didn't--I don't worry about it.  And I didn't.  I really didn't worry about it because, you get to learn and know a youngster after so long.  And we'd bring these boys to town--and they'd never been to town before.  Nobody would trust them.  We'd bring them into town and put them out at the movies.  And we'd say, "Now, after his movie is over--we didn't know what time--meet us on this corner.  And those youngsters would meet us on the corner.  Otherwise, they could run away.  But they knew they had a home.  They knew they were getting three meals and good treatment.  And I suppose they--oh, funny education, but I called it an education because some just didn't read or write, and this type thing.  But it was the love I think we gave them that made them so devoted to us, I wasn't even worried about it.  I wasn't worried about it.  And I really thought that was a very rewarding job, and some of those parents, those that had parents, but couldn't control them at home, they would come to us and tell us how much they appreciated what we had done for the youngster, you know.
Story_ID: 12281
Speaker 1: At this stage in your life, who were your role models.  I mean did you--were there certain individuals that you really admired, about how they handled themselves or was there anybody you tried to pattern yourself after.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm, well, my first--other than my father [Thomas Roach], now, I don't want to leave him out of this scenario, one of my basketball coach, William H. Gilbert.  And then my parents had a good friend who became a friend of mine, it was Whitney Young, Sr.  That was the father of Whitney Young, the famous, former [National] Urban League man.  We--our parents were very good friends.  And he told me, the father told me, he said, Sanford, when you go to--I asked him about coming, from leaving Lexington, [Kentucky] leaving the Bate [High] School [Danville, Kentucky] 'cause I started down at Bate School, and I had an offer to go to [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School], this big school over in Lexington.  I--cause my father had passed.  See, my father passed when I was a freshman in college.  So I, this man, Mr. Young was giving me, I'd say, friendly advice.  He said, now, when you got to Lexington, "Don't get lost."  I never will forget that.  "Don't get lost".  He, to me that meant, come over and use whatever talent or influence I might have had to better myself.  And I've always thought about that.  And I always gave him credit for that few of advice.  And, of course, Whitney, Jr., his sisters and all of us, we were all good--pretty good buddies.  But I, really, that advice he gave me back in those days stuck with me.
Story_ID: 12282
Speaker 1: As you said, you started at Bate [High School, Danville, Kentucky], and you were a fairly successful basketball coach at Bate, and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, okay.  My third year there, we had a record of twenty-nine and one.  We were headed for the state tournament.  Now, there was gonna be a big party--you know, we district tournaments.  You had to qualify for the district and all this stuff.  And this prior to the district tournament.  There was gonna be a big party.  Well, we had sat and talked with our boys and told them, that we needed them to be well conditioned to go into the state tournament, the district tournament, and not to go to the party because we had an idea what might take place with the ladies back in those days.  Anyway, we had one young lady who told, one of our best players, said, "You come on and go."  And the young said, "Nah," 'cause, Mr. Roach said not to go.  She said, "Well, I'll tell you what you do.  He may put you off, but he's not gonna put the whole team off.  Get the rest of the boys to go."  Of course, he influenced--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) There sounded like a good idea, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he influenced the other boys to go.  See, but we already said, now, if you go, we gonna suffer the consequences cause we already warned them not to go to this party, this dance.  And lo and behold, he carried the first team to the dance.  And my assistant coach, his name was William Davidson from Louisville, Kentucky.  We both went to this dance, and there they were.  So when we came back to school the day or next--yeah, cause we were going to the tournament that weekend, going to the district tournament.  They came down to the gym to practice, and we read, read them the riot act.  We said, fellows, you're not going to the tournament.  You've had it for this year, turn in your uniform.  Man, they went home and told their parents that Mr. Roach done put us off the team.  Phone rang off, my phone rang off the hook, and my--people visiting my home.  But we'd already made the decision.  It hurt me, it hurt me.  I cried like a baby, but they wasn't gonna play anymore.  I had only--I had my substitutes, and I took them all to the district tournament, got beat the first game.  But, and from that incident, I--it may have been a selfish type thing, but I felt that if I lost control, I couldn't coach anymore anyway.  And it was right after that incident, the principal from [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Lexington, Kentucky] came over to Danville and asked me if I wanted to come to Lexington to coach.  He said, we need a good, strong coach at our school.  And I said, yes, of course.  And then I realized I was getting eighty-five dollars a month in Danville, that's twelve months a year though.  But eighty-five dollars.  I could come to Lexington for a hundred and sixty-five.  So, you know what I was gonna do.  So I came to Lexington for a hundred and sixty-five a dollars month.  Can you imagine-- but just think of the significance of eighty-five dollars and a hundred and sixty-five.  So I came to Lexington in 1941.
Speaker 1: Okay, now the war [World War II] is going on at that time?
Speaker 2: '41 [1941], '41 [1941], um-hum.
Speaker 1: Did they try to draft you or anything?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, I'll tell you what happened then.  My good friend who was my coworker for twenty-six years, and he was Norman L. Passmore.  He's Reverend Passmore now, but he's sick, real sick.  Incidentally, we worked together for twenty-six years and never had a cross word, never had a cross word.  He coached football, I coached basketball.  He was my Assistant; I was his Assistant.  And Passmore, he worked with me and I--in my book, I think, I know I gave, gave him credit for a whole lot of things in my book.  Said, Mr. Guthrie, said, "You come on up here to Lexington."  So I got the superintendent--I didn't get the Superintendent, he got the Superintendent to set up an interview for me.  And from there on, I was able to come to Lexington to be a coach.  I was the Assistant Coach from '41 [1941] to '42 [1942].  F. L. Baker was the coach.  Mr. Guthrie then moved Baker up into the athletic director, gave Passmore the coach of the football.  And I coached basketball from 1942 to 1965.
Speaker 1: Okay, and from what I understand, Mr. Passmore was your assistant in basketball, and you were his assistant in football, right?
Speaker 2: Right, um-hum.
Speaker 1: That was a good working relationship.
Speaker 2: Good working re--and we never--I, I, it was really, we never had a cross word.  Oh, I don't say we didn't agree.  The thing, what happened to us, the boys would never see it.  See, he was coaching football, he wanted--and I coached his backfield for him.  If he wanted me to tell the boys to run backwards, okay, they run backwards, you know, or run sideways, any way he want to do.  It didn't make no difference, but I would have my opinion, and I expressed it to him.  But he said, nah, that's what I want.  And I--that's what you want.  And when we got into basketball, that same way.  I would always respect his advice, always, and he did me.  But anyway, we were just good buddies.
Story_ID: 12283
Speaker 1: We went to--you were talking about the war [World War II], we [Roach and his friend Norman Passmore] both signed up for the Merchant Marines.  We went up in Detroit, Michigan and served on the Great Lakes for five years.
Speaker 2: Really.
Speaker 1: Really, all during the war.  The board--our draft boards did bother us.  We served on the, on these big boats called the Western--D, D&C Navigation Company, maybe you've never heard of it, where these big paddle wheels that ran up and down in the Great Lakes.  And they carried passengers and motor vehicles.
Speaker 2: Now, did you do that for five straight?  I mean it was like part-time--?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, now, 'cause we taught.  And when the, when the teaching was over--
Speaker 2: For the summer?
Speaker 1: Summer, yeah, for summer.
Speaker 2: You'd go up and--?
Speaker 1: Right, we're coaches, we got to do something for the summer anyway.  But that was really moneymakers for us.  And, well, it kept us out of the war too, but--
Speaker 2: And you got paid.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, I got paid for it, see.  I was sending my money back to my wife.  She thought I was there gambling, I was sending money to her so fast.  But I wasn't, but so I--a lot of those guys, it was sinful to see, see them make so much during the week and Saturday and Sunday, they would gamble it away.  Every--I--it was just amazing.  Monday, they were broke.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, yeah--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, and I mean just make very good money.  The company would pay us, and plus, the passengers would give good tips, you know.  But I really enjoyed that.  The first day that we got on that boat, I never shall forget the first night out.  The first night out there was a severe storm.  And we sat, had to--we slept down below the waterline.  And that boat rocked and reeled.  I say, God, you mean to tell me you gonna let this boat sink my first night out (laughter).  I was scared to death.  But nevertheless, we survived.
Speaker 2: So, but you were based in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 1: Based in Detroit.  We sailed out of Detroit to, up at Mackinac Island [Michigan], with--you've heard of Mackinac.  And back in those days, just about that time, Jews weren't allowed on, on, at Mackinac.  They didn't allow Jews up there, really, in these hotels.  They may go to the island, but not in the hotel.  So, you know what the Jews did, bought the place (laughter).  That took care of that.
Speaker 2: That would take care of it.
Speaker 1: Bought the place.  And it, it's recognized as the longest porch in the world of a hotel.  And at that time, they--no automobiles allowed on island, nothing but horses and buggies and carriages and bicycles.  Beautiful place, beautiful place.  And when our big boat would land--of course, there were other boats coming in too, we'd always have baseball matches and things like this; good food, good food.  But we'd always--I'd always rather get back to Detroit to go up on St. John or some of those streets and buy me a good ole bowl of beans.  I was tired of all that good food.  But we made good money.  And back, and back and on to the school to come back during the fall and go through our regular routines.  I was teaching biology and physiology and coaching basketball and assisting with football and so on with my good buddy, Passmore.
Story_ID: 12284
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you how you met your first wife because she was quite a basketball fan?
Speaker 2: No--oh, my first wife?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, my first wife was quite--plus player, played in Bate [High] School in Danville, [Kentucky].
Speaker 1: Yeah, her name was Mary?
Speaker 2: Mary, that's right.  Bate, she was the mother of my children [Thomas Roach and Sandra Cole]--Bate School and Danville, right.  She played basketball, and how we met, it was just one of those high school things, I guess.  And, but now, we didn't go together in high school.  We didn't start going together until we got in college.  My first high school sweetheart was a young lady that played basketball also, but she didn't go to college.  So this other young lady went on to college, and I guess we started going together--I know we started going together in college.  And after we finished school, and went back, and we thought we was slipping off getting married, at least, I did.  And one of the county clerks in Harrodsburg, [Kentucky] where my grandfather lived, he said, "George"--that's my grandfather's name, he say, "There's a Roach who came here to get a marriage certificate, his was Sanford."  Do you know him?  My grandfather said, "Yeah, that's my grandson."  And here I thought I was slipping to get (laughter), thought I was slipping off.  And he said, "George, your grandson is getting ready to get married."  And that's all, and, of course--nevertheless, he didn't let the water out of the bag--cat out of the bag.  So we got our license, and went to this preacher's house over in Lexington.  I'll never forget.  And my first, before she died, she said, "When you went in there to get the preacher, I started to drive the car off" (laughter).  That's what she said, but, no, she was a great lady.  But that's--we met in high school, and then, when she passed, and I met this other young lady, cause I was teaching at [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School, Lexington, Kentucky].  And this lady that I'm married now [Lettie M. Roach], was an elementary teacher at Constitutional Elementary School here in Lexington.  And we met from a, some type of meeting.  I don't know, but--and they didn't know each other.  They did not know each other.
Speaker 1: They were at the same school--?
Speaker 2: It's, no, no.  Well, they didn't go to the same school.  My present wife went to Lincoln High School in Stanford, [Kentucky] but my first wife went to Bate High School in Danville.  But they were born in the same county, see, Lincoln County and were Baptists.  All my girlfriends have been Baptist, I'll tell you that (laughter).  Anyway, but those were some good days.
Story_ID: 12285
Speaker 1: You coached from '41 [1941], I guess to 1965, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I started in Danville [Kentucky] in Bate High School.  See, I coached starting in thirty--1938, 1938 to 1941, I was in, at Bate High School in Danville cause that was my alma mater.  And so, and then from--then I left Danville in '41 [1941] and came to Lexington in '42 [1942] and '41 [1941], I was assistant coach, and I became head coach at the end of the '42 [1942] season.
Speaker 1: And you coached until 19--?
Speaker 2: Sixty-five.
Speaker 1: Sixty-five.
Speaker 2: I was--my wife [Mary Roach] died in February of '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: That was about twenty-seven years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was 27, 26, somewhere along in there. We had a good record in the two schools.  Of the both, in both schools, our records a 167 and 124 or something like that.
Story_ID: 12286
Speaker 1: What philosophy of basketball did you--I read somewhere, in one of these pieces that you, your style is basically, you all would press on defense and run out on an offense?
Speaker 2: Right, well, we used both.  We used both and, but our main weapon was the pressing defense and a running offense.  It wasn't a helter skelter thing, but there was a pattern to it.  And now I did let the boys ad lib some.  I, I didn't want to stifle their initiative.  I think that hurts a basketball player, to stifle his own, his initiative, and you can't do what--you got to do it my way, you know.  If he's, if he's skilled in doing his way, good, you know.  So, but he would fit into the mold of things, our offense, which was run.  And we could, we could slow it down, we could play it--in fact, in one of our slow-down games, you know what the game was at the half?
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: Two and two.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Can you imagine that, two and two.  And that was on the--that's after integration, one of--against one of the big white high schools here in Lexington.  The game ended sixteen, twelve in our favor.  Foot--a basketball game now, sixteen--two and two at the half.  But that's how we would slow it down.
Speaker 1: And somebody tried to do that in college ball not that long ago, they tried to slow down the game to beat UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] or somebody.  They slowed it down where it was real, the score was real low. They kept passing the ball around--and that was before they had the shot clock in college basketball.
Speaker 2: Could have been.
Speaker 1: Some coach did that, and I can't think of who it was now.
Speaker 2: But our slow-down game, I never shall forget, was played in eastern Kentucky cause the white coach in Lexington didn't want to play it in Lexington because he knew we'd have a lot of fans.  But once we got wind of them going to Lexington--I mean going to Richmond, [Kentucky] the Eastern, we had several busloads going to Richmond.  And we had a lot of fans down there in Richmond.  And it was from that game that they put into the rule books, the team behind had to play.  In other words, you couldn't stall the ball.  See, you got to play, you got to play.  You--and that was put in the rule book.
Speaker 1: So how would they judge you stalling?
Speaker 2: 'Cause you wouldn't try to score.
Speaker 1: Maybe they'd give you so many seconds or something?  I mean how would they make a judgment call?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I--yeah, right, but oh, you can tell when you're out there batting the ball, batting the ball on the floor (laughter) and not, and not making any advances.  You can tell, you can tell.  And this, and this coach was one of the greatest coaches we had in, in Kentucky.  His name was Ralph Carlisle, young white fellow.  And we played them eleven times, and they beat us once.  The first game--time we played them, they beat us.  And after that, we wiped them out.
Speaker 1: Now, what, is this a black school or--?
Speaker 2: No, Lafayette [High School]'s [Lexington, Kentucky] a big white school.
Speaker 1: Big white, okay.
Speaker 2: See, we only had one black school in Lexington, and that was [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School] at that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you played white schools?
Speaker 2: After 1957.
Speaker 1: After '57 [1957], okay.
Speaker 2: After '57 [1957], now, of course, there was another black school in town--no, it wasn't in town, in the county, called Douglas.  My very good friend, his name was Charlie Livesey was the coach of Douglas High School [Lexington, Kentucky].
Speaker 1: Charlie what?
Speaker 2: Charles Livesey, H. Livesey.  And a very good friend of mine, but he was--we were basketball competitors, this type thing, and friends at night over a card game or something like that.  Anyway, we used to have some great sessions, some great sessions,  Dunbar-Douglas.  And I don't where--where was I?
Speaker 1: I was just asking you about your philosophy.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, philosophy, of course.  It was, and we were talking about the running game and the pressing game.
Speaker 1: Does one feed the other, I mean how does that work?
Speaker 2: I mean really the, the running game feeds the pressing--or vise versa because once you score, you need to press, and this type thing.  And we had a very scrappy pressing defense.  And we missed give credit to our youngsters.  Now, the youngsters have got to have some ability.  You just can't (laughter), you can't make a plug horse into a thoroughbred, you know.  They've got to have some kind of ability out there on the floor.  And you might teach them certain things, and they must follow directions.  But you're allow them a certain amount of space where they can do their own thing.  And that's what some of the schools didn't do back when this, it--one of Lafayette's faults.  We knew they were pattern team.  They were so patterned, they couldn't ad lib, couldn't do anything else.  If a pattern blocked, they were stifled, see.  We knew this.  See, if, if you can't run the pattern, you quit.  And we knew that's what they would do.  And so, we would set up blocks in the way of a pattern, and they were just lost, whereas our team, really, if a block came, this kid could do something else.  It's just like a man blowing trumpet or horn.  He could read it, and if the music's not there, he could still blow and play it, see.
Speaker 1: Some can.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, yeah, some can, some can.
Speaker 1: And that is the essence of how the difference of what people have said over the past twenty-five or thirty years, right, and about the difference between black art and traditional art and black athletics too--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --traditional athletics.  There was a book called 'Elevating the Game[: Black Men and Basketball'], I don't if you've seen it, by Nelson George.
Speaker 2: No I haven't--.
Speaker 1: And it talks about the development, how black basketball players have elevated the game of basketball to a different game--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --in other words.  I mean he talks about, you know that pattern play that white teams had developed, where you would pass the ball around in such a predicable way--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and it was efficient, but when, but you can't pattern yourself, you can't plan for an ad lib--
Speaker 2: You can't ad lib, no.
Speaker 1: --you can't plan for that.  And if somebody could really do that well, then--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and you don't have youngster who are mindful of the fact of what's gonna take place, you have to anticipate so much, and this is the type thing we try to drill into our youngsters, anticipation and passes and so forth.  And you could be at the, you could anticipate of pass and be there time they got there, you know, and this type thing.  So a lot of it--it comes from self-discipline and the player too.  He's got to do his thing so far as that's concerned.  And I give credit to a lot of our players.  They, they would listen.  They would listen, see.  And I'd tell them all the time, if it wasn't for your contribution to, to our basketball systems, I couldn't have gotten the recognition I got because you helped me get where I was.
Speaker 1: Now, what that style of basketball implies being able to press and run out like that, it implies that you're in shape.
Speaker 2: Good shape, good shape.
Speaker 1: Great shape, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, great shape.  And the same they're running now, you talking about point guards, oh, we might have had a point guard.  It's a guard who's the number one person, but he wasn't the guy that was so out in front all the time.  See, our other guard, or maybe it was number three, say if I have guards at two and three, he is, he can do the same thing, see.  He could do the same thing as your number one could do.  And the, and the--everybody on the floor could interchange positions, the forwards could interchange positions and the center, I very seldom let him handle the ball.  He could handle it, but I didn't want him cuddling up things trying to handle a ball too much.  See, but they all learned how to dribble and this type thing, but that wasn't his forte.  He wasn't supposed to be out there on the floor.  He was supposed to be back there where he could get under the basket, and let these other kids do their thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, what we were discussing kind of reminds me of two different models, or two models in recent days of ball playing,  and one is the Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] team--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: They seem to, they had that press--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Well, the [University of] Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky] team, with Rick Pitino--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --under Tubby Smith to some extent too, the pressing team that will run out on you, and the press triggers that run out 'cause they steal the ball a lot--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and a lot of loose--also the [Chicago] Bulls' team before 1998 had a similar style of play where they had like, defensive players that would pop the ball loose, and they would run out on you, and didn't need a point guard cause they'd really--the Bulls didn't really have a point guard, they didn't have a guy bring the ball.  They just kind of had--anybody could bring it up-- Bring it up.  [Scottie] Pippen or [Michael] Jordan and then they'd--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, now, we had one pattern, it was a one-three-one.  And I guess it, we could have called that a point guard if you wanted to.  But, even though he was out there on the points, he could go back over in--let the other guard come out if he wanted to.  But, and I, I--we were fortunate enough to win, to win a championship with that system when they're playing a zone defense.  And I had a good player who was, won the State championship in New Jersey by using that same system.  He called me and told me, said, "Coach, we used tree"--we called it tree. "We used tree and won the State championship."  He was so pleased, but he died not too long ago.  But that's where, I guess you get your reward from, when youngsters go out and do well, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, does this "tree" system have any similarity to what they call the "triple post"?
Speaker 2: No, we could.  There's a guard here, forward, center, guard and a man in the back.  One, it was one, three, one.  I guess you could call it--I don't know what you call it.  We just called it, called it tree and a double post.  And these two post men could interchange and use a high low if you wanted to, if you wanted, throw over.  It was a good system.  And we, we always have, we have score meetings about twice a week.  Every boy was equipped with a notebook, with all of our patterns and so forth.  And everybody on that, boy on that team knew the other positions, even the center would know the positions. And another thing we did with notebooks, every grade during that week would be placed in that notebook for, for review on Friday.
Story_ID: 12287
Speaker 1: So everybody's academic record was--?
Speaker 2: That's right.  We would know--
Speaker 1: --under scrutiny?
Speaker 2: Well, right, under scrutiny.  And we had youngsters, the youngsters liked it and the teachers liked it cause they knew that we were enforcing their rule of getting the work, see.  And we helped the youngster because if someone didn't stay on them, you know, after all being a young--you know what you do.  You just don't do it.  But, they knew if they didn't it, they wasn't gonna play.  So, and we had very supportive parents, which I don't know about these days and times--of course, the youngsters are different, I know that.  There're different.  And I guess it's kind of hard for coaches to get a younger involved, really, just become that much involved in basketball or football, whatever the case might be.  They got so many other things on their mind.  If you get some dedicated athletes now, you--thank goodness, yeah.  They got things on their mind we--our boys didn't think about.
Story_ID: 12288
Speaker 1: You spoke before about how your team [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Lexington, Kentucky] dressed.  You always made sure your team had coats and ties.  They wore green?
Speaker 2: Well we--no, we, no, we--our blazers were green with a D on the collar, small D on the pocket.  We used a gray trouser and naturally, a white shirt with a green tie.  That was our traveling uniform, and they always had travel bags for their uni--for their, to carry their uniforms.  All our teams dressed in socks.  It's either a green and white sock or a white and green, whichever way you wanted to put it, but you always had socks.  And warm-ups were corresponding to the uniform they played in.  We, we always furnished, at our practices, practice shoes, and then we used the games shoes.  Of course, a lot of times, the boys would rather use the practice shoe for the game shoe, which was all right with me.  Of course, they had, they knew they had two pair of shoes to do what they wanted to do with them.  So, after every, every practice session, they had to--the pair of shoes they wore for practice, they had to check them into our, our equipment manager.  He took care of all of that stuff.  They couldn't carry anything home, now.  They had to check it in.  The only thing they'd take home was an athletic supporter if they wanted to, but the rest of it stayed with the, stayed with the school.
Story_ID: 12289
Speaker 1: We were a very disciplined team [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Lexington, Kentucky], and never--we would go into, after the integration, we would go to eastern Kentucky, not being from Kentucky, you don't know too much about eastern.  But you've heard of Appalachia maybe.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: All right.  The most hospitable places we ever traveled, believe it or not, and there were no black in business--just living in the area, but those people treated us royally.  And we formed some great friendships with the coaches in eastern Kentucky.  And I know we went to a place called Paintsville [Kentucky].  No blacks had ever stayed in a hotel at Paintsville, of course, we had to stay overnight.  The superintendent, I knew him, we were in college--at the university [Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky] together where we got our master's degree.  And he knew me, so he interceded and we were able to stay in this motel during the night.  I guess the manager thought we were gonna tear the place cause they have--seems like that's a reputation of a lot of schools, a lot of teams gave this place.  But anyway after the night's lodging, we got ready to leave, the manager said, you fellas, have been gentlemen, come back any time you get ready.  And that's, that's the reputation we got.  And I never will, shall forget, we went up to Breathitt County, that's up in east, all these are eastern Kentucky.  We arrived there that afternoon, and they fed us.  In the meantime, they wasn't supposed to feed us until a certain time of day, but the coach was smart (laughter),  and I've never forgotten it, he would ask about this all the time.  He took me out on a sightseeing trip.  Well, I was stupid.  And while I was gone, they called and fed the team.  They had blackberry cobbler, greens, green beans, fried chicken.  They had everything these kids wanted.  And, you know, when you get full, you don't want to do nothing, you know.  Anyway, I--
Speaker 2: And the game was coming up?
Speaker 1: Oh, the game was coming up that night, and here, when I gotten back, those guys were stuffed.  And here that coach was laughing his butt off, saying, hah (laughter), I never shall forget that.  But we were fortunate enough to-- we went out, but he had us so sluggish, it was pitiful.  I never will forget.  His name was Ferris C. Woods.  I never will forget him.  And he laughs about that all the time.  They did us in, but nevertheless, the people were great.  The people were great.
Speaker 2: Now, where'd you have trouble at?  Now, you say, eastern Kentucky you're thinking of the type of people that was gracious, you know, basically, in those days.
Speaker 1: Well, I mean, wouldn't say trouble.  We just didn't have any trouble, but I mean nobody treated like, just royally when we went to eastern Kentucky, they didn't feed us like this in other parts, places.  And so for, naturally, when we got on the floor, it might be some pushing and pulling, like you do in basketball, and that kind of stuff.  We didn't have any fights.  I don't think we ever had, we didn't have any fights, even in Louisville [Kentucky].  And that was tough playing Louisville.  But nevertheless, everything was nice.  And I mean--huh?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) You never had any trouble on the road?
Speaker 1: No, no, sir.  Never had--the one, the one trouble we got on the road, I, I was in high school.  And I saw my coach go, go up under the table, trying to get away from people who were gonna whip him.  I was in high school then.  But we, I didn't see anything like that in--one thing, the high school athletic association didn't have the strict rules like the high school athletic league which was the, the white association had.  See, anyway, because had that happened then, I think the schools would have been put out of the league.  But, no, see then, I guess things had to be tight during integration because a lot of people were on edge, you know, blacks playing whites and blah, blah, blah and all this kind of stuff.
Speaker 2: What was a major difference between playing during segregation and then playing during integration?
Speaker 1: So far as play, there's no play, I mean no difference in the play.  It was a difference in the people who are rooting.  It's the spectators might be different, see, because I know, for example, in, in the state tournament, we were playing my school, Breathitt County, as I mentioned, one official called twenty fouls against us, one against Breathitt County, twenty-one.
Speaker 2: And that's a curious disparity?
Speaker 1: Oh, man, and the fans at the Memorial College stadium, that's when the place would seat twelve thousand, of course, because of renovation, it doesn't seat that many now.  But half of the gymnasium was black, half of it was white.  And white fans being sports fans, you--most of the good sports fans, they want to see fairness, they don't care.  They want to see fairness.  And man they booed and booed and booed.  And this official never called another game after that particular game.  And all during the game, it was a seesaw battle, but because of unfairness, you could see we were gaining support from the white group.  We just gained a lot of support.  And when the game ended, we shot--our young man shot behind the center line, through the nets, the next--one second to play, we won the game by one point.  But we never had, really had any trouble.
Story_ID: 12290
Speaker 1: Who were some of your best players, and who were some of the players that you remember?
Speaker 2: I can remember quite a few of them.  And some of them--I never like to get into a discussion of best because of different eras.  We had some good players all through.  And it's in our book that you saw, I remember I had some names of people in those books. They were good players, good players.  Now, if I want to say "best", I, I could say, which I consider to be the best, but I don't want to because they were all good players.
Speaker 1: Okay, who were some of the good players?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I knew you'd--all right, Julius Bear is in the book, Robert ['Bobby'] Washington is in the book.  Joe Hamilton is in the book.  Now, Robert Washington and Joe Hamilton were the only two professional players we had.  They went on to play professional ball, NBA [National Basketball Association] ball, and--oh, shucks, Washington played in the--was it NBA?  Washington in NBA.  He played with the [Cleveland] Cavaliers.  Joe Hamilton played Artis Gilmore and that gang in the American with--
Speaker 1: ABA [American Basketball Association].
Speaker 2: ABA.  He played with them.  So those were the two professional basketball players.
Speaker 1: I think Gilmore played with Indiana, didn't he [sic, the Kentucky Colonels in the ABA]?
Speaker 2: Right.  And Julius, Julius, from up in, the East, oh, where was Julius, Julius great basketball player?
Speaker 1: Erving?
Speaker 2: Erving.  See, he played in this league.  Yeah, Julius Erving.  Shucks, then we have a young man by the name of Lou Johnson.  We called him 'Slick' Johnson, he was a great basketball--all around player, athlete.  And he left us, and, of course, he really got his notoriety from playing with the Brooklyn Dodgers [sic, Los Angeles Dodgers] for basket--baseball.  We had a young man by the name Dave Whitney who coaches Alcorn State [University, Alcorn State, Mississippi] basketball.  He played with us.  He became an All-State player.  And he went--he played with the Kansas City Monarchs.
Speaker 1: Baseball?
Speaker 2: Baseball.
Speaker 1: And aren't they getting ready to play the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky].
Speaker 2: Alcorn, in, in January.  We played, they played Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] first, then Alcorn follows.  And he wanted to bring Dave back home.  Dave, now, Dave played on one of those teams where you jump ball after each basket (chuckle).  And we were playing this tournament with Dave.  And Dave was playing guard, and his mother was there.  And there was another mother there by the name of Mrs. Davis.  Now, we were trailing twenty points, twenty points, twenty points?  We were trailing four points, with twenty seconds to play.  Now, they had to bring the ball back to the center now after each basket, every, two points, see, four points, twenty second to play.  Now, we won that ballgame, by one point, and those two ladies fainted.  I never will forget.  They fainted.  His mother (laughter) they fainted, they had to get the paramedics to come and revive those women (laughter).  But can you imagine, four points, twenty seconds to play and then after each basket, you bring the ball back and jump it in the center, start all over.
Speaker 1: In those days, in that kind of a game, if you had a big center, that was bigger than the other guy, you could get all the ball all the time, right, or?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, always, gonna, always get the tap, the big (unclear)--but--and the other team, if they--of course, if they were in front, they could almost stall it out, but we were fortunate enough to get the tip, score; come back, jump, get the tip again and score.  That's what won it.  And they, the young men on that team, all of them, not all of them are living 'cause one got killed in World War II, but (pause) we've had some very, very good basketball players, nice young men, good young men.
Story_ID: 12291
Speaker 1: You were talking about the challenges that youth have today that they didn't have when you were coaching--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: When I, when I say challenges, I don't guess it was so much challenges as it were, I guess, you call it things to do other than basketball.  See, the age of TV or youngsters going out and playing golf.  See, we couldn't do that type of thing.  See, we had no golf course.  One, maybe one swimming pool at a park some place.  There, and, of course, right now, where they would have the activities that youngsters have now, it is not as--some of them, I won't say all.  But you won't find the dedicated athlete now, like you used to have because basketball was his life.  Football was his life, but he's got other things that he's involved in now with computers and so forth.  They'd rather go home and watch--play Nintendo or whatever that game they play, one of those games, than to play with basketball.  But back in those days, you'd find boys who would sleep with the basketball, you know, he's crazy about it.
Speaker 1: Now also I suppose the families were more intact in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely, you had more--
Speaker 1: They had the father and mother--?
Speaker 2: Father and mother or a good strong mother, whatever the case might be.  We, when we had to go on trips, we'd have mothers to pack lunches for every boy, whether they had, it was their boy or not, they just packed lunches for everybody.  And so when we went on trips, we were never hungry cause we always had some lunches prepared by the mothers.  And now, whether this happens today, I don't know whether it does or not.  But as I mentioned, those times, those days--and we had one mother who turned one hundred about three weeks ago.  She was a mother, she was always talking about--'Slick', Lou Johnson, Louis 'Slick' Johnson that played football, basketball too, and played baseball with the Brooklyn Dodgers [sic, Los Angeles Dodgers].  He's a, and incidentally, he's a drug, what do you call them?
Speaker 1: Counselor.
Speaker 2: Counselor now.  He's a drug counselor.  His mother, a greater supporter of our team.  And I never shall forget, she came to me one day and said, "Mr. Roach, Slick's getting hard to handle.  Will you help me out?"  I said, "What do you want me to do?  She said, leave him home one time."  I said, "Ms. Johnson, I can't do--leave," she said, "Leave, please, you leave him home one time."  And I said, "Okay." I left him home.  He cried like a baby.  And evidentially, that broke him 'cause she said, after that, she didn't have no more trouble out of him.  So I was so glad I could help her, you know, by--we might have lost the ballgame, but I thought perhaps we had enough manpower to win it anyway.  Anyway, I wasn't, I wasn't willing to take him anyway, if she wanted him to stay home.  And as I mentioned, I grew up--we'd always have a talk with our young ladies and boys, prior to our basketball season and football season.  Well, I won't put this on here, on tape.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) what were you gonna say?
Speaker 2: Well, we'd always have a little, a little, I guess you'd call, it wasn't a, not a riddle, but just a little saying we'd always tell our boys, a little story about a dog crossing the track.  And the train come along and run over the dog's tail.  Naturally, what would the dog do?  Turn around and look to see where his tail was.  He'd what, lose his head.  And what's the moral of that story?  Don't lose your head over a piece of tail (laughter).  We'd always tell that to those kids.  Kids, they laugh about it now.  And, anyway.  So, yes, sir, in those days, those days.
Speaker 1: Boy, oh, boy.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 12292
Speaker 1: How many championships did you all [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Lexington, Kentucky] win, what's the--?
Speaker 2: We, we were fortunate enough to win--see, by divided into two leagues, we had the Kentucky Athletic League and then the Kentucky Athletic Association.  That was the integrated portion, the Association.  So in the League, we won two State championships, in 1948 and 1950.  But in the Association, we didn't win any championships, but we were a runner up three times.  We got to the finals and runner up three times.  So, but we didn't ever--we never won.  But we did get to the finals and played them.
Story_ID: 12293
Speaker 1: You retired as a coach in 1965.  What happened?  Well, why did you retire?
Speaker 2: I lost my wife [Mary Roach] in February.  And it just, it just took something out of me.  She was, she was a great basketball fan.  In fact, she was a sports fan, but crazy about basketball.  And when they had tournaments in Lexington [Kentucky], I'd always--if we were in the finals or anywhere in the tournament, I'd always take seven boys and we'd go over to my house.  She'd prepare a meal for them.  And it never created any animosity for the rest of players 'cause they knew that they were in that category.  They weren't in the first seven, and they knew that.  But they'd come over there and eat, and when we'd take a nap.  And they were just crazy about her.  And when she passed for the kidney ailment.  And I don't know, I just--I don't know, it's just something happened I guess.  And I got a chance, the man called me that summer, right--just prior to school ending.  And he asked me if I wanted to be a principal.  I said, well, yes, cause I, I had prepared for it.  I'd had my master's and all the credentials to be a principal and this type thing.  So, he said, "Well, I got--I have a position for you."  And that was the George Washington Carver Elementary School [Lexington, Kentucky], this is right after integration, the first integrated school, integration.  So I took it.  A young man by the name of Louis Stout came here and succeeded me.  He was the--it was the first high school athletic administrator, black high school ever to have a black administrator in the United States, and the only black--I should say only black high school to have a black athletic administrator, administrator in the United States.  He just retired this past year.  Louis Stout.  But we had the good fortune of our team.
Story_ID: 12294
Speaker 1: Here in Lexington [Kentucky], well, around the country, the University of Kentucky basketball is long associated with Adolph Rupp, and Adolph Rupp was a great coach, I suppose he won a lot of games, but the team was--became a symbol for segregation all over the country.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I know that's true.
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) That's true.
Speaker 1: (simultaneous) And I'm not from here.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I know everybody, that Kentucky's team was announced like [University of] Alabama's [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] football team-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: With [Paul] 'Bear' Bryant.  You know, it was all supposed to be a good team, but all white, everybody knew it was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and they tried to hold out, he tried to hold out as long as he could with that tradition, right?  And that became like a symbol for kind of a battle here in Lexington.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And can you talk about that and your--?
Speaker 2: Well, I must the, the gap between the University of Kentucky and the black community is still there because of an incident that happened way back under Adolph Rupp.  And the only thing I can say, the gentleman, he would never take any of our players.  And we had some good ball players who could have played on his basketball team.  He'd never take a black player, period.  And he could have because of his stature in the Southeastern [Athletic] Conference.  He was just a giant among coaches.  And whatever he said, it was gone.  He finally did get a black player out of Louisville.  His name was, oh, shucks.  He was very tall--
Speaker 1: Tom Payne?
Speaker 2: Tom Payne.  He got Tom Payne.  Well, see, Tom--I hate to say this, but, was of questionable character when he got him.  Now, we feel he got him, of questionable character so that people could recognize, this is not the type of player we want at the University of Kentucky.  Why do we want a black, you know, this guy is terrible, which he was (laughter), you know.  And, but that wasn't representative of the blacks in Kentucky.  And from that day on, you see, now, Bear Bryant finally gave in, in Alabama.  He finally put on some black players.  And it was C. M. Newton, who left here and went to Alabama and had the first black players.  And C. M. used to come to our basketball games at, over at [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Lexington, Kentucky].  And C .M. finally became an Athletic Director here at the University of Kentucky.  But Rupp was a symbol of segregation, and blacks just couldn't forgive him.  See, [Wes] Unseld who played for [University of] Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky], who is the general manager now for either the [Washington] Wizards or--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it's the Wizards.
Speaker 2: Well, Unseld was a great basketball player.
Speaker 1: He was All-American.
Speaker 2: All-American, and here with Butch Beard and all those kids.  Well, Unseld came here in a State tournament once, and the crowd just booed and booed him, see.  And the youngster never got over it, and Mr. Rupp never went to really get him, just to give him a scholarship.  Of course, and the Rupp following says that the reason that Rupp didn't go after black players because they had to go to the South.  And, you know, how the conditions were in the South.  They weren't as conducive to a black boy being down there.  But C. M. Newton took a, took a gamble.  See, he was right in the heart of the South in Alabama.
Speaker 1: That's correct.
Speaker 2: And so Wendell Hudson was his, the first boy that--black played in the South.  And C .M. was, I guess had the nerve.  He took five boys out of the South to New York to the play in the NIT [National Invitational Tournament].  I don't how they got--I forget how they came out.  But he took five boys from the University of Alabama.  And here's Rupp, won't make a move.
Speaker 1: That's when Leon Douglas, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and all--that game.  And Rupp won't make a move, see.  It's kind of--that's, and right now, right now, that's the very reason that they had, they had so much antagonism against the University of Kentucky in Lexington because of the fact that Lexington was turning out some good boys.  But Rupp wouldn't take any of them.  And so they said, if 's Pitino's down--it wasn't [Rick] Pitino then, it was Denny Crumb in Louisville, took the black boys and played, see.  But not Rupp.
Story_ID: 12295
Speaker 1: And I had the distinction with being put out of the coliseum way back here [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] (laughter) yonder there, I asked my--it's my book there.
Speaker 2: It was 1955?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right.  Well, I didn't--actually, I wasn't put out, but it was, they made the thing so disagreeable, that you walked out, you know.
Speaker 2: What happened?
Speaker 1: Well, my principal said--we wanted to see Guy Rodgers play.  He was a great star with Temple [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  We wanted to see Guy Rodgers play.  So we bought our tickets, and our principal bought the tickets now.  But the ticket allowed us to sit on the front row, near the center stripe.  Now, it wasn't my fault.  We didn't know.  But we followed the ticket.  So, before the game started, here comes the Girl Scout, Boy Scout came down and said, "You fellows have to move."  Well, we looked at him, we're paying--okay, we were, "Why move? " He said, "Well, you just got to move."  He didn't know.  Next we know, here come the Scoutmaster down, a big fellow, you men will have to move.  Well, we still didn't pay no attention to that.  We knew we had tickets there.  The tickets called for seat two or three, whatever it was.  Then here comes Bernie Shively  who was the Athletic Director at that time.
Speaker 2: Athletic Director, himself came down?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He came and said, "You men will have to move."  We said, "Why?"  We said, "Mr. Shivley--now, we're working for the Board, the City Board of Education."  We said, "Why?"  He said, "Blacks are not allowed to sit in front of whites".  What?  (Laughter) And here we've bought our tickets, now, we got our tickets.  He said, "You men will have to sit in the back."  And our principal looked at me, and I looked at him.  We started to sit there, but we knew we would go to, what?  We'd be on, not, what's the word I want to say?  We were members of the City Board, City School System.  The Board of Education would have more than likely fired us had we stayed.  So we moved.  And I told that story to everybody I knew at K.  I mean it took all the presidents to come out there.
Speaker 2: That's incredible.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and we was, we--
Speaker 2: --fired you?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, had we, had we refused to move, they would have actually fired us.  We knew they would have.  See, we knew, and we know they would have, so we didn't give them that opportunity.  So we moved.  So, that was, whew, an experience.  And if we hadn't bought a ticket, it would have been something different.  And, and we weren't, we weren't gonna move into the back, gee whiz, you can forget that.  Anyway, we, self-esteem was blown all out of the window (laughter).  But those were the days, and, of course, I mean I was fortunate enough, after all that, to be--I've been serving on the Athletic Board now since 1975.  So, you can say, I've seen four Presidents and three Athletic Directors.  And had I, I guess, had I balked and caused a scene, maybe this wouldn't have come along, I don't know.  But because of being on the Athletic Board, I've been able to get scholarships, get tickets and things for people and things like this, see.
Story_ID: 12296
Speaker 1: One thing that you did is dramatic and kind of famous to the present day, is that you either nominated or seconded the nomination for Tubby Smith to be coach [at the University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] after Rick Pitino left for the [Boston] Celtics, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.  I was the, I was the guy that did this.  Well, when--we had heard through C. M., C. M. Newton, that he was gonna recommend Tubby.  So I was prepared to either recommend him or second his motion at the Board meeting that day.  Well, once it was recommended, I seconded the motion.
Speaker 1: And he was approved unanimously.
Speaker 2: Unanimously.  Wasn't nobody gonna vote against--they wouldn't have dared (laughter).
Story_ID: 12297
Speaker 1: I've heard that the installment of Tubby Smith as basketball coach placed the real racist history of the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky] athletics in the past.  Now, I mean that's what some have argued, that, going forward now, that nobody can say there's, it's a lot of racism in the University of Kentucky Athletic Department, and what used to be there has finally now, the [Adolph] Rupp era and all that is over with.  What do you think--?
Speaker 2: Well, so, the Rupp era, I guess is over with.  But, and the University of Kentucky is no doubt only, the only school in the United States, major school, that has two blacks heading major sports, Tubby Smith, basketball; Bernadette Maddox, women's, women's basketball.  I don't think it's another combination like that.  But outside of that, it's not the university because the--and you can see the diversity at the university.  It, it's the diehard fan who didn't want Tubby and still doesn't want Tubby.  It's not the university itself so much.  But it's the, it's the fans that attend the ballgames or don't attend the ballgames.  They still have this feeling that Tubby's not the coach for the University of Kentucky.
Speaker 1: So they still identify with the Adolph Rupp's style?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, style.  Now, of course, not only--they're still identifying now with Rick Pitino's style, but I think basically though, it's that racial, that racial tone is still there, the racial tone is still there.  And I don't know what it's gonna take to dispel with these so-called fans.  And it's not the fans--I mentioned about eastern Kentucky.  You would think it would be the fans from eastern Kentucky, but Tubby is strong in eastern Kentucky.  It's the Lexingtonian fans, where he receives his most criticism, not that a coach can't be criticized.  A coach can be criticized, but that criticism is strictly racial.  And it's, it's strictly racial.  And I don't know, what kind of style he plays, don't care whether he's playing a up tempo or a down tempo, I don't care what it is, win or lose, they're not gonna change.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I heard he was criticized recently after he beat the prestigious University of North Carolina [Chapel Hill, North Carolina] team by three points.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: He was still criticized.  He should have done something else.
Speaker 2: Something else.  It's always something else.  Of course, I'm glad the man has got broad shoulder.  And he had a rough way to go last year because he had--he was coaching his son [Saul Smith] year before last.  And he, oh, he really undergo, had to undergo some stern remarks from people.  And he was, his son, he, both stood up against it.  And so he's doing all right.  He's gonna have a good team this year just if, if people just get off his back.
Story_ID: 12298
Speaker 1: Looking back on everything that you've done, on your career, what do you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Legacy?  Well, I'd say helping people.  I'd say I would like to be remembered by somebody who helps others.  That's the way I'd like to be remembered by.  And after coaching, after leaving high school, I don't think we mentioned this, I went into State government.  And I was in a position to see that a number of minorities at that time, it was strictly black.  And finally they put in the phase of females there being minorities, but I was able to help a number of minorities get jobs.  And I like that, see.  And right now, as a member of the Athletics Board at U-K [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky], I've been in the position to get a number of tickets for black school it is difficult to the University of Kentucky basketball game, even though they have twenty-five thousand (laughter) seats out.  It's just difficult to get seats.  You've got to be in a certain position to get them.  And the ground is--so far as getting seats for blacks and whites, it's not an even playground.  It's not an even thing, but I've been in a position to be able to get a number of seats.  And let's hope, just we mentioned today, in our meeting today, what's gonna happen when you increase the prices of these tickets.  And I know they're going up.  See they're in the seven hundred category now for two seats.  So, yeah, (chuckle), they're going up.  Next year, they'll be up.  And then--.
Speaker 1: Talking about big time basketball.
Speaker 2: Yeah, then they have a fund, they have a fund.  They call it Blue and White Fund where if you want the choice seats, you give X number of thousand, plus the tickets, see.  And you can see, eventually, if they want to, if they're not careful, if they don't stop or put a boundary on the number of seats they're gonna sell in this Blue and White Fund, they're gonna price us, the average citizen out of the place, if they're not careful.
Speaker 1: And most black people wouldn't be able to sit near the front anyway
Speaker 2: No, and that's right.
Speaker 1: --now, cause they can't afford it.
Speaker 2: They're not gonna be able to.  They just can't they don't have that, as you say, the financial means to do it.  And there, but you have all-black players out there on the floor, see, a black coach and all this thing.  So it's alI, I preach this each and every day when I go out there and particularly at the athletic meetings.  And I think the new athletic director is going to be, they're going to see, see what we're talking about.
Speaker 1: Now, people have discussed in the things I've read about you, the level dignity that you brought to or portrayed to your students when you were a coach, and that many of your players became successful and they attribute that success to the model which you set.  How do you explain that?
Speaker 2: I would like to think so.  I know I just tried to be, you know, to deliver a good image for those youngsters, boys and girls.  And I think I have the respect of all of them, I think.  I know we had our trials during the times that we were in school cause, but nevertheless, they'd come back and said, "We think you did what you had to do, and it helped us," you know, this type thing.  So, all these young.  We, we were tickled to death with the success of our players, really, truly.  They have been very successful.  We've lost some.  We lost some, and then we've had some to go to great heights.  We've had doctors, lawyers, in the ministerial field, one of the greatest pastors in the Baptist church is Reverend Billy Jones.  He is the pastor of one of the largest churches in the New York, in Brooklyn, New York.  His name is Billy Jones, great young man who was one of our ball players.  And we've had some doctors and lawyers, all, all fields, you might say.  And then we've had some average citizens, you know.  But they've all been good people.
Story_ID: 12299
Speaker 1: Your mother [Jessie Pendleton Jackson] did get a chance to see you become real successful and kind of a celebrity coach, didn't she?
Speaker 2: No, my mother never saw me play a game of basketball.
Speaker 1: She never did.
Speaker 2: She would not come to a game of basketball that I played in.  She didn't--wouldn't listen to a game of basketball that I coached.
Speaker 1: And so she wasn't really concerned about--.
Speaker 2: She was concerned, but she was over concerned.  She was nervous.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: See, she was nervous.  And the only game she saw me play, that's the game that I got hurt in, remember I was telling you I got my teeth knocked out.  That's the only game she saw, (Laughter) the only game she saw.  But she never saw me play, all during high school, she wouldn't see me play a game.  And then when I started coaching, and they started broadcasting, she wouldn't listen.
Story_ID: 12300
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  As a person who was fair, honest, trustworthy, that's how I want to be--I guess that's it.  A fair, honest, trustworthy, that's probably--that's good enough.
Story_ID: 12301
Speaker 1: This was taken at the [Earvin] Magic Johnson, what should I call it, (pause) reception, Magic Johnson Reception at the Marriott Hotel.  I can't give you a date right now.  This is Mr. P. G. Peoples, the Urban League CEO in Fayette County, Lexington-Fayette County, [Kentucky] standing, and that's my wife, Lettie M. Roach, sitting on the left there.  And this is myself over on the right.
Speaker 2: [Sanford Roach (right) and wife, Lettie M. Roach (left), with Lexington-Fayette Urban League CEO, P. G. Peeples (center) at a Magic Johnson reception, not dated, from the collection of Sanford Roach]
Story_ID: 12302
Speaker 1: This is [Earvin] 'Magic' Johnson, and on the left there is our Councilman, and he's in the 2nd District [Lexington, Kentucky] Jacques Wigginton, and that's myself on the right.
Speaker 2: [Sanford Roach (right) with Earvin Magic Johnson (center) and Jacques Wigginton (left) of the Lexington-Fayette County Government's 2nd District, not dated, from the collection of Sanford Roach]
Story_ID: 12303
Speaker 1: This is cover of our book called 'Transition Game,' who was written by Billy Reed, one of our great sports writers here in Kentucky and published by Host Communications, which is a great publishing house in Kentucky, in Lexington, Kentucky.  'Transition Game.
Speaker 2: ['Transition Game' by Billy Reed, a book about Sanford Roach's career. From the collection of Sanford Roach].
Story_ID: 12304
Speaker 1: This was a trophy awarded to me at the National High School Federation Convention in, in Tampa, Florida.  I was inducted into the National Hall of Fame, and that gentleman's name, I can't quote it right now, who was, presented that trophy to me.
Speaker 2: [Sanford Roach pictured on back cover receiving hall of fame award in Tampa, Florida, not dated, from the collection of Sanford Roach]
