Story_ID: 51043
Speaker 1: Okay we're gonna start and I wanna--was gonna start out by slating it.  My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I am the interviewer.  Scott Stearns is the videographer, and I'd like to have you state your name and spell it for us and your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Carl Ray, C-A-R-L, R-A-Y, August 30th, 1944.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I'd like to have today's date and the address we're at?
Speaker 2: Today is March 28, 2002, 10123 Bon Vista Court, San Jose, California, 95127.
Speaker 1: Bon Vista, spell that.
Speaker 2: B-O-N, V-I-S-T-A.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have your profession?
Speaker 2: That's a good one (laughter). I'm a community activist, that's what I'm called, but I'm a motivational speaker, an actor, and a stand-up comedian.
Story_ID: 51044
Speaker 1: Okay, and I ask five questions of everyone that's a little "People" magazine-ish short answers, but I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: My favorite food?  Grits.
Speaker 1: Favorite.  You can't laugh.  No, no laughing out loud, none.  No response. Okay.  Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Bahamas.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying.  I got a lot of them, but I, I think this is probably the best one, oh gosh, now you got me trying to figure out one of them.  One of my favorite saying is, "If I wake up in the morning, it's a good day."
Story_ID: 51045
Speaker 1: Now I wanna first start asking you about your mother and her background, and if you could tell me her name and what you know about her background?
Speaker 2: Her name is Vidella Ray, that's V-I-D-E-L-L-A.  Her maiden name is Harbin, H-A-R-B-I-N.  She was born in Choctaw County, Alabama, on May 3rd, 1908.
Speaker 1: Do you know--did she talk about her growing up, sir?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She was the oldest of seven children and naturally responsibility always came to the oldest child.  In most cases, that child was the one that was gonna have to help raise the other kids, so that was kind of standard in all families back then.  So the oldest person was the second parent.  So, and her life was dedicated basically to helping raise her sisters and one brother.  Even after she was married, she was still like helping to raise them.
Speaker 1: And, I have one question, Choctaw County is that, was it named after the--do you know the history of the--
Speaker 2: Well, it was named after the Choctaw Indians--
Speaker 1: Indians, right.
Speaker 2: You know along that section of Alabama and even into Mississippi you will find the word Choctaw a lot because that tribe lived in that area and even into Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you ever know your grandmother?
Speaker 2: On my father's side.
Speaker 1: On your mother's side?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side, no, I was young when she passed.
Story_ID: 51046
Speaker 1: Now your father, can you give his name?
Speaker 2: His name is George Ray, III, also born in Choctaw County, Alabama, Butler, 1900, March 2nd, 1900.
Speaker 1: And can you talk about his, his, you know, what you know about his background?
Speaker 2: He was the second of nine children, eight boys and a girl, and he also had the role of being that boy in the family who had to help provide for the rest of his brothers and his sister because the older brother moved away, so he and my mother both had that responsibility of being the matriarchs of the family.  He took care of--my father had his own farm, which was something that was unique.  He bought his farm in the '30's [1930s], I believe.  The old plantation owners offered all the blacks who stayed on the plantation to buy their land for a dollar an acre, so he bought 50 acres.  And he was always kind of looked up to as the guy, the black guy, or the cousin or the uncle that had his own property, had his own farm.
Story_ID: 51047
Speaker 1: And what about your siblings?
Speaker 2: There are five of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you give their, you know, name and their birth place?
Speaker 2: Elaine, E-L-A-I-N-E is the oldest daughter.  She was born in 19--January 19th, 1929, I believe.  My brother, Lindsey was born in December of that year, December 15th.  Brother, Lamravin was born four years later in 1933.  My sister Louida, L-O-U-I-D-A, was born in 1939.
Speaker 1: And do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, in those days the Harbin family and the Ray family, you know, everybody lived on a plantation so the, the Harbin's lived a few miles up the road and they had all the girls and my brothers and my father's [George Ray III]side there was eight boys and one girl, and on my mother's [Vidella Ray] side there were seven--six girls and a boy, so all the Ray brothers used to like the Harbin girls, but my mother and my father got married, so they always had this deal or this thing that if any of the other brothers and sisters were to marry they would divorce, because they didn't feel right with another brother marrying another sister in the family, so that was something that they detested, didn't want it to happen, and it didn't happen, but they felt so strong about it that if any of these others, any of your brothers marry my sister we'll just separate and fortunately none of 'em ever married.
Story_ID: 51048
Speaker 1: Now what's your earliest memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory.  Probably, I'd, I'd, about 4 years old.  I had one memory of my grandfather.  People said I wasn't old enough to remember him, but he rode a horse and I was about four years old and I remember him coming up on this beautiful horse and I could describe the horse, but people said nah you heard people talk about it so much, you don't remember.  I remember that horse.  That's my earliest memory.
Speaker 1: And do you have other memories of your early childhood?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have early memories.  I was, I was a polio victim, so I have all of those memories.  You know, sitting on the porch (laughter) when they'd go to play, watching the kids play and I have those memories.  I have those memories going to the clinic.  Well they weren't clinics in those days.  It was really nothing but a numbering system. Once a year they would round up all the kids in the county that had polio and count 'em.  That's basically what it was.  They did not do anything for us.  The most serious ones they would send to Mobile, Alabama, and put in a pool or something, but there was nothing they could do for us at that time and I remember crying to my mama [Vidella Ray] telling my mama I was not like those kids.  There was nothing wrong with me because I did not want to be sent away, and my most vivid memory, maybe I was five years old, of all the kids that had polio there was one young girl that was bent completely backwards.  They had to have something to support her in the back because her head went one way and her feet went another way, and I can remember looking at that girl and told my mama, I'm not like these kids, nothing wrong with me, and that, that, that was the memory that stuck with me from the, the clinic where they used to herd us in.  So that's the memory that I had from having polio that was very vivid.
Story_ID: 51049
Speaker 1: How did you, how did you contract polio?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know.  At that time in the '40's [1940s] a lot of kids came down with the polio.  I mean it was just a virus going around, and they didn't even really know what it was at that time.  I remember browsing some old magazines a few years ago when I was in Los Angeles [California], and I picked up a magazine from the '40's [1940s] and to read what they were saying about--it was the late '30s' [1930s], oh it was a virus, it will pass, you know, and they'll be fine.  So at that time they really didn't know what caused it.
Speaker 1: What were your symptoms?
Speaker 2: I just woke up one morning and they say I was four years old.  I just woke up and I was paralyzed.
Speaker 1: And so you couldn't walk?
Speaker 2: I could walk, but I, you know, the right side of my body, my arm and everything was just, it was just paralyzed.
Speaker 1: And so there was no treatment?
Speaker 2: Basically, there was no treatment.  I mean you gotta realize at that time the vaccine hadn't been discovered, so there was basically no treatment.  The only treatment I received, the physical therapy.  They gave my mother [Vidella Ray] a little bucket, you know like kids carry and to put sand in the bucket and to--a little bit of the sand to see if I could hold the bucket, and she would put sand in it and, and see how much sand she could put in it before it would fall out of my hand and over a period of time I would just have to carry this bucket of sand around.  For a long time, I had no, no use of the hand whatsoever, so when it began to come back my physical therapy was a bucket of sand, that was it, and the doctor told her, "Vidella, take the boy home, ain't nothing we can do for him."
Speaker 1: So, how did you eventually get over and have more mobility?  It just happened?
Speaker 2: It just happened, you know, it just happened over a period of time.  As you can see now, muscles--these muscles are gone and I have pretty good use of it today.  Now if I am in cold weather it automatically, you know, closes up and even to this day, but I have no use of the thumb in that area, but I have pretty good use of it and when I started school I had, I had no, no mobility of it at all.
Speaker 1: Now, was--so was that--do you remember that being a painful time of your life or was it just, you know, that's what you had or did you feel separate from other kids?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah I was separate from other kids because I was never allowed to play.  The thing I remember most about, I, I was never allowed to play because I was so fragile.  First of all I was a preemie.  I was born two months premature, so I, I was always sick and then the polio came along, and I wasn't allowed to play.  That was the most vivid thing, sitting on the porch watching the kids play, and I remember sometime my mom and aunts, the kids would be out there playing football or whatever and they would say "all right you guys gotta let him play" and they didn't want me to play because they couldn't throw me down or something, so I would get out there and they would let me run the distant of the yard, you know, and they'd say all right and they would start whining, ah you know they wanna go back and play, so I have to go back and sit on the porch and watch (laughter).  So those are the, the vivid memories that I have.  Like things I've, I've never done like roller skate 'cause people would always say, gonna get hurt, don't hurt him, you gonna get hurt, so even when I started school it was always don't hurt him, don't hurt him, don't hurt him, and the kids, don't hurt him, don't--so I was never allowed to mingle, but once I got up a little bit starting the fifth and sixth grade I said I'mma play and I would get hurt very easily, but I would play and by the time I was in junior high school I had mobility to--I played basketball.  And I remember the, the coach did a great thing when I was about the ninth grade on the junior varsity he let me start.  You know, I would go in and start, play a couple of minutes, he would take me out.  It did, it did a lot for my ego and it--so that was--looking back it was just great.  He saw it, he let me play that two minutes, I was out of the game, but I was on the team.
Story_ID: 51050
Speaker 1: Now, what's your--Can you just describe some of your, you know, family life, what was family life like?
Speaker 2: Family life was great.  I was the youngest.  I was the baby, so it, it was great.  We grew up in a religious family, not a fanatic, but religious family.  Daddy [George Ray III] was the church man.  It was his church.  He pretty much ran it.  Ministers would come and go, but George stayed.  It was his church and things ran accordingly and if the weather was bad there were times when the only people in church was us, the family.  And my father had a farm and, you know, always had enough to feed everybody, so we had relatives that would come from the city and they would pack up, I mean, corn, whatever, watermelons, tomatoes, vegetables.  They provided for everybody, so everybody know go down to George's and Vidella's, we going to get our food and my mother [Vidella Ray] would can all year long.  She would can and about the only staples that we bought from the store was flour and lard, basic things like that.  We even had our own lard because we had hogs.  We killed the hogs, we processed the hogs and everything, so we were pretty much a self-contained family or farm.  My dad had worked in the, in the, the mills for awhile, but he always, you know, pulpwood and logging industry.  In those days, you had the two guys with the crosscut saw.  When the power saw came out in the early '50's [1950], late '40's [1940s], early '50's [1950s] that put a lot of men out of work because one man could cut more in a day than two guys could cut in a couple of weeks.  But he had his farm and he just came on back home and he, and that's what he did and that was pretty much the family life.  He had a rule in his house that you had to go to college.  He had a fourth grade education, and his rule was, "you're not grown in this house 'til you get a B.S. degree" and it, it wasn't up for discussion.  He just said, "I'm gonna provide for you to make sure that you have a better life then me, so you don't have a choice until you get a B.S. degree." It wasn't something you discussed, you just knew that you were gonna go to college, that was the rule of the house, which was unique for this bi-- country area where people didn't go to college.
Speaker 1: Did your other brothers and sisters go to college?
Speaker 2: They all want to college.
Story_ID: 51051
Speaker 1: And, you know if you take yourself back to that time period can you tell me what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: Ah yes, ham in the morning, hams sounds, you know because mama [Vidella Ray] always got up and cooked that ham and grits and eggs and you always got that coffee.  That would stick 'cause they had coffee first.  You had that Maxwell House coffee and when you woke up in the morning you smelled that and you smelled ham.  And the sights, we, we had this--there is this area where we would go. It was--we call it "the bottom" and you know in the summertime when the, the, the water levels get low we would always go to "the bottom."  We had a well in "the bottom;" we had a well at the house, and in "the bottom" we had the creek and this great white sand I used to go play in as a kid, so, under this big hickory nut tree.  That was my favorite spot.
Story_ID: 51052
Speaker 1: And so as the youngest did you enjoy--were you spoiled?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well yeah, yeah I was spoiled in a sense, you know, I, I was to a degree, but not really spoiled.  See first of all I was protected because of sickness and polio, so I was naturally treated different.  I wouldn't say that I was spoiled 'cause they whipped my behind real good if I messed up, but I, I was protected because I could do things and get away with it and mama [Vidella Ray] and daddy [George Ray III] would just let me slide.  I could mistreat the--my brothers.  I could do things and when they'd do something to me I'd go cry and mama say, "Leave that baby alone, leave the baby alone" and it was always I would just harass them and then go hide behind mama and daddy, you know, "Leave that baby alone"--(unclear)--and I would sit behind them and make faces and they would say "Mama y'all don't know what this boy doing.  I ain't doing-" "Won't y'all leave that baby alone."  And so I always had that "Leave the baby alone" and then once they went away and my brothers always pull that ole "you adopted" routine on me. And no matter how many times they came back and mama said no and daddy say no, they always would pull it.  It's the same line, "You tell him, I ain't gonna tell him, won't you tell it, mama and them don't want him to know.  Tell me what?  You know, you adopted."  I looked like mama and daddy, he looked like mama and daddy, (laughter) and I would just go berserk, that would just hurt.  By the time mama got home, I would just--I'd cry so much.  You know you could only, only--no more water left in my body and she would get on 'em, "Y'all leave this baby alone," and I'd get all the special treatment, and I was happy again.
Speaker 1: Now, as a young person did you--what kind of child--I mean you know you said you were a little spoiled, you know, and you were sickly, but I'm wondering did you have any thoughts about what you wanted to become or, you know, or, or dream, you know, were you a dreamer?  Were you, you know, were you a reader?  Were you mischievous? What, what, what kind of child was--
Speaker 2: Well naturally I was a reader, and you are a dreamer because when you live, when you live in the country and you don't have water, indoor water, you don't have indoor plumbing, you don't have electricity, so naturally you become a dreamer, and I used to pick up the magazines and I would see the magazines and I would say "That's what I want some day," those pictures and I would read and I could just get lost in my reading because one day I know I was gonna leave the country, I was gonna leave that farm, and I was gonna go out and in the world and experience some of those things that I only saw in books, you know so at a young age I knew I was going to college, I didn't have an option there.  And somehow I got interested in electronics and electricity because I remember I was almost a teenager when we got electricity, and I was like "Yeah we got some lights."  I used to leave the lights on, and I became interested in that and so I think that kinda lead to me going to school, majoring in engineering because it was so fascinating to have what other people had all the time was electricity.  And see in those days they would only run the electricity as far as the last white family up the dirt road.  If you weren't lucky enough to live inside or down the road inside of a white family, you didn't get electricity because they only ran it to the last white family on the road; that's just the way it was.  So everybody who was black didn't get electricity and you better hope, and you would pray, and you would wish that a white person would move further up the road than you were so they would run the power lines up.
Story_ID: 51053
Speaker 1: And did you have any sense--was your community pretty sort of iso--was the black community somewhat isolated there, you know where you, where you lived?
Speaker 2: Yeah it was isolated.  We were furthest distance from the town, most--we were out in the country.  You know when you get out in the country and, and there was always a community, and the community was named after the church in the community.  Like I lived in Mount Olive Community.  I lived four miles from town and two miles from the paved road, so we were out in the rural, very, very, rural area.
Speaker 1: Wa, wa, wa, was your community mainly black or where you just--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 51054
Speaker 1: And what other, other, other like stories you'd like to tell about those, you know, early years, I mean, where, where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: I, I, my first grade was at Mount Olive Baptist Church. That was about a mile from the house up the dirt road, and after that they closed that school and we had to go to Bu, Butler Public Elementary School, which was in town, just on the outskirts of town [Butler, Alabama], which mean we had to walk.  And we did not have any buses, so we walked to school, and it was, it was a lot of fun, even in walking, even when it's raining cold, you know, to walk in the mud, didn't think anything about it.  It was just that, it was a way of life and that little four mile walk every morning and afternoon in the cold it was--never really thought about it.  And we could play on the way to school, back and forth, you know.  And we had a bus, oh probably by the time I was in the fourth grade, but if it was raining the bus couldn't get up the dirt road, so we still had to walk two miles to the highway if we were gonna catch the bus.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of your teacher's names?
Speaker 2: Mr. Fowler (ph.) was one of my teachers.  I remember him vividly, because he slapped me.  And I always remembered that, and I felt it was unjust.  I remembered him for a long time.  It was just I, I went up, you know--kid--you know how kids crowd around teachers and everything.  I know teachers get frustrated and I remember him and of course the principal was Mr. Darthen (ph.), I remember him because later I went to--I stayed there until I was in the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Now why did he slap you?
Speaker 2: You know how kids are gathering around.  They were gonna give polio shots, and I didn't wanna take a polio shot.  I figured why take a polio shot, I'd had polio already, you know, and they would come to the schools and give shots and I was afraid of needles.  And all the kids were gathering around and clammering I didn't want to take a shot, so he slapped me to make me get in line to take the shot, which I didn't wanna take that shot I was so afraid of needles.
Story_ID: 51055
Speaker 1: When you were--did you have friends, any friends that were close friends to you or was it mainly family?
Speaker 2: Oh, I had friends in, in the beginning when we went to the country school out in Mount Olive [Mount Olive Baptist Church] had friends, but in those communities pretty much everybody was related.  But when I went to Butler Public School then I had friends and I met one of my friends, and we're still friends today, Eddie Rogers; he lives in Jackson, Mississippi.  So we became good friends and then we went away to high school together and we picked up another friend, so--and then my first cousin she had a friend, Minnie Horn (ph.) and I still keep--I still touch basis with Minnie today, so I--from the elementary school [Butler Public Elementary School] I still have a couple of friends that I communicate with today.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did you with your friends, did you guys--I mean were there any games you'd play--I mean what were you--you know you said you played sports, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: But there are other things--did you ever have discussions about anything or jokes or--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, there was--in fact I picked up jokes in, in, in the elementary school, like kids began to tell jokes and even--there was kid named Sammy Lee Sashton (ph.), and Sammy Lee could hang out at the juke joints and where the old men work, you know.  Back in those days an old men at that age was 20, 25.  They were old, and he with these jokes and he would come to school and he would tell these jokes and they were funny and I would remember when I would go tell them to all the other kids and I became like, like a second Sammy Lee because I could take his jokes and I could tell 'em better than he could tell 'em, you know, so that was my first experience at really doing comedy because of the jokes.  And it was my first experience of really being accepted, you know, because now, you know, I couldn't do this, I couldn't play this, but then I could, hey, I could make the kids laugh, you know, and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  So that was my little claim to fame, that was my corner.
Story_ID: 51056
Speaker 1: So you, you, comedy sort of was your--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was my angle because that was this--you know life kinda changed for me once I went to Butler Public [Elementary School], you know.  Rather than being in a one-house school [Mount Olive Baptist Church] with a lot of cousins, now I was around kids that really didn't know me and what began to happen, you know, you're teased a lot.  That was my first experience at being teased because I had polio.  So I, I always tell the story of this kid, Bubba Ford, who this, this little boy just hated me, I mean he was the meanest kid, I mean, you know, just mean and evil and every opportunity he'd just beat me up for no rea--he just, just hit me.  And I would tell the story that one day Bubba was getting ready to beat me and the kids was always used to coming to see this 'cause they knew Bubba picked on me all the time, and I just started acting silly, you know, and planned this charade about imitating how Bubba was gonna beat me up and all this stuff, falling down, hitting myself in the face, just acting and the kids started laughing and they were just cracking up and Bubba just sitting and kinda looked at me and said I was crazy and these kids are having so much fun and that's when I said, "Ah, I got 'em now."  So comedy, make 'em laugh, so that was my, my, I think that was my turning point that I--if I could use that as a weapon to keep him off me and I think that's when that little comedy thing started because if you could make the kids laugh, hey, you, you were seen different.  I wasn't handicapped then, you know, I was funny, so that was like that transition and that's--then the jokes came along, Sammy Lee Sashton with the jokes and I got all the jokes and hey and I just kept 'em going then, bingo, moved into middle school, on into high school, and I became like the man, you know like, I had my own little niche.
Story_ID: 51057
Speaker 1: Do you have any Indian in you?  Do you think your family--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess my mother--grandmother had Cherokee, I believe.
Speaker 1: Every black person says Cherokee.
Speaker 2: Yeah, some with Choctaw.  There were--a lot of those running around.
Speaker 1: Chickasaw.
Speaker 2: And Chickasaw, so yeah.
Story_ID: 51058
Speaker 1: So you, you, you know I was asking you if you were a good student?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a good student and see that was another thing that set me apart, because I would make all A's and I was popular every six week when the, our report cards would come out and the kids would gather around to see if I made a B, you know, and a C, so I got a little, little glory when my report card came out if I got all A's 'cause the kid wanna see my report card, "Hey let's see this report card, ah man he got all, ah wow," so it was like all right I was somebody then, you know, so I had to use every opportunity that came along was my little perk.  So if I got good grades, boom, that made me somebody in the cut.  Over a period of time then the teasing begin to go away 'cause I could make you laugh, ha ha, you don't wanna tease a man who can make you laugh, oh, he's the man and then I began to make good grades, hey, and he's smart too, you better look out, he'll make you laugh and he'll help you make an A.
Speaker 1: So your parents were very proud of you then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they, they were, they were proud of all of us.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah they were proud of us because they worked very, very hard and our job was to study, that was our job.  You know you had all the chores when you came home.  On a farm you got tons and tons of chores, you know, seven days a week, but with the chores and studying that, that was your job.
Story_ID: 51059
Speaker 1: And was it always anticipated where you would go to school?
Speaker 2: No, my brothers and sisters had gone to Alabama State College, which today is Alabama State University [Montgomery, Alabama].  But when I was in high school, you know, being in the 4-H club and being in the farmer's club our instructor, shop instructor, you know, teachers did a lot of things then.  Mr. Smith would take us to Alabama State, and then we would go to Tuskegee [University in Alabama] because Tuskegee would have the Future Farmers of America, and we would all go there and I went to Tuskegee and like when I saw the place I was like this is it, this is it, nowhere else for me, and I went there a couple of times in high school and it was--I, I filled out one application when I finished high school, that was it, I didn't want to go anywhere else.
Speaker 1: Well what, what appealed to you about Tuskegee when you went there?
Speaker 2: This place was huge, I mean, those buildings, you know to see brick buildings like that and the valley and the trees and kids just walking over this vast places, going to classes and, and I was just in awe.  I just looked at that, and I said this is it and I told my two buddies, I said when I get out of high school I'm going to Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: Did you know at that time what you wanted to be?
Speaker 2: Um hum.
Speaker 1: You knew you wanted to go into engineering?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what--where did that come from?
Speaker 2: Like I said, I think it came from the electric lights.  I remember working on an old fan once and getting shocked.  I was always tinkering with things and we'd gotten electricity and there was a throw-away fan which probably had a short or something in it, I didn't know.  So I'm tinkering with this thing trying to fix it, and I got shocked and the next thing went from messing with radios trying to fix radios and, and I just--and used to get these little heat kits and, and try to make little things and make my own little radios, so I just got interested in it at an early age and say, hmm, I wanna be an engineer.
Speaker 1: But you knew that that's what an electrical engineer did, that's what I'm saying, so, you know, it's one thing being handy with things, it's another understanding--
Speaker 2: Well as I, as I, you know, as I got into high school and began to find out and, and understand what engineering was all about and I said, ah okay that's, hey, this is what I, I like doing.  It's an extension of the little radios and the little things that I'm doing, which is electronics anyway, it's just an extension of that and I wanna stay in that area.  So I, I remember probably in the tenth grade or ninth when they came out and said what do you, what do you wanna do in ninth and tenth grade-"What are you gonna be?"  "I'mma be an engineer."  That's just something that I wanted to be.
Story_ID: 51060
Speaker 1: And, and you knew that there was an opportunity to do that as a black person, you felt that?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't know that how difficult it would be to get a job as an engineer.  You know I, I didn't know that, I just thought you go to school, you get a degree, bingo you're an engineer, you got out in the world and you get a job, but what I found out later and people were trying to tell me, especially in the '50's [1950s], you know, it's not gonna be easy getting a job as an engineer.  And it wasn't until the six--I finished college at the right time in 1967.  If you finished college in '65' [1965], '66' [1966], doors began to open and the class of '67' [1967] even more doors opened, and I remember eight guys from my school, from my class [at Tuskegee University], got offers to come to Lockheed [Corporation] in California and the reason being--and at that time I think it was [Secretary of Defense Robert S.] McNamara who had told Lockheed and the Defense Industries, at that time Affirmative Action was coming on, "If you don't increase the number of blacks that you have working for you, you not gonna get this contract."  So, what happened I filled out an application in September for Lockheed.  I got a job offer in February.  Well as it turned out, I go to class I was the first kid to, to get a, a, an offer to go to work.  Well as it turned out before it was over, like eight, eight guys out of my class at Tuskegee ended up coming to work for Lockheed, and it was because of that.  And I remember going to Woodruff Electronics in Forrest City, Arkansas, on an interview and I go in and they had never hired a black engineer, and I walk into the plant, I'm walking around, the guy is showing me around.  People are looking, their leaving their workstation, their staring at me, and we go back to the office and the guy said, "I, I think I should ask you something."  He said, "Do you think you could be Jackie Robinson type."  He said, "We've never hired a black in your position, so that's gon be a lot of flack.  There are going to be a lot of things said, a lot of things done.  I just wanna know can you look the other way, not see and not hear and do your job."  Well, I knew right then (laughter) I said yes, but I knew right then I wasn't gonna be going to work in Forrest City, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: You didn't think you could survive in that environment?  You think it was destined for failure?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was not about to subject myself to that.  I just grew up in the South.  I've been in the South, I've been through all of this, hey I wanna escape from this now, I don't wanna continue to climb a hill.  I don't wanna be Jackie Robinson, you know, and I had an offer to come to California anyway, so I had backup.  This was just to get a free trip away from school really.  So I didn't wanna work for them no more than they wanted to, me to work with them.
Story_ID: 51061
Speaker 1: Now I wanna ask you--I wanna go back to an event in your life that had a great deal of effect on you and that was with William Carlisle, and I wanted you just to describe, you know, what happened?
Speaker 2: Okay, September 6, 1962, I was getting ready to go to Tuskegee, packing my bags, and that afternoon I had this old foot locker that I was packing my bags in and there were some firecrackers in it.  So I, I, I just took the firecrackers out and when I finished packing my bags I had a little cousin Moses--by this time out in the country where we stayed there were only two black families living there because the old miners had died out and the people who took over their property had put all the blacks off, but my dad [George Ray III] had his own property, so he stayed there and my aunt, who was very old, even though she stayed on the new landlord's property, they didn't put her out, so you gotta realize we're two miles from this dirt--from the highway and the only people living back there, there five people, me and my mom [Vidella Ray] and dad and his aunt and her little grandson.  And that afternoon as we were walking down the road I shot some firecrackers and then shortly thereafter this truck came up with this guy named Bill Carlisle who, whose mother had taken over the plantation.  So he came up and he asked about the gunshot sounds, and I told him I shot some firecrackers and during the course of the conversation I said "yes" and "no," which was in those days you didn't say yes and no to white people, so--and he asked me if, you know, do you know you supposed to say "Yes sir" and "No sir" to white folks, you know, and I, I said no and then he just beat me up, he just literally beat me up, you know, and attempted to cut my throat, but he just stopped for some rea--after he had beaten me helpless and, then he took out his knife to, to kill me and he stopped and he just got up and then I went back home and I went in the house and I got the shot gun and I told my daddy what had happened and, and, and my daddy said "Okay forget it, let's go to aunts Dit's (ph.) house which was like a 100 yards away to watch the Douglas--he always watched Douglas Edwards on the CBS evening news anyway.  So we just went down to his house, down her house, and daddy didn't go in the house.  He took the television, he sit it in the doorway, and we sit there.  And a few minutes later heard the sound of the truck, Bill Carlisle drove up, got out, walked over to the porch, and told my daddy I had to leave 'cause I didn't know how to talk to white folks.  And the last words my daddy said was we'll he's, "He's gonna be going away, he's going to college" and that's when he reached in his back pocket and pulled out a .45 and struck him across the forehead and then we held onto him.  I hit him with an old Clorox bottle, and then as we held onto him he just cocked the .45 automatic and shot him eight times.
Story_ID: 51062
Speaker 1: Did you--why did you just say "yes" or "no?"
Speaker 2: I don't know, I, I don't know.  I, I've often wondered that, you know, I--maybe it was just a Rosa Parks move, I don't know I was a kid, I didn't know.  And I've asked myself that a million times, you know, what would have happened, you know, all of this wouldn't have happened had I said "yes sir" and "no sir" and you know I've, I've lived with that and it's caused me to, to really do a lot of self-sabotage in, on myself, you know, it's just--'cause it was always "If I hadn't, what would have happened."  But what I, what I have come to live with that he [William Carlisle] was gonna kill him [Ray's father, George Ray III] anyway.  He was gonna kill him.  It's just that, that gave him that reason at that moment.  Now it might have been a week, it might have been a year, two years, but he was gonna kill him.  He'd had already made up his mind to kill him and, and I found out so much later--see when a black man own property in the South he was under constant pressure, constant pressure.  And I went back later and I talked to, to my brother and, and just before my father was killed.  He told him that the old plantation owner after he sold him the property one day told him said George "If I'd have known selling you that problem was gonna cause me all this--that property would have caused me all this problem I wouldn't sold it to you," which means they, they had gotten a lot of flack for selling land to their coloreds as they would say.  And then I found out a lot of history about blacks owning property and how they were persecuted, just the fact that you own land and in the adjacent county down in Washington County in 1955 there was a black man went by his sister's house, gave her a package and said "I just want you to hold this and, you know, if anything happen to me you open it, but don't open it unless something happened."  Then he went down and he called out the white man.  You know in those days if the man may own--who owned the commissary store you bought everything at the commissary store, your clothes, your food, feed, and he killed the guy and he went down into the woods and he killed himself and in the envelope he explained why he did it.  This man had harassed him for years.  Would withhold his grain two or three weeks to cause him to miss that planting cycle, withhold his fertilizer, and he had made up his mind a long time ago that he was gonna kill him when his boys finished college and left Alabama, he was gonna kill him, then he was gonna kill himself and the reason he killed himself he explained he didn't wanna trial and he never wanted his boys to come back to Alabama.  So that is just an example of what happened to black men who owned property, and my father owned property and it set in the low lands over the so called oil spot.  In other words, they wanted to drill an oil well, but in order to do it they wouldn't drill on a black person's property, so they set up on the white guy's property to slant drill off our property, which they finally stopped.  And I just found out last year why they never drilled.  They had to ask the adjoining families, white families, property owners, if they would agree to have an oil well drilled on George Ray's place and only one white said yes, a lady by the name of Ms. Wimberly (ph).  All the other whites said, no, and I was back--I just found that information out last August when I was down there.
Story_ID: 51063
Speaker 1: Now the other question I have, who was William Carlisle?  Who was he?
Speaker 2: Okay, William Carlisle was the--now when the, when the miners became old and sick there was a family fight on who gonna get all of this property.  His mother won out.  She won the property kinda with his help because he was a rowdy guy that pushed people around, used his gun, and people were afraid of him.  So when, when, when the estate settled, his mother got the estate and then they moved onto the property.  So when they moved in, blacks had never had to pay rent, so all of a sudden blacks began to have to pay rent and they began to put them off the property and I guess what happened one day his mother sent for my mother [Vidella Ray] to do something and she was talking to one of the other blacks one day and said "George and Vidella is gonna have to move.  I asked Vidella to come down here and do something and she didn't come," and they said move, they own their own property.  They thought they owned everything and that was the kinda of the beginning.  So her son was the kinda roughhouse guy that would kinda help push the other family members out of the way to help clear it for them to win the estate.
Story_ID: 51064
Speaker 1: Now, when that happened to your father [George Ray III], how did you feel?
Speaker 2: Helpless.  I often said and I often realize what--that's the first time I really understood that we were second-class citizens.  The trial was a mockery, it was a joke.  People you know--I was basically put on trial for saying yes and no to a white man.  That was the most important thing, it had nothing to do with George Ray being killed.  It had to do with this sassy boy don't know how to talk to white folks and you know put me up in the courthouse and "It's his fault, if you know how to talk to white folks your daddy still be alive, bingo, we oughta take this nigger to the Mississippi line and throw him out of the state of Alabama," you know, threatened to throw me out the state.  So it became an attack on me.  So the whole purpose was it was my fault and "If George had trained that boy how to talk to white folks he'd still be alive and it's his fault, bing, that's that little uppity boy."  So it wasn't the fact that Bill had killed daddy, it was the fact that it was my fault.  I said yes and no, so that was justifiable homicide.
Speaker 1: I see, so what--you know you have something in here where it's a warrant, not a warrant, but a subpoena or what--
Speaker 2: So what happened they had a trial.  You gotta understand in Choctaw County [Alabama] at that time no white had ever been tried for killing a black.  Not only that, no white had ever been, been arrested or, what's the word I'm trying to use, had for doing anything to a black, not on record.  This was the first time.  And the problem with the trial was it was so much static because they never had a trial of this--they never tried a white for killing a black, so this was like a circus, I mean, this was a big to do and the saying was see my daddy was a church man, he was a Christian, did all the right things.  He was the typical colored that they looked up to because they would hold George up and said "Okay look at George, George sent his kids--George was the boy that they would always hold up.  So the thing was is it came down to the fact well if you can't have a trial for somebody killing George," and the folks said "Dog Bill, I mean you could have killed a whole lot of coloreds, you had to kill our best boy."  In other words, he could of have killed a whole bunch of other blacks and, and it a just been business as usual.  But "You killed George, George is a good boy."  So the district attorney decided--well the circuit solicitor de, decided to have a trial which ended his career, simply because he tried the case.  And when I did the play ['A Killing in Choctaw']--I do the play, one-man play, 1999 there was an article written about me doing the play and there was a call at the theater from a man in Alabama who said he was at the murder scene that night, he took the pictures.  And the guy who took the pictures at the murder scene I called him and he talked.  He's a white guy, lives in Camden, Alabama, now, but he explained a lot of things to me to make me understand what Choctaw was all about and like I told him, I said--he said you know me and Waymen (ph.) sit up a lot of nights over your daddy.  So finally Waymen said "I'm getting the hell out of Choctaw County," and he said "I'm leaving too."  So I'd gone back and there had only been one article ever written.  Then I found out why.  He came under pressure for writing about it.  He took a picture, and he had it on the front of the Choctaw Advocate, the weekly newspaper.  He took a picture, wrote about it, Waymen tried the case, they both had to get out.  Ended Waymen's career.  So I was, I guess you could say how I felt, I was--I have so many emotion, disappointment, anger to really feel I--it came, it just came to me, you can kill my daddy and nothing be done about it, and you turn the guy loose.
Story_ID: 51065
Speaker 1: And then, so you, you're you're really--I mean you're a mess right now at that point [after the murder of his father, George Ray III]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're a mess?
Speaker 2: Um-hum
Speaker 1: And is your thought that you wanna still go onto school, or you're not even thinking?
Speaker 2: Well, at that time it, it, it--everything happened so quick.  So my sisters and brothers came home and you know I'd already been accepted to Tuskegee [University in Alabama], so they took me--my brother stayed in Albany, Georgia, so he--after the funeral and everything they packed me up and dropped me in Tuskegee with his sister-in-law, and she, she worked at the VA Hospital and she go through campus the next morning and she put me out with my little bags and then I'm trying to register, you know, I'm, I'm a week and a half late and I'm in this place, I'm in shock.  I was still in shock and my worst nightmare was just beginning.  By this time, I was, I became a vegetable.  I just shut--I ain't talk to nobody.  So I stayed a couple of weeks, and then I went back to Louisiana with my sister and I just kinda moved between Mississippi and Louisiana, you know, and I went to the community college.  I really wasn't going to college.  It was just a place for me to go.  I went when I wanted.  They set it up with the president that I could come in and it would give me something to do, so I just kinda moved around, something to do, and I decided that well--what happened I went back to Tuskegee, but what happened-they had a Christmas party and I went and a lot of kids that I went to high school [Rosenwald High School] with in New Roads, Louisiana, came and I, I watched them and they were talking about college and all of this and I felt so out of place, because I had nothing to say.  I felt embarrassed, and there was this one kid that was talking to a girl named--(unclear)--, majorette, and he had receding hairline and bifocals and I just, and I just envied him.  I said I know I'm smarter than he is and when I got a chance I just slipped away from the party and I went home and I that would become one of many, many, many parties I would slip away from through life because I felt uncomfortable being around people.  And I'd sit there on the steps, the next day my brother-in-law came and said "What's wrong," you know, I said "I wanna go back to college."  He asked me "You sure."  I said "I'm sure."  I didn't tell him because that boy was talking to that girl, but I, I knew I was smart as those kids and I did'nt do anything--I wasn't doing anything.  I had nothing to contribute, so that was a turning, in fact, that was a turning point in my life.  I said I'm going back to college.  That boy talking to that pretty girl and all those kids are talking to him it's so much fun and me and my buddy, what do we do every day?  We go down to the pool hall.  We hang here, we hang out there, we just didn't have a life.  So that was a turning point in me going back to college.
Story_ID: 51066
Speaker 1: And you went back [to college at Tuskegee University in Alabama] and how was it?
Speaker 2: It was a nightmare.  It was totally a nightmare.  I mean, I was still a zombie state.  You gotta understand I lost, I, I mean I just--what I mean I lost it.  My mind stayed on that, so my ability to think, I'm, I'm unable to concentrate, my attention span was shot.  My whole life 24 hours a day every awaken moment was centered around that afternoon; that consumed me.  I could not read a page.  I would, I would go I wanna go back to Tuskegee.  I would take a book, I would go to the vet school auditorium and hide from everybody.  I would sit in a chair at 6 o'clock, 2 o'clock in the morning I'm still on page one.  I am so--my rear end is hurting because I have been in a daze, I had been sitting in that seat all that time.  I'd been out to lunch.  And what happened there were a lady named Ms. McGregor (ph.) and Dr. Fuller, over the math department, and she knew that I would stay by myself, so she would send this kid, Robinson, to come and get me, to keep an eye on me because I stayed locked up in my room all the time.  And when I went back I made sure I didn't have a roommate, so I did'nt wanna live with nobody, so when I had my, my moments, my nervous breakdowns, and my severe depression, I would just lock up.  And I didn't talk to nobody, I didn't have a friend, so that was my world.  I was gone, and I would sit in class you give me a test paper I wouldn't touch it.  I had one room that I was afraid of, my math room.  It was on the first floor of Huntington Hall.  It was a very frightening room because I played every scenario.  Bill [his father's murderer William Carlisle] was gonna come through that door and I sit there.  I would have to go out the window because, jump down, you come in on the first floor, but out the back you had to jump down, so I played games in my mind when he came in that room and started shooting all I was thinking--I was always hiding, who I was gonna jump behind, how I was gonna get, that one room was the most frightening room going.  And that's how I spent my time in that room, planning my escape, and I would stay locked on that door and the teacher knew, Ms. Christian knew that I, I wasn't there 'cause she would come and wave her hands in front of me, but I was so--I had to watch that door.  It's like he was gonna walk in that door any minute.  I don't know why that room--that's how I spent my time watching that door.
Speaker 1: So how did you make it through school?
Speaker 2: Well, I survived.  What happened I, I knew I was in trouble.  I knew I couldn't concentrate, so I had to figure out, okay, how can I focus?  So I began to play a game.  I said okay I can read for two minutes.  If I can read for two minutes I'm gonna stop, I'm gonna get up, I'm gonna walk around.  So I began to get this little thing where I'd work every five minutes. I would try and read for five minutes.  If I could read for five minutes without my mind going off, I would get up, I walk around the building, I would do something, I would come back, I'd sit down, then I'd sit here and I'd try to stay focus for five more minutes, and that's how I did it.  And I basically survived on what I'd learned in high school.  Now math was a little bit better.  I could, I, I, could, I could--the numbers and all of that and equations, you know, I could stay focused, but my biggest mistake, I think, was being ashamed and hiding because I wasn't around anybody and I was allowed to just put myself in a position where I just daydreamed all of the time.  There was always a scenario, me and him, me and him, got this war going and that, that was my life.  And my turning point I remember Dr. Fuller--there was Dr. Fuller, Ms.McGregor, Mr. Henry, and Mr. Tramball (ph.) who who knew and when I would, I would get real bad, then they would take me off campus.  But, I remember I would walk into the college union and I would stand and I would watch the kids playing pool and they had the card room and over a period of time I would get a little bit closer and I would just watch them through the glass and, I'd watch them and I just disappear.  So I finally got up enough nerves just like a little dog, a scary dog, you know, I finally got up enough nerve.
Story_ID: 51067
Speaker 1: Now, you were saying--you were describing yourself at the window [of the college union at Tuskegee University in Alabama].
Speaker 2: Right, so what I would do I would gradually get up enough nerve to get closer and after a few weeks I walked in--I went into the card room and I would watch them play cards.  And by this time, I'm standing next to kids playing cards and one, one of the kids said "You wanna play."  I said "No I don't know how, I don't know how to play."  He said, "We'll teach ya.  Come on and sit down, we'll teach ya."  So I sit down I didn't know nothing about no cards, just playing bid whist.  And they were teaching me how to play and for the first time I--it was something I enjoyed and I got into learning a game, and that was like a savior for me 'cause I learned how to play cards and I would go every, every day after dinner.  I would get in there around 5:30, and I would play cards until they close.  Well when you play cards kids talk and they slam the cards down on the table, and I was developing this little personality.  I was enjoying--I was slamming cards down and they say humorous things, I'm saying humorous things, and talking back and all of that, and so that card room became--I stayed there every night 'til they closed.  Because when I left there, I had to go back and into, to, into this, this world, which wasn't pretty.  So I became the man, playing cards.  I even got me a job in the college union so I could stay there all the time.  Now when I leave there, my, my biggest problem wa, was nightmares.  I had nightmares like you wouldn't believe.  They were so painful and fearful until I wouldn't lay down to sleep.  I would sit on a straight chair and that way I would bob and weave so I would never fall into a deep sleep 'cause I would always wake myself up.  So I became--I, I, I could exist on two, three raggedy hours of sleep a night because I would rather stay awake then to lay down and have these nightmares.  So what I begin to do I begin to become a, a prankster.  I would stay awake late at night.  I would go around and I would get trash cans, and I would fill 'em with half of water and I would lean 'em on the door so when the guys opened their doors in the morning the water would flush in. Even I would get a mop and put it right in the crease of the door so when they opened it, it would fall in on 'em.  I would get ropes and tie doorknobs together so when guys try to open their door--so I kept myself busy, two, three, four o'clock in the morning sitting up all these little pranks.  And they, finally they knew who it was, 'ole Ray had been here, but what they didn't realize I was, I was doing anything to entertain myself because I wouldn't sleep because of the fear of the nightmares.  So I would do anything to stay awake.
Story_ID: 51068
Speaker 1: So how were you doing with classes [at Tuskegee University in Alabama] and studying?
Speaker 2: Well I would, I would go--I, I, I started going, going to class and my first year well it was just, just, horrible.  I, I flunked out, you know, I figured "Okay if I flunk out of school I'm outta here, I'm gone" (laughter)--they, they wouldn't let me go.  Nah you ain't going nowhere, you just on probation, you know, stick around, stick around.  And they get back here and they, they, they were--'cause they, they knew, you know, those few people who really knew what, what had happened.  So nah, nah come on back, you know, so I went back and I'm on probation and som, some point I began to produce.  You know I began to, to, to, to get little study groups, I began to produce, and I began to get this clown atmosphere.  Oh now I'm really a prankster, I'mma clown, I'mma joker, you know, so that became my persona as the school clown, the happiest kid going.  Now when I would go into depression I would lock up in my room.  I could come in my room, I could fall out on the floor, my insides coming out, I could cry all night long, but when I walked out that door da-da-da, I was happy.  I mean I'm joking with you, I'm put--by this time you know I'm about, about a year into it, I, I'm, I'm rocking.  I got a joke, I got a line every time you look around.  Now sometimes what I would have to do in the morning if I had been crying I would have to go run to the shower, get in, and wash my hair so I would have an excuse for having red eyes--(unclear)-"Ah man I got shampoo in my eyes, man, oh God."  Guy said "Man you sho get a lot of shampoo in your eyes."  But that way I could get out and I would have an excuse for having these red eyes, but then I'm rocking then.  If I tell you I got shampoo in my eye I got you laughing you done forgot about whether my eyes are red or not, and I'm smoking, boom, and then when I would have to--they were gonna take me off campus or something and I would disappear, well you know I came back with an excuse, you know.  "Hey man where you been?"  "Ah man you know I've been off campus I had three women I was with this weekend, boy I had this party, party, party."  "You had three women why you didn't call us."  "Hey, call you man I'm too much for three women, not quite enough for four, but I'm working on it" and they laugh it off, bingo, and I was going.  They didn't know where I was.  They didn't know what problem I was having, because I kept 'em laughing and I kept 'em laughing.  As long as I kept 'em laughing, they didn't have to see the pain of what I was going through.  They didn't have to know, know that I had no nervous breakdown, who, funny as I am, it never would cross their mind that I had this other life of trying to survive because they saw me as Ray, Ray the man, Ray gon keep you laughing and I became so loud.  When Scotland graduated, I was glad, glad, because I was the loudest kid around.  They used to say "Have you seen Ray, said no, but if you listen you'll hear him."  So I used all of that to cover the two personalities that I had to develop to survive.
Story_ID: 51069
Speaker 1: And then I developed a third personality which was the frightening one.  That's when I began to attack people.  The only thing about that during my blackouts I never remembered anything that happened when I would black out.  I could leave my dormitory going to class, hit a blackout mode, maybe three or four hours later when I'm in the woods somewhere, I'm hiding, I'm behind, behind buildings I'm hiding, and I snap out of it and I missed three hours, I missed classes.  So I have to get up and figure out what time it is and get back on and go to what classes I have without anybody knowing that what happened.  And the first time I attacked somebody was a counselor.  You know, the RAs in the dorm come put the mail in the room, doors were open, and he said I came and hit him, went back and laid down, don't remember it.  Almost killed my first wife, don't remember it.  I did it, but took me a long time to figure what was happening.  Maybe ten, ten or twelve years ago it had dawned on me I was attacking people.  I was doing to people what he did to me.  So that's what that dark side was that I don't remember.  So I had to deal with all of these things, then study and hide all of this stuff.  You know, I just told my closest friend who lived about 20 miles from here.  We were like that and just about four years ago I began to explain to him, and when I began I said "Okay now there were periods of time I would disappear."  I said "You know what happened," and I began to tell him the stories.  I said "Even after we came to California we were here partying there were times I would disappear" and he said "you know I never know that--you right."  But see I had them all fooled, even when I was an engineer working it I kept everybody fooled.  I lived those two lives, those two personalities and, and something--every time I would get ready to crash something else would come along.  So I started--when, when I was working at Lockheed [Corporation] this nice young engineer, you know, is just as screwed up in the head as I wanted to be.  Afraid that I'm gon hurt somebody.  You know I had gotten rid of my gun and everything 'cause I didn't want to snap out and go off.  I was literally afraid of myself.  Riding to work with a friend one day they had start talking about comedy classes in San Francisco [California], boom, I started that comedy once again.  Here it comes to the rescue, bam, started driving to San Francisco going to comedy classes, bingo, comedy to the rescue again, so I could bury all that stuff again and I kept burying it.  Every time it about to rise up, something would happen I could bury it.  So then I lived that way for 22 years.
Story_ID: 51070
Speaker 1: Now how did you eventually come to terms with it?
Speaker 2: Well, after I quit working as an engineer [at Lockheed Corporation] I'm down in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California].  I'm doing what all wannabe entertainers doing I'm waiting tables, I'm driving taxi cab, and I meet this guy in a taxi cab and I drop him at Canadian Airlines, psst, just a guy, you know, don't think nothing about it.  One week later I walk into a hotel in West Hollywood, who walked downstairs but that guy, and it was like an impulse we just hugged each other like we were, been friends for 100 years and man what you doing back here and I took him out to Brentwood [Los Angeles, California] and he, he--I, I waited for him.  He said he wanted to go to Burbank [Los Angeles, California].  And he would make these little statements, you know, make these little statements the kinda weird things like we were going on the 405 near the 101.  I can exac--I can tell you exact location every time he--"he said what do you do?"  I said I'm a comedian.  "How's it going?"  I said, "I'mma beat my head against the wall to the fall."  "Stop, stop let it come to you."  What are you talking about?  "Just stop, it a come to you.   Sometimes people trying to get somewhere they moving and they miss the opportunity, but if you wait it will come to you."  Yeah, yeah sure.  I took the guy to Burbank, dropped him off and didn't think nothing about it.  I got a fair going to Burbank Airport that evening.  I don't wanna go because by the time well you get back to Hollywood in all that traffic, fairs are gone, the rush hour is over, and the coming back from Burbank I come by the studio I look over there, there's a guy with his back to the street talking to a woman, it was that guy.  Well I know he's called a cab, so I do the ole U-turn trick to get him in my cab before the guy who had him, so I get back out on the street and I say, "Wow man what a coincident."  He said, "What?" I said, "Coincident, we just keep meeting like this" and he's all here he come again, "Do you realize there is no such thing as coincident."  He said, "You ever think that maybe we are meeting like this there's a reason for us meeting?"  "Ah yeah, yeah, yeah, shut up and get in the cab."  And he said, "Take me back to the hotel, get my bags, I wanna go to LAX [Los Angeles International Airport]."  So we go back and we're driving down the street again, da-da,ba-di-di, then here he comes again.  We're discussing an accident that had happened in Westwood [Los Angeles, California] where a little girl got killed and, and they--he go off on a limb, ah, he said, "Well you know people who wanna die know they gonna die and blah, blah should die."  "Oh now, oh now I gon tell you something I don't even talk about, but you done made me mad" and I blurted it out, I just blurted it out that my father [George Ray III] was killed 'cause I said yes and no to a white man and he didn't wanna die; I just went off.  This guy is just calm, you know.  He said I didn't know it sound real.  So finally he said, "Psst forgive you dad and forgive the guy, yo daddy knew he was gonna die."  "Oh man come on, come on, now you going off the deep end," I'm just getting angry, angry, angry, you just, you asking for it.  So finally in my frustration he said, "I tell you what you do, said if you wanna be free forgive your dad for dying and forgive the guy [William Carlisle] for kil, killing him."  "Ah now, you have gone too far.  I'm ready to go to blows now.  You don't know nothing about me and you just making these little snap"--so I just shut up and he knew I was mad, and going up the oil fields-La Cienega--to where the oil wells are and he just kinda raised up on the seat and said, "I'mma make a deal with you, I gon bother you again."  He said, "In fact you don't even have to mean it, but if you would just let me here you say the words you forgive that guy I will never bother you again."  Well, I was so angry, I was, I was so furious.  Somehow I just said it, I didn't I didn't mean nothing about it, I didn't intend for nothing to happen, but I said "I forgive the guy" and when I did it was like bam, instantly I was at another place.  I mean, it just like everything just disappeared.  The greatest high, the greatest moment, the greatest second I have ever had in my life.
Story_ID: 51071
Speaker 1: It was like everything's a poof.  I had no feelings, I had no anger, I had no, nothing against this Bill [William Carlisle] guy.  I mean this was--I was high.  When I dropped him off at the airport and I went and, went to my buddy's house, I said, "Now I wanna talk to you about something," and I told Brad and, you know, and he was trying to figure out--I said--and I don't know if Brad knew all the story, but I had told him and I said the way I was feeling and I said--so Brad what you gon do because he gave me his card and told me to call him sometime.  I said, "Man I ain't call that guy 'cause I figure I'm just, I'm just at a peak, you know, this, this is just something that happened I'm--hey tomorrow or next day I'm gon feel the same way, I'mma be angry," but in about 6 months I' called him and that was another turning point.  And I was always at a stage where I needed something to happen because I was going into depression again, and I would go over to the taxi, get my taxi every day, I got everybody laughing and I would walk in, in the mornings and say "Hey Ray," said "Boy you the happiest guy in the word aren't you."  I said, "But the blahs is after me baby, the blahs."  Now they didn't know what that was.  There used to be a Alka-Seltzer commercial.  The guy would be running down the hill, you never saw the blahs, but you hear the rumble and he's rushing down this hill to get to the Alka-Seltzer, and when he drinks the Alka-Seltzer they pan back up to the hill and there's an explosion, poof, he got rid of the blahs.  So what I was telling them in my humorous manner that no I wasn't the happiest person in the world, the blahs was after me, which mean this, this thing was coming after me, but I did it in such a joking way they wouldn't figure it out.  I was trying to tell people look I'm hurting, I'm depressed, I'm in pain.  And when I was telling them the blahs was after me, even though I was making a humorous, I was hurting, I was in pain.  And this guy came along and that released it again.  There was always a release when I get to a breaking point, there's always been a release.  Comedy, as usual, had been that release to keep me from going over the, the edge.  But this was a release now because I had blurted it out and then I could start talking about what had happened.
Speaker 2: Did you ever have therapy?
Speaker 1: No, I just started therapy in January of this year [2002].
Story_ID: 51072
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna take you back to Tuskegee [University in Alabama] and you graduating and, and how you got to Lockheed [Corporation]?
Speaker 2: Well my senior year [1966 to 1967] I just began to fill out applications.  I wanted to be the first kid to get a job.  So I didn't wait to recruiting season in January and February.  I went into the trade publications, and I just started writing companies, you know, asked, asked for application, asked for application, filling them out.  Sure enough come February before the recruiting season I had an offer to come to Lockheed in California.  I go to class-go to the professor say "Hey Ray got a job, Ray going to California."  So that was how I got to California.  And my Buddy T.J. who was still there we drove across country together, Crocket and Ellis. We all drove to California to Lockheed together in 1967.
Speaker 1: Now you said there were 5--how many that started--
Speaker 2: Well finally there were, there, there were eight.  Reggie went to San Diego [California], he came on up here.  Valmore (ph.) finished up, he came in August.  Stovall (ph.) came out of the Service, so it was really like eight of us finally ended up there out of that class.  And there were some ahead of us the year, the year ahead of us.
Story_ID: 51073
Speaker 1: So how did you find the experience at Lockheed?
Speaker 2: When I first got to Lockheed, the day I got to Lockheed I ran into what they called racism today, but hey I knew the game.  I walked in and they said "Carl Ray" we, we had to take a physical and they came out where all the new engineers were, they called my name and said a, "a manager John so and so wants to see you."  So they give me direction to this building where, where I was going to be working and I go up--before I could take my physical he wanted to see me.  So I go up and find out what he wanted.  He said "Well yeah I just wanted to talk to you.  I had noticed that you had polio and I was wondering whether you could do the job or not."  Well immediately I begin to put him in his place.  I said "Look, man you hired me as an engineer.  The only thing I'm gonna pick up is a pencil and I'm not here as a dig ditcher, digger, not a ditch digger," you know, and, and I realized later that I really gave him a good tongue lashing.  And he said okay, so I went on back, I took my physical.  I checked into the department and they had a white boy in a wheelchair.  Now you gon call me in to see if I can do the job because I got polio in my right hand, that was a game you gon play onto me, but when we got in you found out--back in those days there were a lot of--that's just the way it was, was no Affirmative Actions, Action as it is today, so you get stuck off in a department and they just did the way they wanted to.  I remember my first assignment, three of us, two white engineers and myself and we went in and they assigned us projects.  There were three parts to this, this project, and I found out later that I got the dog of it.  I begin to go around and ask--they said man they gave you the dog, this is the toughest thing going, ain't nobody doing this.  So and the two white boys got the easy stuff.  Now, the supervisor would come out he would go talk to the two white engineers.  He would very--he would come by my desk, give me an assignment, walk away.  I got no assistance whatsoever.  I had to set up on my own network in other departments and labs in order to do my work.  So I was writing a program to test for, for this motor, this part that I to, to test that everybody said, "Man it's a dog."  So I, I had to go out, find out--they had all those big old cards back in those days, so I worked on the project, I worked on the project, I went to everybody to get help.  Finally I wrote the program and it ran.  I got all my cards and all my print outs and I go back, I'm so excited and I say "I got it."  He immediately said, "Oh that's just what we been waiting on.  Take my stuff, get the two white boys, go into the manager's office."  I got up, got my stuff, walked out the door, walked out the door.  So those are the things that you had the deal with so--but being resourceful you set up your network in the company so when you ran into those problems--the next department I ran into the same thing.  I guy named Schultz(ph.).  Redesigning a simulator.  He walks up to me and he throws some blueprints on my desk, say "We got a problem with this unit, here's the blueprint, this what it all about, you went to college, you oughta know."  Once again I got a set up a network in the company to find somebody to help me to find out what's going on, but that's just the way it was.  And then once you accomplish this, you didn't get the recognition for it.  They would take it and give it off to a white engineer then, and then you were stuck.  But then I ended up working for a black manager, named Hal Lewis, didn't take no prisoners, 100 percent black and protected his people.
Story_ID: 51074
Speaker 1: Now did you--was Lockheed a surprise to you?  I mean, you know, this is your first time really out of the South and you know remember you were saying you came along at the right time, you know, because there were opportunities opening and there's a whole--that eight people is a lot of black people to start at a company so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was there sort of a headiness about it, an excitement, you know and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there, there, was an excitement about it.  We found out later there was another engineer from Tuskegee [University in Alabama] had finished.  They had hired him there in '62' [1962], I believe, and he was great.  And there was this unwritten rule that the rumor mill kinda went around, you can hire any engineer from the Tuskegee sight unseen because if they like this guy they gotta be good.  So when it came time that they had to hire, they came to Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: And this young, this group of you, did you have--did everyone stay besides you at that point?
Speaker 2: Yes, most of 'em stayed, they for a number of years.  To this day there's two left and others are still in the business, but some have retired, but two still work there today.
Speaker 1: And so for you it was "this is ridiculous" in some respects, you know, the frustration, the--(unclear--that are sort of making you work harder and destined for failure, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: We were prepared for that.  See when we came along you were prepared of what the world is gonna be like and you were told, "This is what it's gonna be like when you get out in the real world.  You gonna have to work twice as hard as your white counterpart, then you may not get it, but don't let it upset you, you just move forward, you keep moving."  So when they began to bring up all this stuff, we were already prepared because our professors and then we grew up in the black community they always prepared you this is what the real world is like.  So we weren't surprised when we faced it.  We already were beginning to plan ways--they taught you, "You always plan a strategy, always be prepared, always be prepared because this is gonna happen."  So as they begin to do their things against us, we were already--'cause like building a network I knew coming in I had to build a network, so I  built a network with other blacks in the company and there were whites and they say hey look who, whose who, and they would tell you, "Okay these guys, you know, they're, they're okay they're white, but they're okay, and you--they would tell you where the whites were that would cover your back."  So you come in and you find out "Okay who are they?"  You know they are there. They're the quiet majority, but if you find them and you make them a part of your network so when you need somebody to cover your back they give you a project out on a limb, expect you to fail, boom, you go to the blacks and you go to the whites that you have set up and say, "Look I got this project I need help," that's how it was done.
Story_ID: 51075
Speaker 1: And what prompted you to seek out a career in comedy?
Speaker 2: Well, like I say going to work I heard that commercial about the comedy class in San Francisco [California], and I in fact, I missed it, I bugged the radio station to give me the number and I, I got the number and I called up this guy named Frank Kidder and he say we have classes, come on up, and I went up to San Francisco and went to the Intersection Theater and there was this little guy in there teaching a comedy class, and I started going over taking classes.  Hey, hey, this is all right, I thought I was funny anyway.  I had kept kids laughing through high school and college, so now I get a chance to go to school and that's when I started going up.
Speaker 1: Did, did your family think you had lost your mind?
Speaker 2: Oh you bet your bottom dollar.  They thought I was stone crazy, especially when I quit work.  Though I, I know it--there was this black lady she worked for the Navy, you know Lockheed's na, navel contract, and she was so proud of me, you know, young black engineer.  And after I quit Lockheed I saw her at a Safeway parking lot one day.  She was hurt, she was hurt, and she said "I heard you quit your job" and I said, "Yes ma'am," and she said, "You a crazy little something" and you could see how hurt she was and she just turned and walked away.  It's like I let her down, I let all the blacks down, that, that they were so proud of this young black engineer and I quit to do comedy, I let 'em all down.  My brother in North Carolina [Lemarvin Ray] had never called me.  He called me, "Boy what you doing out there, what you doing quitting your job."  So yeah it was--that was a drastic move.
Speaker 1: Now why did you want to do that?  Why did you--I mean I know you said you had--but what motivated you 'cause the--it wasn't--you weren't happy at Lockheed?
Speaker 2: Oh I was happy.
Speaker 1: You were happy or not?
Speaker 2: Oh by this time I'm happy, by this time hey things are going good, you know, I, I got my little position I'm flying around the country in the company jets, used to go down to --(unclear)--and fly in the Learjet, so like I, hey, they got me on the road, boom, but you know this comedy thing came along.  I realized later it was a sabotage move.
Speaker 1: What do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Well every time I close to succeeding in something I would do something to, to mess it up because although I didn't realize like I did I have so much guilt, I had so much self-hatred.  I had--I did not like this person a lick.  Deep down inside I didn't like this person at all, so I would always do something to sabotage myself.  My consciousness wasn't there.  I figured this out later because I sabotaged myself a lot of times.  So all of a sudden I'm, I'm, I'm, moving, I'm moving.  I, I got a promotion after three years at Lockheed that even in the company manuals everything it said take five years to reach this point I got in three.  So I'm, I'm on the road, hey go back to school, get your B.A., get your M.B.A., got your engineering degree, get your M.B.A., bingo, you on the road. Nah, that a been too good for me.  I had to find something to mess it up, I didn't deserve that.  The, the, that, that, that, that that deep person in the inside, boom, comedy came along, boom, that was my opportunity to get out, though comedy was always a savior.  See I don't know if it was meant for me to be management material and this bright engineer.  Now my buddy T.J. that came to California, he is the highest ranking black at Lockheed today, and we finished together, we drove to California together.  He stayed, I didn't.  That was on me.  And I got into classes and somebody paid me $25 one time to do a show and when I decided to really quit. Robin Williams he left.  In fact the, the night, the week before he left, we worked together.  I made 30 and he made 15, and he was so good I got the guy to give him another $10.  Well he leaves, he was gonna go back to school, but he go to Hollywood [California] and he goes by the Comedy Store, guess what, he never made it back to school.  So they wanted to do a remake of the old Laugh-In show and they were going to New York [New York City, New York], Chicago [Illinois] looking for comics, so Robin say "look go up to San Francisco they got a lot of comics in San Francisco."  So they came [in 1977]--he brought George Schlatter up here and auditioned a group of us.  Nine of us got call backs and two out of the nine got selected for the show.  So you had three comics from San Francisco that was picked up for this one show, and Robin had opened the door for us and hey we took off to Hollywood behind Robin, hung it up, we gotta go.  Robin is making it, bingo.
Story_ID: 51076
Speaker 1: Did you think she [Ray's wife, Brenda Ray] suspected that there was a sad person inside you at the time?
Speaker 2: Not at the time, no, 'cause I was the life of the party.  But then she begin to figure it out later because I couldn't--she began to see that other side, that guy who wouldn't talk to you, who wouldn't say a word to you.  So she had to live with that guy and you know I, I would always stay by myself.  She made a comment one time, said "if we ever got married, I bet you have to have your own apartment, wouldn't you?"  'Cause I wasn't gonna see over no two--I didn't want to see you two days in a row, that was just my policy, and she didn't know how true it was.  I got me an apartment in LA [Los Angeles].  For the first eight or nine years I never stayed with that woman more than two weeks.  I come home, or sometimes I be out in the yard, I be looking up at the airplane, she says "You gotta go, huh?"  "I gotta go."  I get in my car, "Psst see ya."  I just--there was not--I could not stay around people.  I just preferred to be alone and then comedy came along and I went on the road, that was perfect, and I didn't have to deal with people, I get on the stage, I got my hotel room, I'm travelling all the time, so I didn't have to deal with people.
Speaker 1: Now did you, did you enjoy that part, you know, when you were doing comedy like that--what, what did it--
Speaker 2: Oh originally?
Speaker 1: --when it was something that--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah it was great, it was great originally, but near the end when I quit it was a nightmare.  The--I was so miserable, you know, like most comics I, I had one hour out of the day.  The only time I enjoyed life when I was on stage.  The other 23 hours were miserable.
Speaker 1: And you were travelling too, you said?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 51077
Speaker 1: And, and what, what was your, what was your, you know, each comic has their own approach of their routine.  Do you, do you, can you give some examples of some of your routine?
Speaker 2: Yeah well, well what I began to do I had two sets.  One I, I, I, I dealt with family, having kids.  I put out an album once called "Nightmare Of Living With A Pregnant Woman" and where I went through all of that.  So I would start with the kids, raising the kids.  I would do this whole routine on kids.  Everybody can relate to having a kid, when their small, growing up, so I had a nice routine on that.  Then I begin to develop routine about women, and I would always come up with women like I go through the Bible now I can you a 30-minute routine on the Bible and all the women in the Bible.  So I used that angle and then that would get the response from the women in the audience.  You know, it's all done in humor, but it, it roused them up.  So that was my other angle, comedy to kinda semi-bash women that way you get them to interplay and, and to get them in.  And then I used the men, "All right y'all gotta back me up," so, so you kinda slowly work it up to get the men over here 'cause you gon bash the women and you want the men to kinda back you up, so it's a humorous of bashing the women and getting the men to back you up.
Speaker 1: Now can you given an example of one of your jokes or routine or--
Speaker 2: One of my routines?  Yeah, I can give an example of my routine.  I start with Eve.  When I explain over one of the first woman to bash a man, and you ask the audience "Who was the first women to bash a man?" and somebody gon say "Eve."  Ah, now see I'm set up, then I can start telling about Eve and how she messed over Adam.  First of all I say "Adam was the hardest working man on earth, do you know why" and they'll crack up and it's obvious he was the only one.  What did he do all day?  He had to name everything you see in the universe in six days, every star, everything he had to do it in six days.  What was Eve doing?  She was at home watching TV.  They say ah.  I said didn't they say they have everything.  She was watching shows like If the World Evolve, All My Animals, Oprah goes--(unclear)--I gotcha there, see, throw that in there and then I said "Oh you know one day while she was at home the, the snake came by named Tyrone and I tell Tyrone come by and said let's go down and have a cold one at Nero's Bar and I can't go, I gotta go way down in the valley to get fruit for Adam and have it here for dinner."  "Oh baby you don't have to do that you got that big tree right in the front yard."  "Oh Adam said I can't eat off that tree."  "Oh if you eat off this tree you'll be as smart as Adam."  And then the point--what woman don't wanna be as smart as a man and so that rouses it up, so I just go through all this stuff.  He comes home as a result he eats, she comes, she, she makes up her excuse that Tyrone said it was good for my backache and all this stuff, so the point and the end of the line is "If it what 'en for Eve do you realize all of us today would have everything we want.  You want a Lexus, you just go down and say I want that Lexus.  You want a mink coat-"so then I set up everything is Eve's fault.  And by this time then I got the women and yah, yah, yah, then I just go through the Bible, David, Bathsheba, I just go all the way through, bing, bing, bing, bing, bing, bing.  And said "First of all everyone of us supposed to have seven women?" and the women said "Nah."  I said you--like I would say-"Do you read the Bible?"  And they say "Yeah I read the Bible."  "Do you believe in the Bible?"  "Yeah I believe in the Bible."  "Do you believe every man supposed to have seven women?"  "No."  I said, "You believe in the Bible go to Isaiah 4:1, what does it say?  In that day seven women will say to one man let us take of your own name.  We will buy our own apparel, own food."  I said, "Now you see that guys, seven women working bringing home the money, you on welfare, can't use ya" and just kinda routines like that.
Story_ID: 51078
Speaker 1: And so you said comedy was working for you and then what happened?
Speaker 2: Then after awhile it began to wear off.  It didn't, you know, it's like a drug.  Pretty soon you need more and more and all of a sudden you don't have the affect anymore.  So that's why you see comics going off the deep end doing things.  By this time, you staying in your hotel room all day.  It's no more fun anymore, you can't--it doesn't give you that high.  It doesn't hide your problems anymore.  I remember when I quit.  I was in Raleigh, North Carolina, a place called Charlie Goodnights [Comedy Club], Sunday night.  By this time, blacks were beginning to go to clubs, I mean, that place was packed.  I sit in the brownstone that day I was just flat out miserable.  I had been miserable.  I had been on the road for about six weeks and what I'd usually do go the club and tell 'em "Hey man look I'm out of it tonight, I'm not feeling--I'm gon give you a good 40 minutes, that's all."  Then you get on stage and I stay an hour and 10 minutes and wanna know what happened.  So I went on stage that night and up until the minute they began to play the intro I didn't want to do it.  I, I was out of it, but the minute they played that minute, bing, bing, bing, bing, and you're headliner Carl Ray, when I hit that stage, bingo, I was on.  Cash regi--the computer messed up that night and they gave me a note and said hey stretch it until we can get the computer so they can check the people out on the bill.  I rocked for an hour and 20 minutes.  I'm rocking, I don't wanna get off, boom, 'cause I know when I get off the same thing I'd accuse other comics of doing staying on stage because that's the only life you have, that's the only enjoyment, and that was the only enjoyment--I was like all other comics I had one hour of happiness a day.  And when you see comics get on stage and they go on and on and don't wanna get off, he got a problem.  All comics got problems, but he is, is, is, it's happening then and that stage is his world of protection 'cause once you step off that stage, psst, you back in the dumps where you were.
Speaker 1: So what, what--when you say all comics have problems--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --can you, can you be more specific?
Speaker 2: Most comics, especially the comics--I'm not talking about a comic who go out and take, just take classes, but most comics have something that they are hiding and they use comedy to cover it.  I don't care if he's the class clown.  You go to school you find that kid that's always cracking, it's the class clown.  There is something in him that he's hiding, and he's hiding behind the attention, taking the attention away from what the real problem is.  And I know a lot of comics--I been on the road with a lot of comics and we've sit and talked.
Story_ID: 51079
Speaker 1: So during this time you know this--you were talking about just doing your break, during a 10-year period, I mean twelve, twelve, but 10 years on the road, and I'm just trying to get some perspective, you know, who you were performing with, how many, you know, how many people on a show, you know on a bill?
Speaker 2: There were three comics.  You always had an opener emcee and a feature act, which was the middle guy who would do about 30 minutes, the emcee would do 15 minutes, and the headliner would do 45 to an hour, so it became a pecking order.  I started out on the road as a feature, a middle spot.  If there were big clubs, I would go in as an opening, but the thing is to move up as quick as you can, and so as a feature in the big clubs, which was the punch line circuit back in those days, that was pretty much a good place to start and the thing you tried to do is get to the headliner position as quick as you could.  Now every comic think he's a headliner before he's a headliner, that's just human nature.  You think hey man I'm ready, I'm a headliner.  Feature-- emcee think he's a feature, feature thinks he's a headliner, that's just the way it goes.  But that was the thing to make it to the headliner spot as quick as I could.
Story_ID: 51080
Speaker 1: Now during this time you're married, what is your wife [Brenda Ray] thinking of all this?
Speaker 2: Psst.
Speaker 1: Why because--
Speaker 2: She just let me do my thang.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I'm not gon be happy.
Speaker 1: With the--right--
Speaker 2: So she just stay here and deal with it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and were you making a decent living?
Speaker 2: Starting out as feature you what en making that much money.  You know back in those days if you could make $500 a week that was good, $450, $500 a week, but it wasn't about the money it was about being able to practice your trade so you could get in a position so you could make the money.  So $500 dollars, $400 dollars a week, hey that's fine, that's wasn't it, you needed the stage time, you were getting paid for it, and you were travelling.
Speaker 1: And so--but at the beginning you said this was--it was very satisfying?
Speaker 2: Oh at the beginning, you know, before you start making money and you have to do all these things and go to all these clubs just to get on stage and do five minutes, 10 minutes while you are building, while you building an act.  See it takes a long time to build.  First you have to build a 15 minute act, and a 20 minute and, and, and a 20 minute act, 30 and it takes time to build.  Because you can write a whole lot of material, but it takes time for you to come out with a good 30 minutes, a good solid 30 minutes, then a good solid 40, 45 minutes, and then to an hour.
Speaker 1: Now with the people that you--I think I wanna say performed--were there any people that we know that you-- you mentioned Robin Williams, but were there other people on the road that you, you know, experienced--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there is Robert Wuhl who did very various--you know he's successful as a, as a comic and as a writer, director.  Tim Allen, worked with Tim Allen when he was starting, you know.  We were in South Carolina.  We worked a couple of places together.  Who else did I work with?  Every now and then I'll look up on television and I see somebody that's boom, that's hit--Marsha Warfield, Brad Sanders as you may remembers years ago he had "Ti-Rone", "Letters to the Stars", and Soap Opera Updates.  He's out of Chicago [Illinois].  So there are a few others that, that have done very well in the business.
Speaker 1: And did you find at some point you said these people are weird and I don't want to be around them?
Speaker 2: No, no, no no, no, no, no, no, what I, what I began to find you, you always want to be around them even though you know their weird, but that's why you guys get alone so good because all you guys are weird.  But then you begin to find out that, hey they are weird.  See me I had a cover.  First of all, I was older when I got in, so a lot of the young comics saw me as an ex-engineer being married as stable.  So when we go out on the road together I went to the club, I went back to the hotel, I was always--I became that father figure.  So they would come and give me all of their problems.  So I became like the road psychiatrist, psychologist, the therapist and, and what they did not realize I had more pain than they had.  I had nobody to dump it on.  They would come to pops, hey pops, and they would just lay out.  Bingo, I mean, the whole nine yards, so I, I had to carry all of this, be a therapist for all of them and sometime I'm sitting there listening to their world of problems and think I'm more screwed up than you are.  But, they had put me at this image, so when the kids come to pops and say I need to talk, you know I, I need NA [Narcotics Anonymous], but I never had anybody that I could talk to, so I had to have this image, but we're all screwed up.
Story_ID: 51081
Speaker 1: Now are there comedians that you particular like?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me who some of your favorite ones are?
Speaker 2: From the old school was Redd Foxx, Flip Wilson. They were from old school.  Then when I was in high school Pigmeat Markham, Baby Seals.  I had a little comedy team in high school.  Me and my buddy used to, used to do them.  There was Moms Mabley, then you come--then Richard Pryor came on the scene, bam, new.  Now Flip, I always loved Flip Wilson because he was a great story teller, so I began the emulate him years ago telling stories 'cause he would tell stories.  And Richard had just--everybody loved Richard because he was, he was completely different, so that, that was the man.  I done forgot another guy I used to like, Franklyn Ajaye.  I don't know if you ever heard of him, but he didn't become very big, but I, I just loved his, the way he wrote and the way he delivered his material.  I loved that.
Speaker 1: And what do you think makes a good comedian?
Speaker 2: Time and delivery, being able to, to deliver and also being able to be quick wittted.  Now people think--it comes with being on stage, it comes with being on stage.  People say ah gosh that was, that was off the top of your head.   No it's not off the top of your head.  You been doing comedy so long, you have seen every scenario, if somebody say something to you it seems like you got a automatic response, but you have been in the situation so much if somebody say blue, you got a response for it, you got two or three responses, bing, but the main thing is being able to set up the story and deliver it, deliver the line, set up and delivery, set up punch, that, that comes with writing, knowing how to write.
Story_ID: 51082
Speaker 1: Writing, yes, did you write?
Speaker 2: I learned to write and, and that was part of the classes, see basically you can be funny, but how do you set up, how do you segue?  All of those things I didn't know about, but going to classes and then watching comics how to deliver it, how to deliver that punch, when, when the voice should be here, where you gonna deliver the punch from, how, at what tone.  They had a lot of things to deliver the punch, so going to classes and they teaching you the basics on how to set it up and how to punch, how to set up and deliver the punch, how to segue and all of that so you begin to write.  But a lot of comics like myself would write as we go, by trial and error, because you write stuff you get on stage and there have been times I've written routines and I've, I've done routines, did, didn't even write 'em down.  Thought about it in my head, bingo, and then you listen to the tape and work it out that way.
Story_ID: 51083
Speaker 1: Now in '94' [1994] when you decide to throw in the towel you've had it or are you just tired or you've gone out and you've done enough?
Speaker 2: Well I was reaching a point to where I was burnt out, I was burnt out.  I'd been down to Florida, I came from Florida up to the Carolinas into North Carolina, came back to California, went to--I was supposed to go to Spokane, Washington on into Montana, back into Seattle [Washington].  I got to Spokane I did that night, I called the agent and said "I'm quitting."  She said "You can't quit."  I said "I'm going home."  I said, "Get somebody else to, to take the rest of--."  She said, "Well you know the comics out of Seattle you know, get the comics out of Seattle."  She was saying "Well you know they've, they've seen the comics out of Seattle you know."  I said, "I'm quitting."  I've never quit before, I'm going home.  I went one night, turn around, came home.
Speaker 1: Well what were your thoughts that you would do at that point?
Speaker 2: I didn't know.  I knew I was tired, I couldn't, I didn't wanna do that anymore.  I was tired of it, I mean, I was just burnt out.  And I had come across, drove across country and I just had a talk with the man upstairs, "You know hey, I said look a here what's the problem, why me, you know.  I mean what you got against me, you know.  When you gonna let me up, I mean, I just--" I just said hey, I just really gave him the whole nine yards, you know, "Hey, gosh, am I you're kid, am I you're child, I mean, I look around all these other people and I'm doing this, I'm doing this, all this stuff in the community, I work with kids, I do this and hey it ain't happening, what's wrong?"  I blast him out, you know.  I blast him out real good coming across the Mojave Desert and all those places, blast him out real good, gave him a peace of my mind, asked him a whole lot of questions, why me, why me.  When it is gonna let up, I mean, I cried the whole nine yards, and I got a sign (laughter).  I get to Bakersfield [California]; my car break down.  I roll off the freeway right into the perfect place for your car to break down, and then I said oh my goodness what I if I had broke down 100 yards, 100 miles, or 200 miles back.  The perfect place.  It's like he said "Okay I'll show you."  It was like gosh, yes, this is the place to break down.  So it was like okay maybe I am his, you know, maybe I'm going through a change, but I was questioning you know.  No, no why me, when am I gonna get up, when you gonna release me.  And I went up to Bakersfield, I went to Spokane, and that's it.  See ya, I came home and I sat down, just stopped.  I began to do a little local stuff around here, you know, went to Mississippi to do some casinos like that, but the road I--that was it.
Story_ID: 51084
Speaker 1: So what have you been doing the last eight years?
Speaker 2: Been doing some motivational speaking, consulting work, educational consulting.  What I, what I, what I did I said, "Look, you know, I got all of this experience, I got all of this experience where through the years on the side I've spent all this time working with young people, helping young people get into college.  There has to be some value there," so I just went to a guy and say "Look hey I got a lot of experience, this is what a wanna do," and I just started the contract here and there, bingo, it was a natural for me.
Speaker 1: And talk about that, because you were start, you started to take kids to--
Speaker 2: Oh, about fifteen years ago this year I just started taking kids to visit Historical Black Colleges and Universities [HBCUs] in the South, and that was a spontaneous move.  I, I took 4 young men.  I was looking for something to save some of the young black men.  And I never will forget we were out one night and you know how we get together as a group and we talk about all the problems we have as African Americans in the community, and after we do all this talking and there's always well you know "They oughta do something, they oughta do something," so coming home that night I asked my wife [Brenda Ray], I said, who are they.  She said what you talking about.  I said have you ever notice we get together, we have all these great discussions, we come up with all these solutions to all of these problems, then we say why don't they do something.  Nobody ever do anything, and I just said I'm gonna become they.  And that's when I got four boys and said "Hey look I'm gonna take y'all out South," put them on a plane, flew them to George, got a van, psst, rode around Georgia and Alabama; that was it.  Then I said oh--buddy of mine said when you go back next time and maybe we'll rent two vans.  I said I'll think about it.  The next year I ended up taking four to five kids.  No money.  Charged it on my American Express card.  American Express called me up, "Hey have you lost your card?" (laughter) "No."  "We see a lot of activity on your card, we've never seen this much activity."  I said, "I just bought some tickets for some kids.  You gon get your money back."  Now before they called me mind you they had checked my checking account, my savings account, and they said, "Well we've check all your accounts and you don't have that much money."  I said, "Don't worry about you'll have your money, I'll get you your money, don't worry about it."  So I got them that money.  I went out to some folks in the community and say, "Hey look give me--I need $9,000, I done charged about easy"--but I got the money, paid it off, and it just kinda mushroomed from there, and it's still going.
Story_ID: 51085
Speaker 1: Now what other things that you've been involved in the community are you proud of?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh, I don't know let me look up on that wall and see (laughter).  I got all that stuff up there on the wall.  I guess out of all the things that I've done as far as the public speaking and the, doing the things for the different organization and churches and being on different boards and everything I, I guess the thing it always come back to the children, the students that I have touched their lives, the students who've gone to college and gone out in the world who never figured they could go to college, but they've gone out, finished, got their families very successful, get a call every now and then and, you know, "If it wasn't for you, blah, blah, blah, blah."  That is probably the most, the thing, that I'm most proud of is being able to really affect some child's life in a positive way, you know.  All the other things there great, all the awards there great, you know, but when it boils down to it like I tell people "When I see my condominiums and my Rose Royce and my Mercedes it's when they walk out of college, they, that's my car, that's my whatever, you guys may like BMWs, Mercedes, you may like this and that, but when that kid walk out of college, that's it, and you get little card in the mail, ah Mary got a kid" and those little perks keep coming through the years makes it all worth it.
Story_ID: 51086
Speaker 1: And so you--I also wanna talk just briefly about the school [Courtland Esteem School] that your,---was it your wife [Brenda Ray] started here or that you, you, both of you?
Speaker 2: Well it was her idea to start the school.  What happened we had our daughter in Martin Luther King Academy when she was four years old, and they went kindergarten--preschool, kindergarten, middle school, high school, and it was the perfect thing for the Valley [Silicon Valley, San Jose, California], a black school here in the Valley.  And it closed all of a sudden and by the time she was five, almost five years old, it just closed and the parents didn't have anything to do or they didn't know what to do, so my wife said "I'm gonna teach my kid at home" and a couple of parents just, you know, well can you teach mine until they find a place, you know, and it ended up they came over here and she started teaching them, and I don't think we ever intended for it to last, we were just gonna do it until we could find another school  And I think the parents I thought they were gonna take their kids away, and then the year was up and somehow I decided to do it the next year and the next year, so then I thought when my daughter get in middle school, psst, didn't happen.  Okay, by the time she get to high school, so she was home schooled until she was in the tenth grade and then after she left it's still going, so I thought the school was gonna go maybe a year or two years and here now she's out of high school, she's in college, the school is still going.  We stayed here in the house for almost 12 years--11 years and then we moved out, we got a building, so it's just still going.
Story_ID: 51087
Speaker 1: You've, you've been very involved with kids and I'm wondering what your hope, hopes and concern are for the youth?
Speaker 2: All youth or?
Speaker 1: Black kids.
Speaker 2: Black kids?  Girl, girl, girl, girl, girl black youth, well not only black youth, but blacks as a, as a whole is in a very, very serious predicament, but especially black youth.  I often said, "The worse thing ever happened to us as a group of people was integration."  And ever since integration our youth have been just wiped out in every aspect.  The way it was designed and I speak about it, I, I talk about it a lot to all the professors in the universities and to make them understand how this system works.  Even though there are good intentions, but they destroy and how--why so many black youth are being destroyed today because there is a system set up that we don't fit into.  And before integration we had, we had, we had black teachers, we had black this, we had black that.  Integration was set up in such a way that it was set up to destroy.  Now, when integration came, the first thing they did was to integrate the high schools.  They closed the black high schools, bused all the black kids over to the white schools, laid off all the black teachers.  Then they did the same thing with the middle school, down to elementary school.  A school would stay black until they could integrate it into white school.  Now you had a system where all of these kids are now being taught by somebody who don't look like them, who don't understand them, who are not gonna push and drive them the way people of the same ethnic group push and drive each other.  So finally you end up with a system in America where almost 90 percent of the teachers in America today are white.  Eighty percent are white female.  Now you are being taught by people who are farthest removed from you who does not, who do not understand you, who don't care to understand you, who don't have to understand you.  You can sit in the back of the classroom, you can do whatever you wanna do, fine, but there is nobody there now to teach us.  So what does this do to the minds of young blacks being put in this situation when they don't see anybody who look like them.  All of a sudden this is a computer.  See every mind is a computer, and the system feeds that computer and that computer then feels about whoever the way the system is designed.  Now you may happen to be black, but if that computer, that program is in you, you feel that way.  Like I spoke a few years ago to the professors from the university on, on a break, and I explained to them I said, "You know what people say that you're a racist, but your not, you're a program.  Out of the goodness of your heart you destroy internally more black students and you never think about it."  I said, "When I black student raise their hand in your class and it is a difficult question and you think they may not know the answer, so rather than call on them for fear they don't know and embarrass them, you won't call on them.  You have just sent that child a message that I don't believe in you."  I said, "When a black kid makes a C and you try and pacify 'em and say well that's okay.  You would never tell a white student that a C is good.  You have sent that child a negative message.  When you have a kid in the sciences, in physics, in engineering, a student, and then you say you know gosh that's really difficult you oughta be over in criminal justice or you oughta be over in social science, or you oughta be over in sociology."  I said now from your heart it's a good intent, you not being racist, you not being, you, you think you're doing the kid a favor, but what you tell that child is "Hey this is too difficult for you," so they leave and they walk away and you read all the stats of the white colleges and you see this big dropout rate of African American students over a four or five-year period and you don't know why; you contribute to it.  And when I finish speaking two white professors came up, they apologized.  They said "Carl I'm sorry, I've done it, I didn't know."  I said, "Sure you didn't know.  I said your programmed too.  So when you think two of you who now realize what you are doing and how damaging you are," I said, "Think of America.  We have young blacks who go all the way through high school and college and their never taught by a black teacher, never, that's very damaging."  And we will continue to fill the prisons rather than jobs in the industry, doctors, lawyers, or whatever because we're set up against a system--we're playing against a stacked deck, we can't win.
Story_ID: 51088
Speaker 1: And then you take the television, you take the media, and look at all the negative stuff that comes across the television.  Every time you sit down and watch a television you see a black person--I used to record--I used to take my VCR--I used to record. and I would tape 'em and I would said okay let's watch them and almost 80 percent of the time a black came up on that screen, the screen it was something negative.  I used to tape the Fresh Prince [Fresh Prince of Bel Air] show and go through all the negative stuff that it was hitting, bam, bam, bam, bam, all the time.  Kids sitting and watching, everybody was laughing at Fresh Prince, it was a great show.  I didn't pick on him I did other shows, but like I said one night watching Fresh Prince he's a salesman, he's a car salesman, Robert Guillaume is trying to get him to, to, to, to quit school 'cause he's selling cars so good, he's a good car salesman.  In an open showroom broad daylight a little black couple walk in and say hey can I take something on a test ride.  No, his character say, no you can't take nothing out.  This young couple attempted to get in the back seat of a showroom car and Will's [Will Smith] line was "y'all can't do that in here."  Now how negative that was.  You have just told America that this little black couple was so stupid and ignorant they were gonna get in the back seat of a car in a showroom in broad daylight people walking around having sex.  Bam, was it necessary to put that in there.  One night a little boy, a little black boy was given a boom box, and his line was "wow I never received anything with a serial number on it before."  Everybody laughed. What did that mean?  Everything he had received had been stolen.  And I used to take the television, I used to sit down and get the pad and I say okay let's watch if it was a black, look at all the negative stuff and your bombarded with so much, and people wonder why we act the way we are.  We wonder why we losing so many little black boys.  A system is designed, you playing against a stacked deck.  The power of the television, the most dangerous thing there is.  The worse thing that we as black people have in our home is a television 'cause that's a program.  It programs you, it programs you, and I point out the way the system is set up.  A black comic can get on television and say anything he or she wants to.  They will not allow a white comic to do it.  [HM Russell Simmons'] Def Comedy Jam, psst, the most disgraceful thing ever been on television.  Have you ever seen a white comic get on television, vulgarity.  Andrew Dice Clay they ran him off.  Do you know who An, who Andrew Dice Clay is?  Do you know Andrew Dice Clay can only come on Pay Per View?  Do you know they basically ended his career, the, the, the right wing, the religious group came out, the Women Groups came out.  Do you know they drove this kid off the face of the earth.  Black comics do the same thing, even worse, do anybody say anything, no.  Eminem, the white rapper, they ain't gonna let him do it.  He performed down in Daytona Beach [Florida] somewhere.  The mayor said you can't perform anymore.  When the last time you seen Eminem?  There is an effort put together to drive Eminem out, off television because he is a white kid that's a bad image for other white kids, but it's okay when blacks do it.  It's a double system.  We playing against a stacked deck, and we wonder why we are filling up the prison.  It's by design; it is no accident.  It's by design.  So when I look at what young black males are up against, they don't even know.  A lot of black people don't even know, but sit and watch, watch, read, listen then you'll understand the television, the movie screen, but especially a television.  Like I often say, "They don't have to put chains on us no more."  They got chains on our minds and that is worse than have chains on your ankle because when you got chains on your ankle you wanna escape, but when you got a chain on your mind, hey, you don't have no desire to escape whatsoever.  You like that elephant that can pull everything around the circus, but once you put him in that little circle with that little chain on him he forgets.  He has enough strength to pull that stake up and do what he wants to, but his mind has been controlled and that's where we are and that's my take on youth, youth and what they face.
Story_ID: 51089
Speaker 1: One other thing--two, I've two more questions.  One, you have talked about programming, you've decided at this point in your life to do, do your own healing, you know, to seek out to do your own healing, and I was wondering if you had a comment about what you want to accomplish?
Speaker 2: Through my own healing?  Through my own healing, I wanna let go of a lot of baggage that I've been carrying that was put there, not really my fault.  I wanna get rid of a lot of guilt that I've had, taking full responsibility for what happened to my father when it wasn't.  I wanna get rid of that.  And I want to when I do something it's what I want to do.  I want to get off stage.  I, I've lived my life on stage, so once I get into a surrounding I'm on stage.  If I'm in a group of people or whatever, I'm on stage.  That's how I survived.  Now I just wanna be myself, be what I call normal and not cover anything.  See the whole thing of therapy is to put everything out on the table.  I don't wanna hide nothing else, I don't wanna be ashamed, and I don't wanna be covering up nothing.  I don't wanna be blaming myself, going through the self-sabotage. It--I wanna release all of that.  It wasn't my fault.
Speaker 1: What would you say to your father [George Ray III] if you could talk to him now?
Speaker 2: Hmm, you know I'll say to him I know he, he didn't blame me.  I mean that afternoon he made a conscious choice to die, I understand that.  That was the only option he had that day and he was prepared for it.  He had three options that afternoon.  He could let me kill the guy [William Carlisle], nope that'll mess up my life; he kill the guy, oh no, he was a Christian ain't no way he would harm anybody.  So he made a conscious effort to die and that's why he took us down to aunt Dis house to sit out in the open 'cause he knew that man was gonna come and kill him.  And it was kinda strange a, a few years ago I really thought about it and I remembered when I was a kid and, and they had lynched this black guy and I remember my mama saying, you know and I'm thinking why wouldn't he run 'cause he stayed and he prayed until they came.  And I can remember as a kid and was saying well "Why wouldn't he run?"  And my mama [Vidella Ray] said he didn't have nowhere to go.  And then years later, even after my father was killed, that came back to me.  My father did the same thing.  After I found out how they had been messing with him all those years, he did the same thing.  He knew that the time was then, he knew it, and you know something I knew it.  I didn't know he was gonna get killed, but I knew that man was coming.
Story_ID: 51090
Speaker 1: What do you, what do you want your legacy to be, sir?
Speaker 2: (Laughter), oh gosh my legacy?  I guess I would like my legacy to be that I really--my main focus was saving as many African American kids as I could, trying to stress to them the importance of education.  That has been my focus, that's what I work for to make sure that I encourage every kid I can to at least try to get a college education, because if you get a college education then you can deal your own hand sometime, but you increase the odds of the game that you're playing in.
Story_ID: 51091
Speaker 1: Okay, this was in June 1962 graduation from high school.  On the left is my sis, oldest sister, the oldest sibling in the family, Elaine Ray Nelson, who lives in New Roads, Louisiana.  That's my dad, George Washington Ray, III.  That's my mama, Vidella Ray, and of course that handsome guy on the right is me, Carl Ray.
Speaker 2: Can you spell your mother's name?
Speaker 1: V-I-D-E-L-L-A.
Speaker 2: Do you know the year?
Speaker 1: The year of that picture?  June 1962, high school graduation photo.
Speaker 2: Okay, this photo is--we were fortune enough to have a bike ride with the mayor of San Jose [California] who was Mayor Susan Hammer at the time and also the mayor or San Francisco [California], Mayor Willie Brown, and as a result of that bike ride $34,000 was raised by, by Willie Brown, mayor of San Francisco to send kids on historical black college tour.  On the left you can see--I'm there on the left.  I don't know the gentlemen next to me, but then there is Mayor Willie Brown and Chris Parker.  Chris Parker is the young man who would ride his bike to raise money for different charitable organization.  He has ridden his bike from Canada to San Francisco.  He rode from San Francisco to San Diego for the AIDS drive, so he came up with the idea of riding his bicycle to raise money for the college tour, and that's how that came about.
Speaker 1: And that photo was taken my senior year in high school, my graduation picture.  I graduated from high school in New Roads, Louisiana, Rosenwald High School, and May 28th, to be exact 1962.
Speaker 2: This photo here was taken at Tuskegee Institute which is now a university.  I pledged Alpha Phi Omega fraternity and as you can see we were going through our last week of pledging where we were singing and that was our sweetheart and of course that's me there with my arm around her.  I was the James Brown of singers.  I was the superstar of that line because I was the lead singer.
Speaker 1: And that photo there that's the avenue.  When you're pledging you--we would walk and march on our way to lunch every day to the cafeteria, and we had to sing and march and there I was the shortest guy on the line, so I was leading the line by Brother Grissom (ph.) there, so I was--because of my singing ability I became the man because I had to do all of the singing.  I had another brother on there, Schaefer (ph.) who was a former member of the Alabama, the Five Blind Boys of Alabama, and he was a blind pledgee on there and he could also sing.  Between the two of us, we did all of the lead singing for the group.
Speaker 2: Oh, we go way back to 1955.  I was about 11 years old there when that photo was taken.  They would come around to the school and take all those school photos, and look at that handsome guy, I was such a handsome young man back then and still a good looker today.
Speaker 1: Oh, my two brothers, Lamarvin and Lindsay.  Lindsey is on the left, in the middle is Lamarvin, and I am on the right.  That was taken at, oh in Butler, Alabama, in the church yard, Mount Olive Church yard, where I grew up. Oh gosh, I don't have my middle sister, ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's my wife Brenda and my youngest daughter, Ania and myself there.  Ania is now a freshmen at Tuskegee University [Alabama] majoring in animal science.
Speaker 1: Can you spell her name, sir?
Speaker 2: A-N-I-A.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA MALE VOICE):  And give us the date if you can remember it?
Speaker 2: Oh the date, that looked like she was about, oh, six years old, so, oh, that was I would say that was in, let's see--I don't even know when my kid was born to tell you the truth.  That was in '89' [1989].
Speaker 1: Okay, that's our daughter, my daughter, well our daughter really in our father-daughter photo that we took during her senior year, which was just last year really.  We took that picture on her graduation last year in June 2001.
Speaker 2: Oh, that photo is where I'm shaking the hand of Coretta Scott King.  She was in town, and I had been invited to meet her by Applied Materials, one of the high-tech companies here in the area that have been very instrumental in assisting us in funding for our school [Courtland Esteem School].  So that's how I ended up going to meet the great Ms. King.
Speaker 1: Oh that is my daughter, Lillie, who lives in Fredericksburg, Virginia.  That was her wedding, which was 10 years ago [1992].  I went back there to give her away, and you can see that she is a very beautiful young lady, and she has two kids.
Speaker 2: Okay, that photo was with our current mayor, Mayor Ron Gonzales.  That was one of the fund raisers for him at my friend's house, Tommy Fulcher.
Speaker 1: Can you spell, is it Ron?
Speaker 2: Oh Ron.
Speaker 1: Ra, Ron.
Speaker 2: Ron.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: R-O-N, Ron Gonzalez.
Speaker 1: And then at the home of?
Speaker 2: Tommy Fulcher.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Fulcher?
Speaker 2: Oh, F-U-L-C-H-E-R.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Did we get a date for this?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was--yeah I can give you a date on that.  That was 1999, June 1999.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a photo of Mr. Lee, who is president of the 100 Black Men of Silicon Valley.  In 1999, I was awarded the citizen of the year award, which was given by the organization and for my community service.
Speaker 2: Oh that's a picture of Sinbad, my wife, and myself many years ago when we started the school, and we wanted a fund raiser for one of the schools here, and I called Sinbad up who I knew and I said, "Hey man would you do me a favor will you come up and do a benefit for us so we can raise some money," and he said he would.  And I asked him how much, he said whatever you pay me, so we bought him up and he did two shows and raised a lot of money, and I'm still in his debt today.  So one day he's gonna call in the chip, and I owe him big time.
Speaker 1: Now this photo was taken at the, at Michigan State University in East Lansing, Michigan, in February of 2002.  The man on the far right, Mike Dale.  Mike Dale lived in Choctaw County [Alabama].  He knew [William] Bill Carlisle who killed my father.  He knew Bill's kids.  So when he heard about the play ['A Killing in Choctaw'] and he heard that I was gonna be in Michigan, he said let him know, so he came to the play with his sons.  One was a freshmen at Michigan State and the other one is in high school, and it was a dynamic performance.  After I finished the play doing questions and answer, he came up on stage, I introduced him, and he was able to share his experience and how he came to know Bill Carlisle and he came down from Wisconsin and what had happened his father hired a secretary who was Clara, Bill Carlisle's wife, and they didn't have any friends and she asked him if his son who was 16 at the time could be friends with her son.  So Bill Carlisle went and picked him up with his son, Merrill (ph.) one Saturday morning to go fishing in the same pick-up truck that I talk about in the play.  And while they were out fishing, there were gunshots, 5 gunshots.  Bill had shot a snake with a .45 automatic, and Bill told him the history behind that gun.  That was a 1912 military issued .45 automatic that he brought back from War World II.  It was also the gun that he had killed this colored guy with, and he had begged the sheriff to give him that gun back, and he got up and he told that story and the audience was just in awe.  Like he said, he was a kid, but he knew something was very wrong when the sheriff would give the--Bill his gun back that he had killed my father with.
Speaker 2: And how--spell Carlisle, sir?
Speaker 1: C-A-R-L-I-S-L-E.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is a photo of the black college tour taken at Tuskegee University [Alabama], the stature of Booker T. Washington lifting the Veil of Ignorance.  That is a very popular statue.  You see it a lot around the country, and it reads, "lifting the veil, veil of ignorance of our people," and we took a photo when we took kids from here to visit the university there.
Speaker 1: Are you on that picture, on the side?
Speaker 2: Yes, I am over on the extreme side, the right side.  Now the chaperone standing on the left side with the Tuskegee shirt on is Reginald Braddock (ph.).  We finished Tuskegee together in 1967.  He is an engineer to this day at Lockheed here in Sunnyvale [California].
Speaker 1: Oh, this photo was taken by Roosevelt.  Roosevelt is a very well known photographer here in, in the Bay area, and I was performing speaking engagement for the Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, and he just came outside and said, "Man you looking sharp, let me take your picture" and I'm not gonna charge you anything.  He never charged me for any work, because he say I've done so much work in the community til he will never charge me for anything that he does for us.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Ah yes, that's me in 1954, yes I was at Butler Public Elementary School, those school day pictures.  What can I say, hey, I was good looking and I just, I've always been a good looking kid.  Look at the pi--
Speaker 1: Okay, this photo was my first television appearance back in 1973.  I was doing a routine, a spoof on the Pet Rock, so rather than buying a Pet Rock you can see I went out in the alley and got me a big Pet Rock, I named him Freddy, and I was doing a routine about Freddy the Pet Rock.
Speaker 2: Those were my days, those were the days.  I was a bowler for about 10 years and became pretty good at it on a bowling team out of Sunnyvale, California, made up of workers from Lockheed Missiles and Space Company.  And notice that stroke, watch that follow through, hey, that's a strike in the making.
Story_ID: 61077
Speaker 1: Okay, this picture is at the city council meeting in the city of San Jose [California].  The focus of this meeting was educating of young people in the Silicon Valley, and I was the guest speaker there for that event.  I don't know why they always called me up.  People think I know something.  I don't really know anything, I just get up and smoke em, just pull the wool over their eyes, walk out, and they say, hey that was great.  They don't even remember what I said.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Did you give the year for this?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, this was in 2000, June of 2000, end of the year.
Speaker 2: Hey, hey this is my publicity shot that I sent with all of my--when I started doing comedy on the road I went out in 1982.  I had that made in 1982 at a studio in Hollywood [California] where you go to Hollywood you have to have publicity shots, so I had that publicity shot in 1982 and believe it or not even to this day I sometimes use that same publicity shot.
Speaker 1: Let me get the date on this.  What am I, okay, sixth of May, okay, oh that was '96' [1996].  Okay I got the date.  Okay this was on stage at the Foothill Theater.  As you notice the drums in the back, that was the Louie Bellson concert.  Louie Bellson is one of the old drummers from the old jazz age, the big bands, who was once married to Pearl Bailey, and that was a concert and I was the opening act for that concert.  That night was also a surprise birthday party.  It was my surprise 50th birthday party.  That was in November 1996.  Now what made that work I was 52 years old when they decided, my wife decided, to throw me a 50th birthday party because they figured they couldn't surprise me by giving me a 50th birthday party, so they waited two years later and it was surprise.  They had people from Texas all over in the audience that I wasn't aware of.
Speaker 2: Ah yes, now we go all the back to 1974.  You can see that kung fu there, that was one of my first publicity shots.  Back in the day, I had my big natural.  I didn't know I just went to a studio up in San Francisco [California] and we just start taking pictures.  So you can see the big natural there and, and I was looking good there too.  Oh gosh, I really need--let me, let me see one of those over there.  I really want to put Tommy Fulcher up there.  Tommy is the guy that, that conceived the play, paid for the play, the whole nine yards.
Speaker 1: Is this him?
Speaker 2: No, he's on a, he's, he's on a photo right in here.  I saw--
Speaker 1: Okay, this photo was taken at the San Jose International Airport as we were about to depart for a historical black college [HBCU] tour.  This was taken in 1996.  Kneeling next to me on the floor, left, is Chris Parker, the young man that I talked about that ri, ride his bicycle to raise money for different charitable organizations.  And along the front you see students and chaperones there.  And over on the far right-hand side, of course, once again is Reginald Braddock who was also my classmate at Tuskegee [University in Alabama] and still works at Lockheed and going on all of the tours every year.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, this was March 1981 you can see there this was my driving certificate.  I drove taxi for Celebrity Cabs in Hollywood, and that's the city of Los Angeles vehicle for hire, which mean I was a valid taxi driver.  Out of all the things that I've done, driving taxi was probably the most exciting thing I've done because I got a chance to meet every type of individual on the face of this earth, rich, poor, healthy, unhealthy, you name it.  If they walk on the face of the earth, at some point they gonna get into your cab.
