Story_ID: 261657
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Neculai Burghelea; observing is [HistoryMaker] Mr. Paul Brock.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Mildred, M-I-L-D-R-E-D, Bond, B-O-N-D, Roxborough, R-O-X-B-O-R-O-U-G-H.
Speaker 1: All right, now, did you have another middle name at one point?
Speaker 2: Before I married, I had Mildred Louise Bond.  But that was too many names.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 30th, 1926, Brownsville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay and ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a consultant.  The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: June 8, 2005.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're sitting in the conference room on the twenty-second floor of 39 Broadway [New York, New York], which is the NAACP corporate and regional offices.
Story_ID: 261658
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions.  I think you've already--you've seen them all on the form already that I must ask, as company policy.  So, the first question is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Several.  You want--I'm sorry (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is there a favorite, or just, or a certain family of foods?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not really.  I like--depends on the category of food.  I like crab cakes, I like vegetables.  I very much like vegetables, and I eat a lot of fruits, assorted, particularly the tropical fruits, like papaya and mango and--which I eat every day, by the way, cantaloupe, melon, honeydew melon and muskmelons, that kind of thing.  I don't eat a lot of meat.  But--is that the kind of thing you need?
Speaker 1: Sure, that's fine, that's fine.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm sorry to laugh.  I hope I'm not ruining your interview (laughter).  I can't help it--please.  Well, at home I use quite a lot of blue, in my home, in my apartment.  And, I tend to like bright colors at home.  For dressing, clothing, I wear more muted, softer colors.  Variety again, blues or greens, but no one color.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Now, you're laughing.  This is preliminary, I hope?
Speaker 1: Yes, this is preliminary.
Speaker 2: I like the autumn leaves, and I think spring and autumn are my favorite times of year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is the fourth one.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I try to avoid being redundant, so I don't--I try not to be--repeat phrases too often.  I don't have a favorite phrase offhand.  I might think of one tomorrow.
Story_ID: 261659
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her full name was Mattye, M-A-T-T-Y-E, Bell, B-E-L-L, Loralee, (laughter) L-O-R-A-L-E-E, Tollette, T-O-L-L-E-T-T-E; that was her maiden name.
Speaker 1: And, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 5, 1895.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: Tollette [Arkansas], Howard County, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the town was named after the fam- after your family?
Speaker 2: Grandfather [Sanford Tollette].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I, I read--
Speaker 2: Founded the town.
Speaker 1: Yes, a black town, right, basically.
Speaker 2: Well, there were a few whites in the town.  He was an African who married an Irish lady, so at least there was one white there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell us, now what--tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side.  How far back can you trace the ancestors on her side?
Speaker 2: Well, I can--on my mother's, my maternal grandparents would be her mother, who was a Caledonia Crofton, who was also born in Arkansas, in Howard County.  The same county in which that town was founded.
Speaker 1: Okay, now Caledonia, this is the first Caledonia I've heard in real life, and--
Speaker 2: Well, that was her name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Caledonia Crofton.
Speaker 1: You remember the song 'Caledonia,' right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, yes, yes.  That song came some generations after my grandmother was around.  And her father, no sorry, her grandfather was Stephen, S-T-E-P-H-E-N, Crofton.
Speaker 1: Okay that's on her mother's side.
Speaker 2: Yes, her mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Her father's side were the Tollettes.  Her father was a, was one of five children born of Sanford Tollette [sic. Stephen Tollette] who was an African who bought his freedom from a French planter in Louisiana outside of Shreveport [Louisiana].  He was able to--he was paid for working on that plantation.  He saved his money, and he purchased his freedom and some extra money.  And he left Louisiana and went to Arkansas and purchased three hundred acres of land.  And he is the one who married the Irish lady and had the five, I think they had five, six children.
Speaker 1: About what year was this?
Speaker 2: One of which was my mother's husband.
Speaker 1: About what year did this African, Sanford Tollette, buy his freedom?
Speaker 2: This was before 1863.  It was--I have some, probably some more specific information at home.  I can't remember the exact--but I would judge, it was probably maybe in 1850s (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  This was certainly before slavery had ended, 'cause he was a slave.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And he was free at the time the Emancipation [Proclamation] had been signed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He had purchased his freedom.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  That's is unusual.  So, so he went to Arkansas and basically founded--
Speaker 2: Yes, you see, Arkansas and Louisiana in that part of the--those states are--Shreveport is near Arkansas.  So, I don't know that he was concerned about state lines at that time, except as going where it was unpopulated and there was land available.
Story_ID: 261660
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about him [Roxborough's maternal grandfather, Sanford Tollette] and his wife and how they were able to make out, you know--
Speaker 2: I don't know; there is a history of Tollette [Arkansas], one which his various relatives have been working over successively for the past twenty years.  And, I'm not sure unless I refer to it, what specific details there are about the two of them who gave birth to the children from which my grandfather came, who was my, one of whom was my father's, my mother's husband.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is at the union--
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: --which produced my mother's husband.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right so your grandfather was--your, your--Sanford Tollette [sic. Stephen Tollette] is your great-grandfather (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is my great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: And then your grandfather is, what was his name?
Speaker 2: My grand, my grandfather--shame, I'm think that it's Frank, Jim, Sam; shame, I can't remember his first name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The uncles I remember, but I cannot remember his.
Speaker 1: So, is your grandfather the one that founded the town, or your--the--or your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: My grandfather founded the town.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He applied for a permit for a post office.  It was a crossroads.  His father [Stephen Tollette] had acquired this land, as I said.  And he wanted to be able to get mail and get supplies into the area, which was just beginning to develop.  And he applied for a post office.  And they sent back the permit and they--the post offices in those days were given names when you received an approved application.  And the name of that post office was Tollette, which was my grandfather's name, surname.  And he subsequently built a store and the--built a church there, and some other small businesses were developed at that crossroads.  And that's how the town grew.  And the post office was built on the edge of my grandfather's property, not his father's property, but my grandfather's.  And my grandmother, Caledonia Crofton, who married--it's on the tip of my tongue, my grandfather, was a very enterprising woman.  She managed the farm, and she sublet acreage which was used by others for farming.  And she was the good money manager and the--her husband managed the post office.  And they acquired, they bought more land, and they bought cattle, and they bought sheep.  I don't know why, but they had sheep too.  And they had a rather prosperous farm and enterprise in those days.  And this was--by this time my mother [Mattye Tollette Bond] was born in 1895.  And by this time it was probably the 1880s when they had acquired this land and started their family, the family.  She was the next to the youngest of six children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And her father's name was--
Speaker 2: That's what I--
Speaker 1: That's the one you can't--okay, all right.
Speaker 2: He's the one I can't--it just has escaped me.
Speaker 1: Well, that--this is quite a history.  Are there any, any other stories about, about them, you know?  'Cause that's a--it seem like that, that's, that's sort of a--that's a situation where a lot of stories would grow out of the, you know, the mixed marriage and the acquisition and try to hold onto land in Arkansas in those days.
Speaker 2: Yes well, they, they kept the land.  It was there.
Story_ID: 261661
Speaker 1: The siblings went away eventually to different cities.  My uncles, there were--my mother [Mattye Tollette Bond] had one sister and four brothers.  And they all went, except one stayed in Arkansas, but the others went to different places.  One, Sanford [Tollette, Jr.], became a minister, a Methodist minister.  They were Methodists by religion.  They were, they were baptized in the Methodist Christian, in the Methodist church.  They--the children.
Speaker 2: This the C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] church?
Speaker 1: Yes, it was C.M.E.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I saw Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee], I thought--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, and my mother attended Lane College, actually.  And when she--at first they sent her to--she went to a private boarding school in Nashville, Arkansas.  Actually this place is a few miles from where president, former President [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton was born.  He was born down in that area.
Speaker 2: Hope [Arkansas].
Speaker 1: He was Hope.  Well, this place is about twenty-five miles from Hope, Tollette [Arkansas] is.  And she went to a private--my mother attended a private boarding school for eight years, because there was no school in Tollette, you see, as such.  And then, she went to Lane College, and they had a high school there where--high school grades there at that time.
Speaker 2: So, she went her high school years at Lane, too.
Speaker 1: Two of them, the last two.  And the junior high was done there in Hope.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Lane College is in Tennessee, right?
Speaker 1: Jackson, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's actually twenty-six miles from the town in which I was born.  She met my father [Ollie Bond] at that college.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right so--
Speaker 1: He was a Tennessean, you see.
Speaker 2: Now did your, your mother talk about growing up, or any--did she get--did she pass along any stories about growing up to you?
Speaker 1: Yes, she talked about when she first learned to read.  She, mother, her grand--her mother [Caledonia Crofton] would take her to the post office when she had to stay--the father [Sanford Tollette] died early.  He was forty-eight, I think, when he died.  So, the mother became the postmistress after the postmaster died, who was her husband.  And she would take mother to the post office.  She was the youngest at that point.  And she started reading the periodicals and the magazines which came to the post office.  And she learned to read, my mother was taught to read by her mother, by reading these periodicals.  And, of course, one of the things that she learned early to recite was 'Lift Ev'ry Voice and Sing.'  The song, the word, the lyrics which were written by James Weldon Johnson, you know, then his brother wrote the--but she--that's where she started her reading, in the post office.  And by the time she went to school, she was reading, and she could write--went to that boarding school.  And she talked about what a rich experience it was in later--when she was older.  The fact that she actually had all of these books at the post office which probably wasn't supposed to be reading them; you know, they were mail.  They were sent to--but she thought that that was a wonderful experience to have had.  And that she just thought it was ordinary, that this is the way people learned to read and write, until later on when she found, you know, that there--so many of them did not have any opportunity to do so in the 1890s, which is when this was happening.  And that it was--after the turn of the [20th] century that she went to Lane, to Jackson, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Okay now, what did your mother major in at Lane?
Speaker 1: What did she major in?  Mathematics; she had two majors, English and math, in college.
Speaker 2: Okay, was her goal to be, was, was her goal to become a teacher?
Speaker 1: Yes.  She had decided that she wanted to become a teacher, and she studied Latin and Greek, because in those days that was a part of a regular curriculum in a--in that college, anyway, and in many colleges at that point in time.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So, did she become a teacher afterwards?
Speaker 1: Yes, she did.
Story_ID: 261662
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Ollie, O-L-L-I-E.  I'm talking too much; Seahorn, S-E-A-H-O-R-N.
Speaker 1: Seahorn, S-E-A-H-O-R-N.
Speaker 2: S-E-A-H-O-R-N, Bond, B-O-N-D.
Speaker 1: Seahorn's an unusual name.
Speaker 2: Comes out of an Indian [Native American] heritage, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell us anymore about it?
Speaker 2: I think they were Cherokee.  Let's see.  He was named by a lady who was friendly with my grandmother [Aurelia Anderson Bond] and grandfather.  My father's mother and his father.  She was a Caucasian, the lady who named him.  But Ollie was--I don't know where that came from, but Seahorn was Cherokee.  My father's father, his parentage was Cherokee and white.  His grandfather was Cherokee and white.  And Maltimore [Bond] was his father's name.  And actually, as far as we know, although he was culturally black, he wasn't--there was no African background in the Bonds, they're mostly blond, you know.  So, this Indian was one of his grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this lady knew this.  Betty Whitelaw [ph.] was the woman's name who named him.  And the middle name of Seahorn.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So his name was Ollie, was it Oliver?
Speaker 2: No, it was O-L-L-I-E, not Oliver (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what's his--
Speaker 2: And it's been used as a family name.  It was one of his uncles or something had that name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As I said, you see, they were primarily white.  I don't mean it in a pejorative sense, but that's why this lady knew so much about his background, my father's ancestors.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the lady that named him actually knew that was a name that should have been in his family or something?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, she knew about the Indian, of course; it's a small town.  And if you go to Brownsville [Tennessee] today, if you'll say something about Bond, you'll find, maybe a fourth of the town, the surname will be Bond.  And you had the black Bonds and the white Bonds, and it was very difficult to tell them apart until they started marrying darker skinned women.  The black Bond men who were primarily blond in color, my father's generation.  His brothers married fair black women, they were fair, but they were mixed, they were mulattos.  And my father married the only brown skinned one of my five uncles' wives.  The others were fairer, but they were black by this time.  And, and I distinguish it by saying culturally so you'll understand that--what I mean and it's not important really.  But--
Speaker 1: Well, it is, historically, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes, so from my father's side of the family, you had--you were asking me if I knew his grandparents.  And I don't, I never--they were dead before I was born.  And actually, his father died before I was born. But I know that his father, whose name was Maltimore Bond, was--
Speaker 1: Like Baltimore, except with a M?
Speaker 2: Malt, M.
Speaker 1: Maltimore.
Speaker 2: M-A-L-T-I-M-O-R-E, another one of those family names, now.  His father--so, let me tell you, let's see.  No, I have to start over.  His grandfather was Maltimore and his father was Andrew, Andrew James [Bond].  The grandfather was Maltimore, and his father's name is Andrew James Bond.  And he was the sheriff of Haywood County [Tennessee], his father was.  They called him a high sheriff.  This is during Reconstruction you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well that's--
Speaker 2: You've got to keep me disciplined, 'cause I'll get off.
Speaker 1: No, this is interesting.  He was the high sheriff of that county.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And do they recognize him as black or white at that point?
Speaker 2: They knew he was black, in those days.  His father, Maltimore, who was--he was a brick mason.  Now, he was black, but he was white in color.  He had white parents, one white parent [father, Thomas Bond] and one mixed parent [mother, Bobbie Bond].  And he came from North Carolina with his white uncles.  They brought him to North Carolina, from North Carolina to Tennessee.  He had been trained in North Carolina as a brick mason.  And he was brought.  And he was never enslaved, although this was during slavery.  He'd come out of the house, and they trained him to become a brick mason.  And so he came over to Tennessee with his Uncle Tom and Uncle James.  And these were white people, contrary to him, he was--they knew he was black.  So, he practiced brick masonry.  As a matter of fact, he was the supervising brick mason who built the county courthouse in Brownsville, which still stands today.
Story_ID: 261663
Speaker 1: What's your father's [Ollie Bond] date of birth?
Speaker 2: I didn't say.  October--trying to think whether it's one or twelve, 1891.  October, I think it was Columbus Day, October 12th.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, now did your father talk about growing up?  What do you know about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, let me see.  They lived on a farm.  My grandfather, Andrew James [Bond], who they called Buck Bond, who was a sheriff, had bought this land.  He bought five hundred acres of land, and they found the deed to the land in the courthouse.  You know, some of the recent--some of my contemporaries, as verification of the fact.  But the--it was fertile land.  And what happened, it was farmland.  And he died in his forties.  So, there were five brothers.  And they worked on the farm.  My father was the one who went to college.  And the other brothers worked the farm.  And there was one sister [Etta Bond], five brothers and one sister who lived.  And during my father's third year at Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee], he was summoned home.  The draft board said, of the brothers, one had to go.  This is, by this time, World War I [WWI].  And he said that he would go so that the others could work the farm.  And they had--at that point, they had children, his brothers, 'cause he was next to the youngest.  And he didn't have any children then, because he married my mother [Mattye Tollette Bond] just before he went off to the [U.S.] Army.  They was in college there.  And he left in his third year and was drafted.  And now why did you ask me--why did I tell you this?  You asked me a question.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just asked you if he talked about growing up, how did he grow up?  And so, this is good, this is his chronology.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so he worked on a farm, on the farm there.  And he--until he went to college.  Then when he went to college, he was drafted.  I wouldn't say drafted, because he chose to go, so that neither of the other brothers would have to go. He was the one without (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so he's about, he's in his mid-twenties, I guess, about.
Speaker 2: Nineteen or eighteen, whatever, 1891 is when he was born.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so by nineteen seven--well, the war started in 1914?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was later, after the war had been going on.
Speaker 1: Okay, maybe 1915 or '16 [1916].
Speaker 2: I would say about 1916.
Speaker 1: He's about twenty--he's about twenty-five, twenty-six years old.
Speaker 2: Somewhere in there, maybe.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  And so did, did he talk about the war or what happened in the war?
Speaker 2: No.  He didn't go overseas.  He wound up--they made--he was--when he was discharged, he was a master sergeant.  He was an aide to a lieutenant colonel, that's what--I guess, one of the reasons why he was made such, because he was literate and, you know, able to read and write.  He had--third year in college.  So they needed people who were literate, in those days.  And, I would suppose among the whites and the blacks you didn't have an outstanding number who had gone through high school and college, you know, recruiting for the army.  So, he did well and his--the commander of the post liked him very much.  And, he wound up being his military aide, whatever they call them.  He was a master sergeant when he came home, anyhow.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He chose not to stay.  They wanted him to stay and they'd asked him to stay and to re-enlist.  And he said no, he wanted to go home.  He needed to get back to Brownsville [Tennessee], and get into the business of his family.  His--he had married my mother before they went--he went away, but they didn't have any children.  It was just a wartime marriage.
Story_ID: 261664
Speaker 1: You were gonna ask me about Father [Ollie Bond] and Mother [Mattye Tollette Bond] meeting.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did they meet?  Well, they met in college, obviously at Lane [College, Jackson, Tennessee].  And, my mother was very bright woman, human being, I should say.  Because she had an extraordinarily good mind and to her math was nothing.  I can't add two plus three and a half, but math was just one of those things for which she had a natural ability.  She became a math teacher, actually, after, later on.  But so, she had an agile mind, and she was an excellent student.  So was my father.  He was restrained and deliberate.  And she was outgoing, and volatile, and very social, sociable.  And she says that they used to talk, the girls, of which Alex Haley's mother [Bertha George Haley] was one.  They were classmates over there at--and they roomed together at some point at Lane.  She lived in Ripley, Tennessee.  The, the Haleys were over in--
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Georgia.
Speaker 1: Few miles over from Haywood County [Tennessee].  And she said that they girls used to talk about the fellows in the class.  And my mother said, has said that, "Well, you know Ollie--" my father, "he's the most handsome boy on the campus."  And, "That's who I'm going to marry.  He's not only handsome, he's bright and intelligent, and he's got a good mind.  And I think he would make a good husband."  And they said that, "You just, you're just interested in him because of his looks."  She said, "Of course, why shouldn't I like the way he looks?"  Now this is 1900-whatever.  So, in any case, she had said to one of her friends that she was going to meet him; she didn't know him at that point.  And they had some class together.  And she was able to meet him.  And she said that she was the one who--was the one who made overtures, as far as developing a friendship.  Back in those days it wasn't so much you would be doing.  But, but she said that she set her cap for Ollie, and she was going to make sure that he would have no escape from her plans.  I don't know what she did, but eventually they became very good friends, number one.  And number two, they used to talk about Gaul and [Julius] Caesar and the Appian Way.  This is Latin class.  I think that's where they were.  And she decided she would impress him with how much Latin she knew.  And that was the thing that got his attention.  That she was able to read to him in the Latin, and she could almost do simultaneous translation.  And she said he didn't know that she made sure she was, she prepared at night so that she could in the class and impress him about how much knowledge she had.  So it all stemmed from a Latin class.  It's not a--I can't tell it funnily, but she would have you laughing about it if you could, if she were around to tell you the story.  But that's the way they met: they met discussing Caesar and Gaul.
Story_ID: 261665
Speaker 1: So when he [Roxborough's father, Ollie Bond] comes back from the war [World War I, WWI], they were--so she [Roxborough's mother, Mattye Tollette Bond] had to wait for him to come back for, what, a couple of years?
Speaker 2: It wasn't that long.  The war was over in 1918, wasn't it?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Well that's a few years.
Speaker 2: A couple of years.  And she was living in Tennessee by that time with his family.  And when he came back, they built a house.  Her brother Jim was a carpenter, Jim Tollette, James.  And he came up from Arkansas, from Tollette [Arkansas], and he built their house, the first house they had.  And they moved into that house on Jefferson Street in Brownsville [Tennessee].  And he, my mother was teaching at Haywood County Training School [Brownsville, Tennessee].  My father started teaching there also.  He became the assistant principal.  He was the coach, and he taught what they call woodworking, 'cause you had to be a jack of all trades in those old schools.  And he had them build--they didn't have a stage in their auditorium.  So one of their first projects was to build a stage in the school auditorium.  Then, they developed a mechanism so that they were able to build tracks, so that they could have curtains, which they could open and close on the stage.  And they were, they would have high school and grammar school plays and that kind of thing.  But they had--it was a segregated school.  They didn't have the money to do it.  So, they would solicit funds or give--the parents would bake bread and sell things to get the money in order to buy items for the woodworking class.  And they used their learning skills, he supervised them and taught them how to do these things, to erect the stage and the build the curtains and the backdrop and whatever for the school auditorium.  That's the way they were able to get an auditorium in there.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Haywood County Training School.
Speaker 1: Haywood County Training School, okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: And my mother taught--she was, she taught there in the school, and she was teaching math and English and Latin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: And he taught chemistry and woodworking, and he had to serve as the assistant principal, and, oh, and he was coach.
Story_ID: 261666
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: Did he have?
Speaker 1: No, you.
Speaker 2: I have two sisters.  There were three of us.  Three--he was--poor man was outnumbered.  There were four women in his family, his immediate family, my mother [Mattye Tollette Bond] and three sisters, three daughters, and my father [Ollie Bond].
Speaker 1: Okay, and are you the youngest daughter or the oldest?  You're the youngest (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I was the last one.
Story_ID: 261667
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I remember when I was four years old.  I was--there was always somebody to take care of me when my mother [Mattye Tollette Bond] was working at [Haywood County Training] School [Brownsville, Tennessee].  Our house was on the same side of the street as school, and about maybe one hundred yards between the campus and my--from where the school campus to where our yard started.  And she would have--there was usually an elderly lady who would take care of me, who was called Aunt Dubby [ph.].  But then by the time I was four, she started taking me to school.  So, the school girls would, you know, would take care of me.  They would take me out on the playground with them and be my mentor at school.  And, of course, they were the older ones, probably in high school by that time, the ones who would take care of me.  So--and I would hear all the things they were saying and so forth and so on.  And a couple of things I remember as a child.  I was running with a switch or something, chasing boys.  And my mother said to me, this is on the school yard, that, "You shouldn't be chasing those boys, [HistoryMaker] Mildred [Bond Roxborough]."  And I said, "Shall I walk after them?"  So, the (laughter)--the next time, next little incident I can tell you is I was coming home.  Althea [ph.] was the girl who was bringing me home.  And across the lawn, my mother was on the front porch.  And we were coming across the school yard, and we approached my house, and I stepped in a puddle of water, of which I didn't see, because the grass, you know, the foot soaked in it.  And I said, "God dammit!"  Four years old.  And my mother heard me.  And she said, "Come here, you come here."  And she brought me up there, and she told the girl, "You go in there and get the brush."  And she told her where it was.  And she brought the brush out, and she turned me over, and they said, "Don't, she's only four years old."  My mother said, "If she knew how to use profanity, then she will remember this, so she won't ever use it again."  So she turned me over, and took the brush and beat my bottom with the brush.  And she said, "Now, you will remember the word you will never say again."  And I said, "Yes, ma'am."  And you know, I don't use profanity today.  And it was all just because--I'm not saying she was right or wrong in doing it, but that was etched in my mind.  The way at four years old I knew how to use the word, and she heard me.  And she said, "Now that's too much.  If she's going to cuss like that at four years old, I've got to do something about it," (laughter).
Story_ID: 261668
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of?
Speaker 1: Of growing up.
Speaker 2: My father [Ollie Bond], when he--while he was still a teacher, a relative died whose name was John Bond, and he left an undertaking establishment.  So he stopped teaching.  I think they made about fifty dollars a month.  And to run the business, because the death brought business to the funeral home, and there was no black funeral home except his, except this one in the town [Brownsville, Tennessee].  And I was a father's child, I followed him as much as I could whenever I could.  And he had sent a young man [Al Rawls] to mortuary school [Gupton-Jones School of Embalming, Nashville, Tennessee] to work with him in the business.  And that young man, they eventually decided he was gonna start his own business.  So my father then went to mortuary school, and this is while I'm growing up.  I'm still in my, not in my teens yet.  And he came back, and he would--and I would like to go in the embalming room.  Try to go in there and watch what he was doing and he--it was forbidden.  This is at the [Rawls] Funeral Home [Brownsville, Tennessee], which was what we called uptown from our house.  And one day he had told me, he had told me many times, "Don't come in here."  So I went in there one day, and as I stood in the door, the man who was on the gurney, I guess you call it, sat up.  And I started running, and I didn't stop until I ran home, got home.  And I never went back to the embalming room again.  He had died seated, apparently.  And the things that secured him weren't tied properly, I don't know.  But as a result, he sat up.
Speaker 1: So rigor mortis had set in.  He sat right up (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  And you never had any trouble with me going to the--but, that didn't stop me from following my father.  But those are the kinds of things I remember in my childhood.  And I was precocious, apparently.  And there was a span of six years between me and my nearest sister.
Speaker 1: So you were really the baby.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and see when they--I was--when they graduated from high school in 1937, you see I was about ten years old, even then.  And they never came back home to live.  They would come back for brief periods.  So I was really literally like an only child at that point in time.
Story_ID: 261669
Speaker 1: I enjoyed my childhood, as far as I can recall.  Then, they decided, my parents [Mattye Tollette Bond and Ollie Bond] decided that they were going to organize an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] branch, because--
Speaker 2: Now, you were about--I read you were about nine years old?
Speaker 1: Probably about eight when they started.  What had happened was, in the town, you didn't have that many educated people.  And the people would bring their problems to my father and my mother.  If they needed forms filled out, or they needed things that the white people could go to the lawyers and this and that and the other, or their mortgages were being--they were being threatened and they didn't know how to fill out the this and that and--and they would come to my mother, my parents, to get help.  And, and of course the Haywood County [Tennessee] was predominantly black in terms of population.  There was two thirds of the population was black in the county and about one third white.  And, but they were originally segregated.  They were not--they were denied any kind of equal opportunities in terms of employment, in terms of credit or whatever, they were at the mercy of the white store owners to get through the farm season--through the winter season in order to--they would carry them on credit, until it came time to plant crops and then to harvest them and then.  And they worked at low wages.  So they became the people in the town who, to whom all of the folks would come for help.  And my father was very concerned and my mother was, about the fact that blacks were not able to vote.  There were three counties in the state in which blacks did not vote and it, Haywood County, was one of the three.  And although they had voted during--they had black officers and everything during Reconstruction you see.  And he decided that--
Speaker 2: Three counties in the State of Tennessee that, that could not vote.
Speaker 1: Haywood was one, Fayette [County, Tennessee] was another, and I forget the other one.
Speaker 2: Now that's a history, right--
Speaker 1: Fayette was where the Tent City was built back in the--when they were fighting to get the vote.  This is around the same time as he started to--it was after he started organizing the branch that that happened.
Speaker 2: Now, this is something that people, I don't think people realized that people in Memphis [Tennessee] could vote, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Shelby County [Tennessee], yeah.  All the counties in Tennessee, except three.
Speaker 2: So, you know, some of the voter right struggles in the South didn't include--
Speaker 1: And this is right down--it was the western part of the state.  The western end of the state near the Mississippi River.  That's, you know the Mississippi River runs along the bord--and Brownsville [Tennessee] is fifty-two miles north of Memphis, and twenty-six miles from Jackson [Tennessee] where Lane College is.
Speaker 2: Now, if you were in Memphis you could vote; Shelby County, yeah.
Speaker 1: You go to Madison County [Tennessee], twenty-six miles away and you could vote, where Jackson, where Lane College is, where the college was.  But not in Brownsville, not in Haywood County.  And so he started--so memberships saying that this would be one way we could even improve the help for blacks here.  And 'bout a--it took about a year or so to get the number of members so they could apply for a charter for the branch.
Speaker 2: How many did they have to have, do you remember?
Speaker 1: They got twenty-five members; that was what you needed to get a charter at that point.  And who joined, who paid the money, fifty cents, I think it was then, back in that day.
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-six [1936], where NAACP--
Speaker 1: Either fifty or a dollar.
Speaker 2: Yeah, NAACP is about twenty-six years old then, I guess, right?
Speaker 1: Nineteen eleven [1911].
Speaker 2: Nineteen oh-nine [1909].
Speaker 1: Nineteen nine [1909].  It was founded in 1909.
Speaker 2: So about twenty-six, twenty-seven years, okay.  So, what was the--do you know what the attitude--did the community--they feel like they should just, they should join.  Did they feel fearful?
Speaker 1: Some of them, but others were afraid.  And his family was split on this, the--by this time, his nephew was--had become principal of the school.  And he was more concerned about his job than he was civil rights.
Story_ID: 261670
Speaker 1: Anyway, they got the charter, and so many people white people didn't know what NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was, you understand.  And they invited for the charter ceremony or meeting, they had it at the First Baptist Church [Brownsville, Tennessee].  And they invited the sheriff and the mayor and the somebody-else from the city.  And some of them actually came and spoke, and it was later that they found out what they had--the NAACP was.  They were calling it NAPC and AWC or whatever.  But the--"It's a good thing for you coloreds," you know, that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: They actually tried to-they took it as a chance to compliment black people on doing it.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: They didn't know what it was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They didn't know what it was.  But, when he [Roxborough's father, Ollie Bond] went up to register to vote, with the group.  Went to the courthouse to register, so that they would be eligible to vote in the next election.  And he said, "Now, you know you don't have no business up here," you know.  But it was about that time when the blacks started coming back and asking for the right to register for vote, that they realized, they started learning about the NAACP.  It didn't take them long.  And as a result, they were threatening--they started threatening the members.  They wanted--they could identify, in a small town, they could identify the people who were willing to go and do this.  So, they could identify the members, and they started threatening them.  And my mother [Mattye Tollette Bond] was a teacher.  She was fired from her job, at that point.  And they were threatening the other people.  One was a shoemaker, and they had different kinds of vocations.  And there were two or three teachers in the group.  And, of course then they started threatening the black people for using my father's funeral business [Rawls Funeral Home, Brownsville, Tennessee], you know.  And they arrested him a few times on charges like violating some local ordinance, or trespassing or jaywalking.  And a couple of times they arrested him, and they--he was pretty badly beaten.  So they brought him home one night and I was there.  And brought him home, opened the front door and brought him into the living room where I was.  And he was beaten.  They had used brass knuckles to beat him.  And said, "Here's your pa, you take care of him now."  And put him in there on the couch and left him.  So, those are childhood pictures, you know, that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: So what--you know, what a horrible thing to happen (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was a very gentle man.  He wasn't very literate.  You know he wasn't a--his militancy was determination, not overt and physical.
Speaker 2: What a horrible thing to happen as a child, to see your father beaten like that, and--
Speaker 1: I guess by then I was about nine; eight, nine.  And he--and they told him that, that, "You should, you should know better.  After all, you come from one of us, you know."
Story_ID: 261671
Speaker 1: Did he [Rosborough's father, Ollie Bond] try to explain this to you all as a family, you know?  'Cause this is like, it's getting pretty close to home now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We always were told that--well when we were growing up, you see the children played together, because you must remember that in some instances, the pattern of living in the South was much more integrated, even in those times, than in the North.  You had blacks and whites who were living around each other and being happy with each other, until you came to certain issues.  You know, the children were--it was--before NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] came along, you played with whatever was around the corner from you or down the street from you, and there were white kids.  You went to separate schools.  But when you came home, if you lived in that kind of a neighborhood, you played with whatever was around you.  And your people worked for their people, and the children knew each other, and they were contemporaries.  And the children called each other by their first names.  It was only later on that you had to start saying Miss and Mister or whatever.  So he, they--our parents had always told us that, that we should--that everybody should be--we should treat everybody equally.  That your schoolmates, everybody was as good as you, and you were as good as they.  And despite the fact that you may be told that you are not equal, there's no reason for you to ever believe that.  And we thought that we were, because that's the way we had been taught from birth.  And we--and you must remember the families didn't look too much different from the ones who were oppressing us, you know.  So, we didn't have that cautiousness about black skin.  Some of our relatives were more prejudiced than the white folks.  You know, they wouldn't--some of my uncles didn't want to have anything to do with--so, all I'm saying to you is that it wasn't the color, the physical color of the skin that makes a difference.  It's the cultural environment and the culture that is inculcated in you, in the sense.  And we were taught that we were who we were.  We were human beings who were equal to everybody else.  So, I think we did not have the disadvantage of having to run home crying, because somebody called us names, for example.  Because we were in a segregated school.  So, we didn't have that, and they couldn't talk about, they wouldn't talk about skin color, because the whole school was black, except that you had light skinned--and kids were being cruel.  But, you know what I mean.  So, we felt that we were--who we are, and it was a shock to find out how mean and violent people could be.  'Cause we hadn't had--they--my parents didn't fight.  We didn't have violence in our home.  But we learned about it at--through the development of the NAACP.  And, but I think we were secure enough by that time so that, it hurt, but it did not make us feel inferior.  It just made us feel more determined that we were--we should be able to continue to do what we're doing.  Now, all the blacks didn't agree with that, of course.
Story_ID: 261672
Speaker 1: And sometimes, as I said, his [Roxborough's father, Ollie Bond] own family was split on this issue of civil rights.  And, his nephew was what we call a real Uncle Tom, you know.  He was instrumental in firing my mother [Mattye Tollette Bond], and he would do whatever they felt--they wanted him to do and to be the missionary and come back and try to quiet the blacks in the town [Brownsville, Tennessee], and so forth and so on.  And in later years, of course, he became the greatest civil rights advocate, you know how that goes.  The turncoat.  But, but--
Speaker 2: He's always been in the struggle and all.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And, and, of course, it became more and more difficult when people started losing their jobs, and they needed to eat, and people started leaving town.  That is, those who were in the movement started leaving town.  And my father said he wasn't going anywhere, and of course my mother had gone to an adjacent town in Humboldt [Tennessee], and she was teaching over there.  And--because she couldn't teach in Haywood County [Tennessee].  And then in the--during this, there were threats, reprisals.  My father had been threatened, his life had been threatened and whatever, 'cause every time they went to vote--or he would go to represent somebody and go to court in their behalf, the things, the pressure became more and more intense, and credit was denied, and the usual things that you--you hear this story over and over, so I won't dwell on that, except to say that, in the midst of all of this, my mother's brother [James Tollette] was injured in Kansas City [Kansas] in an accident.  And she went to--he was one who had built the house for her, and they had moved to Kansas finally.  And she went to Kansas City to visit, to see, because they--he was critically injured.  And, and I was there with my father, so I was staying with relatives instead of staying in the house.  We had a big house.  When I say that, a two story house.  And he was there, and I was there, 'cause my sisters were obviously were in college.  So, he had me staying with relatives.  And they had threatened to kill him again.  This was in December, just before Christmas.  And he said, well, he wasn't going anywhere.  So the, the county coroner went to my grandmother [Aurelia Anderson Bond] and told her that they threatened they were going to kill my father and that he wanted her to see if she could get him to leave town.  The county coroner whose name was John Sevier, was my grandmother's half-brother, of course, that's on the grandmother's side, not the Bond side, now.  And of course everybody knew that too.  And he took care of her, he was a doctor.  So he, he went to--he took up her health needs, as a doctor, but also, as I said, the whole town knew the relationship.  So he said, "Aurelia," that was her name, "I can't do anything about it, but I want you to know that you should get Ollie out of town."
Story_ID: 261673
Speaker 1: Oh, I was telling you, Christmas, that John Sevier went to my grandmother Aurelia [Anderson Bond] and whose half--who was her half-brother.  And she sent for my father [Ollie Bond].  She lived out there on that--on the farm I mentioned earlier.  She was still alive at this point.  And she lived in the house, in the farmhouse.  And the brothers had built houses down the way from her, you know, in a row.  On that, on the farm but at distances, so they each had farmland, a part of that farmland for themselves.  But--there were two brothers who lived down, she lived at the top of the hill and then they lived--so anyway he came out to the country, which is six miles out of the town, to tell her this.  And to tell her to get him out of town [Brownsville, Tennessee].  That he couldn't afford to stay here any longer, and he did not want to see him killed, and he knew for a fact that it was going to happen.  So she sent for him, and he came, and she talked to him and told him.  She said, "Now, I've never asked you to leave before, but I want you to go.  It's time for you to go.  You have a family.  You've got three children and a wife [Mattye Tollette Bond].  Now you go."  And so, that night, the house burned, and of course in those towns they had--they have a fire whistle, alarm, fire alarm that rings, and you can hear it all over town in those days.  And that means that the fire department had to go when--and to the site of wherever this was.  So they went, and it was a white, colonial frame house.  It was an antebellum house.  It had been built before the Civil War.  And they had bought this house from a lady.  It was across the ha-incidentally, I forgot to tell you, the first house in which we--which his [sic. her] brother [James Tollette] built and in which we lived, in which I lived the first six years of my life.  It was burned down.  My mother went--she went back to college part time after she was teaching and she--to get her baccalaureate degree.  And we went to commencement, and we came back, and the house was burned down.  Nobody ever found out--we don't, we don't know what happened to it.
Speaker 2: You don't know.  You don't--do you suspect it was foul play?
Speaker 1: They think it might have been, but we don't know.  They claimed it was an electrical reason, electrical shortage or something.  But there was nothing to have caused it.  I mean, we had wiring in my house, but there was nothing on to cause it to--because at that point, at that point in time, you had iceboxes with ice in the insulated thing, a brown icebox in the kitchen.  So, it was only after we moved across the street that we had electric refrigerator.  We had--it was a very lovely home, but it had running water and all, but it didn't have--we didn't have a refrigerator, what you call them, Frigidaire or what.  Anyway, he left that night, and the thing about midnight, there was a fire alarm.  And, because by the time they got there, the house was completely burned, except it had two huge chimneys.  A chimney in the center of the house where you had fireplace, two sided fireplaces.  And a chimney on the side of the house, which had another fireplace.  It was a beautiful old house.  You know, those old houses.  And they were standing.  And that was what was left of the house.  And apparently, there was some kind of inflammatory, I mean, the fire was set so that the wood just burned, and everything in the house burned.  But they didn't know that my father wasn't in, nobody knew where my--that my father wasn't in the house, because he left without any notice.  He left that night, and the house burned just a few hours after he had left the town.  So, it wasn't until he called--he didn't call.  The people, the relatives with whom I lived, called Kansas City [Kansas] where my mother was to say that the house had burned down.  And, of course, he had gotten to Kansas City.  He went on the bus.  He went to Memphis [Tennessee] and got a bus, and by the time they talked, either he was--they knew he was on his way or he was there, I can't remember right now.  But that's--it was only then that they found that he wasn't in the house.
Story_ID: 261674
Speaker 1: So, did your family have to permanently move away from Brownsville [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Well, he [Roxborough's father, Ollie Bond] never went back to Brownsville until he died.  He couldn't even go back for his mother's [Aurelia Anderson Bond] funeral.  She died two years later, but they told--his family said, "Please do not come here.  The bitterness is still here, and we'll be afraid of your life.  It's just two years later."  When, and when he died, the day he was buried at [Church of Christ of] Beech Grove [Brownsville, Tennessee], which is a family church down there, 1960, the blacks were standing in line at the courthouse for the first time to vote.
Speaker 1: Okay so that's twenty--
Speaker 2: In Haywood County [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: That's twenty years after the house was burned.  That's something.
Speaker 2: And it was a funny thing.  It was a strange thing.  Just as a coincidence that this had happened like that.  But his funeral was held, and it was a weekday, and they were up there registering, and they said, "Ollie Bond is being buried today; we're gonna go and vote."  But anyway--
Speaker 1: Is that how it happened?  They do--that's how it happened.
Speaker 2: Well, they, you know they--it was one of those stories.  But see, just after he left in 1940 is when Elbert Williams was killed, his best friend who was treasurer of the [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)] branch.  They took him out in his pajamas, just a short while after my father left there.  And took him to the Hatchie River and shot him and threw him in the river.  He was the treasurer of the branch.  My father was the president and, and mother [Mattye Tollette Bond] was the secretary.
Speaker 1: That's something.  Yeah, that's the cost, I mean that's a terrible cost to have to pay for something like the right to vote.
Speaker 2: It's history.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You never went back.  You never went back?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went back for his funeral.  And when I--'bout that time I had started working for the NAACP, in 1960.  I'd been working for the NAACP about 1954.  And when they reorganized the branch, twenty-five years, about five years after that is when they reorganized the branch, and I went down there and spoke.  And the mayor was there and the county something else, all the city officials were there at the dinner.  And they gave me the key to the city.
Speaker 1: So it ended up the way it started off, with the town officials there saying it was a good--
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter), so it came full circle, so to speak.  They got a good branch down there today, as a matter of fact.
Story_ID: 261675
Speaker 1: So, when your family moved to Kansas City [Kansas] for a while, so you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then we--I went to high school there.  I went to finish school there.  When I left, when we left, I was in junior, I was a--I was ahead of myself in school, you understand, in terms of age.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what are the, what are the schools that attended?  Now, what was your first school?
Speaker 2: Haywood County Training School [Brownsville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, Haywood County Training School.
Speaker 2: And then I went to Kansas City, junior high school, Northeast Junior High School [Kansas City, Kansas].  And then Sumner [High School; Sumner Academy of Arts and Science, Kansas City, Kansas] is the high school from which I graduated in 1943.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1943.  Well, now, tell me about the school.  Now you--obviously you're very bright, and were you a good student in school?  I would guess?
Speaker 2: I was a good student, not in math.  I don't know.  I guess 'cause my mother [Mattye Tollette Bond] taught math.  But, I was a good student.  I think I was in the honor society when I graduated from high school.  That was a, it was a segregated high school, but it was a very excellent high school, Sumner.  They had good facilities and all, you know.  They integrated just, just around that time.  Just after I was there, they integrated the school, in Kansas, I mean.  I don't mean Brownsville [Tennessee].  But that--I came to New York [New York].  I graduated, I was fifteen when I graduated from Sumner.  And I came--my sister, when she graduated from college in 1941, the one nearest me, not the oldest, the older one.  They were eleven months apart.  And Maryann [ph.] had won a contest sponsored by Pepsi-Cola [PepsiCo] in 1941.  She came to New York, and they had offered the winners job opportunities.  And she came to New York, and they had to go through a committee, interviews and judges and whatever.  And Eleanor Roosevelt was one of the judges on this--this is Pepsi Cola.  And, she was one of the winners, the final winners.  And she was given a job in the marketing division of Pepsi Cola in 1941, where she was traveling, cultivating--started in 1941, cultivating the black market, you know.  Walter [S.] Mack I think was the head of Pepsi Cola at that time.  This pre-dated Harvey [C.] Russell [Jr.].  And I came, she was living here, so I came.  I was going to college, going down to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And I stayed with her the summer, went down to Howard.  And it was during the war, World War II [WWII] you see, so you weren't doing a lot of traveling, going back to Kansas City and whatever.  So I would come to New York and stay with my sister holidays.
Speaker 1: Let me go back to Howard.  Now, how did you choose Howard?
Speaker 2: It was a good school, and my parents thought I'd get a good education there.  And you know I came from the so-called class of blacks where they sent their daughters to Howard.  But my parents weren't thinking, they weren't social people, although, you know, they would fit in what you would call the black whatever.  But they felt that the faculty there at Howard, Alain Locke was there, the man who taught me English, I forget his name, Sterling [Allen] Brown, all those people.  They thought that was where I'd get a good education.  So--and it was near New York where I could--'cause traveling back to Kansas during war, it was not--almost--well, you could in difficult circumstances, but you were standing.  The trains were overcrowded, because troop transfers.  The trains were being used for the armed troops and things.
Story_ID: 261676
Speaker 1: And anyway, I went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and--
Speaker 2: And that was quite a time to be at Howard.  I've heard so many stories, all the geniuses there.  The two you just mentioned, but quite a few great teachers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in my--some of my schoolmates, Jeanne [L.] Noble was--I can't remember now, but if you would--
Speaker 2: The law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] people were--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and the medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Charlie Houston [Charles Hamilton Houston].
Speaker 1: So, I stayed there two years.  My freshman and sophomore year.  Then I decided I didn't belong there, so I came to New York [New York].  I'm not--I wasn't interested in social--I mean I did all the things that they would expect a black person like me to do.  I pledged the sorority Delta [Sigma Theta Sorority], became a Delta.  Then did this and did that.  But I didn't enjoy, I didn't enjoy that part of it.  And this is part of networking, which I understand is very important and this is what people do today.  The clubs and the whatever.  And, and it was important for so-called black middle class folks to do certain things and to interact.  And this is the way you met other people and so forth and so on.  But, I just--I was not comfortable.  Don't ask me why.
Speaker 2: Do you think it--
Speaker 1: My values just--I wasn't--I mean, I was a Delta, my sisters were Delta.  They were pledged Delta down there in Tennessee [Agricultural and Industrial] State [College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] and Lane [College, Jackson, Tennessee].  And everybody in my family is a Delta, for example, the females, the sorority.  The men I think were Omegas [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], I believe.  But it wasn't a part--it didn't fit in my value system.  I mean, as I said, I wasn't comfortable.  That's the best way I can describe it.  And by this time I was seventeen, so I came to New York and went to Washington Square College at NYU [New York University College of Arts and Science, New York, New York].  I was lost there in the big maze of--I think there were a few thousand in my graduating class.  I--now that was fine with me.  I liked the anonymity of it.
Speaker 2: But were, were there any experiences at Howard that stand out?  I know that so many people were there.  I mean, I remember, people have told me that Howard Thurman would invite people to his house and talk to 'em and--you know, students, once or twice a week.  And that's one--I mean, so many--
Speaker 1: Well yes.  Yeah, we had good, you know we had those--that kind of mentoring and good teachers.  I know Alain Locke; I had a philosophy class.  That was one of the things--I didn't appreciate it then, but in later years, I appreciated the fact that I had had a year-long course in philosophy, you know, two sections.  We were on the quarter system at Howard.  Philosophy I or something and II, whatever it was, under Alain Locke.  And he was acerbic, he was--he could be--he was an autocrat.  And you were afraid--little man.  I don't know if you know him.  But, but he was--
Speaker 2: So, he was a little guy.
Speaker 1: Put the fear in--physically, I mean.  Put the fear of God in you or whatever, just coming in the room.  But very literate man, and that was, that was an interesting experience.  Later, I appreciated it, and I appreciate it of course under Sterling [Allen] Brown in English.  Sometimes, I'd make very good grades and then on a test, and then sometimes I'd make terrible grades.  And he told me, "Are you such an unstable student that you can't be consistent?"  And my feelings were hurt, so I went to the dorm and started studying and didn't stop until I left there.  My grades were--but I was young, and I was not, you know, at fifteen, I was down there in school away from home.  And while I knew lots about civil rights, I never had much time for purely social activities and what we call wasting time and whatever.  And I remember pledging the sorority.  I had to wear those little red and cream colored outfits.  Delta's colors are red and, and yellow, red and gold, red and cream.
Speaker 2: Red, white, yeah, cream or something (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, whatever.  And you had to wear those little outfits and bow down to the--and all this.  And that used to hurt my soul (laughter).
Speaker 2: So you were a pretty serious young lady, I guess.
Speaker 1: I had a sense of humor, but it was a misplaced one.  You know, I have a dry sense of humor; it doesn't fit the--I will find things funny which maybe the average person wouldn't (laughter).
Story_ID: 261677
Speaker 1: I know some people, I mean, a lot of people in the late '60s [1960s] for instance, found a lot of the, the sorority stuff kind of difficult to deal with in light of what was going on in the country, you know, too.  So you kind of--did, did you ever encounter E. Franklin Frazier [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.] or--
Speaker 2: Yes, I met E. Franklin.  Had sociology, a sociology course.  It was about that time he had written one of his early books.  It was a large class, though, because they would put the freshman in what we call survey courses.  And they--a large number of students, rather than later on when you started getting into the smaller classes and doing part two of a course or whatever, more advanced.  Yes, I had sociology, I guess it was called.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about--now he's kind of--a lot of people don't know him, know him, but [William] Leo Hansberry who taught African history.
Speaker 2: He had an acerbic tongue, too.  Bright man, very bright man, yes, yes.  I had one course under him.  I had some good teachers.  So when I went to NYU [New York University, New York, New York], I had a good foundation.  You know, I wasn't challenged in the sense of being intimidated.
Story_ID: 261678
Speaker 1: Did you feel like closer to--I mean, more secure being with your sister in New York [New York]?  Do you think that was part of it?
Speaker 2: No, well, she traveled.  So lots of times she wasn't there.  My cousin came and lived with us.  We lived on 138th Street in a brownstone.  Lady owned this what they call Striver's Row, 245, I'll never forget.  And we had the top floor of her brownstone, this little--she was a Geechee [Gullah people] from Savannah, Georgia.  And she had been up here since 1917, was a seamstress, and they bought this house for about seven thousand dollars.  Beautiful home--those beige, brick buildings.  And today, they're selling for a million dollars.  But, we lived on the top floor, so there were three bedrooms up there and we had a little kitchen and our own bath on that--and that's where I lived.  And the Dingles--her name was Dingle [ph.]--her son was a lawyer, and he was not married.  And he--her son and two, and a daughter, the three of them lived in, in the other part of the house.  It was a big house.  But--so I was there with my sister.  But with Pepsi-Cola [PepsiCo], she traveled extensively.  But I felt--New York, I found a comfort here in its--in the fact that you could be anonymous.  I liked that.  And I made friends, I had friends I made here.  Those who haven't died, you know, we're still friends.  And I like the bigness of the school, and the Calendar [ph.] twins were my schoolmates [at New York University, New York, New York] down there.  One was a track star eventually, and I met Dazzle Patterson [ph.] down there.  He's one of our public figures here today, practicing law now, I think.  And you met black people, but you also had a choice of other friends and acquaintances, or you didn't have to bother.  And you didn't have to strive to be social.  That's the thing that I really liked.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It was just more of a natural kind of a--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I didn't want to do what was expected of me, and that was to be a nice, upstanding young woman who would find the right husband and marry, and some professional-kind of a husband or other.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're a troublemaker (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, you're right.
Speaker 1: Okay, in New York City, in Harlem [New York, New York] in those days.  So--
Speaker 2: An intellectual rebel (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Okay.
Story_ID: 261679
Speaker 1: The intellectual life in this town [New York, New York], did you--I mean did you meet people in those days like say John Henrik Clark, or Ella Baker, or people like that?
Speaker 2: I knew Ella Baker, sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See my sister, when she stopped working for Pepsi-Cola [PepsiCo], she started working for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And she worked for I guess two years on the field staff, she traveled.  And I started meeting a lot of those people in my early years there, 'cause see, I was still in school.  And met Gloster [B.] Current and Roy Wilkins, Walter White.  Walter White hired me.  He was the one who--he was still there.  He died a year later, 1955.  And I knew Ella Baker, yes, to answer your question, and the early NAACP people.  I knew James Weldon Johnson's wife [Grace Nail Johnson].  She was, I was assigned to take care of her when I started work for the NAACP.  You know, she was quite a personage, very autocratic lady, wealthy lady.  After he married her, see, he didn't have to worry about his material being, because she had financial security.
Speaker 1: So he could afford to be an activist and not have to pay the financial penalty for it.
Speaker 2: Her father, John B. Nail, was a realtor here in New York [New York].  And he was black, but he looked as if he were white.  And she was a real autocrat, and she was the kind--even at the time, when I first met her, I guess she died in the '70s [1970s].  I can't remember exactly right now.  But we were 20 West 40th Street, and, and Mr. Wilkins told me, "You need to take care of Mrs. Johnson now," because she would call, and she would want to know this, and a very grand lady.  And we couldn't afford to offend her.  So my job was to make--to keep her happy and, not that she was difficult, but whenever she needed something or we invited--this lady had a suite over there at the Gotham Hotel [The Peninsula New York, New York, New York] here, and she would have tea.  And I would have to go (laughter) and sit at the Gotham Hotel and have tea with her.  And there was a restaurant here.  I think it's still here, La Caravelle [New York, New York].  You, you know New York?
Speaker 1: I don't know that.
Speaker 2: Which is a very excellent French restaurant, Henri Soule was the maitre d'.  Well, she went to this restaurant, she was a frequent visitor there.  So I would--she would go to lunch there periodically, and she still lived back in the olden days when you had cameo broaches here and those fur pieces over your shoulder.  And so she told me that she was going to--she had to go--she was going to lunch this day and--the first time I went with her.  And so she ordered a car and we went to lunch at La Caravelle.  When we got there to the checkroom, and they were there greeting her, they took the fur coat, and then the fur pieces, which she would wear around her shoulder after the fur coat, she kept that and put it across her shoulder.  Then Henri Soule, this famous man here who ran that hostelry, he and she and the--his helper, the captain and somebody and me, we went to the dining room, and we made a parade across, in line, across the restaurant.  And of course, this was my first experience, fancy restaurant.  And everybody was looking, you know, because as I said, she was an elegant lady with her chin up in the air and some kind of hat on.  And he led her over to a banquette, and she sat at this banquette.  And her parade finally got to there and whoever was bringing something or other of hers, put it, deposited it there, and they told me where to sit, and we sat.  There was a silver container on the table.  And the man came over with the napkin on his arm, and he reached into this silver container and pulled out a bottle of J&B [Justerini & Brooks] scotch and poured it into a crystal glass.  I'm sorry, you aren't gonna use this stuff.  But anyway, I sat there with my mouth[EH1] open as this elegant lady drank this scotch straight.  'Cause it really shouldn't be published, I shouldn't be telling you this story.  As he [Larry Crowe] just laughs and doesn't say anything.  But it was amazing to me.  I don't tell it well, but to see him pouring from a bottle of J&B scotch into this--from this silver thing; I was just dumbfounded, because I, you know, I'd had tea with her, but I didn't know.  But she sipped that scotch during our lunch.  We had a very pleasant lunch.  And then the driver came and he took her back home and I, and I came back to 20 West 40th Street.
Story_ID: 261680
Speaker 1: Now, you didn't tell us.  Now, there's a good story about how you got drafted into the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 2: Mr. [Gloster B.] Current called me and asked me to come down, and--
Speaker 1: Now, now you had been to--you finished NYU [New York University, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, I was--I had finished NYU and--
Speaker 1: When did you finish NYU?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty--whenever my class finished, 1947, I guess it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, yes.
Speaker 2: Four years after 1943.  I worked for two years at the [City of New York] Department of Social Service[s]; they called it, it was [City of New York Department of] Welfare then, I think.  Then I went back to graduate school, went to graduate school.  And I graduated from Columbia [University, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, grad school at Columbia.
Speaker 2: And, by that time, it's 1953.
Speaker 1: Now, you studied abroad too.  Was that later, much later?
Speaker 2: During the--
Speaker 1: During the period that you were at Columbia?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Let me go back and say, I went to Mexico as a part of the student exchange program when I was at NYU.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't tell you that.  That's when I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I went abroad as a part of my master's [degree] study at Columbia.
Speaker 1: So that's when you went to Paris [France].
Speaker 2: When I say--I mean to Europe.
Speaker 1: So you went to Paris.
Speaker 2: Marseille [France], then Paris.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Marseille, okay.
Speaker 2: I was taking, majoring in social psychology with an area of specialization in international relations.  And this was a program which was sponsored by the Quakers' American Friends Service Committee.
Speaker 1: Okay, AFS[C], yeah.
Speaker 2: Student exchange programs and et cetera.  So that's where that fit in.  I'm sorry I didn't--we didn't talk about my--
Speaker 1: Okay, but that's a lot.  That's a lot to, you know, so that sets up--that makes this drafting even more dramatic, because you've got big plans.
Speaker 2: I had gone--I had started taking some courses, preparatory to going back to school full time to work on a doctorate and Mr. Current called me.
Story_ID: 261681
Speaker 1: We were talking about how Gloster [B.] Current drafted you.  We had set that up, you just--you were gonna work on a Ph.D. (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was saying he called me.  Yeah, I'd gone and--um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you were ready to do that.
Speaker 2: He called me, and I went down, and he said that he had a project he would like for me to do for three months.  And I said, "Well, I was just getting ready to go into the fall term at Columbia [University, New York, New York]."  And he said, "Well, you just finished," some such, you know, "You got your degree already."  I said, "Well, I was gonna get an advanced degree."  And he said, "Since you want to work with people and all, why don't you just do this?  We need very much, we need this, we need help for--to get this project done, and you can go the first of the year," you know, the term beginning in January.  And I went home and said, told what had happened.  By this time, my parents [Mattye Tollette Bond and Ollie Bond] had come to New York [New York].  My sister had told them, had encouraged them to sell their--they had gone to Kansas City [Kansas], bought a home, settled in and, you know, done all the things, started all over again and were doing well in Kansas City.  And my sister said, since nobody's there anymore, we're all scattered, why don't you come to New York?  My father came to visit, and she took him to the Louis-Conn fight.  And--
Speaker 1: Joe Louis and--
Speaker 2: Billy Conn.
Speaker 1: Billy Conn, okay.
Speaker 2: To have a picture of him holding up the paper in his New York visit.  He went back home and thought about it a while and so forth.  Finally, he and my mother decided to--that they would sell the house there and come to New York and see if they couldn't find a place here in which they could live, since the family was scattered.  So I went back, 138th Street, and they were there staying with us there then, and the furniture was in storage and all, to tell them what he wanted.  And we talked about it.  And they encouraged me--they said, "This is good experience for you.  It's only for three months.  You don't have to--you don't have any reason--there's no reason why you shouldn't do it, and it's a a good cause," so forth.  "After all, if the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] needs help at this point, and you are available, make yourself available and do it."  And they always--great ones were telling you to do good deeds.  So I went back to Gloster Current reluctantly and told him.  So, we went to--they were having a staff meeting and he took me--this is a few days later after I agreed.  I was going--down there to be oriented.  And he took me, had me come to the staff meeting.  Well, at that time, at 20 West 40th Street, the legal department was still there in the NAACP.  The, the Legal Defense [and Educational] Fund and the NAACP had not separated, physically or politically, you know.  It was our legal department, in other words.  You do understand that?  That's how the Legal Defense and Educational Fund was established, as the NAACP's legal department, in order for us to get tax exemption.  So, Thurgood [Marshall] was there in the meeting and Mr. Current introduced me to the, to the group.  And said, "And you know," and I didn't know anything about this, you see, "[HistoryMaker] Mildred [Bond Roxborough] is going to Baltimore [Maryland] to do this, to work with Dr. [Lillie May Carroll] Jackson for three months."  Well, you never heard such a cackling and laughing and carrying on.  And Thurgood said, "Gloster, you so-and-so, you should not do this to this girl.  How could you do this?"  And I had no idea what on earth they were talking about.  And everybody was clucking and pitying me and shaking their head, and Thurgood was leading the group.  So, we went after the meeting was over, I said, "Mr. Current, what is this?  What, what is going on?  What is this about?"  And he says, "Now, Mildred, don't pay any attention to them."  He said, "Dr. Jackson has a reputation of being harsh.  She's just the branch president, and you are going down there to organize and conduct this membership campaign and do the drive for six weeks.  And then you will clean up and do the clean up afterwards and have--make sure that the dinner is held and the programs and awards are given, and so forth and so on.  And, and it'll be--you'll be able to work with her."  I went down there and of course she was notorious.
Story_ID: 261682
Speaker 1: --Give us her full name.
Speaker 2: Lillie May [Carroll] Jackson.
Speaker 1: Lillie May Jackson, now she's a legend in Baltimore [Maryland] and in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 2: Well, I don't need to explain her to me--to you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, she knew everybody in town, knew everything, and very religious woman to suit her purposes.  I don't mean she wasn't religious, but she was, she can practice, not necessarily practice what she would preach a lot in terms of her machinations and her politics, and so forth and so on.  So, she was down there giving orders and instructions, and she looked at me, and she had had a stroke so the corner of her mouth was twisted a bit.  And she didn't articulate as clearly as she had at some point.  And she had this son, Bowen, Bowen Keiffer Jackson [Jr.].  And Bowen was not married.  And she decided I wasn't married, Bowen wasn't married, and this was a good match for her son who, by the way, was an alcoholic.  But anyway, between her giving me orders on how things should be done and how I should sneeze, literally, and how the campaign division should be organized, and so forth.  I said, "I don't know," to myself, "I don't know if I can survive this."  We had a meeting in the Sharp Street Baptist Church [sic. Sharp Street Memorial United Methodist Church] in Baltimore [Maryland].  And it was a campaign meeting.  Mrs. Jackson got up to speak and she was going to introduce me to the audience, because I was new, and this was my first venture in the public arena after getting there.  And she said that, "She's going to run the campaign, and she will do--be in charge of everything, and she will have the ultimate authority."  And her daughter Juanita Jackson Mitchell, was a very well-known attorney there.  And she was very active and aggressive, also.
Speaker 1: She was married to Clarence [M.] Mitchell [Jr.].
Speaker 2: And Clarence, who was a very restrained guy.  Had a temper, but Clarence was a wonderful person.  He was director of the NAACP Washington [D.C.] bureau.
Speaker 1: And a confidant of Thurgood Marshall.  They were both in school together.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well, that, that's--they were contemporaries, you see.
Speaker 1: See, I'm just trying to tie it all--this is a real--
Speaker 2: And Clarence is a good guy, liked him so much.  I liked Thurgood too.  He could be, he could have a foul mouth at times, but I never, I never had any problems with him.  We--this is pre-judge time, you know, this is all back in the--so I--after she did all of that, telling the folks what I would do and what I was and so forth.  I got up, and I thanked her.  And I said, "Let us, let there be no misunderstanding.  We all know who's in charge.  We know that Dr. Jackson, despite what she has said to you, is, is in charge and expects that her wishes to be followed.  So what we do during this campaign will largely be inspired by what Dr. Jackson wants."  What did I say that for?  That evening, Juanita, we were--they had invited me to go with them for dinner.  Juanita said, "Mildred, are you feeling all right?  Did you have--do you have a headache?"  I said, "I'm fine."  She said, "Well, I--we were concerned because the things you said about Mama."  I said, "I didn't say anything about Dr. Jackson except that she was the boss."  She said, "Well that--she is hurt because she has brought you in to be the person for the people, so that they will have a leader.  And that you have, you have declaimed being the--in a responsible position."  And I said--I didn't have sense enough to realize, you see, that I had said the wrong thing.  And, I said, "Well," I said, "I'm sorry, but it was true."  So she said, "Well, now we want to be able to work together, and we don't want you to be concerned about Mama, and Mama is not going to bother you and so forth and so on."  So anyway, I learned from that experience how to start working with Dr. Jackson and--around her, and being in--you know being able to do what needed to be done without having a problem, without causing her grief or concern.  It was an extraordinarily good experience, I guess, for me to have at that time.  It was like a baptism, because believe me, it was, for two months of campaigning, and then the wind-up.
Story_ID: 261683
Speaker 1: But I'll tell you one thing: in the morning, noon and night, when I left Baltimore [Maryland], I could breathe a sigh of relief for the first time to feel that I was free.  But we got through the campaign, and we did reach our membership goal.  I don't know how, but we did.  But it's an experience I've always remembered.  And believe it or not, she [Dr. Lillie May Carroll Jackson] demanded that I come back the next year.  And I said, "Well, I won't be here."  So, anyway I went back to New York [New York] and they got such a good report, Mr. [Gloster B.] Current said, "Well, you know, we have three cities.  Washington [D.C.] is in trouble, somewhere else, and Detroit [Michigan].  And if you could just finish out this year, this school year," he said, said, "this is the fall and just take the spring.  And then you will be--come on, come on and work with us."  This is the fall of '53 [1953] when this happened.  And he said, "If you come on and work with us until the end of the school term," I started to say end of the school, end of the year, but the end of the school term, "you can go to summer school and go back to school next year."  And I said--finally, I said, "All right." I don't know why.  But I went to Washington, and Eugene [C.] Davidson who was some kind of commissioned officer [C.O.] in the [U.S.] Army, and they always called him Colonel Davidson, was the branch president.  And he was another prima donna, a primo don, I guess you would say.  So, I had my year--I had a year of baptism in NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] with three of the most difficult branch lead--with the leadership, some of the most demanding and difficult leadership, where it was difficult to find people to work with them who were acceptable to them.  That is the national office had the responsibility of they had a field secretary at large who was supposed to take assignments like this, her name was Gertrude Gorman.  But she was off somewhere else, and they didn't want her.  So he put an unknown entity in there, because they couldn't say one way or the other until I'd been in there, whether I would do.  So he gave me, what I would judge to have been, three of the most difficult field assignments that any--according to the staff, the field staff, in terms of the leadership and the personalities.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I heard stories in Baltimore about people coming to, to--I mean Roy Wilkins being driven around by Dr. Jackson who couldn't see that well.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she would talk and drive at the same time.  And she had, her poor husband, very handsome man, she had this story every time she--up on the--before--on a dais, before a pulpit, she would tell the story of her husband and they used to travel in vaudeville.  But it was religious vaudeville.  And his name was Keiffer [Albert Jackson], I guess.
Speaker 2: Keiffer, right.
Speaker 1: Also.  She would get up there and tell about, "Here is my husband, too black to be white and too white to be black." He's a blond man, you see.  And this poor man was held up and every time she had a meeting, that was one of the first things she would say, and I would just say, "Lord help us."  But anyway, it was quite an interesting, fascinating family, the Jackson family.  And the Mitchell family, the two families merged, you see, in the sense of them inter-marrying (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: A powerful setup for NAACP activity (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Between real estate and politics.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but the whole activity in that, in Baltimore with NAACP is really some powerful activity.
Speaker 1: Exactly, that was--
Speaker 2: And then, and then you go to--
Speaker 1: I went to Washington.
Speaker 2: Washington, which is a--
Speaker 1: And with Eugene Davidson.
Story_ID: 261684
Speaker 1: And then, after Washington [D.C.], I went to Detroit [Michigan], and it was when there they had their first life membership [Fight for] Freedom Fund dinner.  It was initiated that year and Alf Thomas [Jr.], a doctor there, was the first chairman.
Speaker 2: Now, just to interject something here, that the Freedom Fund dinner in Detroit, correct me if I'm wrong, is the largest NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] dinner and one of the largest dinners, period, in the country.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Occurs annually.  Huge dinner at Cobo [Center, Detroit, Michigan] hall.  Three daises.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes it grew.  And it was--it's time, the first one, was a success.  And it, again, was a trauma.  I did the membership campaign and at the end of which was the dinner.  And Arthur Johnson was the executive secretary of the branch, we worked together.
Speaker 2: Now this is, by now is it '54 [1954] now?
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is '54 [1954], and when we were planning the membership campaign and went and organized--it was organized in teams and sections all over the city--we were discussing the dinner, the fact that we had to have a successful dinner.  And they said that they wanted Thurgood Marshall to speak for this dinner.
Speaker 2: This is right on the eve of Brown v. the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].
Speaker 1: Yeah, Ed Turner [Edward M. Turner] was the president of the branch, and Alf Thomas, as I said, was the chairman of the committee.  And so they looked at me and said, "You've got to get Thurgood to come here."  I said, "But the branch--you're the president," to Mr. Turner.  And I said, "Alf Thomas, he's a real power here in the city," he had a hospital.  They used to have these private hospitals, the doctors did in Detroit, at that point in time.  But to make a long story short, I was told that, to produce Thurgood Marshall, so I produced him.  What can I say?  It was just one of those bits of luck.  I--he was always ordering me around, so I said to him that this is a first, you know, and he was a good NAACP-er at heart.  And it was just fortunate that he had not made a commitment and so forth.  But he came, and he spoke for the dinner.  And I was one of the happiest people in the world to get out of Detroit.
Speaker 2: Now, now was that--did he speak prior to the Brown decision, or--
Speaker 1: No, the dinner was after the Brown v. Board.  They had expected it to be--the decision to come.  You know how they predict that the [U.S. Supreme] Court will do this before the end term and this and that.  And there was all this publicity about it, you understand, although the decision had not been rendered.
Story_ID: 261685
Speaker 1: What was it like being in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] when this decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] came down from the [U.S.] Supreme Court?
Speaker 2: It was a time of rejoicing and jubilation.  And it was like you had come out of a tunnel.  That was the feeling people had.  And then they started talking about, "We've got to go back next year," you know, "and get the mandate from the court."  And they would started wondering, on the heels of the decision, what would the court say.  And, of course, that was the next issue, because you know what they said.  And it was that summer.  At that point they had seminars at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee].  So, we went there, some of the NAACP staff and some other nonprofit people, for these civil rights seminars.  And it was there that--I want to get the year right.  I think it--I don't know whether it was 1954 or '55 [1955], that Hoxie, Arkansas announced that it was voluntarily integrating its schools.  I think it was '54 [sic. 1955], because of this Supreme Court decision.  They had--that poor school board, you know, they didn't have enough money to maintain two school systems, but legally they maintained segregation.  And the minute they found that they had a--they had been instructed by the highest court in the land that they could--you no longer could have segregated schools.  They used that as a reason to integrate immediately and get that burden, the financial burden, removed.
Speaker 1: But most school, school boards, they listened to the language of the court was--you alluded to it, but you didn't say what it was.  It was for, it's not for me, it's for people that will listen to it later.  What was the--what did the court say?
Speaker 2: "Deliberate speed."
Speaker 1: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 2: But they didn't, they weren't thinking about that.
Speaker 1: "With all deliberate speed."
Speaker 2: But the issue here was the fact that they announced it, and it hit the press.  It was all over; it was the first school board to integrate its schools.  And it--the national press picked it up all over the place.  And--
Speaker 1: How do you spell Hoxie?
Speaker 2: H-O-X-I-E.
Speaker 1: H-O-X.
Speaker 2: Hoxie and Walnut Ridge, Arkansas.  There were two towns together in the same county.  And there's a film ['Hoxie: The First Stand'], the guy [David Appleby] from the University [of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee], was it Memphis, did--it was on PBS [Public Broadcasting System] this past year.  The story of Hoxie, how they voluntarily integrated.  But I'm telling you all of this to say simply that when the publicity started, then the backlash started, you know.  White America [inc.], which was an organization at that point, a rabid anti-integrationist organization; Amis [Robert] Guthridge was the head of it.  He was declaiming this, and, "We've gotta go to Hoxie and do something about it."  And so in the seminar, one of the sessions, Thurgood [Marshall] said to Gloster [B.] Current, "Those people down there need help, the families."  There were nine families whose children were affected by this, that they need help.  "They need somebody down there with them."  And he said, "Send [HistoryMaker] Mildred [Bond Roxborough]."  This is what Thurgood told Mr. Current.  So off to--after the seminar, off to Hoxie I went.  And, and up in the corner of Arkansas.  Hot, this was--I forget how the split school sessions run.  You know, they go to school in the summer, and then they close the schools for when it's time to harvest the crops.  This had to be July and August that the school, they were in school.  And they went to school a certain part of the summer.  Then in the early fall, they did not go to school; they picked cotton and did whatever else you had to do.  This was common in the South.  Do you understand what I'm saying?  I mean, the practice, you know?  All right.
Story_ID: 261686
Speaker 1: So, I went to Hoxie [Arkansas], which is up from Little Rock [Arkansas].  About, I guess it takes about two hours to get up there; it did then, anyway.  Daisy Bates was the president of the Arkansas state conference.  And I went up there and stayed with this lady.  And we would have meetings to keep the families assured, and so forth, and would walk with the kids to school every morning, I and some of the parents.  And then the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] was around investigating, because the White America [Inc.] had sent people in to agitate.  So, they started having meetings in Hoxie.  And it's a funny thing.  The people had outdoor privies.  And the family who lived on the next street, their privy backed up, it was against, adjacent to the privy of the family, the black family with which I lived.  But that family over there was white.  And it developed that somebody, one of the officials of White America was staying there.  So, we'd go out to the privy, and I would see this man out there.  Anyway, it was a hot summer, and we met and met and met.  And they stayed, they stuck with their guns.  The school board said they were staying, they would not be intimidated.  And, of course, the state conference was supporting.  They didn't want people in there, you know, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] people coming in there en masse, having public meetings.  It would have caused a confrontation.  But I was there just to be the stabilizer for the families.  And I was running around in cut off pants, shorts and barefoot, you know, just like they were.  I was young then.  So it was--I fit into the environment, apparently.  And then I would go down to Little Rock periodically to have briefings, and the FBI was asking this, that and the other questions.  And the state conference would have meetings down there.  But we got through the summer.  It was one of the longest summers I have ever spent.  I guess I was there about a month.  I was there at least about four weeks until school finished.  Then I left, because they were going to have the next several months of no school.  And the school board eventually went to court to defend itself.  It didn't want, it didn't want outsiders to do it, it wanted to do it itself.  And you should hear the stories sometimes.  That tape ['Hoxie: The First Stand'] is excellent that this man [David Appleby] did.  I have a copy of it.  But then, I had to go, from there, to visit branches in various communities in Arkansas to get them to file petitions, sign petitions to be filed with the superintendent of schools requesting that they integrate the schools.  This followed the 1954 [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka] decision.  So, I guess I visited about--I don't know how many communities that summer.  I probably visited at least two dozen branches, and traveling on buses and in cars and wagons and whatever else they had and staying with branch people in their homes.
Speaker 2: Now did you ever get in trouble traveling on those buses?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was put off of one, 'cause I--the driver told me to go to the back seat, and I was on the next to the back seat, and I said I wasn't going to move.  And he said, "Then you'll get off."  I said, "Well, I guess I will."  So, I took my suitcase, I was coming from Hoxie, and got off the bus like an idiot out there, was late.  And decided I would do this (hitchhiker's gesture).  This is 1954.  So I guess I didn't have any better sense.  And somebody stopped and picked me up, and I got in the car, and it was a white man.  And he took me on.  We went to Little Rock, and he dropped me off at Daisy Bates' house.  But I said I'd never do that again.  I was young, and I didn't realize, you know, the import of what I was doing.  But I knew I wasn't gonna move.  I was already in the back seat, the last two, it's a double seat.  Two, you know how those seats are.  Two people in two separate seats adjacent to each other, and then the long back seat in the back of the bus.  There was scattered, there was one or two seats, but they wanted to sit in that seat together.  This white couple.  So that's what happened.
Story_ID: 261687
Speaker 1: What was Daisy Bates like?
Speaker 2: She was quite a very active lady.  Newspaper [Arkansas State Press], she and her husband [L.C. Bates] were newspaper publishers.  And she inspired people to talk, to listen to her.  And she was willing to get out on the front lines and very attractive woman, so it was an unusual combination of a youngish, a young woman who was willing to take on the civil rights leadership, and to take on the governor and the state and town fathers, the citizens.  And she stuck with this, the Little Rock Nine, all the way throughout that.  And, I was traveling.  She wanted me to get finish as many branches as possible.  Thurgood [Marshall] had said, "Get these petitions in," and we would--and the--one of the things that was so impressive about this project was that you would take the petitions which the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] would supply, you know, just for the parents to sign, requesting of the superintendent of schools.  It was a generic thing, so you could use it in any community.
Story_ID: 261688
Speaker 1: Now, petitions, you're going to--
Speaker 2: Yes, we're going to--I'll just tell you a little bit about that.  The petitions, it was for me it was a moving experience.  The parents would come to these meetings at night, after work, and they wouldn't--usually, more often than not, in a church because that was available in these small community meetings.  And sometimes, they would have to come across fields or whatever in--out in the country to do this.  And you would explain to them what it was, very simple, not the town leaders and all of that.  Just some of the people who could barely read and write.  And as a matter of fact, some of them, when they would come to sign the petition, they would say, "Can you help me?"  And I would say, "Yes," I'm not knowing what it meant.  And of course, they couldn't write their names; some of them could not write their name.  And sometimes some who could do--on some, a few occasions, if they could do a bit, I would help them, guide their hand.  But sometimes they would just do an X and you know you would write their name out and attest to the fact that they're--and that just really got to me, that these people were willing to do this in 1954 for their children.  They said, "We want a better education."  And, I've always remembered these instances in which this happened.  And in--we were in--one night in Cotton Plant, Arkansas; it's a town, believe it or not, and we [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)] had a branch there.  And this happened.
Story_ID: 261689
Speaker 1: And another town to which I went, and this is on the lighter side.  I was staying with the branch president, and I had been on a long bus drive, and I was dirty, dusty, and took a bath.  And of course--are you familiar with the--I think they're number nine, the washtubs, corrugated?
Speaker 2: Those galvanized--
Speaker 1: Galvanized--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We heated water in the kitchen on the stove and poured it in this tub.  And in the bedroom where I was staying, and I got in the tub, and I was putting soap and then wetting--and I decided to sit down in the tub, because the water was splashing around the newspaper.  I had newspaper around the thing, but it was still splashing.  So I sat down in the tub and I was able to get the water all over me.  Then, I couldn't get out of the tub.  My knees were, you know, I was in that position, like the fetal position, with my knees up under my chin.  I was sit--actually, literally sitting down.  See the water had come up around me.  I was getting ready to go to a meeting, the petition meeting.  And I called the president, finally.  And she came and--not the president, the host, the wife of the president.  And she says, "Well, I think some oil will do this, will get you out of the tub."  So she--
Speaker 2: You're actually stuck in the tub.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  She took some oil put it here, 'cause there were ridges on the back.  And I--she said, I'll get miss somebody to help pull you up.  And of course, they couldn't get me out of the tub.  And finally, they had to call the man and somebody.  And they took the tub and me in the tub into the kitchen, down the kit- out the back door, down the steps into the yard, the chicken yard it was.  They had chickens in coops and things.  And they decided that they had to pour the water out of the tub in order to get me from the tub.  And they tilted the tub over, and of course, the yard was enclosed in a fence, but a wire mesh fence.  So they poured the water out and tilted me along with it and pulled me out of the tub like this.  By this time, the people were walking along the street were stopping, looking over there at this, at this event.  And, and I--apparently it was like suction.  They poured me out, poured the water out, and then they had to really pull me up out of the tub, because the suction--I had gotten down, and I was like a rubber stopper or something.  So they pulled me up, and she gave me a towel, and I put the towel around me, and I went into the--up the steps into the house, got ready, went to the meeting.  And the president introduced me.  And one of the people in the audience said, "You know, you really don't have to introduce her, 'cause we've already met her."  And he said, "And you know, actually, she looks as good with her clothes on as she did with 'em off."  And everybody just laughed, and I was so embarrassed, and I said, "Well, what can I do?"  But it was really funny, afterwards.  It wasn't funny, so funny at that moment, but after it--I realized that what could I do?  They had seen me in my birthday suit, and now they're seeing me in my clothing.  So we went on about the business of the association.  But those are the kinds of experiences you--that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] has wrought, in terms of going into odd places and doing various assignments.
Story_ID: 261690
Speaker 1: When you were in Arkansas, did you go to Tollette [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to--I've been to Tollette many times, but I'm trying to remember whether I went that particular time.  No, I didn't on that visit, because that was strictly on a time schedule.  I was programmed so that I didn't, I had not much time between these trips.  I'd go from one place to the other.  And they wanted me to--I had an assigned number of branches that they wanted to cover to get those petitions in, because the legal department wanted us to file as many as possible, and especially since Hoxie [Arkansas] had done what it had done.  But, I have been to Tollette.  AS a matter of fact, one of my mother's [Mattye Tollette Bond] nephews, Truman [ph.] was his name, was one of the first blacks to graduate from University of Arkansas  medical school [University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas]; to talk about the situation there.  And this was back--we were contemporaries, so that would have been about 1940--let's see if he graduated from high school in '47 [1947], it would probably be about 1951, something like that.  And--but the petitions, we finished that group of petitions, and one of the next assignments I had, not the next necessarily, but an assignment I remember.  The black farmers in Mississippi were being subjected to economic reprisals, because of their voting, and you might recall Yazoo City [Mississippi], the president of our branch there was killed.  He was a minister.
Speaker 1: What was his name, and--
Speaker 2: Gus--I'll have to look it up.  Was it Gus Courts?  It might be.  But I don't want to give you incorrect information for a record.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Mississippi, yeah, like--
Speaker 2: So I went down there to interview these farmers, as many as we could, in order to get their stories, see what the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] could do by way of providing assistance for them, because they would be losing their land.  They couldn't get credit, and they couldn't get groceries and so forth.  So Medgar was the field--Medgar Evers was the field secretary for the state.  And he and I were traveling together.  We would--we were going, and we would have to go to their homes, as well as have meetings.  But it was a fairly perilous to have meetings in some of the places.  In some places, we could have evening meetings that the people could come, would come--would feel that they could.  And usually at night and down in the [Mississippi] Delta area, because that's where it was.  It was not the--you didn't have the safest feeling down there.  And I know when Medgar and I were driving, when we first started, I was--I had a habit of taking my shoes off when we were sitting in the car.  And I felt this--something cold under my feet.  And I said, "Medgar, what is this on the floor"?  And I'm looking down here, of course, it was a shotgun he had, and I had my big feet propped on it.  I said, "You mean to tell me I've got my feet on a shotgun?"  But that's something that you learned.
Speaker 1: That's something that I think might, might strike people who hear this as being unexpected in a sense, because I think they think of everyone involved in the Civil Rights Movement as being nonviolent and passive in that sense.  But Medgar Evers carried a shotgun with him.
Speaker 2: Well, in the Delta area, he--if he were going to get killed, he was going to try to defend himself.  Fortunately, he never had to use it during those weeks, that period when we were traveling.  But he had it down there on the floorboard of the car.  And as I said, I put my bare feet on it.  I hadn't noticed it before, because I guess I hadn't taken my shoes off.
Speaker 1: But, but it does point to a difference between say [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and somebody with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], you know, who is, you know, teaching nonviolent and the NAACP organizing, I guess, in that sense.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, they believed in self-defense.  I mean, they were shooting people all, and people were disappearing and--but we did get the petitions signed and, and not the petitions, we got the information from the farmers about their--we had to get their--I won't say testimony, but their factual presentation of what their situation was and what had happened to them, and how they--what credit they were denied and so forth.  So we could then take these stories, assemble them and take them back to New York [New York]--
Story_ID: 261691
Speaker 1: I was taking--going back to New York [New York], and give them [interviews of farmers in Mississippi] to the legal department, and of course our executive director and so forth and so on, to see what kind of funding the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] could legitimately put together to make available to them, to help them subsist through the winter and to keep them from starving and losing their homes and what have you.  And that's what this factual data was designed--we were eliciting this information for that purpose.  And so--and what I'm saying to you is just a little part of a story where we had field--I happened to be a field worker at large.  But we had field, the secretaries, they called them then, in those southern states who lived there.  See, I didn't live there, so I would go in and do things and work with them, or work alone if there were no field secretary, and come on back to New York.
Speaker 2: Just a couple of names I've heard.  You read about this area, you read about, Amzie Moore in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: He was a branch president.
Speaker 2: Okay, and he was based out of--what town was he based out of?  Was it Green--Greenwood [Mississippi] or Jackson [Mississippi]?
Speaker 1: I have to look it up, I've got the--
Speaker 2: But he's a Mississippi man, so was [HistoryMaker] Dr. Gilbert [R.] Mason [Sr.] down in Biloxi [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Yeah, I knew him very well.  And I just admired--you work with people, and you take 'em for granted.  And I had, I took Medgar [Evers] for granted, in the sense that you're working this--you see, you don't see it like somebody from the outside sees it.  You get into it, and then it becomes almost unreal, in the sense that you aren't feeling this until afterwards, probably.  You know, after you come back from a field trip.  You would say, well, you know, "I did that?"  But you don't think that way when you're doing it.  And I didn't do anything.  I mean, those guys who were there in those states permanently on a--they lived there, were doing this day after day, week after week, month after month.  It was a little different with me, I guess, because I was a young woman and floating around in that time.  Now it's not unusual.  And then ten years later, it wouldn't be unusual for a woman, young woman, to be doing something like that.
Story_ID: 261692
Speaker 1: Did it make it easier for you to travel from--through those [southern] states, being a young woman rather than a young man?
Speaker 2: It made it easy in some respects and more difficult in other respects.  Prior to--you have the situation, also, the social side of it, where people saw you freely traveling like this.  At that time, that they would also think, "Well, she's an easy mark."  This is the male thought now, you know, in terms of young, attractive woman, and respectable men.  They--you all--let me back up and talk, say it again.  The men will look at young, attract--what they call attractive women, and they're unfettered and free, and think that, "Well, it won't hurt for me to make a pass at her, or see how far this will go."  Well, I had to deal with that like a young man would not have to do at that point.  The female constituents of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] weren't aggressive, and they weren't reaching out to the young men in that sense, as it was.  That was that duality of treatment.  Still, the dual standard occurred there.  And apparently, to them, I was a young attractive woman.  So, I have been in some places, I awakened one night and to have a--I just happened--just woke up for some reason, and there standing over me was my host in the bedroom, in the guest bedroom.  And well, anyway.  So (laughter), and you had to be very careful, because you did not want to insult people or offend them, because then they would complain, find a reason to complain about the fact that the work of the NAACP wasn't being done properly.  And I've had branch presidents--like an idiot, one night out in Denver, Colorado, I went to let the man help me carry stuff from the meeting up to the hotel room.  This is a long time ago, of course.  I'm going back to my early days.  And he came in to put the papers all--the garbage--the junk that we have left over from meetings, the important documents I should say.  And, we deal in paper.  So, the next thing I knew, he was chasing me around the hotel room (laughter).  It caught me completely off guard.  And he--now this one wasn't an old man, either.  And some of them were the older ones who had less inhibitions.  But these are things that go with the job, that went with the job.  And, so you had that in the '50s [1950s], and probably the early '60s [1960s] too.  It was still not usual for a young woman to go freely and travel in these kinds of circumstances.  So, it was an extraordinarily good education for me, but I had to learn to follow a line, so that we would still be friends, and I could still go to that dinner the next day, and sit there at the dais, on the dais with him next to me, and we were friends, and there was no animus between us, because that was the thing.  The volunteers are our bosses.  And, that was one ingredient which was on the debit side of the ledger.  But travel, I could get away with doing more things than a fellow could in many instances in the course of traveling.  And being--getting into places and getting audiences and talking with mayors, or whatever my assignment would be at that time, because they would say, "She's inoffensive and she's--."  You know, it's a matter of their having the power and the control, and they didn't feel threatened by having someone like me come in and talk with them.  Then they would go out and see me leading a demonstration somewhere, and they would decide they had made a mistake after all.
Story_ID: 261693
Speaker 1: --Did you face any strong opposition from white people who recognized what you were doing and who you represented, or did they ever get it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a lot of yelling and shouting and opposition in Benton Harbor, Michigan, in the middle of the wintertime.  We went there to the schools, the blacks did not want to leave.  They built a new school for them, and they did not want to go, move into that new school, 'cause it would be a segregated school.  It was built in the district where there would be nobody there but them.  And then, they would have to travel, some of them, to that school.  And they preferred--so they were sticking with the old and shunning the new, that was the headlines and things.  And then, you had the people out--one of our lawyers in Michigan, we had a good team of--state conference had a good team of lawyers there, and they were lawyers who many of them came--went on to be judges.  Some of the people I worked with were [HistoryMaker] Damon [J.] Keith who be--
Speaker 1: Judge Keith, yeah.
Speaker 2: Became a judge of the Sixth Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals].  Hobart Taylor [Jr.] who became a White House [Washington, D.C.] counselor was one of the lawyers there with whom I worked.  Somebody else came from Detroit [Michigan] to Washington [D.C.].  I was trying to remember.  And one of the other lawyers there whom I met and finally married, John [W.] Roxborough.  He was the chairman of the legal redress committee, and he came down to Washington to work in the [President Dwight David "Ike"] Eisenhower administration.  His, he was--his family--he came from a Republican family, and he was appointed to assistant to John Foster Dulles back in nineteen--whenever it was.  That was before we were married.  But anyway--
Speaker 1: So when did you get married?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty--yeah.  You met and worked with a lot of people.  Like, I first met Senator [Richard] Lugar, when he was, when he was mayor of--I think he was mayor [of Indianapolis, Indiana] first before he became senator.  And he was at our--came to our NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], some meetings and things we were--something we were doing in Indianapolis [Indiana].  I forget what it was.  But had occasion to meet and get some help from the Mayor [Anthony J.] Calabrese of Cleveland [Ohio].  And they--this all had to do with the work of NAACP.  But you do what you have to do and when you did it, and the things--you're guided by the branch leadership usually in terms of their knowing their community and what buttons should be pushed or with whom you should work, or to whom you should reach for results.  And you try wherever possible to, then, to work within the restraints of the local community and its traditions and its leadership.  You don't go in and just be heavy handed and try to force them to do something.  You find a way, diplomatically, of getting the point on the national office across.  If that becomes the--necessary.  At least that's, that was the way I worked.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you, did you work in North Carolina with Robert [F.] Williams?  That was a famous case where--
Speaker 2: No, I knew him, but I never--we had a field secretary there, Walter McLean [ph.].  He was a big Mason and this and that.  So, he was able to relate to the people, he was a people person and folksy, and he worked in the--he worked in that state, and of course you know that Robert Williams' membership was taken--he was excommunicated in terms of being a member and an officer.  He was a branch president at one point.  But he preached violence.  The NAACP never subscribed to the doctrine of violence, but at the same time it did not decry self-defense.  And you couldn't have an organization which was working within the framework of the constitutional process supporting and even tolerating violence in its ranks.  And that, that was the issue there which occurred with Robert Williams.
Story_ID: 261694
Speaker 1: Since you spent a lot of time with Medgar Evers, what was he like?  I heard he's very, he was very formal, even had his wife call him Mr. Evers when they were at work together.
Speaker 2: In the office, yeah, but she didn't call him--I had, I stayed with them on occasions in Jackson [Mississippi] when I would go down there to work.  Got to know Myrlie [Evers-Wlliams] very well, still have contact, good relations, with her.  He was a deliberate kind of a person, determined.  If he believed in something, he chose to adhere to his principles.  He was very principled and wasn't a person who engaged in a lot of verbiage and declarative statements and bombast.  He was understated, if anything.  And he would speak from--and you could tell he was speaking, fundamentally, from his own beliefs when he spoke in the public meetings.  But he was very--he was quietly determined that he was going to follow a course, and he chose to do that, that's the whole point with that voter registration campaign which was going on.  And he was exhorting the people to--not to give up with the whole process of the integration of the--in Jackson, of the public facilities in Jackson and the lunch counters and having the right to vote and the right to be treated equally and ridding you of separate water fountains.  And all those issues which were involved in the Jackson, in the [Civil Rights] Movement in Mississippi prior to the Freedom Riders because this set the stage for them to be able to come into that state.  And he led the boycotts of the Woolworth's [F.W. Woolworth Co.], the popular five and dime stores.  The buying, selective buying campaigns we called them, actually.
Story_ID: 261695
Speaker 1: I've heard a couple of stories from people who were in NAACP Youth [Council] who talk about starting sit-ins even before the--
Speaker 2: They did, in South--
Speaker 1: Three brothers in Carolina--
Speaker 2: --South Carolina.  They integrated the lunch counters.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I've heard, I mean, the Mitchells in Baltimore [Maryland] talk about doing that out in Virginia and other parts of Maryland, they'd be going to lunch counters and sitting in.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they did--it was--
Speaker 1: Prior to--
Speaker 2: It was a--and, as a matter of fact, the early South Carolina, the youth councils were doing that in South Carolina well before the movement.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, before the--
Speaker 2: And the Freedom Summer and all of that.
Speaker 1: Before North Carolina A&T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] guys did it.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I heard also Ron Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters], who's now political commentator, he lives--he's at University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] now, but he was at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] at one point.  Ron Walters was talking about in Wichita [Kansas] being leader of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] youth group that also did sit-ins before--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because they were segregated there.  See when I was in school in Kansas--except the university wasn't segregated, the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] was not--it's a very good school, by the way.  It wasn't segregated.  My mother [Mattye Tollette Bond] did some graduate work there, actually.  But, the public schools were segregated, and the facilities in the community, things like lunch counters and whatever.  Now in Kansas City [Kansas], the downtown stores--because Kansas City, Kansas and Kansas City, Missouri were large sort of urban--Kansas was smaller.  But they didn't segregate you in the stores, you know, the segregation was not extensive in Kansas City, Kansas, as it was in--out in the out state, in outer part of the state.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Ronald Walters was in Wichita.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a smaller--and Topeka [Kansas], the same thing.  It was the state capital, but it was still segregated (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I guess what I'm getting up to is, it seemed to be--everybody I talked to said it was some tension between the national office and the youth branches in terms of, you know, doing direct action stuff.
Speaker 2: You mean back in that time?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: I don't know that there was tension as such, except the concern of the leadership that they mightn't be able to defend them if--with this recklessly--they--the national office wanted to do things in a planned way.  So I guess, to some extent, they would have more control--be able to control the situation, so it wouldn't get out of hand.  And they were concerned about life and limb, I think, and their ability to defend and the loss of lives, because we had had so much in our history, so many lives had been lost individually, like Harry T. Moore and his wife [Harriette Vyda Simms Moore].  Their home was bombed because of civil rights actions and the campaigns.
Speaker 1: I think about, like, Vernon Dahmer, [Sr.] had--
Speaker 2: And Vernon Dahmer, another branch president.  So, naturally, the wisdom of the elders was that we do these things, but we do them with more control than the youth, willy-nilly, would want to go out and just start a sit-in movement.  And then somebody would have to come and pick up the pieces, or be able to.  And I think that it was not so much tension--I know we're finished.  But it was a concern about the ability to defend one's self and make a valid point without not only losing the point, but losing the life.
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: I think it was more of that kind of difference.  Just as today the youth are less restrained than the older people in doing certain things.
Story_ID: 261696
Speaker 1: Today is August 24th [2005], and Shawn Wilson is the interviewer, and Neculai Burghelea is the videographer, and [HistoryMaker] Mrs. Mildred Bond Roxborough is the HistoryMaker that we're continuing with today.
Story_ID: 261697
Speaker 1: We were talking before we started to roll camera about some of the things that were happening to the farmers and the people that you were trying to register and vote in Mississippi in the 1950s.  So, the mission was for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] to help register voters.
Speaker 2: Yes, we were leading a voter registration campaign.  And that was Medgar Evers, one of the primary responsibilities he undertook to get, because of the voting strength--because of the potential voting strength of black Americans in the state, which was one of the most populous states in terms of the proportionate representation of blacks as compared to whites.  The percentages were almost equal.  And in some areas, higher; in some communities, some counties, blacks outnumbered whites.  So, it was an important step to try to get blacks to register, registered to vote, so that they would have a voice in the election process.  That's one way of addressing the problems which were rampant in the state.
Speaker 1: So, one person that I want to talk--I mean, I know one of the NAACP worker, or I think he perhaps may have been a secretary in Belzoni, Mississippi, Reverend George [W.] Lee.
Speaker 2: He was president of the branch, as I recall.
Speaker 1: Okay, he was president of the branch as you recall.  Do you remember having inter- any interaction with him?
Speaker 2: I met him.  I was not involved in his attempts to register, but of course, we were aware, and I'm sure that Medgar Evers had been in the community on a number of occasions.  And he was well acquainted, well, he was well acquainted with most of the NAACP leaders in the state, that is, the branch presidents and the people who were active in those branches.  And, I certainly--I was acquainted with him, but I was not directly involved in his particular effort to register and vote, because this went on on a continuing basis, as you can understand.  Not just when we would go on visits in the area.
Speaker 1: So, do you remember when he was assassinated?  The Reverend George Lee, when he was murdered in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Yes, I can't recall the year right now.  It was in the '50s [1950s] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think the year was 1955.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I believe it was.  I was in New York [New York] at the time he was assassinated.  But we heard about it immediately, because of course, they called Med- you know we had an almost--although you didn't have email then, the network was almost instantaneous.  They'd call on the phone in the middle of the night or--whenever you'd get those late calls, you always knew that there was a--some kind of critical problem or crisis which was developing.  And we knew within hours of the time he was killed that he had been killed.  And, of course, there were others in the state who were killed as well during that period.  The--I can't remember the names at the moment, but Gus Courts.
Speaker 1: Gus Courts.
Speaker 2: --was another one who was a branch leader who was killed.  Simply because he wanted to vote.  And most of these assassinations or killings, I should say, or murders, whatever, however we want to characterize them, was simply because of that.  Because of--they were concerned about acquiring the civil rights as citizens, and they had been--the world was getting smaller at that time, and people were communicating with each other, and they were aware that people in other areas were attempting to put on or launch successful voter registration campaigns.
Story_ID: 261698
Speaker 1: One of the, I think, inspiring things which had happened, which started this drive, was in, I guess it was 1948, when the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] through litigation, through the courts, had gotten one, the right for blacks to participate in local primaries.  You see, an essential ingredient in the electoral process is to be able to start at the grassroots and participate in the primaries, where you select the people who will eventually become leaders in the community, in the state, and pretty much in the nation.  And that--blacks had been denied that, that ability to register and vote in primaries.  And when that was achieved in 1948, it gave another impetus, a new impetus to the move for voter registration throughout the South where it was primarily the problem.  We had problems in the North too, but they weren't legal ones.  That I mean they weren't done per force.  They found ways of reducing the number of blacks who registered and voted in many northern communities simply by using the tactic of qualifications and saying that they were not qualified.  Either they couldn't answer specific questions, or they didn't have the right identification, or there were always ways and means of preventing people from qualifying to register and vote, as you heard, in this last election, in the 2000 election.  So, getting back to Mississippi, the issue was to get as many blacks on the registration rolls as possible so that a difference would be made and could be made in the electoral process.
Story_ID: 261699
Speaker 1: What year did you stop working so vigorously in Mississippi?  When did you feel you had--
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't just working in Mississippi.  As I said, I was [field secretary] at large.  So, I worked across the country in various states for different reasons.  But my purpose in Mississippi had been that, and also to investigate the economic reprisals to which our people had been subjected to see if there was any way in which--how the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] could best help them to survive during the period when they were without credit, charge accounts at the grocery stores where they normally would be able to have the credit until the spring, harvest or harvesting time came and that kind of thing.  So--or it may be that I would be assigned to go to Benton Harbor, Michigan where they were having a school problem, and the blacks did not want to be moved to a new school which was in the midst, middle of a segregated district.  They redrew the districts so that, where they were attending an old school which was integrated, they would have wound up attending a new school which was segregated.  So, in the middle of the winter we were out there in the snow yea deep protesting, marching and protesting.  "They cling to the old and shun the new," that's the way the local headlines carried that story.  But, in different communities, the needs might be different.  They might need help in organizing a membership and fundraising campaign to support the programs of the branch and to expand the membership, or renew the memberships, which helped build the base for the national NAACP.  So, I did that in many instances as well, or did workshops and conferences, issue oriented, depending on what the issue may be.  Or we have about thirty-eight state conferences, and they meet every year, and in the fall they meet.  So then, our national staff participates to the extent possible in many of those conferences, or help them organize those conferences so they will have workshops on issues which will be of value to training the stalwart volunteers who attend and who go back into their own communities to work.  So, my job as a field secretary at large had varied responsibilities, all of course intended for the same purpose, and that was to make our NAACP better and stronger and more effective in community X, Y or Z.  Because, in sum total, we are--we have 1,700 adult branches and 500 youth and college units.  And those represent the greater portion of the membership of the NAACP.  We do have members at large who enroll and don't affiliate with any local unit.  But that's--those are a minority, a small, a smaller percentage of members.  The primary source of our membership comes from our units across the country.  So, it is in the best interest of all concerned to keep those units viable and healthy.  And that's what the national office tries to do by having its staff, the limited staff we have, work in communities.  We are sitting today in New York City [New York, New York], which is in what we call Region 2.  It's made up of eleven states.  And the office next to this conference room is the office of our regional director, Mrs. Hilda Rodgers, who oversees the activities and programs in this eleven state region.  They are now in the midst of having state conferences; in October, New York will have its state conference.  New Jersey has one coming up very shortly.  And I think there is--Pennsylvania just had its state conference, as I recall.  So, she is responsible for working with them to do that and again, this just illustrates what I meant by the support of the staff of the national office to keep our constituency viable and moving.
Story_ID: 261700
Speaker 1: When you look back to, sort of, over the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in the '50s [1950s] and what you were doing out in the field at that time, what stands out as some of the important issues that you were--some of the important issues that you were working to change?  Voting rights--
Speaker 2: Education.
Speaker 1: Talk to me about education.
Speaker 2: Well, education is a given.  There was a continued effort, from the 1930s up to the time that the Brown v. Board of Education series of cases was filed to the [U.S.] Supreme Court, to work to that end.  So there were legal cases in communities across the country, especially the South.  And, in those days in which segregation occurred in public school education, which would include Kansas.  And one of the known cases is you know, came from Kansas.  So, our legal staff sat out on this course.  Actually in the late '30s [1930s], the concept was developed by Charles Hamilton Houston who was our NAACP general counsel in the '30s [1930s].  He'd come from Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And it was his concept that--which culminated in the Brown v. Board of Education litigation.
Speaker 1: So tell me what was his concept?
Speaker 2: By having, in communities, local communities, by monitoring what was happening in those communities, and seeing where a viable case could be filed through the local attorneys who had the knowledge and information.  We just this year gave the NAACP Spingarn [Medal] award to Oliver W. Hill, Sr. [HistoryMaker Oliver W. Hill], who was an attorney in the State of Virginia.  And one of those cases [Dorothy E. Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County] was initiated and won by Oliver W. Hill on a local--on a state level.  Then, it progressed through the court system after appeal to the Supreme Court.  And it started as a result of some black families who had children in a segregated school [Robert Russa Moton High School, Farmville, Virginia] which had inadequate facilities, just to accommodate the children.  And they said, Prince Edward County [Virginia], and they said they were not going to keep those children in that school.  So they sued the school board for equal facilities.  And that's the kind of situation which gave rise to the cases in each of these communities, similar situations where individuals just decided they'd had enough.  And the NAACP and the parents who wanted to do something about giving their children a chance to get education, an education.  Just a decent viable education which would enable them to go out and live and make a living and go forward and become useful citizens in this country.  So that, the concept, was to take these cases through the court, through the courts, and to continue to appeal until you could get to the highest court, which is what happened.  And when they got the combination of cases which our legal staff, our legal experts, concluded were appropriate and would stand the litmus test, so to speak, they filed case, the litigation with the United States Supreme Court, which was an extraordinary series of events, you know, leading up to that.  The fact that they consistently did this.  But this is the way it occurred, and it was on that basis that the Supreme Court eventually, of course, after hearing the case, ruled, and then it came back a year later to indicate how this should be achieved.
Story_ID: 261701
Speaker 1: Other problems existed.  Public accommodations, where blacks had to move to the back of the bus, or they had segregated railroad cars.  And, of course, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] worked over any number of years until it was able to secure the enactment of the public accommodations law [Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title II], which outlawed segregation in inter- and intra-state travel.  So that's, that's one of the things.  (Coughs) Sorry, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: No problem, this is good.  So did the NAACP, or did you, work at all with the [Pullman] Porter's union [Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters]?
Speaker 1: [A.] Philip Randolph was the head of the porter's union.  And, of course, the NAACP and the Sleeping Car Porters cooperated, and Philip Randolph was a member of our national board of directors.  And it was he who developed the concept of having a march on Washington [D.C.], which he had announced they would have in, back in '48 [1948], I believe it was, when [President] Harry [S.] Truman was president.  And it was as a result of that proclamation and the threat, I suppose you can say, or the plans to have such a march, that pressure was put on the administration to the extent that we were able to get a fair employment practices law [Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title VII] passed, with lobbying of course, but that was the impetus was initiated by the, by Randolph's pronouncement that we were gonna have a massive march on Washington.  And years later, when we had it, the concept had evolved from him, from--he was the father of that.  And of course, Bayard Rustin was the logistician which worked with us, there were ten organizations involved in the actual basic structure of the group who put the march together, supported it and made sure it happened.  And the NAACP was the lead organization, although the public doesn't realize that.  But structurally, we had units across the country and of course the association was able to generate the support from its units, through its units across the country and developed a network which brought in others, and they brought the buses and the trains and whatever into Washington, as a group.  So Philip Randolph played a key role in having developed this concept.
Speaker 2: In 1948--
Speaker 1: Well, that's when it started (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) was when he developed, yeah, when he started it.
Speaker 1: And I think I need a--
Speaker 2: Go ahead, go ahead.  We're gonna just back up a little bit.  We'll just back up a little bit.  You were telling me the issues you were fighting.  What, what were the issues with, with--
Speaker 1: We were talking about--we mentioned that in summary, we talked about education, public accommodations, housing, voting rights, those are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then the porters.  You were telling me that they were--inadequate wages.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And they were in--treatment, unequal treatment.  The same white employees received wages far greater, better than theirs, and they had certain benefits, and they certainly had the freedom of staying in adequate sleeping quarters if they had to stay overnight.  And they didn't have to work double shifts to the extent that the black porters did.  And, of course, they were just--the treatment, the unfair treatment, cut across all of the lines of whatever was there in the workplace.
Story_ID: 261702
Speaker 1: Where did you stay when you went into the different communities (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In homes of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] officers.  That's where we stayed and other workers who, you know, traveled also.  But there were some places where there some, a few black hotels in which you felt you could safely sleep.  For example, in Mississippi there was, in Mound Bayou [Mississippi], which was an all-black community, there was a hotel, I guess it was better called the motel.  And I think I told about the fact that Medgar Evers and I stayed there when--in the earlier part of this interview.  So, I won't repeat that story.  But in Arkansas, I would stay with the--I spent a better part of a summer down there getting petitions filed for--to get parents asking the board of education to integrate the schools.  This was after the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision [in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  And then we would--we were expected to return the next year to get the reply, the official reply.  And in going through those various communities, I stayed in homes of the officers, and there was--well, I don't know whether I should tell that story or not.  There was one, you can always cut it out.  There was one place in Arkansas in which I spent the night or two, whatever, I think it was one night, with the branch presidents, at his home, or her.  I forget.  But it was a couple, anyway.  And I had been riding on the bus all day, it was dusty, so I wanted to take a bath.  And of course they, they had running water indoors, but they didn't have an indoor bath.  So, in those days they had washtubs.  I think a number 9 this might have been, in which you put a washboard and you washed.  So we filled that up for me to--in which I could bathe, and put it in the bedroom, and I bathed.  And I made the mistake of sitting down in the tub, so I couldn't get up, get out of the tub, because my knees were under my chin.  And of course they had to extract me from the tub finally by taking the tub out the backyard, where the chickens were, and pouring the water out of the tub and putting a little olive oil or some kind of oil in there, and pulling me up.  In the meantime, there were people on the sidewalk along the fence of the backyard, because you could see through it, watching this operation.  And I went to the meeting that night, and the branch president introduced me and one of the people from the audience said, "Yes, we have seen her before.  She looks," how did they say it?  "She doesn't look any better with her clothing on than she did with them off."  So those are the kinds of experiences.  It, it was--at first it was embarrassing, then I said, "Well, what can I do?  They've seen me any way they want to see me."  So these are the kinds of things which might happen to you back in those days, which all went into making this, for me, an extraordinary experiencing working for the NAACP.
Story_ID: 261703
Speaker 1: So, who were some of the extraordinary women that you had the opportunity to work with in those early days of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?
Speaker 2: Well, we had one lady who was a membership secretary, Lucille Black, she was a very colorful character with a raucous voice, and a chain smoker.  But she could extract memberships and whenever Lucille Black indicated what your goal was at a given, for a given branch, that branch felt that if it--on threat of its life, that it had to meet that goal.  We have had ladies like Daisy Lampkin who was an older lady, then, from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and she traveled the country soliciting memberships.  And I think I have a picture with Daisy Lampkin on it.  We've had a lady who was then in her seventies, as I am now, like L. Pearl Mitchell in Ohio.  She was known across the State of Ohio for membership solicitation and leading marches and demonstrations, although she was in her early seventies.  And they listened to Miss Pearl there.  You know those are the--I don't know if those are the kind of ladies about which speak, but to me, women have been the backbone of the association.  The primary leadership, that is the branch presidencies, have been predominantly male, but the women have been the workers who shored up the operation and who made it possible for the men to become successful branch presidents.  Not to say you don't have women presidents, but you do have female presidents today, many more than you had then.  But the workers who really carried the branch forward, were primarily, and this is not a biased statement, were females.  And there's a colorful woman in, practically, most communities across the country who is known to have been an NAACP leader or a workhorse in that community.  And today, our board is--again, there are more men on the board than women, but we have had on the board of directors and at the leadership of the NAACP, we have had two female chairmen, chairwomen, over the years.  And out of the--we haven't had that many chairpeople, probably about a dozen altogether.  I don't want to give exact figures, but because they served as chairmen a long time.  And we have not had a female executive director yet.  But, we've had female president and female chairman and eventually we'll have a female president C.E.O.  But I fondly remember a number of the ladies who were not nationally known figures, necessarily, but who were known in their states and in the NAACP circles as NAACP stalwarts and stars who--and of course you had people like Harriete [Vyda Simms] Moore who along with her husband [Harry T. Moore] was killed in the firebombing in Florida.  And she was a leading worker in the State of Florida, along with her husband who was state president.  And today, women have key roles in keeping the branches viable across the country.
Story_ID: 261704
Speaker 1: So you were spending a lot of time working in the field with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 2: Because that was my assignment at that point.
Speaker 1: That was your assignment.  But you did have an opportunity to meet and marry.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, in 1963 you married?  Was it sixty--
Speaker 2: I think, yes I believe it was '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: So can you talk to me about meeting your husband [John W. Roxborough]?
Speaker 2: Why do you wanna hear that?  I, let's see I met him first in the middle '50s [1950s].  And he was from Detroit [Michigan].  And I met him in Detroit, because I'd gone out there to work.  And then, I later met him again in Washington [D.C.], when he had come to Washington to work in the [U.S.] Department of State.  And it was after then--he was a lawyer by profession--and it was after then, when we renewed our acquaintance in Washington that I got to know him.  And we eventually married.  Which--it was in the late '50s [1950s] when I first met him, and then when I met him again, it was probably about 1960, thereabouts.  And so, we married.
Speaker 1: So I'm remembering the story you told about your mother [Mattye Tollette Bond] and she, you know your mother and father [Ollie Bond], and they were at Lane [College, Jackson, Tennessee], and she says, "That's the man I'm going to marry."
Speaker 2: When my mother married, yes.  She met my father at college, sure, and--
Speaker 1: And she said--
Speaker 2: And, and she told her friend, roommate and some other friends, "I'm going to marry him.  He's not only bright and intelligent, but he's handsome."  So--and she did marry him.  Now, I don't know whether she coerced him into it or whether he did it of his own volition.  I'm sure he, knowing him, he did it because he wanted to do.  But she was a talker and he was the one who quietly did things.  And, she did things too, but she was an achiever, but she also was a proclaimer.  She would let you know what was happening and why she thinks it should happen and what should happen.  And he would go about the business of doing it.  But, it was the two of them who organized the branch in Brownsville [Tennessee], which later caused us to wind up in Kansas.  And that story as you know is in the previous.  But I've known some very enduring and strong females.  We've had them in my own family (laughter).
Story_ID: 261705
Speaker 1: We were talking about the blocs of, you know, you can't perceive black people anymore as a bloc.
Speaker 2: That we're not monolithic.
Speaker 1: Monolithic.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And I was saying that, although that has been the standard societal procedure and the societal perception of us.  "They," you know, "they act like that," or, "they talk like that, or, "they don't want to do this, that or the other," or, "they have limited crania," you know.  And, well, that's typical.  And, you see, the exposure of blacks to whites is still limited on a day-to-day-basis.  In urban areas, you get--in the workplace, you get blacks and white mingling.  But people, most generally, go back to their own neighborhoods.  You certainly have many integrated neighborhoods, but you've got more segregated neighborhoods in this country today than you have integrated neighborhoods.  And there's still that feeling of, "These people are different, and they will cause problems," even those who are wealthy or who can move into middle class neighborhoods.  You, you find residual resistance to that.  Not widespread, but it doesn't take much to scratch the surface and get to that kind of feeling.  And it's all because of the fact that there's a lack of education for the public on what the role of blacks has been in this country, and what the history has been.  It should be as much of a staple in our public education system in this country as is so-called American history, and it isn't.  So ignorance breeds contempt, and ignorance also breeds a lack of self-appreciation.  And we have an extraordinary history.  And many of our young folks who turn to crime and who just don't succeed, or who have no willpower or motivation, don't understand this, 'cause they don't feel that they're worth anything.  And we haven't taught it in our homes as it might have been taught, because people have been more concerned about making a living than that these--my parents taught us black history, but of course they were teachers by discipline, by profession, who were well, you know, very well-educated, highly literate.  And but, the next door parent didn't do that.  And you don't have to have a master's [degree] or a doctorate to teach the value of black history because it can be taught in very simple terms.  And we've got to do something more about--more effectively about that.
Speaker 1: And we're gonna get off a little bit here, but I want to just have you talk about it, because it's come up.  Talk to me about the value of black history, from your perspective.
Speaker 2: From my perspective, it made me understand how important I was, and what kind of a background, what a heritage I have and what people had sacrificed to make it possible for me to be here.  And, that's what it taught me.  And by example in learning about the emancipation heroes, blacks who had the nerve to fight in the Civil War, who ran away from slavery to join the Union Army to fight in the Civil War, the blacks--what was it--forty thousand blacks fought in the Revolutionary War.  And they weren't even people then, as they were not under the [U.S.] Constitution which was enacted when we became a union.  So, this is something which made me understand and gave me the sense of value, self-value and self-worth, so that you know I don't feel any sense of being a lesser person than the person over here who made me of English extraction or German, or Anglo-Saxon.  The population is dwindling rapidly as far as white Anglo-Saxon population is concerned.  The coloration in this country is becoming browner and browner, so, but the history-fundamentally, many of our people have feelings of insecurity, and they--it's manifested in different ways.  Non-blacks have it too, but we have--it's more extensive, I would suspect, among us, because of the conditions which have been forced upon us.  And we had been denied the ability to get outside of a certain limited area, in the sense of our mobility.  And after we became more mobile, it grew--it automatically happened that we became more intelligent about our own worth.  And I think the more that continues, the lessening of the feeling of insecurity far too many of us have, that it will lessen and subside in time.  I won't live long enough to see it, but to the extent that it's universal, but I'm sure it will happen.
Story_ID: 261706
Speaker 1: You were married in the '60s [1960s].  And how did the NAACP's [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] role change?  As you were promoted--you became the director of membership, or life membership.
Speaker 2: Well, I went from there to, and then to an executive assistant to the director.  And that's where I was when Medgar Evers was killed.  The NAACP--
Speaker 1: Can you take me through that day when Medgar Evers was killed?  Do you remember the day?
Speaker 2: I remember getting word early in the morning before coming to work.  It was, I mean, it was dark here in this country--'cause the time was around midnight, I would imagine, in Jackson [Mississippi].  It was late at night after a meeting.  He had gone home and was of course shot in his carport.  And the word spread to the NAACP national office, that is, our Executive Director Roy Wilkins, probably within about two hours of his being pronounced dead.  He was taken to the hospital and pronounced dead.  And then, of course, a network of phone calls started.  And I learned about it, I don't know what time it was, but it was early in the morning before sunrise when I heard the news before going to work.  And, of course, went to work and of course NAACP was in a state of emergency.  And this was the first major civil rights killing, you see, that occurred.  Those which started happening, occurred after Medgar Evers was assassinated on June 12th [1963].  And he--it was the news was immediate, you know, the news media, the newspapers.  Although television isn't what it is today, but the headlines in the newspapers, the news magazines, the radio and the television stories, and of course media descended on Jackson, Mississippi.  And what I remember about our office is the tumult, tumult which occurred in the--it was tumultuous in our office, and it was the first major crisis like that.  We had had the individual killings in the, you know, in the local communities, like Gus Courts and Reverend [George W.] Lee and the Moores [Harriette Vyda Simms Moore and Harry T. Moore].  Those people, which also caused shockwaves.  But this was a national organization representative.  And the oldest organization--civil rights organization in the country.  So it had a different flavor, if you will, than the other killings did because it was more--far more far-reaching than the others.  The others were decried and were tragedies, but not in the same world sense that this was something that other countries' media picked up and really headlined.  And you had media from all over the world who, representatives who went to Jackson for the funeral.
Story_ID: 261707
Speaker 1: So, what were the thoughts of the organization [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)] when Medgar Evers was killed?
Speaker 2: It's hard to say, except that--shock, tremendous shock, sorrow, and of course anger.  All of those components.  And our executive director at that point was Roy Wilkins.  And he called for calmness and restraint, and that we should be peaceful, and we would have an organized funeral in Jackson [Mississippi].  It would be public, because you could not not have a public funeral.  But we would certainly not permit that funeral to develop into a riot, for example, or warfare.  And they--it was a funeral of national import.  You had members of the [President John Fitzgerald] Kennedy administration, Robert [F.] Kennedy and cabinet members who marched in the funeral procession.  People from all walks of life did that.  And the funeral and the processional afterwards, were peaceful.  And yet, demonstrably, it was one of the first major tragedies that captured the public attention and the faceless people in the communities decried it.  People who were anti-civil rights felt--proclaimed that, "This is terrible, this is not right," you know.  The majority of the people who wouldn't support civil rights, you know, for--in other circumstances, were decrying this.  And, of course, what they did not realize, that this was an example of what was to come, because, you know, in that same year you had the president was assassinated, and of course you would, you would have the assassination of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], you had the Birmingham [Alabama] children, the girls, and you just--and then you wound up with Mississippi, the three [James Chaney, Andrew Goodman and Michael Schwerner] who were killed and put in a dump--were--just recently the perpetrators were actually arrested again after they were let go the first time.  And, it took thirty years to get resolved the assassination of Medgar Evers.  Mrs. Williams, Mrs. [Myrlie] Evers-Williams simply pursued it and pursued it and pursued it, until the district attorney in Mississippi, a district attorney in Mississippi, took up the cause, and he then committed to continue the investigation and pursue it until they could derive justice there.  That again showed you the changing in times in Mississippi.  Where it--although it took thirty years to do this, to bring Byron De La Beckwith to justice, it finally occurred in Mississippi.  And in the interim, you had a James Meredith situation, as you know.  And you look at the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi] today, it's an integrated educational institution.  And you have blacks holding a high proportion, high percentage of offices in the state.  It's no Mecca, but it's certain like a different country in that state today compared to what it was twenty and thirty years ago.
Story_ID: 261708
Speaker 1: So when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] couldn't contain the people, and riots did erupt.
Speaker 2: Well, they--the King assassination, I wouldn't say that it caused the riots, but I would say that it was a, probably, a trigger.  Conditions had gotten so bad in the country, economic conditions in the inner cities.  The employment was--unemployment was very high.  Young blacks were jobless.  The housing, the rigid segregation, although it was illegal, the segregated housing, the lack of employment opportunities, all those things converged on a hot summer, and the trigger was the assassination of Martin Luther King.  And of course, the rioting went from a reaction to his death to see how much damage would be done in terms of the firebombings and the pilfering.  There were people who were genuinely disturbed and upset by his assassination, the brutal assassination, and there were those who took advantage of it.  But in any case, that's why this society can ill afford not to do something to alleviate the oppressive conditions in which people in the poverty stricken communities live.  We have a similar situation today where you have a high percentage--there are more young black men in jail than there are in public, in institutions of higher learning.  There are more young black males in jail than there are in college.  And of course, that's symptomatic of a wrong, something fundamentally wrong in our society.
Speaker 1: What do you think that something is?
Speaker 2: Again, the, the consistent lack of equal treatment.  The lack of--the limited access they have to education, to quality education.  The limited ability to have decent housing in the urban and farm areas where you have communities limited, because, one, you've got an overlay on that is technological changes.  The fact that technology is taking the place of many employment opportunities which were previously in existence, and now you can get a machine to do the work which will equal how many on an assembly line (unclear).  And then you have the export of employment across, overseas.  Well, that's not going to stop.  But what do you do with the people who are no longer employable?  You retrain them, or you train them so that they can be employable.  But that isn't happening.  Our companies are reducing their workforces, and they are not contributing to the training of people who cannot be a productive citizen in a workforce if they don't have a skill.  And primarily those who suffer the most in that--to that extent, are those who are minorities.  Either the blacks or the browns, the immigrants who are coming into this country, about 11 million immigrants, so they say, who have come in illegally.  And they cannot all be absorbed on the market, although they can be employed for lower than minimum wages.  You have the minimum--the fact that unions are having difficulty maintaining their memberships, which again goes back to the workforce reduction.  So, if we don't address this issue in terms of a planned attack from a national level, you can only do it sporadically in the community level.  And the minorities.  All I'm saying is the minorities are the ones which bear the brunt of these societal changes.
Story_ID: 261709
Speaker 1: It's probably somewhat easier to tackle a problem of voters' registration, or to integrate, you know, buses or dining facilities as--because it's so tangible, the results, you know.  You're gonna--we're gonna sit and eat at this counter, or school's gonna be integrated.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Versus the problem you have outlined today.  How does the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] tackle an issue that doesn't seem tangible?
Speaker 2: It's very difficult.  But one of the things that the association is, has been working to do, is through its units in the communities.  You see, the outreach has to be--you have got to touch the people.  You can issue proclamations, have programs and policies.  But if you don't have a direct way of connecting with the people, it's hard to get a specific, a substantive response.  Especially when it's not built around somebody's having been killed or some emotion, something that has a specific emotional appeal.  And it isn't easy.  But when people are hungry, and when people are unemployed, they can be reached.  So the association is trying to address this, the issue by having, by its--through its units.  Attempting to meet the needs of people in their community by seeing--say if we have X number that are unemployed, we've got health problems and so forth.  You look around at the leadership in the community, be it business, and political.  And then you try to work with them, collaborate with them, to get them to help address the problem in that community, because it means it's a positive step for the leadership and the business community--and the businesses to take in the community so that they will have better constituents.  So, the technique is not just to demonstrate and to demand fair treatment, but to try to collaborate concurrently.  And that's one of the things that the NAACP is trying to do to get the power structure, if you want to use those words, in the community to be responsive to the needs of its constituents.  And that's a slow and tedious task, but a local branch, the best way it can function is to take its principles, the points that it feels are important for the betterment of the people in its community, and find a way of having a meeting of minds by agreeing that we're going to work together to produce X number of jobs, or to make medical services more accessible in the ER [emergency] rooms of hospitals, for example.  That's a specific, and that's an urgent need.  Or we are concerned about the education in district nine, and what is it our schools needs there, be it books, which they don't have, or facilities, that is computers.  And we have a project, a proposal before a company now in an effort to get computers for a large number of school systems.  Those are the kinds of things that our branches are undertaking to do in this changed environment, that is, in terms of not that the needs have gone away, but the form of the needs and the way in which they can be addressed, must be adapted to the avail--to the circumstances as they exist today.
Story_ID: 261710
Speaker 1: You mentioned leadership in the black community.  And I want to talk about leadership as you see it, today, in this moment that we're recording your oral history.  It's--there's, there's no--I mean, I guess there are a few monolithic black leaders, you know that--
Speaker 2: Well, there may there--you have a lot of black organizations today, have a proliferation of black organizations.  And, and they have elected leaders, usually.  And today these organizations, many of them, I would say the majority of them, has adopted certain programs designed to improve the community in which we live.  The Links [Incorporated] for example, gives scholarships, have scholarship programs.  You get--I don't like to name names, but you have other social groups, fraternal organizations, and Greek letter organizations which do scholarships, or they adopt a school, or they do something about back to school, stay in school campaigns.  They do training programs to open job opportunities.  So, you do have the organized civic groups, civic and social groups, which are helping to some extent, a limited extent, meet the needs in the community.  Then you have churches who are engaged in outreach programs.  You have churches which have now daycare centers and who have nursing home affiliations, who again are providing services with grants of various kinds and nonprofit organizations.  So, you have a proliferation of this where you didn't have this existing before.  So, that is one means of helping to meet the ever increasing need, in our common community of need, in this--across the country.  And wherever you have black citizens, you're going to have some of these organizations.  And they will undertake--they are undertaking to justify their reason for being by contributing to the community from the standpoint of a certain amount of strength they have, having gotten to the stage in life that their members are reasonably secure.  The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] undertakes also to engage in dialogue with these kinds of organizations and a collaborative effort that is to bring to the communities some kind of services and information which will provide guidance and help improve what is going on in the community.  We have the president, for example, of the New York State Conference of NAACP branches is very active in the political structure, in the political structure in this community, in New York.  And she's also active in a variety of civic and social organizations.  And these organizations in which she is involved are--each one of them has a particular goal as far as the betterment of the black community is concerned.  And you have voices like that.  Her name happens to be Hazel [Nell] Dukes, a very interesting woman who is again, an NAACP stalwart, and is known in this community for her being outspoken in behalf of the rights and for black citizens and opportunities and what have you.  So we have more of that today than we have had in the past.
Story_ID: 261711
Speaker 1: So when you look back to say the work you were doing in the '50s [1950s] and then the change to '60s [1960s], when we became sort of more "black is beautiful," Black Panthers [Black Panther Party], how did the role of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] change with the times?
Speaker 2: Well, during that period, it didn't change that much.  Our director [Roy Wilkins] at that point, and he was pilloried for it, was saying that black power, used in the separatist sense, means black death.  And simple reason that he said you can't separate yourselves from mainstream society in this country.  You know, that was one of the concepts, to develop separate entities, separate--separation of the groups and have separate goals and not be concerned about integration, but to maintain the quality separateness.  That was one of the concepts in the Black Power movement.  And, of course, he took the position that this was self-destructive, because as long as we were in this society, you, in order to succeed, you were gonna have to become a part of it and not a separate entity within it.  And of course, eventually, it developed that that concept diminished in the sense, in that sense.  And black power today means, today means achievement and victory, and not, "We want to run our own operation.  We don't have to depend on those people or relate to those people or work with them."  But there's no problem with believing that blacks should be powerful, and there should be black power, but it's black power in the context of the total society.  And, the NAACP maintained its integrationist posture and then and it, and although it was assaulted for it, eventually, it became obvious that if we're to survive in this society, we've got to become a part of it.
Story_ID: 261712
Speaker 1: --People have said that we've lost more than we've gained with integration.  You were giving me your personal opinion on it, which made a lot of sense, which I'd like for you to repeat about the pockets of--
Speaker 2: Well, for those people who feel that we've lost more than we have gained as a result of integration vis-a-vis segregation, and in this case we're talking about public schools, certainly there was some excellent public schools which were segregated, which had extraordinary teachers who could not get into the mainstream school systems, so we had a concentration of extraordinarily good teachers in these black schools.  And they were teachers who could teach Greek and Latin and math and calculus and whatever in the backwoods country towns like Brownsville, Tennessee where I was born.  When, when integration occurred in Brownsville, the one black school, which was an excellent school, which we--public school, high school we had in that community.  There were about two grade schools, was lost, yes.  But we gained the ability for many more black students to get access to heretofore segregated schools in places nearer where they lived.  More of them were able to come in and get a public education, albeit the quality of public education has probably diminished, somewhat significantly, compared to the turn of the century and, and the '40s [1940s] and '30s [1930s] and even '50s [1950s].  But it is, in volume, it's available and basically education is good that they--it's just the character and quality of its implementation has not been as forceful as it should be or as enlightened as it ought be.  We don't place enough emphasis on the importance of public education in this country.  We'll pay a mechanic eighty dollars an hour and teacher eighty dollars for a day's work.  And what are you going to get for that?  You won't get the best quality, you'll get a good quality, a high quality mechanic for eighty dollars an hour, but you aren't going to get the highest quality of a teacher for eighty dollars a day.  So, certainly I agree we did lose something, but it was in isolated pockets, in my judgment, as opposed to gaining for the greater number of people in need and who are eligible for education, the opportunity to get that education.  That, that's my view.
Story_ID: 261713
Speaker 1: So, as times were changing in the '60s [1960s], I mean, the women's movement became a force to reckon with in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, the [National] Association [for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)] provided an example of a nonprofit organization which was able to seek redress successfully.  And you'll notice that the organizations which evolved--you had women's LDF [legal defense fund], you had various ethnic LDFs, legal defense and education funds--modeled on the NAACP [Legal Defense and Educational Fund] successful prototype, so that the organizations learned their, got their voices and their protest techniques from the long established, actually, the father of this movement was the NAACP, by its example of how it systematically organized and affected changes over the years.  And they said, "If it works for them, then it can work for us."  And it's not that we're taking any extraordinary credit, but we were the model and the example which was used as these groups proliferated, and they were able to get a voice for a specific cause by organizing in the same way, in similar way.  You know, you, as I said, the National Organization of Women [sic. National Organization for Women (NOW)], you mentioned.  But you have the ethnic groups, the Hispanic groups who have various LDFs and you even have conservative groups who have them, not just so-called liberal causes, but the conservative causes have adopted the same technique.  So, apparently it works, and it has enabled people of various groupings to gain a voice.
Story_ID: 261714
Speaker 1: So, as you look back over your career with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], what are you proud of that we have not talked about yet?  What are some of the things that you're most proud of that we haven't spoken about?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I'm proud to have been doing for fifty years, to have worked for the NAACP for fifty years.  For me it has been a marvelous experience.
Speaker 1: But in the trenches, I mean, you were there, you were--
Speaker 2: You know, it's been a marvelous experience, in that I have seen life in so many different guises and, geographically, had a chance to work in about forty states across the country in my lifetime.  And worked at something I thought was important and to which I had a commitment.  Not that I didn't get upset and frustrated at times and whatever, but there's nothing worthwhile I think without some giving on the part of the recipient.  And, for me, it's been a privilege to work for the NAACP, first of all, because it's a continuum.  It started in 1909, and it's still going today in 2005.  It has withstood assaults, predictions of its demise (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What assaults have you withstood?
Speaker 2: The association?  Well, you had the segregationists who out--the attorney general of the United States in, in the 1950s outlawed the NAACP in Missi- in Alabama and Georgia.  We were not permitted to function.  And it, that was--they were beginning to systematically outlaw the United States in the southern states.  Certainly, we could not function.  We had to move our--see the NAACP's regional office for the southeast region was located in Alabama.  And we had to move out of Montgomery, Alabama, out of Alabama to Atlanta, Georgia, because we could not operate.  The attorney general had made it--had demanded that we turn over our membership rolls, the NAACP turn over its membership rolls, which it refused to do, because it knew that if it did that, the people whose names were on those membership rolls would not--would be harassed, some of them would be subjected to--most of them would be subjected to economic reprisals.  And some of them would lose their lives.  You could not expose them to that kind of threat and intimidation in the 1950s.  There was no way that the NAACP was going to do that.  And so, then, and we were outlawed there and in a couple of southern states.  And, we had to fight through the courts to regain the ability to do business in those states.  So that's what I call an assault.  In Mississippi, the NAACP was fined a quarter of a million dollars, because of a boycott against, a successful boycott against some stores in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Was [S.H.] Kress [& Co.] one of them?
Speaker 2: Claiborne, the name of the case was [NAACP v.] Claiborne Hardware [Co., 1982].  But we did have a boycott on, it was [F.W.] Woolworth [Co.], I believe, in Jackson [Mississippi].  But--and that, that quarter of a million dollars was enough money to run us out of business, virtually, back in those days.  But we paid the fine and started fighting the case.  And eventually the NAACP won that case, but those were lean days for the association.  It could barely function, because a quarter of a million dollars in those days could break your bank, you know, our bank.  And, it took about ten years to win the case.  So when you ask what kind of assaults, those are the kind of assaults.  And yet when the Freedom Riders were jailed en masse in Mississippi in the '60s [1960s], it was the NAACP who put up the quarter of a million dollars to pay the bail, to post the bail bond so they could get out of jail.  Otherwise those Freedom Riders would not have gotten out of jail.  And that was not an assault on the NAACP in that case, but on the Freedom Riders which also affected the movement.  So those are the kinds of things which have happened, and--
Speaker 1: Did you know Freedom Riders?  Some of the Freedom Riders?
Speaker 2: Yeah, some of them were, were--
Speaker 1: Who were some of the people you knew?
Speaker 2: Just acquaintances that I knew in, you know, from Maryland and Mississippi.  They participated like you do, and they came back without any physical problems except having been arrested or scared out of their wits in the process.  But it was an experience they would never forget.
Story_ID: 261715
Speaker 1: So, you take me back to Mississippi.  I have a couple of questions about it.  Fannie Lou Hamer.
Speaker 2: Yes, [Mississippi] Freedom [Democratic] Party [MFDP].
Speaker 1: Freedom Party, Democratic Freedom Party.
Speaker 2: Yes, she set the [1964] Democratic [National] Convention [Atlantic City, New Jersey] on its ear, which was a good thing to do.  And without that kind of a move, it would have been much longer before we were able to get the more equitable representation in the Democratic Party if that had not happened.  But it brought again focus, again through media, the focus on that convention, because with media there, with television there, the world was looking.  And that was on Fannie Lou Hamer's side, and the movement.  Obviously, she didn't do it alone.  But she was a symbol around which the Freedom Party rallied and was its voice.  And of course as a result of the fact that it happened in an age when it could be communicated as it was, it garnered support and the party had, eventually had no choice.  It was hard for them to swallow, but eventually they came to their senses.
Speaker 1: What do you think about the party today?
Speaker 2: What, the Democratic Party?
Speaker 1: Right, correct.
Speaker 2: I think it's a viable party.  You've got different views represented in the Democratic Party.  They aren't monolithic either; neither are the Republicans.  They're having their problems.  I think that our political leaders to a certain extent became more complacent than they should have, and they have been more concerned in many instances about accommodation to reach a consensus rather than to truly reflect the component elements in the party, in terms of the needs of its minority members, the needs of its worker members.  They have worked to find a general umbrella, and in my judgment, they need to be more definitive in addressing issues like the War [in Iraq] and like what are going to do to protect social security, specifically, against this onslaught of what the current administration wants to do.  And I'm not an avid Democrat, I'm not a Republican.  I'm really an independent voter, which is not necessarily good in terms of the party primary situation.  But I am registered with neither, but as an independent.  And I vote my conscience in the sense of voting for those who most nearly represent, and I would say most of my votes have been along the Democratic line, because I have felt that those representatives, whoever they might have been, have, have--like the President, like President [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton or, or--and I occasionally vote for the Republicans.  I voted for Jacob [K.] Javits back in the days before your time when he was a senator, because I felt that he represented my interests, as did many non-Republicans.  He was able to garner support across party lines.  So I think that the Democratic Party needs to enforce its voice and enforce its concerns as should be representative of its constituents.  And I don't mean to say that there's one constituency above the other, but they should be given equal treatment.  And, and I don't get--it is not my feeling, my opinion, that they have been in recent years.
Story_ID: 261716
Speaker 1: So, when you look into the future, and I mean I know a lot of oral history is about the past.  But when I was reading about you, you just talked about how active you continue to stay, and when you gaze into the future, what concerns you about where we are?
Speaker 2: Exactly that.  Where will we be?  What is happening to the character and quality of our society and our environment?  What are we going to do about global warming?  Believe it or not, that's a concern of mine.  We're living in a city like this [New York, New York], and with respiratory, with sinus and whatever and all these other ailments, it has to have something to do with the character and quality of the air.
Speaker 1: I have to inject something here.  Only because it's eye opening and wonderful for me when across the board, I mean, a lot of the African Americans I interview are concerned about global warming.  And you would think that's an issue that doesn't touch, you know, on some level.
Speaker 2: The world is so small today (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's great though, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother [Mattye Tollette Bond] used to say, she said, "It's amazing.  When I was born in 1895, there was horses and buggies."  And she saw her first car, her mother bought a car when--you know at the turn of the century when they had those Fords with the canvas top.  And she said, "And I lived to see a man on the moon."  Said, "Can you imagine what kind of life that is to have lived across this kind of a history?"  She said, "Life is really a miracle," she said, "you should always--you should be thankful every day of your life that you are alive and that you have had an opportunity to live in this society with all of its ails and ills.  And we have many of them."  And you know she would say that.  And my father [Ollie Bond] said the same thing.  And as I said, they lost two homes in the struggle for civil rights, burned to the ground.  They had to move to another city [Kansas City, Kansas] and start all over again.  Life threatened and all.  But they never forgot the miracle of life and the fact that we have--we owe something to our society.  And, they felt that they owed it to our people to try to foster the right to register and vote and the right to education.  And, they thought reaching beyond that, we should earn our lives and do something in return.  And I think that quality of life is important, not just to me, but to health and the welfare of the people who aren't just living, but those who are coming into living and those who are becoming an adult in the future.  I'm concerned about that, and I'm terribly, tremendously concerned about the quality of education.  That's--it, it's such a tragedy when I walk out and see young people obviously who should be in school, not in school.  And I'm concerned about that, and I want to see a future better for them.  I have a grand-stepsons and grandsons.  The grandsons are adults with their sons.  And their sons are coming into a--of age, in the sense, now they are--one graduated from college this year.  The other one is taking the bar to--this month, July.  And they are starting their lives as adults.  And you want to see them thrive and acquire the same kind of concerns along with their ability to make it in the world today as many of our young people are, who walk away from their responsibilities, as I see it, as individual human beings, and as individual black human beings.  And of course I want to see a renewal of commitment to reaching back and helping that one behind you.  You were asking me, I think, what I'd like to see in the future?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Those are some of the things.
Story_ID: 261717
Speaker 1: One thing I didn't talk too much about, and you can talk as much or not at all about it.  I don't want to be too--but your, you married and you had how many children?
Speaker 2: I had no children.  My husband [John W. Roxborough] had two young children when we married, and we shared the custody of those children, and have had a very--I acquired a family by marriage.  And we still--the next generation is coming along.
Speaker 1: Is coming along.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So who are they?  And you said that one was taking the bar?
Speaker 2: This past month.
Speaker 1: And, and--
Speaker 2: And the other one finished University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] and he's going into, plans to go into medical school in the fall.  He lives in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: So where did he go to medical school, or he's planning--
Speaker 2: He plans to go to Howard [University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: To Howard.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And the one here who just took the bar, has--he graduated from Columbia [University, New York, New York], which is just a few blocks from where I live.  And then he went to Columbia Law School [New York, New York], from which he graduated.  And he's working for a law firm now, here in Manhattan [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: So do you think you've instilled in them the sense that--of what your father [Ollie Bond] instilled in you?  To reach back and--
Speaker 2: Well, I think that they have learned--their mother was--has--their grandmother is my contemporary.  And we share similar values.  And the grandmother, with whom I'm very good friends, has also concerned herself with their character and quality.  And between us, we've pretty much have agreed, and with the grandchildren, there is an agreement on values and--to which they have been exposed.  And, we have made a pretty good family unit, a pretty happy one and one which is compatible, you know.  Very fortunate in that respect.  Thus far, they've done well--
Story_ID: 261718
Speaker 1: Why do you think history is important?  And then, break it down to: why do you think African American history is important?
Speaker 2: Well, I think history is important so we'll know from what we have come.  I'm talking about as a people.  I mean, this country.  We need to know--we should know I think the history of the country in which we live.  And it gives us an understanding of why we are who we are today if we know from whence and from what that which we have come.  And, this country was an experiment.  That it was an experiment in independent living.  The so-called Pilgrims came to this country to flee from oppression and to find a better life.  And this country was the goal they hoped to achieve, to establish that better way of life. Some of the ways in which they went about it were, to me, not--were not acceptable, but they happened.  We found this better way of life by taking from others territories which they had, instead of reaching accommodations and living together and the whole concept of the democratic ethic was--is to live together.  That's what evolved, eventually.  But we didn't get it in a democratic fashion after that first blush of landing here and having Thanksgiving.  We wound up with wars, in order just to secure the country, the physical country.  So, but I think it's important for us to understand how this country evolved and as compared with where it is today.  And it gives you a why and it also makes you, I think, understand that if it were worth fighting for and worth establishing a constitution which is--should guarantee the rights and privileges and dignity of individual human beings, then it's worth our knowing this and worth our undertaking to preserve it.  Does that answer?
Speaker 1: That answers the question about history, but--can, now--so the same question about black history.
Speaker 2: Black history.  In that same context within this country, the great majority of black Americans were brought here in slavery.  You know, you had some which were not enslaved, some few.  But and they had no intention of coming here at the beginning of their lives.  You have been brought here, you've been enslaved.  You have been freed and you have, per force, become a part of a society which is the only society you truly know, because the--your heritage is here in this country.  And it's important as far as I can see to understand how you achieved--one, how your heritage came about, why, and, two, how you were extricated from the enslavement, forcible enslavement of a couple hundred years, and how we have developed since then.  It's a part and parcel of our life.  It's a part of the fabric and fiber of our lives.  And if we don't know about it, then we don't--we're not in position to understand ourselves and value ourselves and understand how enduring we are, and what we have accomplished and what we need to accomplish.  And we are an essential part of this country, because this is the only country which is our true home.  Certainly our ancestors came from various parts of Africa, primarily West Africa.  But we did not.  And there certainly should be an understanding of the country from which--of the countries from which we came--those behind us have come, an evaluation of that.  But you don't subvert, nor decry your own heritage, you know, vis-a-vis, where our ancestors came.  And it's a tragedy that we had to come here.  It may have been a tragedy then, but it's no tragedy today.  And, and of course--but we've got to be able to put those in proper context.  And the only we can do that, I think ,is to know what happened, what transpired in this experience.
Story_ID: 261719
Speaker 1: So, when you look at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and its history and how it has evolved, what would you say about its history and its evolution?
Speaker 2: Well, I think NAACP has been an essential ingredient in this country.  It has been something of a conscience for the country.  Starting in 1909, when those riots were--erupted, and the blacks were killed for no reason.  And out of that came the NAACP, to meet a need.  And it's been doing that ever since.  And, it developed from that point as a crisis organization, which it still is.  And again, this was something which was born by the elements of society in this country, which makes it an unique part of this country.  And it is, as I said, in cooking terms, it's an ingredient.  And it has become, it became the voice of America's conscience.  And its fights today and the issues it takes on, [U.S.] Supreme Court judges or appointments of commissioners, or issues, it takes reminding this country that we are a democratic society.  And these are ills which should be addressed and inequities and treatment should not be tolerated or accepted.  And I think that is as true today, the mission of the NAACP is as applicable today and as essential today as it was at the turn of the century when it was founded.
Speaker 1: Is that a shame?
Speaker 2: Well, it is in the sense that a true democracy should not have this much of a negative element.  But, at the same time, with people having come from different origins and the inequities which existed in our society have not been totally erased.  We started with unequals at the societal base.  And while we have gradually eliminated many of the substantive barriers, we have the--those which are unseen and yet which still--the dynamics of which still function, invisibly; they're there.  And because people do have the freedom of speech and the freedom of actions, even when they are negative actions until they violate the rights of others.  So, it will take a longer time to eliminate the vestiges than, as I said, my lifetime.  But I believe that it's incumbent, essential really, that we continue to work toward that end of a utopia.  Have the goal of utopia and in the meantime live in an approximation of a democracy.
Story_ID: 261720
Speaker 1: We are about to get the history of the NAACP's [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] leaders, the board of directors, the leaders, the history of the leaders.  There hasn't been that many.
Speaker 2: Well, as far as the officers, the paid officers of the NAACP, at the outset, the position was secretary, executive secretary.  And that was the chief executive of the NAACP, which was a paid office.  And we have had to date a total of fifteen between 1909 and today.  And in the earlier years, let's see, we have had actually one, two, we have had two women who have been, females who have been executive secretaries, Mary White Ovington, who was one of the founding members at the--in 1909.  And Mary Childs Nerney who was, who served in that capacity from 1912 to 1916.  The rest of the officers in this capacity have been men.  And actually, until 1920, the executive secretaries were not black, they were white.
Speaker 1: That's information.
Speaker 2: The organization was founded by a mixed group of people, white and black, who--in 1909.  And the lady who actually started the move in terms--as following the riots in Springfield, Illinois, was Mary White Ovington who was a social worker.  And of course an article was written in one of the daily newspapers asking, decrying the rights of--Oswald Garrison Villard wrote the article.  He came from, he was a journalist, but he came from an abolitionist family, a well-to-do northern family.  And Mary White Ovington read this article, and she was moved to do something about it.  So they exchanged correspondence, and they got a group of people to meet in a midtown Manhattan [New York, New York] apartment in order to discuss issuing a call on [President Abraham] Lincoln's birthday to ask people to come to the aid of this cause.  Come to the aid of this cause.  And this cause was to represent the good and welfare and the interests of the black citizens in this country who had been so brutalized.  As I said, this was immediately following the Springfield riots.  And that gave birth to the NAACP.  It was organized here in New York City [New York, New York] in 1909.
Speaker 1: Do you know where that apartment--what the address of that apartment was?
Speaker 2: It would have been--no, but it was midtown Manhattan.  It was about located about 40th Street in midtown, West 40th Street in midtown Manhattan at an apartment.  The--at the home of a couple who hosted the meeting.  It was a small meeting with about five people, I think.  And that marked the beginning.  After the organization was established, and it was incorporated here in New York in 1910, nineteen--I think the articles was signed in 1911.  You've had, let's see, Mary White Ovington served as executive secretary from 1916, I'm sorry, from 1911 to 1912.  And then again, in 1916, for the year 1916.  And after that a man [Royal Freeman Nash] became executive secretary.
Story_ID: 261721
Speaker 1: And the first black executive secretary of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was James Weldon Johnson who became executive secretary in 1920 and served in that capacity until 1931.  And you know--you might know, by history, he was a lyricist, a poet, a lawyer by professional training, and a marvelous writer and author.  And he and his brother produced a number of Broadway plays, musicals, James Weldon and J. Rosamond Johnson, here on Broadway.
Speaker 2: Do you know just as a side note, do you know a couple of names of the plays?
Speaker 1: I'd have to dig up the names, 'cause I can't recall offhand, I should, and I did.  But right now I don't have--naturally when you're in a situation like this, your memory goes.  But--
Speaker 2: Just the two brothers.  It was James, James' older brother's name?
Speaker 1: J. Rosamond, R-O-S-A-M-O-N-D, and they call it Rosamond Johnson.
Speaker 2: That's enough for people to look him up.
Speaker 1: And James Weldon wrote the lyrics, and J. Rosamond wrote the music within their partnership.  And he was the one with the words.  And you know James Weldon Johnson wrote 'Lift Ev'ry Voice and Sing,' the lyrics and J. Rosamond wrote those hard, the melody which is--can be difficult.  And that became the hymn of the NAACP, actually, and still is today.  And Walter White succeeded James Weldon Johnson in 1931.  And he served for approximately, nearly twenty-five years.  He served until 1955.  He died of a heart attack.  And Roy Wilkins succeeded Walter White, and he became executive secretary in 1955 and finished--his term ended in end of 1977.  And he was succeeded by the Reverend Benjamin L. Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks].  Now at Roy Wilkins' time, we had a consulting firm come in to review the structure of the national office and make recommendations about improvements and changes.  And one of the changes was the title.  It was changed from executive secretary to executive director at that point, under the Wilkins, during the Wilkins' tenure.  And following that, Mr. Hooks became executive director in 1977.  And the title CEO became a popular title at that, about that time had become.  And Mr. Hooks' title was executive director, CEO.  And he served from '77 [1977] to 1993.  And the Reverend [HistoryMaker] Benjamin [F.] Chavis, Jr. became executive director, CEO in 1993 of May, and he served until 1994, August.  He had a short tenure of--
Speaker 2: He served from '93 [1993] to '94 [1994].
Speaker 1: Yes, for about a year and what, three months.  Following that, Earl Shinhoster who was an NAACP executive became the acting executive director in 1994.  And he served until 1996 when they elected Kweisi Mfume.  And he became president CEO when the title was changed again.  And Mr. Mfume served from February 1996 to December 30th, 2000--this is 2005, right, 2005.  As of August 1, the president CEO who was, who came on board was Bruce [S.] Gordon, that's G-O-R-D-O-N, who was selected by a board of directors effective August 1.
Speaker 2: And what's Bruce's background?
Speaker 1: He came from a business background.  He was an executive, a senior vice president, actually, at a major national corporation, Verizon, actually.  And he retired two years ago after serving about thirty-five years, give or take.  And took a couple of years off and then he was--deciding, I would imagine, what to do with his life, in which direction he was going.  And the NAACP latched onto him.
Story_ID: 261722
Speaker 1: They [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)] had a national search committee looking for an executive, the chief executive, starting--the committee was appointed in January.  So, by July, they determined that they had reached what they thought was an appropriate conclusion--decision, I should say.  And they recommended Mr. [Bruce S.] Gordon to the executive committee of the board, who in turn recommended that he be employed by the board.  We have a sixty-four member board, and they met in July in Milwaukee, Wisconsin during our convention to confirm.  And at that meeting they confirmed Mr. Gordon's official election.  And he was to come on board effective August 1, which he did.  And he is currently in our headquarters in Baltimore, Maryland.
Story_ID: 261723
Speaker 1: How have the leaders been representative of the sign of the times in which they were, in which they served?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the leaders of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the first ones were white.  And of course they represented the voice, the voices which could be, which were heard, and the people who had freedom of movement.  I mean, they came from that segment of the community, whereas it was later that the blacks who we had black people among the founders.  A number of ministers were--actually ten black ministers signed the call to organize the NAACP, and who were among the founders of the association.
Speaker 1: And who were they?
Speaker 2: You want all of their names?  Well, there weren't--not ten black, about six black.  Alexander Walters, Reverend Charles [H.] Parkhurst, Reverend Jenkin Lloyd Jones, Reverend Francis J. Grimke, Bishop Alexander Walters, and Reverend M. St. Croix Wright.  They were of that number black.  And of course we've had clergy active and engaged in this movement since its founding and serving on the board of directors.  As a matter of fact, the chairmen, among the chairmen of our board of directors have been Dr. Channing [H.] Tobias, who was a minister, a Methodist minister.  Very respected, distinguished minister.  Bishop, and Bishop Stephen Gill Spottswood, who was an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopalian] Zion bishop.  Both of whom served as chairmen.  Dr. Tobias from 1953 to 1960, and Bishop Spottswood from 1961 to 1975 as chairman of the board of directors, which is the most powerful position on the board of course, the chairmanship is.
Speaker 1: So, you were talking about the changes in the leaders reflecting at the time.
Speaker 2: Yes, from the white leadership.  The first black leadership in the position of executive secretary was James Weldon Johnson.  As the constituency grew, and branches were organized across the country, you had increasing numbers of black members and the black voices and the people who were available to be of service and could be heard.  They were off the ground by this time.  And as a result, they elected a black executive secretary for the first time.  There was a consensus election in 1917.  And from that point on, all of the executive heads, the paid heads of the NAACP have been black.  And actually they have come from different disciplines.  Walter White actually was an insurance man in Atlanta, Georgia.  He was a volunteer active in the Civil Rights Movement, but he wasn't engaged in it professionally.  But his business was insurance when he was selected to become the chief executive of the NAACP.
Speaker 1: And what year was that again?
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-one [1931].
Speaker 1: Thirty-one [1931].
Speaker 2: Atlanta, Georgia, that's where he came from.  And Roy Wilkins was the editor of the Kansas City Call [The Call] out in Kansas City [Missouri].  He lived, his home was in Minneapolis [Minnesota] and St. Paul, Minnesota.  But he had moved to Kansas City after he graduated from the University of Minnesota [Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota], majored in journalism.  And then he wound up serving as editor of the Kansas City Call.  And that's where he was--
Speaker 1: Now, is the Kansas City Call, was it a--is it a black--?
Speaker 2: Yes, of course, a black paper in Kansas City, Missouri.  And he came to the NAACP in the late '30s [1930s], about 1939 as, he came in as administrator.  And he served in that--he served under Walter White during that time.  And when Walter White died, he then succeeded him as executive director of the NAACP, executive secretary, I'm sorry.  And it was changed to executive director during Wilkins' tenure.
Story_ID: 261724
Speaker 1: And following Mr. [Roy] Wilkins, of course, [HistoryMaker Reverend] Benjamin Hooks.  At the time he was selected, he was chairman of the FCC [Federal Communication Commission] in Washington [D.C.], but Mr. Hooks had been a judge--he's from Memphis, Tennessee--a judge and practicing attorney.  And, also an ordained Baptist clergyman.  And he was appointed by, as I recall, Richard Nixon, President [Richard Milhous] Nixon, to the FCC back in--I don't know the year now, but it was prior, obviously, to 1977.  He had served several years at the FC, Federal Communications Commission when he was selected to become the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And he agreed to come on board.  And then he was succeeded by [HistoryMaker] Benjamin F. Chavis [Jr.], who was a minster, and he worked for the National Council of Churches of Christ as the regional director.  He was posted in Ohio, Cleveland [Ohio], as I recall, was where he was at the time he was selected.  And Earl Shinhoster had been the regional director of what we call our Region 5, which is the southeast Atlantic, the Confederate states, which is our most populous region.  And he was brought in to the national office to become national field director.  And he was serving in that position when he, when Mr. Chavis, Reverend Chavis, left the organization in August, 1994.  And in September Earl was appointed to be the acting head, executive director.  And in 1996, Kweisi Mfume who had been a congressman for ten years--he had a radio and TV program.  He had been in media, in journalism, in talk media, broadcast media, I guess I should call it, as well as serving as the congressman from Baltimore [Maryland] for more than ten years.  I think it was somewhere more than ten years.  And in February 1996, he became president CEO.  And then in December 2004, this is '5 [2005], 2004, is when he left the NAACP, December 30th, and has now been succeeded of course by Mr. [Bruce S.] Gordon.  And you know Mr. Mfume is also running for the [U.S.] Senate from Balt- from, from Maryland.  Sarbanes, Senator [Paul] Sarbanes is not running for re-election and that spot is open.  So Mr. Mfume is running.  So that pretty much--I hope that gives you a bird's eye view of the national leadership of the association, its character.
Story_ID: 261725
Speaker 1: Today, we have a board of directors which has sixty-four members.  And they're elected and come from different parts of the country.  And we--and they serve, the terms are three years.  And they're--you know the terms expire--one third of the membership expires, terms expire each year, you understand how that works.  We have what we call an NAACP Special Contribution Fund which is a fund established, a 501(c)(3) of course, to generate monies to support our programs.  That's its function.  And that has a board of trustees.  And they come from the business community, or they represent certain assets and resources.  In other words, they are chosen by what they can bring to this board of trustees which has fundraising as its primary purpose, and the support of our NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] programs.  And they, again, are elected in terms of--one third is elected each year, or re-elected.  And those are the two bodies which are the governing bodies.  The board of directors is the policy governing body of our organization.  And the board of trustees is a fundraising arm of the association on a national level.  And the people who come onto that board, as I said, either are a part of businesses or entities which can provide support for the NAACP, either financial or in kind services, or from other--they represent other assets and resources in the community which would be beneficial, which are beneficial to the association.  And beyond that, you have our annual conventions, at which resolutions are passed which set the policy of the association and goals for the ensuing year.  The resolutions originate in branches across the country.  They come to a resolutions committee, which is elected.  That committee sees, views those and analyzes the resolutions under the guidance of our legal department for conformance to, you know, the rules and regulations of the association.  And then from that process, those which are resolutions which do conform, are put into a public--a document, I should say, which is then distributed to all of our voting delegates at the convention.  And during the course of the convention, they vote on those resolutions.  And they, in turn, become the prevailing policy on whatever issues they might be.  Usually a resolution either reiterates a position we already have for more clarity, or it establishes a position on something, maybe, on which we do not have a position.  And that becomes the mandatory guideline for the staff as well as for the NAACP branches across the country.  And finally, we meet--we have seven geographic regions.  And our states are divided and clustered in those regions.  As I told you, you're in the eleven state region of Region 2 at the moment, this moment.  And these regions also have leadership training conferences once a year.  And they bring in the volunteer leader constituents who come from the branches in that region to this conference, to discuss programs and policies and be oriented on NAACP issues, positions on issues and procedures and so forth.  And that of course is--precedes the annual convention, which is held in July each year.  The regional conferences are held in the spring, then the state conferences meet in the fall.  You go from the state conference, then to the regional conference.  From the regional conference to the national convention.  And, of course, those are the vehicles through which our members actively engage and participating in the programmatic activities and policy plans of the NAACP.  I hope that answers your question.  And the staff provides support for these various activities, a national staff is--has, we have for example a program, a director of programs, or we have somebody who's concerned about education.  And they provide guidance and, and set--help, shall I say, clarify and set--delineate the NAACP positions on issues in education for the guidance of our units and our members.
Story_ID: 261726
Speaker 1: So, what would you like for your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) A job well done.  Have had the opportunity over these years to help train and mentor incoming staff people.  And I hope I've been able to do it effectively, and those who, you know, new staff and those who go into a new position.  At the moment we have a staff person who's assuming a new position here [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)] out of this office, but not confined to this area.  And I have the present opportunity of mentoring that particular staff person with the hope that by the time we finish our orientation period over these next weeks and months, that she will have benefitted by it, to the extent that she won't make any mistakes (laughter).
Story_ID: 261727
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We've talked somewhat about your hopes for the African American community.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Often what we hear--I mean, well, I shouldn't say we.  I, you know, I hear a lot of what the problems are.  What I want ask what, what I would like in this oral history are some--a to-do list.  Things we can do that will make a difference.  Not that just this is the problem, but perhaps here's a solution.
Speaker 2: Well, we can assume an active role in our own immediate communities.  For example, are we looking at our neighborhood schools, and have we noticed a student, a child, who needs tutoring?  That's something we can do without any extraordinary skills or special training.  Have we noticed in our own community the needs of some of our senior citizens?  That's another thing in which we can engage.  Are we active in any organization, or have we reached out to our community board?  Since we're talking about our community.  There are established organizations in the community to provide service.  NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] is not a service organization as such, you understand.  It provides guidance and help and so forth.  But there are service organizations in our community which are attempting to see that people receive adequate clothing and help them find a place to live.  Are we doing that?  Are we working with a literacy program?  Are we encouraging people to go and register to vote?  Those are essential things that anybody can do.  And I would like to see more of that happening in--when I say, "Your community," I mean your immediate neighborhood in which one might live.  And are we speaking out?  Are we asking our political leaders to address issues which affect our curbs and our--the quality of our garbage disposal collection, collection on the streets, cleaning our streets in these, in neighborhoods which are overcrowded or which have--in which less affluent people live?
Story_ID: 261728
Speaker 1: Your father [Ollie Bond] taught or spoke to you a lot about voting.  What did he see and what do you see as voting being a powerful tool for us to engage in?
Speaker 2: Equal opportunity, and to make our leadership be mindful of us and listen to its constituents.  Your vote speaks, he would always say, "A vote speaks for me."  And he died much younger.  You don't hear me talk about him much, he was sixty-eight when he died.  So it's been a long time, but during that sixty-eight years, he was very active in this--in pursuit of justice and equal treatment.  He was greatly concerned about that.  And that was an overriding issue in his life.  He was willing to make sacrifices for that principle.  He was a very principled man.
Speaker 1: And now I'm gonna ask you just something that's almost impossible, but sort of get into your father's head, because he had come from somewhat of an affluent family, and he--
Speaker 2: Well, in the South, yes, I guess.  His father [Andrew Bond] had five hundred acres of land, and he had been a--what do they call it--high sheriff.  And go on, you were asking me a question.
Speaker 1: But so, where did he get this sense of, "I've got to reach back and pull somebody else up with me?"
Speaker 2: His father had a sense of concern for justice.  And of course his mother [Aurelia Anderson Bond] was the daughter of a slave [Jane Anderson], a former--you know, she had been freed, but of a slave.  It was a--the mother was mixed, the white owner [John Sevier] was the father of his mother.  You know how that works.  And he felt the injustice of blacks around him not being able to go to school.  At that point, they lived out in the country, and there was no school around, but his mother was a teacher.  She taught children in a little one room place there at the turn of the century.  He was born in 1893, and it was after slavery, obviously, three decades later.  But he experienced this, this first hand understanding of the way blacks, because of their color, were denied the right to go to the school, the available school.  And, in fact, his mother taught them to read and write and so forth and so on.  So it came from within the context of his home environment.  The concerns his parents felt about the blacks who had lesser opportunities and who were denied just basic, fundamental rights.
Story_ID: 261729
Speaker 1: --Can you just give us that story and then we'll have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I would rather--I don't, I'm not prepared really, because the details.  It would be important on the public for--you know, on a record like this.  But we did have a meeting to support Ambassador [HistoryMaker Andrew] Young when he was having, encountering the difficulty and was being pressured to resign from his post.  At that point, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] called a meeting of black leaders and representatives from various parts of the country.  And they assembled at the New York [New York] office, at our national headquarters, to discuss this issue and determine how they could address it effectively.
Speaker 1: So how was the issue resolved?
Speaker 2: Well, they supported the ambassador.  That wasn't--it was not--it was just a question of the character and quality of the way--the message that they wanted to publicize and submit and issue, I should say.
Story_ID: 261730
Speaker 1: Why did you agree to become a part of The HistoryMakers?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock, who was a former coworker, asked me to do so, and I said, "No, I don't see what useful purpose could be served by my doing it.  You could get some people of note, name and whatever to do it."  And he said, "No, we are trying to--we have a grant," you know, I'm a fundraiser also.  And when he said that we had gotten a grant for this to, for this project, I said to myself, "Well, somebody felt it was worthwhile."  And then we talked about what the project aimed to do and why he felt that it was important to have.  They weren't--they didn't want just nationally-known people.  They wanted people who were actively engaged in living in the course of their lives.  And he was determined that I was an example of the kind of--of that kind of person.  So, eventually reason prevailed, I guess, and I agreed that, that I would do it, but still decrying the fact that I felt that there would be somebody better at this than I.
Speaker 1: But after having spent the hours with us, you understand.  After having--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not sure.  I mean, it gave me a chance to talk and to expound, but now the--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You understand the importance of it.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lasting benefits or the benefits of this have yet to be judged.  Maybe, I don't know, it might be, might seem, at some point, when--if I get a copy of this, my relatives will probably think it's a great thing to have in the family memorabilia.
Speaker 1: Of course.  But also, the nation will think it's a great thing to have.
Speaker 2: That was Paul's point.  And I said, "You're being grandiose at this point."  But, I could see that such a project is worthwhile, and if it felt that I could truly make a contribution, certainly I was--I became willing to do so.
Story_ID: 261731
Speaker 1: Why do you think the leadership here at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] now, the president CEO, has come from the business world?  And we're seeing that trend throughout the country.  I mean, like [Mayor Michael] Bloomberg, here in New York City [New York, New York], is now the mayor.
Speaker 2: Why do you think?  Well, we had an assorted search committee.  We had politicians on the search committee, nonprofit representatives, and some businesspeople.  That was the combination of the nine members of that search committee.  But implicit in the leadership, in this position in the NAACP, one--I would say probably up to 50 percent of the time and energies are necessarily, are necessary, to fundraising.  And to generating to support, that is substantive support, of the NAACP, in addition to providing--being a spokesperson for the association the titular head, the paid head of this organization, has probably 50 percent of his or her responsibility is fundraising and structuring, generating the funds and putting together the kind of a team which can cause this to happen, which is the complement to having the ability to implement your programs.  Without funds, you can't implement your programs, and without programs you can't get funds.  Like the dog chasing his tail.  But they must be concurrent.  We must have substantive programs for that person.  The NAACP is what the marketers call a brand name.  It's an universal name.  And it's something the person has a lot with which to work from the beginning.  You may not--you may dislike it, but you know about it.  You may know, you may like it, but it is one of the most recognized names in our society.  Those initials, NAACP: either supported, praised, or damned, whatever.  So, it's looking at the background of Mr. [Bruce S.] Gordon, I would judge that the search committee felt that he filled the needs of the category of things which the association needed: to provide skilled leadership.  He had been a leader in an entity of which there were 35,000 employees.  He had been successful in that respect.  He had connections in the business community.  It was presumed that he had, and I'm sure they verified that.  And he also had an excellent, has an excellent reputation in the community, in the larger community.  And I think, I would judge that it was felt that in his person, he met the standards and the criteria, the ideal criteria that--for which the search committee had been instructed to seek.
Story_ID: 261732
Speaker 1: On this photo I'm seated in the center of the first row at age three with my puppy.  My mother [Mattye Tollette Bond] who was the teacher of that class, is seated directly behind me.  That was taken in Brownsville, Tennessee, about 1930.
Speaker 2: That was graduation day for my mother who returned to college and graduated in 1932.  I'm sitting on the arm of my father's [Ollie Bond] chair, standing behind me is my mother and next to her are my two sisters, Vivian [ph.] and Marion [Bond Jordan].
Speaker 1: This was taken in Baltimore, Maryland.  My first field assignment, actually.  Dr. Lillie M. [Carroll] Jackson, president of the Baltimore branch [of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)], is on my right, my left.  And Henry [Green] Parks [Jr.], the president of Parks Sausage Company [Baltimore, Maryland], is making a contribution as I stand between them.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Just repeat the year.
Speaker 1: The year is 1954.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Thank you.
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in the Baltimore office, NAACP, in 1954, with a group of volunteer NAACP members who were membership campaign solicitors.  On the--on my left is Dr. Lillie M. Jackson, president of the branch.  I'm trying to think.  The lady on the end, I believe her name was Mrs. Hawkins [ph.].  The man's name--that was a Mr. Freeman [ph.].  The next person was a Mrs. Tercell [ph.].  I'm in the center.  And the lady on--I'm sorry, I don't remember her name.  And the next lady at the very end is Dr. Lillie M. Jackson, branch president.
Speaker 2: That picture was taken in 1955, and it was taken in Washington, D.C.  Henry Parks, again, is a businessman who is supporting the NAACP campaign in Washington.  Next to him is Mrs. Eula Watts, and next to her I am standing.  And next--the person next to me is a Mrs. Welcome [ph.].  And they are branch volunteers.  And as I said, this was taken in 1955 in the Washington, D.C. branch office.
Speaker 1: That picture was taken about 1960 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.  On the left is the late Judge Henry Smith, who was president of the Pittsburgh branch.  My sister, the late Mrs. Marion [Bond] Jordan, who was executive secretary of the Pittsburgh branch.  Next to her is Mrs. Daisy Lampkin who is--who was an outstanding membership solicitor and also a member of our national board.  I am standing next to her.  And, on the end, is Reverend Fogarty [ph.], who was a branch official as well as a leading clergyman in the City of Pittsburgh.
Speaker 2: This is one of our stalwart and excellent membership campaign solicitors.  His last name is Freeman, Mr. Freeman [ph.].  And he is getting an award from me at the end of the membership campaign.  And, of course, that is in Baltimore, Maryland, and that would be about 1956.
Speaker 1: That picture was taken at the home of Mr. Warren, Mr. and Mrs. [HistoryMaker] Warren Marr [II].  Warren Marr was the editor of our Crisis magazine, and [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Carmel] Marr you can see just at the left hand corner of the photograph.  Seated at the piano is the late great pianist Eubie Blake, who was performing, and he was also guest of honor for that evening.  It was an extraordinary occasion for me, and that was about 1960.
Speaker 2: That was a picture taken at the reception of our Executive Director Roy Wilkins, at our NAACP convention in Memphis, Tennessee in nineteen seven--approximately 1970.  In the center is our late office manager Mrs. Bobbie Branch.  And facing her was another leading NAACP-er, Dr. C. Delores Tucker, who was from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.  And that's at the executive director's NAACP reception.
Speaker 1: On this picture is at an NAACP annual meeting dinner here in New York City [New York, New York].  And that was taken about 1978 I would say.  And on the left I'm seated.  Between us is Dr. W. [William] Montague Cobb, who was chairman of NAACP board of directors, an outstanding physician and also an outstanding anthropologist and a marvelous raconteur of stories of all kinds.  On--seated next to him on the other side is Ms. Bonnie Bailer who was one of our fundraising consultants at that time here in New York City.
Speaker 2: That is a happy occasion, on the occasion of the seventieth birthday of the late Roy Wilkins, who was then executive director of the NAACP.  On his left, far left, is William J. Trent who was an official of the United Negro College Fund, and also had worked for Time Life publications at some point.  Next to him is Mrs. Aminda [Badeau] Wilkins, of course, the wife of Mr. Wilkins, and she was also New York City commissioner in the division of social services.  And, of course, center is Mr. Wilkins.  And on the right, greeting them, I am standing.  And it is a surprise birthday party, his seventieth birthday, which was held the Friday--which was held at the Carlyle Hotel [New York, New York] here in New York City.
Speaker 1: That is at the seventieth birthday of Mr. Wilkins, which is in--was in 1971.  And he--someone had given a toast to him, and he was responding and reacting to the toast.  And I don't know precisely what I was about, but I was happy.  Again, this was at the Hotel Carlyle here in New York City, in 1971.
Speaker 2: That is the seventieth birthday party, encore.  On the far left, in profile, is the late Dr. John Morsell, who was assistant executive secretary of the NAACP.  Standing next to him is [HistoryMaker] Ms. Rose Morgan who was a very famous beautician and NAACP supporter here in New York.  Of course, next to her, facing us, is Mr. Wilkins, the surprise guest of honor.  I'm standing next to him, and next to him is the Dr. George Cannon, who was chairman of our national NAACP life membership campaign and a well-known physician here in New York.  And again, this was taken in 1971 at the Hotel Carlyle.
