Story_ID: 360308
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My name is Edwin Joseph Rigaud [HistoryMaker Edwin Rigaud].  That's E-D-W-I-N, and the last name is R-I-G-A-U-D.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 25th, 1943, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Currently, I'm president and CEO of my own company.  It's a company that does plastic injection molding.  The name of the company is Enova [Enova Premier, LLC, Louisville, Kentucky], E-N-O-V-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you're also associated with the Underground Railroad and Freedom Center?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm the founding executive director of the National Underground Railroad Freedom Center [Cincinnati, Ohio] and currently serve as its board co-chair.
Speaker 1: All right.  I think we should probably just mention upfront that for many years, you were an executive in Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio], right?
Speaker 2: Right.  Yes, I started at Procter and Gamble in 1965 and served until 2001.  And during a portion of that time, I was an executive on loan to the National Underground Railroad Freedom Center.
Story_ID: 360309
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled by management to ask.  And they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, gumbo (laughter).
Speaker 1: That makes sense.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.  (Laughter) As in money.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year.
Speaker 2: I like the fall.
Speaker 1: All right.  Favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: South of France.
Speaker 1: All right.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's an acronym called HOFF, H-O-F-F.  And it stands for what my life stands for, which is honesty, openness, fairness and fun.
Story_ID: 360310
Speaker 1: I want to ask about your family history, and I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family, and your father's [Edwin Rigaud, Sr.] side.  But, we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give me your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, her name was--her maiden name was Mabel Perrilliat [Mabel Perrilliat Rigaud].  And it's M-A-B-E-L, P-E-R-R-I-L-L-I-A-T, and she was born in 1915 in a small town outside of New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about her family?  How far back can you trace your mother's ancestors?
Speaker 2: I've actually just started the process of tracing the family, and I've done more on my father's side.  On my mother's side, I've just begun and I haven't gone very far back.  I've been able to locate her father [Mitchell Perrilliat] and mother [Ernestine Marquez Bahm], and just begun to find their parents.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So back to your grandparents on your, or the great-grandparents on your--
Speaker 2: Great-grandparents.
Speaker 1: --on your mother's side.
Speaker 2: On my mother's side.
Speaker 1: What do you know about their activities?  What were they doing?
Speaker 2: I don't have a good idea.  I know that my mother's father was killed in an industrial accident.  So, he was a plant worker, and he was injured and killed by steam that was emitting from the plant.  And I don't know what kind of plant it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any other stories from that side?  I mean, that was in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: It was in Louisiana, and it was in a kind of a rural area outside of New Orleans.  And I really don't know a lot on my mother's side.  My mother is still alive.  Her memory is not that great.  She's almost ninety-one years old, but I've gotten a little help from her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, as I said, I just started digging.
Speaker 1: So did your grandfather die early in her, you know, life?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was--it was before her teens.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she talk about growing up and what it was like?
Speaker 2: Not a whole lot, no.  I really don't know much about her growing up period.
Speaker 1: Did she have a chance to go to school, or pursue (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I think she went to high school, and she became a seamstress, and she also taught sewing.  And I can remember the sewing classes that she did in our home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, she became a seamstress early in life and--
Speaker 2: Yes, and I think that she learned that trade from her mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So something was passed down from one generation to the next?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, anything else about your mother's side of the family?
Speaker 2: No, not at this point.
Story_ID: 360311
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name is the same as mine, Edwin Joseph Rigaud [Edwin Rigaud, Sr.].  And I was a junior and spelled the same.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  He was born in New Orleans [Louisiana], roughly 1919 or so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, what do you know about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: A little more than on the mother's [Mabel Perrilliat Rigaud] side.  Again, just beginning to dig through this.  I actually have been able to go back a few generations and I know that on the maternal side, there was a bit of Irish influence in the family.  My great-great-grandfather, his name was Paris McCutcheon.  That's P-A-R-I-S, M-C-C-U-T-C-H-E-O-N, and I actually have been able to trace when he came into the country from Ireland, from Northern Ireland. And I'm not sure what his trade was or profession was, and he was, I guess, the father of Maggie McCutcheon Gray [Mary McCutcheon Gray], my great-grandmother.  And she was in turn the mother of my grandmother Mabel [Mabel Gray Rigaud], also Mabel, M-A-B-E-L, Mabel Gray, G-R-A-Y, Gray.  And Mabel was married to Albert Rigaud.  And I've been able to go back on the Rigaud side a bit too.  I'd have to look at the charts to remember all this, but then Albert was the father of Edwin, my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So as far back as you can go right now, is to, well, okay.  All right so--
Speaker 2: I actually have Albert's father and I'm pretty sure about, in turn, his father, so it's about four generations.
Story_ID: 360312
Speaker 1: Now, I was reading some of the material and is there a reason to believe that you may be descended from the governor, former French governor of Louisiana, Rigaud [Pierre de Rigaud] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I'm not sure that that one's connected, and on the maternal side, I've been able to find a name, Boutin, B-O-U-T-I-N, that was in the wine country in France.  And that one's pretty clear that there was a French connection there.  On the paternal side, however, I'm having difficulty finding where the Rigauds came from.  There are several possibilities.  Haiti is a distinct possibility.  And Rigauds were popular, and powerful, and sometimes controversial name in Haiti.  But I haven't actually made--documented the specific connection if there is one there.  There's also a possibility of a slave relationship in Louisiana.  There was a Rigaud slave owner that I've located, and he did have a couple slaves with the first names of some of my descendants.  But I don't have any proof that that was the connection either.  And then the third route would be through this governor who came really from Canada by way of France, and was named governor by his father [Philippe de Rigaud].  And the only thing I know about this guy is that he gave elaborate parties in New Orleans [Louisiana].  He lived in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], you know, which was the sea capital, but he would have these elaborate parties, and he also had known concubines.  And he would give his name to these--to the offspring.  So (laughter), I don't know.  I really don't know the full origin.  Now, I do know that we have a lot of mix.  I mean, we've got Native American, we've got French, we've got some Spanish on my mother's [Mabel Perrilliat Rigaud] side.  It's quite a mixed family.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  There's a lot of different way you can go, though.  A lot of trails that may lead to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and when I really devote some significant time, and I've started, but when I devote some significant time to this, I think I'm going to be able to uncover most of what I need to, to put the tree together.  It just so happens that the Freedom Center [National Underground Railroad Freedom Center, Cincinnati, Ohio] had a genealogy department, and they've been very helpful to me.  It's actually staffed by Mormon volunteers who know how to do this kind of research, and so I'm going to be leaning on them pretty heavily since I created that department.  And it's free for people to do this.  It's really exciting.
Story_ID: 360313
Speaker 1: What do you know about Albert Rigaud and his activities?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a painter and plasterer, housepainter and plasterer.  And that seems to be a fairly common trade within our family, and within the neighborhood we lived in, which was the 7th Ward in New Orleans [Louisiana].  A lot of so called Creoles in that ward, and as you probably know, there was a lot of internal discrimination among blacks in Louisiana, in New Orleans.  You know, very much impacted by skin color.  And so, the 7th Ward was a place where there were relatively fair skinned blacks who were upwardly mobile, but poor by any standard.
Speaker 1: How would you define a Creole?  Because I've heard different ways of describing a Creole.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and there are different ways.  I always include African, some African component.  An African American component to Creole, some people don't.  But also Spanish, and French, and perhaps even an Acadian mix, but different from Cajun.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  But Creoles have a French culture.  The language--did you hear Creole spoken when you--
Speaker 2: I heard some when I was growing up.  It wasn't in my household, but, you know, my grandmother, both sides, grandmothers [Ernestine Marquez Bahm and Mabel Gray Rigaud] spoke it, patois or whatever.  But I wasn't exposed to very much.
Story_ID: 360314
Speaker 1: Did your father [Edwin Rigaud, Sr.] talk about growing up in the 7th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Not a lot, but, you know, he was a career serviceman.  He spent time in the [U.S.] Navy Seabees and [U.S.] Army.  Most of his career was in the Army, and he actually retired from the Army with significant service, over twenty years.  He was an avid fisherman and hunter, and also an avid reader.  But a bit of a rogue, as well.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Loved to drink, loved to gamble, loved to chase women.  (Laughter) He was a typical Creole in New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's typical of New Orleans Creole behavior (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Very much so.  You know, there's a bar on every corner.  And I daresay, if I went to New Orleans prior to Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], I could go to my corner where I lived, and the bar there and find some of my high school buddies drinking beer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I take it he served in World War II [WWII] then?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in Korea.
Speaker 1: All right.  Korea and so he was in the service from the '40s [1940s] I guess, to the early '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, okay.
Speaker 2: He was out--yeah, that's right.  He came out in the early or mid-'60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he kind of got out just as Vietnam [Vietnam War] was--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was starting up.
Speaker 2: My brother [Ronald Rigaud] wound up going to Vietnam.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Any stories about your father that you want to tell us?
Speaker 2: There are many stories about my father (laughter).  Well, I know that he had a tremendous influence on my academic interests and pursuits, because he read everything he could get his hands on.  He loved Reader's Digest, for example, and he would just devour those when he wasn't out drinking and gambling.  And it sparked an interest for me in reading and sparring with him intellectually.  You know, he was not a high school graduate, although, he got his equivalence in the Army and then he got his college equivalency in the Army.  So, he was very smart, but not formally educated, and he would spar with me all the while I was growing up.  You know, we'd do spelling of words, and usage of the language.  It, it kept me interested in the academic side.
Story_ID: 360315
Speaker 1: However, he [Rigaud's father, Edwin Rigaud, Sr.] always wanted me to go fishing and hunting with him, which I rarely did.  My youngest, my young brother [Ronald Rigaud] would go fishing and hunting every chance he got with my dad.  I'd stay home and do homework.  There is a story comes out of that, which--I was, I had asthma as a kid and I think my dad felt like I was a weakling as a result.  And so we had some tension there.  But I had a serious bout with asthma when I was in the fourth grade, and I had to stay out the entire first semester of fourth grade.  And as I was at home and lying around, I felt I needed to do something, not lose that precious time.  There was a set of encyclopedia that my mother [Mabel Perrilliat Rigaud] had scraped up pennies to purchase.  In fact, she paid it on a weekly basis.  Compton's Encyclopedia ['Compton's Pictured Encyclopedia'; 'Compton's by Britannica'], which I remember so, so well.  I saw them sitting there, and I thought, I'm going to read every one of these.  And I did from A-Z.  Read every, every book.  And coming out of that, I was prepared academically to do almost anything.  The only thing I missed during that first semester was they were learning how to diagram sentences.  And so when I got back in school, they were already advanced in diagramming sentences, and it was like something from outer space.  I didn't know what they were doing.  But it took me a little while, but I picked up on that and caught up with the class, but I was well ahead.
Speaker 2: That is quite a feat, you know, to go through the entire encyclopedia.  Did you ever watch GE's [General Electric] 'College Bowl,' ['The General Electric College Bowl'] or 'Jeopardy,' or those kinds of shows while you were--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah, sure.
Speaker 2: You probably would have been a very good--(laughter) on those quiz shows, I guess.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and it was interesting because the way I read, I had more of a photographic memory, and so I always remembered things by where they were positioned on a page in a book, you know, and I had a picture of it.  Which has its benefits when it's still fresh, but it's not very good when that photograph starts to fade (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's quite a feat though.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 360316
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: That's a really good question, by the way.  Well, that was one of them.  Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah I do.  My earliest childhood memory, I was probably around three years old.  I know it was prior to joining kindergarten.  I loved to draw.  You know, every chance I got, I was drawing.  And it was my mother [Mabel Perrilliat Rigaud] who encouraged me.  And, you know, my mother gave me a lot of strokes ego wise, and she's, she was always lifting me saying I was, you know, the king of the world, basically, and that I could do anything.  And she would encourage this drawing, little did I know at the time she was doing it to get rid of me (laughter), you know, keep me quiet while she was doing her sewing and teaching classes.  But I would draw something, take it in to her and, you know, look for her appreciation and she would always glow and say, "Oh son, that's so beautiful!  Go make mama another one."  And I'd run off, and, you know, spend the next forty-five minutes doing another one.  And I actually became fairly accomplished as an artist during high school [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and college [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], made a lot of side money doing that, as well as playing music.  So--
Story_ID: 360317
Speaker 1: There was some information about a portraititure artist in the court of Louis XIV, who was the official--name Rigaud, named Hyacinthe Rigaud.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They actually in France they pronounce it Easynth, which is kind of weird, and there's also in my family, Epolyte [ph.], which sometimes is pronounced Hippolyte Rigaud, and that's one of the great-great-great-grandfathers.  And if you look at the Rigauds in France, and Rigauds in Haiti, you'll find an interesting trend.  The Rigauds in France were artists, and dancers, and musicians.  The Rigauds in Haiti were pharmacists, scientists, drug apothecary managers, and scientists, and also politicians.  They served--
Speaker 1: Wasn't there an Andre Rigaud or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, Andre Rigaud was with Toussaint L'Ouverture was kind of his right hand man.  In fact, when they captured the island, they split it up, and he got a portion of it and Toussaint the other portion, and they eventually became mortal enemies.  But, my suspicion is that that's really the Rigaud side, although they came from France.  So, there's, you know, ultimately a connection in France.  It's a fairly common name in parts of France.
Speaker 1: Okay that's interesting.  So you like to draw and became a painter on the side, basically, you said later on (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Yes.
Story_ID: 360318
Speaker 1: Do you think that, when you look back, do you think that you take more after your mother [Mabel Perrilliat Rigaud] or your father [Edwin Rigaud, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Very definitely my father, but I got some of my mother's soft spots, I think.  My dad was very tough on people.  I'm not.  I'm much more of a conciliator than he ever was.  He was a fighter, I mean, a raw fighter.  And he was always engaged in physical battles and confrontations with people.  Very tough man.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very discipline oriented.  He was a master sergeant.  And, you know, he would--that's the way he was at home.
Story_ID: 360319
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up?  Did you grow up in the same place?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was in the same house all the way through college [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  And, I think, probably the most impactful sights, smells, sounds--my dad [Edwin Rigaud, Sr.] would always bring home fresh game, sacks of oysters, fish, crabs.  I mean, we'd have these bales of crabs that would go in the bathtub, sprinkled with salt to get them to spit out all their dirt.  And we'd have boiled crabs.  We'd together would open oysters, my brother [Ronald Rigaud], my dad and I--open oysters and, you know, they were for frying purposes, however, when we were opening 'em, every other one was (slurps), you know, raw oysters.  And I still today, that's, in terms of favorite foods, there's gumbo, but there's also raw oysters, probably more so than gumbo.  In fact, I just got sick on some a couple of weeks ago (laughter).
Story_ID: 360320
Speaker 1: Was Mardi Gras a big thing in your family?  Well, we were talking about sights and sounds and smells, I don't want to disrupt that, I should go back to that maybe.  What other sights and sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: I would say in the--oh yeah, waking up to the radio in the morning was a big deal.  My mother [Mabel Perrilliat Rigaud] would put on the breakfast parade show ['Don McNeill's Breakfast Club'] (laughter) to wake us up. And there'd be these marches, and I was in a Catholic elementary school, and you know, we'd rush to get dressed--it was only a half a block away.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Corpus Christi.  C-O-R-P-U-S, C-H-R-I-S-T-I, Corpus Christi School [Corpus Christi Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  Corpus Christi Parish [Corpus Christi-Epiphany Catholic Church, New Orleans, Louisiana] is a very famous parish.  It was the largest African American Catholic parish in the world, or maybe it was in the Western Hemisphere, but I think it was in the world.  And it was run by Blessed Sacrament nuns [Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament].  It's the same order of nuns who run Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They specialize in serving poor blacks and Native Americans.  And they built a lot of schools all over the South and the West--
Speaker 1: I'm trying to think of the name of the nun that founded that.
Speaker 2: Mother Katharine Drexel.
Speaker 1: Katharine Drexel.
Speaker 2: And she's now Saint Katharine Drexel.
Speaker 1: I think she used her personal fortune to--
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.  She was ousted by her family, but they gave her some money.  She was--it was the Drexel family in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] was, you know, extremely wealthy.  But, when she decided to become a nun and serve black people, her family ousted her.  They didn't speak to her again.  And, of course, you know, it's people like Dr. Norman Francis [HistoryMaker Norman Francis] at Xavier University who are totally dedicated to this order of nuns.  I mean, they love Norman Francis and he loves them.  But anyway, I got sidetracked.
Speaker 1: You were talking about Corpus Christi School and we were talking about sights, sounds and smells, and Corpus Christi--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.  And when I got to school, they would line the kids up and they would play marches then to march into the building and into your seats and so forth.
Speaker 1: They were regular military marches, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you know, we have this image of New Orleans [Louisiana] as having these jazzy marches, you know, for the funerals.  But it wasn't that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  Semper fidelis kind of marches, and operatic marches, and, you know, I can still hear that music in my head.
Story_ID: 360321
Speaker 1: But, you know, we got exposed to the other kind of music, as well.  Now, Mardi Gras was not a big deal in our family, although, we, you know, enjoyed particularly the Indians [Native Americans].  You know, those beautiful costumes the Indians and Native--
Speaker 2: Wild Tchoupitoulas and different ones.
Speaker 1: Incredible.  And these folks would take, you know, a year to make these costumes and spend, basically, a fortune by comparison to what they had to produce them.  Extremely interesting and creative group of people.  My brother [Ronald Rigaud] and I, my brother's three years younger than me, went to one Mardi Gras.  This is very memorable.  We walked down Claiborne Avenue [New Orleans, Louisiana], saw the Indians, we went all the way into downtown, saw a lot of sights and sounds, a lot of crazy drunk people.  But it's some interesting costumes, as well.  We were walking back home, turned the corner, at that corner barroom, which was about three quarters of a block from our house.  And down the street, almost directly across the street from our, or in the street where our house was, we saw this guy dressed in a devil's costume.  And, you know, from a distance, he looked incredible.  So we kind of walked faster to try to catch up as he was crossing the street.  He went behind a car that was parked, so I went on this side of the car, and my brother went on the other side of the car because we wanted to see this thing up close.  And he disappeared.  He literally was gone.  And we looked inside the car, we tried the trunk of the car to see if it was open, and I tell you, to this day, he and I still talk about that.  We don't know how he did that.  You know, what was going on there, if we had seen an illusion together or what.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's strange.  A strange story.  Okay.  That's quite a story.
Speaker 1: I don't mess with Mardi Gras.
Speaker 2: I used to think that Mardi Gras and--I mean, New Orleans [Louisiana] can be a violent place--
Speaker 1: Anytime.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I've heard.
Speaker 1: If you get outside of the French [French Quarter, New Orleans, Louisiana], you know, the tourist areas, very, very risky.  I don't know what it's like now.  It's gonna be a different place.
Story_ID: 360322
Speaker 1: Were you surprised when Hurricane Katrina hit and there was so much, basically, terror going on in the black community after the hurricane.  Were you surprised at all at that?
Speaker 2: Larry [Larry Crowe], I'll tell you, this is something that I still think about having said prior to Katrina.  Almost sorry I said it, but my wife and I were down in New Orleans [Louisiana] visiting our relatives the month before Katrina hit.  We were driving to my mother's [Mabel Perrilliat Rigaud] house through some of the dilapidated neighborhoods, the housing stock was just run down, kids bare feet out in the street.  You could see and feel the poverty, it was just in your face.  And I turned to my wife, Carole [Carole Tyler Rigaud], and I said, "They ought to blow this place up and start all over again."  And that's how I felt about New Orleans.  I got out of New Orleans because there was very little hope to be successful there.  Particularly, for an African American.  But it was a place of rampant poverty, ignorance, poor education, and that's not what people see when they go to the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana].  I mean, they think it's a fun place, great food, great music, and it is.  It was.  But the vast majority of the people, and, particularly, the African Americans were impoverished and had no real hope.
Speaker 1: I know [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young talked about how rough it was growing up in New Orleans.  [HistoryMaker] Kalamu ya Salaam, a writer, called it a banana republic at a certain point.  I don't know, it's a--yet some people, you know, are adamant about, you know, going back and resettling the city and--
Speaker 2: Oh, culturally, you can't resist it.  It's a--it gets in your bones.  And I know we've had, we've had people who have come to Cincinnati [Ohio] and turned around and gone back to New Orleans because they just missed it so much.  On the other hand, we've had a lot of transplants who have stayed here as long as we have.  You know, and they're lifelong friends.  They love to visit, and they love to get back away from it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, in the 7th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana] where you're from, it's primarily Creole, and was the Mardi Gras and all that a big deal in the 7th Ward as much?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and in fact, there was a parade--what was that called?  Was a woman who had her own old fashion carriage kind of parade every year.  What was that called?  My sister was the queen one year in that parade.  And so it was a big deal.  I got--they had these huge fancy gowns, and they had horse-driven carriages and, you know, they'd go down our st- it started on our street and go around.  It was called the something-Creole parade, run by a very famous woman and I'm sor- I'm losing her, forgetting her name right now.  But she ran that thing for probably fifty years.
Speaker 1: What street did you live on when that parade took place?
Speaker 2: I lived on Johnson Street.  Lapeyrouse [Street] was where she lived, which was a block away.  And it would start on Lapeyrouse, come down Johnson and then go wherever, I don't know.  I'll have to--I'll think of the name.
Story_ID: 360323
Speaker 1: If you would read the encyclopedia from all the way through, you probably liked school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the highlight of my school life was high school.  St. Augustine's High School [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Now, this is--was it deliberately named for an African saint?  Or did you have any idea in those days?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not sure it was named for an African saint.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, St. Augustine [Augustine of Hippo] was a North African.  Now, whether he was black or not was another--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  Now right, right--
Speaker 1: --he was--
Speaker 2: --they never said he was black.  Okay.
Speaker 1: --North African, he was right--
Speaker 2: --okay--
Speaker 1: --in the area around Tunisia, I think.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that.  But St. Augustine's--you remember 'The Big Easy' movie?  They had a marching band, they had a high school marching band, in that movie.  That was St. Augustine High School.  It was run by an order of priests called Josephites [Society of St. Joseph of the Sacred Heart].  And they were very much like Jesuits in how they approached education and discipline.  They--but they focus on African Americans.  That order does, just like the Blessed Sacrament nuns [Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament].  They used a paddle.  They had gradations, you know, A through D classes, and they pushed academics to the highest level.  They were also excellent at sports.  But, of course, you know I'm talking about a period when schooling was all segregated.  Even the parochial schools were all segregated in New Orleans [Louisiana].  I excelled in that school.  Loved math, loved science, language.  I mean, I just ate it up.  I was vying to be valedictorian, and I was beat out by a couple of guys, one who was just brilliant, Raymond Moore.  And another who--Warren McKenna [Warren McKenna, Jr.] who's still a friend of mine, who's an eye surgeon down in New Orleans.  Warren beat me out for the number two spot by .0001 grade points or something.  And it was largely because I was cutting up in a religion class, and got (laughter) docked on my midterm.  I cut up a fair amount.  I had a good time, but I was also a good student.  But at St. Aug, when you did cut up, you got the paddle.
Speaker 1: Even--this is high school now?
Speaker 2: It's high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All the way up through your senior year?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  You got, I mean, I'm talking about some big strapping priest.  These guys could all handle themselves one on one with any of the kids.  Of course, if you fought one of them, you were automatically gone.  But you didn't want to take them on, because they--I mean, these guys were--they were tough.
Story_ID: 360324
Speaker 1: Father Hughes [ph.]--I'm sorry, I'm sorry-Father Berrigan--remember the Berrigan brothers?
Speaker 2: Daniel Berrigan and--
Speaker 1: Dan and, what was his--Philip [Philip Berrigan].  Philip was my English teacher at St. Augustine's High School [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: They were kind of noted for liberal politics in the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, pouring blood on the lawn of the White House [Washington, D.C.] and that kind of stuff.
Speaker 2: Being against the war [Vietnam War].
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.  In fact, Philip quit the order [Society of St. Joseph of the Sacred Heart] and married an ex-nun [Elizabeth McAlister Berrigan].
Speaker 2: I think I saw him first on the field of 'The Donahue Show' ['The Phil Donahue Show'], way back when.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think they're both deceased now.  So, I mean, you know, they, they were very, very progressive.  What I got out of St. Augustine's, and now I understand it in terms that I can describe, was I got my whole brain stimulated.  And, you know, I had this model for how you learn and how the brain works that I've stolen from research here and there.  Down to synthesize into a model that says that there are four quadrants in the brain.  And at the intellectual or cerebral level, the two functions--on the left side is analysis and on the right side is synthesis.  And then on the lower level of the brain, the social-emotional, or limbic level.  On the left side is orderliness, and on the right side expressiveness.  And there are ways you can stimulate each one of those quadrants.  And if you start very, very young, just as my mother [Mabel Perrilliat Rigaud] did.  Stimulating me for art, and I had a natural inclination for music.  Although, I didn't have an instrument to play.  If I had, I would have been a musician.  My uncle was a musician, my father [Edwin Rigaud, Sr.] played music.  But if you know how to stimulate a child's mind in those four quadrants repeatedly, it's guaranteed intellectual success.  So you have to keep working at analysis, you have to keep working at orderliness, following the rules and sequences and all that.  In synthesis, you can do things like art.  Art will help your synthesizing skills.  Expressiveness, that's not the verbal side I'm talking about.  That's on the left side.  Expressiveness on the right side is expression of feelings, emotions.  So things like music and dance stimulate that.  And you have to actually do those things, not just appreciate them in order for you to form the connections early and keep them stimulated and growing.  And, you know, if you don't use them, they will dry up, you know, your brain says you don't need 'em, so they get diminished.  But this is the key to, you know, education advancement in this country.  And so one of the things I did with that was to start an early childhood program a few years back that used that model.  And it was within that context of Head Start, which in Cincinnati [Ohio], the Head Start was four year olds and higher, and I said, "You know, we got to start at two."  Well, I managed to get a program in that started at three.  And I think now they are doing some work at two, but I did manage to get the governor interested and we got some money funded in Cincinnati to expand the Head Start program into three year olds using the model that I had developed.
Speaker 2: When you're saying then in school they--your school is good at developing all those--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --quadrants of the brain, yeah.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  Absolutely, that's what they did.  And, you know, and they required that there be discipline so that they could do this work.  And as I said, I got paddled (laughter).  Quite a few times.
Speaker 2: Now, were you involved in sports too in school, or--
Speaker 1: No, I was still going through asthma in high school.  Not as bad as I had it earlier.  And then ultimately, I outgrew it when I came here.  It wasn't until I was twenty-two years old that I got rid of my asthma.  I liked sports, but I never played organized sports.  Now, my kids on the other hand, have all excelled at sports and academically.  Probably because we were doing whole brain stuff on them (laughter).
Story_ID: 360325
Speaker 1: Were you paying attention to the Civil Rights Movement and what was going on?
Speaker 2: Not as much as I probably should have.  I can tell you, I have--I still have this--a telegram from Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] that came to me--got to me late.  I was the student body president, and so I got it as a student body president at Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  And it got to me the night before the Selma March [Selma to Montgomery March].  And it was inviting me to take part in the march.  And obviously, I couldn't get there that fast; but, yeah, I took note of what was going on.  And I especially took note when it hit me personally.  And the time it hit me personally--we didn't have much contact with white folks, except the service people, the [U.S.] Army people, that either my dad [Edwin Rigaud, Sr.] would bring home and insult, as he invariably would, or when we went to Camp Leroy Johnson [New Orleans, Louisiana] for whatever, you know, we were going there for.  Medical treatment or whatever services or the--what do you call them?  Food stores in the Army.
Speaker 1: The BX [sic.].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, or we were going to the PX [post exchange].  And I worked at the PX, carried out groceries and--but, where was I?
Speaker 1: Well, you said something happened--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --racial discrimination came close to home--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, well, real close to home.  It was 1961.  As I told you, I finished third in my class at St. Augustine [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana]--
Speaker 1: So, you graduated in '61 [1961]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I recognized this whole brain thing, although, not in those terms.  And, you know, I said, what am I going to do?  I've got to study, I'm going to college.  I was going to be the second to go to college in my family, I was the first to graduate college.  My sister got her degree after I did, but she started before I did.  I really didn't know what I wanted to study.  I was good at a lot of stuff.  I meant to turn this off. What I decided to do was go take a look at careers in the library.  And I found a biography on Frank Lloyd Wright.  That was it.  I said, "I'm going to be an architect because it's the best combination I know of the sciences, and math, engineering, and art."  One of the things I did was ask around, are there any black architects.  And my dad helped me to connect with a guy who knew that there were two African American architects in the South.  One that was in Texas, I think, and one in Georgia (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) John Chase [HistoryMaker John S. Chase], yeah.  I think it was John Chase.
Speaker 2: Is that who it was?
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: And he said, you know, "It can be done."
Story_ID: 360326
Speaker 1: I couldn't afford to go to any big school except the state school, I mean, LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  So I applied to LSU.  I found out that their school of architecture was pretty good.  Applied to LSU, got back this letter.  It was one sentence.  And it said, "We're sorry, but our policies will not allow you on our campus at this time."
Speaker 2: Will not allow you on the campus.
Speaker 1: I was devastated.  I mean, I was crushed.
Speaker 2: So you had--you really didn't--you weren't aware that was the case, huh?
Speaker 1: (Shakes head) I had no idea.  I mean, I'm applying to my state school.  You know, my f- the Rigaud family's been in Louisiana forever.  That's LSU.  I didn't--I mean, it never occurred to me.
Speaker 2: Do you think that older people just kind of shielded you all from that kind of realization, or what?
Speaker 1: I think it's back to this Creole thing.  I think they thought they were mostly white.  You know, that they could do anything that they wanted to do.  And it was a rude awakening, you know, that I wasn't equal to anybody else.  I still think about that thing.  I mean, that, that's a blow that I've never gotten over.  And somebody owes me for that one.  Not that I didn't come out all right and you know, make a success out of my life, but it took me in a totally different direction.  And I actually pursued fighting it with Dutch Morial [Ernest Morial].
Speaker 2: Was he a rep of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at that time?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he was.  I couldn't tell you for sure.  I mean, I don't know exactly what his role was, and his father [Walter Morial] too.  I mean--and they said, you know, "It's possible to fight this, but you've got to be willing to stay out of school for a couple of years while we fight it."  And I said, "No, I'm not willing to do that."  'Cause I knew that if I didn't go to college then, chances were I'd be off doing something else and never get there.  I had a scholarship to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  And I said, "I'm gonna to go to Xavier, study the closest thing I know to what I wanna do."  I was a really good chemistry student, top chemistry student.  And so I went into chemistry, and it turns out that Xavier was very, very strong in life sciences.  And so I did that.
Story_ID: 360327
Speaker 1: So you had a scholarship to Xavier--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was a blessing in disguise.  Xavier was great.  I have to say, it was easy for me.  Particularly, the first couple of years.  Because there, my high school [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] was so strong that a lot of what I had to do in those first couple of years was repetitive.  And I, I don't think they were able to challenge me as much as I probably should have been.  And I got a little lazy, but then I realized I was slipping, so I picked it up a little bit later, but I got more interested in leadership on campus.  And I'll say Xavier had an environment that was so conducive to allowing you as an African American to feel like you could do anything.
Speaker 1: Now, that's, that's--I've heard people have mixed feelings about the black colleges [HBCUs] in terms of that.  Some people felt like they were bad, they were too formal, too old-timey for you to really feel that.  And then others say the opposite like Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], formal and old-timey, but they said they got a lot from Benjamin Mays to make them feel like they could accomplish things and do things.  So your experience was pretty positive in that regard?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think the nuns were a little out of touch, you know, but I think the lay professors and just the environment on campus was stimulating.  Now, I had some nuns that did stretch me.  So it was kind of a mixed bag.  I mean, my math professor was particularly strong, and I fell in love with math.  Although, I was already pretty much in love with math, I got even stronger.  And, you know, I was winning first place positions in the class in calculus and, you know, that was like duck soup to me.  I love that stuff (laughter).
Story_ID: 360328
Speaker 1: In all and all, I got prepared and I think probably built my leadership skills there more than I did anything else.  You know, I was always president of my class, president of the student body, president of the fraternity.  When I was there, the only fraternity that was left on campus, 'cause the social fraternities had been kicked out for four years, was Alpha Phi Omega, which is a service fraternity, that I think grew out of the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America], which I was not a fan of the Boy Scouts.  But this service fraternity was the only place that guys like myself who wanted to be in a frat could go.  So what we did was we, basically, changed it into a social frat (laughter).  Ultimately, we got kicked off campus for a while too.  But some great, great friendships--
Speaker 2: And it was called Alpha Phi Omega?
Speaker 1: Alpha Phi Omega.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, you always assume that all the traditional, the Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], Kappa Alpha [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], and the AKA's [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], and Alpha Phi Alphas, and the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], and the Omegas [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], and the Sigmas [Sigma Gamma Rho Sorority], and the Kappas are always on every campus, but it wasn't true at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], huh?
Speaker 1: No, they got kicked off.  And I--Norman [HistoryMaker Norman Francis] was dean of men then, and I'm sure he had a say in that.
Speaker 2: That was Dr. Norman Francis, who is now the president, right?
Speaker 1: Right, Dr. Norman Francis, an absolute gem of a human being.  He was very discipline oriented.  And I think he--I wasn't there when they got booted off, but I'm sure Dr. Francis had a say in that.  But there I was, you know, on a campus that didn't have a social frat, and that was the only thing to do.  And the recruitment was easy, 'cause that was the only game in town.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you provided leadership in putting this fraternity--
Speaker 1: Well, when I got involved with the fraternity, I became its president and my wife-to-be [Carole Tyler Rigaud] was the fraternity sweetheart.
Story_ID: 360329
Speaker 1: So you met your wife [Carole Tyler Rigaud] at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we met in what was my freshman year and her sophomore year.  She got--we are almost exactly the same age, but she got skipped young in the class in grammar school, so she was a grade ahead of me at Xavier.  But there's a story about our meeting.  She was sitting in what was then called the co-op, it was the student center, small little building.  And she was eating lunch, and I was standing a few yards away with my best friend, and I said, "Aubrey [ph.], you see that young lady sitting over there?"  He said, "Yeah."  I said, "Do you know her?"  He said, "Sure, she's my lab partner."  And I said, "What's her name?"  And he said, "Carole Tyler."  I said, "Come on.  Introduce your buddy to Carole Tyler."  He said, "Sure."  So we went over, and he introduced me and Carole was eating this sandwich, and I said, "You mind sharing that sandwich?"  And she said, very sheepishly, "Sure."  She was shy as she could be.  And it was a peanut butter and jam sandwich (laughter).  And I ate this thing.  And I asked her out a couple of days later, and we went out.  We went to JT's jazz club in Gert Town [New Orleans, Louisiana], which is the little neighborhood surrounding Xavier.  Rough, rough neighborhood.  I mean, a dangerous neighborhood.  But all the students would go there.  And they go to J.T.'s, and they had the best jazz you ever wanna hear at J.T.'s.  So Carole and I went to J.T.'s and I'm listening to this jazz and this guy is on the saxophone, I said, "That guy is tremendous."  She says, "Yeah, that's my Uncle Red [Alvin Tyler]."  Red Tyler.  You remember the song 'Java' (singing melody)?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's Red Tyler.
Speaker 1: (Singing melody) Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Red wrote that, and the New Orleans [Louisiana] musician played it with some Peapound [ph.], not Peapound, the other one.
Speaker 1: Al Hirt.
Speaker 2: Al Hirt.  And--but we would go and listen to Red every chance we got.  And dated the whole four years, and we, in 1965, when I graduated, I asked Carole if she wanted to come up to Cincinnati [Ohio] with me.  I had gotten this offer at P and G [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio], and we got married two weeks after I graduated.  And on the day of our marriage, June 5th, 1965, we left our wedding reception to rush to the airport to catch a plane to come to Cincinnati to start working on Monday morning.
Speaker 1: Okay so you were hired by Procter and Gamble?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And I was hired in the research and development as a chemist.
Story_ID: 360330
Speaker 1: Let me go back to the music scene in New Orleans [Louisiana] for a minute
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Just before we get too far away from it.  But in those days, it's like Fats Domino was from New Orleans.  Did you--did he play locally a lot?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I ran into Fats in Mule's Bar [Mule's Bar and Restaurant, New Orleans, Louisiana] where everybody used to go to get sandwiches and play the pinball machine (laughter).  Fats would always be sitting at the bar with his buddies drinking beer, and I remember sitting next to him and seeing all the rings on his fingers.  And it was kind of a thrill, you know, to see Fats Domino, because he was very, very popular--
Speaker 1: He was a big, big--
Speaker 2: --so was Aaron Neville.
Speaker 1: --star.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Fats was a huge star around the country, especially around the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: But you know you flash forward to 1968--yeah, I think it was '68 [1968].  Carole [Carole Tyler Rigaud] and I went to Las Vegas [Nevada] and really that was our first--that was our honeymoon.  We hadn't had a honeymoon.  And we went to Las Vegas and ran into Fats, and went up and said hello to him and asked him how he was doing.  And he said, "Oh, you're good people from New Orleans."  He said, "Fat man's not doing so well."  He said, "Every cent that I make goes back into paying my gambling debt."  He said, "So I'm just working here for room and board."
Speaker 1: That's, that's really sad.  To think--'cause he really was a tremendous hit all over the country, you know.  I grew up near here in Dayton [Ohio], and Fats Domino was the biggest, you know, performer, you know, around here for a while.
Speaker 2: He was incredible.
Speaker 1: To the point people wondered what happened to him, and I think I heard on public radio that he's written a song that Fats is alive, he's not dead.  They thought he--
Speaker 2: They thought he had--
Speaker 1: --had died--
Speaker 2: --perished at Katrina [Hurricane Katerina].
Speaker 1: --in Katrina, yeah.
Speaker 2: But you know the other thing, is the 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana], now everybody knows about the 9th Ward, lower 9th Ward.  Fats built his home--the lower 9th Ward is where Fats lived, and he built a million dollar house.  You know, when a million dollar house was--
Speaker 1: --in those days, yeah, that was a--
Speaker 2: He built a million dollar house in the lower 9th Ward.  And, you know, I don't think I ever saw the house to tell you the truth.  But that had to stick out like a sore thumb.  'Cause they had old shacks, shanties in the lower 9th Ward.
Story_ID: 360331
Speaker 1: In fact, I dated a girl in the lower 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana].  Again, a very dangerous place.  And it's unfortunate, but in New Orleans [Louisiana] the racial discrimination within the black race according to skin color, it worked both ways.  You know, you've heard of the brown bag test?
Speaker 2: Yes right.
Speaker 1: It was true.  It was literally true.  If you tried--
Speaker 2: You mean for admittance to a certain place?
Speaker 1: A dance, a ball, you know, a Mardi Gras ball or something.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I always hear it as a joke not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was not--
Speaker 2: --not as something that is really--
Speaker 1: --it was not a joke.  It was true.  And so you might have a fair-skinned girl and a dark-skinned guy trying to get into a dance, and they wouldn't let the guy in.  "You can come in, but he can't come in."  I mean, can you imagine we perpetrated that on ourselves?  It's just mindboggling when you look back on it.
Speaker 2: Well, when you know where it comes from, you know, that slave experience and that--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean we were--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But I was dating this girl on the lower 9th Ward, and I'd catch the bus into the lower 9th Ward, all the way up to the last stop by the bus on Delray Avenue [ph.].  And I would go to her house, which was a few blocks from the bus line, and come back and catch the bus.  I was coming back one night, and a bunch of guys approached me and said, "Give us your money."  And I said, "I need the little money I have to get on the bus."  They said, "We don't care about that.  Give us your money."  You know, and they were about to do physical harm to me.  And I told 'em that I had just left my girlfriend's house, and I told 'em who she was, and they said, "Oh man!  Oh, oh, oh yeah.  Oh wow.  That's so-and-so's cousin.  Go ahead on, little brother."  And they let me go.
Speaker 2: It's who you know (laughter) that makes a difference, huh?
Speaker 1: (Nods head) But, I was sheltered.  I mean, I really, you know, I didn't know what was going on.  I was very sheltered with all these parochial schools I was in, so I stayed safe.
Story_ID: 360332
Speaker 1: Right after you get married [to Carole Tyler Rigaud], you come to Cincinnati [Ohio] to work for Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio], but how did that take place?  I mean, what contact was made with Procter and Gamble ahead of time?  And how--I mean, was Procter and Gamble looking for a black chemist, or looking for black people?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Procter and Gamble, I think their founding date is 1837, and this was 1965 and I was the first African American to be hired into research and development at a manager level in the history of the company.  And this was generally true.  There were a couple of blacks in sales and in community relations.  But by and large--and they had only come two or three years prior.  So it wasn't until the '60s [1960s] that Procter even thought about hiring any black folks, or any Jews for that matter.  They discriminated against Jews too.  They probably wouldn't say they discriminated, they probably would just say, you know, it was natural for them to hire white folks.
Speaker 1: With the money, they actually--well, I don't know.  I'm thinking that Procter and Gamble developed out of the soap.  They developed their products out of the basic soap industry, I guess.  Using the pork products, I guess, pork fat.
Speaker 2: They actually started with candles.
Speaker 1: Candles, really?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Out of pork tallow?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: And then--
Speaker 1: So maybe Jews wouldn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) then moved to--
Speaker 1: --I don't know if, an orthodox--
Speaker 2: Or if they were--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Jews wouldn't want to work for somebody doing that.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah that's, that's probably true, but I know one of the guys who was the president, I think, at J and J [Johnson and Johnson Products; Johnson and Johnson Services, Inc.] told me that he interviewed at Procter and Gamble, he was a Jewish fellow.  And he said that they told him that he was great, but that they couldn't hire him because he's Jewish (laughter).  I think that was in the '50s [1950s]. But at any rate, I came into this all white environment, it was really, really different.  I mean in--it was also a business environment, which I was totally unfamiliar with.  I had done some work at the Veterans Administration [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] and at the [U.S.] Department of Agriculture in summer jobs when I was in college [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  But I had never worked for a corporation, and especially one that was as demanding as P and G [Procter and Gamble Company] is.  I mean, they really are demanding.  So I was getting myself adjusted, and one of the first people who worked for me was a young fellow who had been born in Germany.  And he--you could tell initially, he was having trouble, you know, working for a black person.  But, you know, being the conciliator I am, I would kind of coax him along, and after a couple of months, we were sitting down planning our work day and he said, "Can I ask you a personal question?"  He said, "First of all, I'm really enjoying working with you."  He said, "But I have a personal question to ask you, you know, if it's okay."  I said, "Sure, Werner [Werner Begaire (ph.)], ask me anything you want."  He said, "Is it true that black people have tails?"  I said, "What?"  He said, "Tails.  Is it true that black people have tails?"  I said, "What in the heck are you talking about?"  He said, "Well, my mother and father told me not to ever associate with black people, because they have tails."  He was part of Hitler's [Adolf Hitler] youth army growing up.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's amazing that people actually believe those things, and I've never really, it's amazing what that somebody would say something and--
Speaker 2: I didn't know that, you know, when he--
Speaker 1: I've heard soldiers say that the German women would ask them that.  They'll be surprised to find out they didn't have tails.
Speaker 2: Right.  I learned it, I found out about it later.  But that was--(laughter), so it was difficult, but there were some really good supportive people that helped me along the way at P and G, and I can tell you a lot of stories.  Basically, I got held up, even though I was performing great, I got held up from promotions and all that because I had a manager who didn't want to take a chance.  Wanted to be absolutely sure in my case, that it was okay to go to the next levels.
Story_ID: 360333
Speaker 1: And there was another manager who was much more informed who insisted on me being transferred from where I was to his department, so he could promote me [at the Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio].  And he promoted me three times in one year.  And he sat me down and he told me, he said, "You know, you've been held up.  And frankly, you've been held up because you're black."  And he said, "I'm gonna fix it."  He said, "You're not making enough money, you ought to be getting stock options, you ought to be at the director level soon," you know, and he just, and he delivered.  And it's because of him that I have what I have today, in the way of a retirement account.
Speaker 2: Well, what's his name?
Speaker 1: Ken Ericson [Kenneth R. Ericson] is this guy's name, and the thing he did for me was bring me into his fold, not only on a business level, but on a personal level, which was something that wasn't happening.  You didn't feel like you were part of their world.  And he would invite me to parties at his house, invite me to play golf, you know, to where it was just kind of a natural, you know, man to man relationship.
Story_ID: 360334
Speaker 1: So you had to function as some sort of adjunct, I guess, in a way, to the whole thing, I guess.
Speaker 2: How do you mean?
Speaker 1: I mean, in terms of, you were at work, but after, there's no--everybody else saw work as an extension of their daily life and vice versa.
Speaker 2: It was the biggest missing element at P and G [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio] in those early years.  You were not really part of the family.
Speaker 1: There weren't many other black employees too.
Speaker 2: Well, they started hiring a good number, and it got to the point--one of the things that was really difficult during those early years when P and G was learning about diversity, is that the black employees were used to do the training, to do diversity training.  It was called multiculturalism or something.  And so--and the approach they were using, based on a consultant's advice was to beat up white folks.  Tell them how bad they were.  And so they had black employees beating up their white bosses in diversity training.  Can you imagine that (laughter)?  It was--
Speaker 1: How did they fare after the training was over?  Do they (laughter)--
Speaker 2: There was a lot of animosity, and it really didn't help the situation, in my opinion.  It broke some ice.  And for some people who were, you know, a little more progressive.  It, it went a long way toward some bonding relationships.  But for the most part, it was fear on both sides.  You know, do I really have to do this again?  I mean, this is going to impact how this guy feels about me when he evaluates me (laughter).  Do I really have to beat up on him?  You know, so it was black rage approach to diversity training, that's what it was.
Speaker 1: That sounds like it could be fraught with a lot of problems.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it probably would have been manageable if it was an outside consulting group doing it, but when you got employees doing it to other employees--
Story_ID: 360335
Speaker 1: You weren't involved in those kind of personnel issues that much, were you or at all (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no I was managing the science, you know, and the product development operation.  You know, one of the things I did was manage the group that introduced Pringles.  I was the section leader of a product development team that brought that product to the marketplace.
Speaker 1: I was just eating some yesterday on the way over.
Speaker 2: Is that right?  I remember my sister, they used to tease me because I had worked on Duncan Hines cake mixes, and I worked on Pringles and she'd say, "This is my brother, Eddie [HistoryMaker Edwin Rigaud].  Yeah, he works at Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio].  He's a baker and a potato chip maker (laughter)."  But then I moved out of R and D [research and development], which really was unheard of for, you know, R and D people to be moved into marketing, and into general management and--'cause that's where I really wanted to be.  But, again, I had an advocate, a fellow by the name of Lawrence--they call him Mike, his name is Lawrence Milligan [Lawrence D. Milligan].  And Mike, who was a vice president of the division, foods division, asked me what I wanted to do.  And this was after I had become a director of product development.  I said, "Well, frankly, I'd like to move into something that's more people-oriented, something that gets me closer to business, managing the business.  I want to be in marketing and general management."  He said, "Consider it done."  And this was a man who--a very stern military kind of guy, Williams College [Williamstown, Massachusetts] grad, who embraced me like a son.  So I had Ken Ericson [Kenneth R. Ericson] and I had Mike Milligan.  And when I lost my spleen in an accident, automobile accident, this guy visited me all eleven days I was in the hospital.  He held Carole's [Carole Tyler Rigaud] hand while I was going through surgery.  I mean, he was that kind of guy.  And he was another one who, you know, just basically said, "Ed, you've got potential to do anything in this company, and, you know, I'll see to it that you get the opportunity."
Speaker 1: Now, that's--when was this accident?
Speaker 2: That was in '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: And you moved from research and development to marketing in what year?  Was it the same year?
Speaker 2: Same year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And into general management.  I was a--what they call it, first a business unit manager, and then a general manager.
Story_ID: 360336
Speaker 1: You were in this pretty bad auto accident, it sounds like.  You lost your spleen.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Another interesting story.  I--actually, it was not a bad accident.  It was a fender bender, but I started having pain that same day.  I was in a meeting, and I had this terrible pain in the gut, and that went on for three days.  I was going into the clinic.  They couldn't figure out what was wrong with me, and finally (laughter), I remember posing the question to the doctor, "You think it might be a ruptured spleen?"  And he goes, "Oh" (laughter).  So they did a CAT scan and you could see the blood coming out of the, out of the spleen, in the CAT scan.
Speaker 1: Wow.  It was just a fender bender?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  What happened was--two things that caused it.  One, the seat of the car I had was apparently loose, the driver seat, and it jerked this way and I had a cold at the time.  So I had an enlarged spleen, and it just ruptured.
Speaker 1: That's something I never would have--yeah.
Speaker 2: I could have died in my sleep with it, is what they said.  You know, with all the pain I was having it was because of the bleeding.
Speaker 1: So they had to remove it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, took it out, which affects your immune system.  So I have to be real careful.  I can't be around little kids (laughter) that have colds.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is a pretty transition year facing something that could be potentially fatal.  Okay.  So, then being promoted and all that too.
Story_ID: 360337
Speaker 1: So what happened next when you recovered [from spleen surgery]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, I went right back to work and like nothing had happened and proceeded to get all the way through to getting promoted to vice president at Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio].  I was the first African American line vice president.  A friend of mine, Ross Love, became the--actually before me, became the first staff vice president.  He was vice president of advertising.  And he actually replaced a Jewish fellow, Bob Goldstein [Robert V. Goldstein], who was known all over the world for his advertising management skills.  And Ross--Ross and I are contemporaries now with some entrepreneurial businesses that we're doing.  You may have heard of Ross.  He's a guy that's got a nice background, worthy of taking a look at too.  He owned some radio companies and sold them to Radio One [Lanham, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay.  His name is G-L-O (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ross Love, L-O-V-E.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Okay.  I know in the mid-'80s [1980s] there seemed to be a lot of young black professionals being hired by Procter and Gamble.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They really stepped it up.  Really stepped it up and promotion was, has been pretty good.  I, I think, I think they've gotten to a point where they're leaders in the area of diversity.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Procter and Gamble kind of diversified its products over the years.  I mean, everything from---you mentioned Duncan Hines cake mix, Pringles, potato chips.  There's soap.  There's all different kinds of soap products.
Speaker 2: Beauty care; health products; Crest toothpaste.  Of course, Tide has been around forever.  Yeah, they, they--the current chairman/CEO, A.G. Lafley, is doing a heck of a job but he's getting out of some of the businesses that aren't as lucrative.  So, you know, like food and beverage business which I grew up in, a lot of that is getting spun off.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what beverages does--
Speaker 2: They had Sunny Delight.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: And they sold that to one of their--to one of the ex-employees.  They tried to get into the orange juice business.  They tried to get into the soft drink business, and those just didn't work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, okay.  Well, that takes us now--when did you become the first African American line vice president?  When was that?
Speaker 2: I think that would have been '92 [1992] or '3 [1993]; probably '93 [1993].  I'd have to check that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think we've got something (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  It's in there.
Story_ID: 360338
Speaker 1: Let's go on to the next.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Nineteen ninety-five [1995], late '95 [1995], early '96 [1996] was a period where I was kind of recruited to do the National Underground Railroad Freedom Center [Cincinnati, Ohio].  I had been a long term member of the NCCJ and--which stood for the National Conference for Christians and Jews.  They have subsequently renamed themselves.  It's still NCCJ, but it's the National Conference for Community and Justice.  And the local chapter here [Cincinnati Chapter of the National Conference of Christians and Jews; Bridges for a Just Community, Cincinnati, Ohio] lead by a fellow named Chip Harrod [Robert C. Harrod] decided that they wanted to, for their local fifth anniversary, give something back to the city.  And the thing they decided was to create something in remembrance of the Underground Railroad which was critically important in this geography, as you well know.  You know, over 40 percent of the slaves who escaped, escaped somewhere along the Ohio River corridor in the 1850s and '60s [1860s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Ohio River separating Ohio from Kentucky which was a slave state.
Speaker 2: Slave state.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And you know, they-slaves refer to the Ohio River as the River Jordan with the promise land on the other side.  Little did they know, it wasn't totally promising (laughter), but that's another part of history.  So I started working with a steering committee of the NCCJ in 1995 as a volunteer and Chip Harrod said, "Ed [HistoryMaker Edwin Rigaud], we'd really like to have you fulltime as the executive director of the National Underground Freedom Center."  I said, "Chip, I don't know if I can do that."  I said, "I have a full time job at Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio]."  He said, "Well, what if we got Procter and Gamble to release you on loan to do this?"  I said, "Well, yeah.  If you can do that, I'd certainly be interested."  So we went to John Pepper who was then chairman/CEO of P and G [Procter and Gamble Company] and John liked the idea.  So in March of 1996, I became the first executive director for the Freedom Center.  And I didn't have any employees.  I didn't have anything but kind of a blank piece of paper that said, create something in memory of the Underground Railroad.  The steering committee had come up with some, lots of ideas on what that might be.
Speaker 1: And now, who's on the steering committee and what were the discussions about, basically?  I mean, in terms of doing something like this?  This is--we're going from conception to, you know, implementation.  So what--how did they conceive of this?  I mean, what did they--what were the discussions about the terms of how to really put this together?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The steering committee grew to as many as twenty-five people who mostly were current or former board members of the NCCJ.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then some community leaders, as well.  One of those is, was Damon Lynch [Damon Lynch, Jr.] whose son [Damon Lynch III] has gotten some national notoriety as a result of the riots in Cincinnati [Ohio], so called riots in 2001, or 2002.  Is that right?  Yeah, 2002.  And Damon was a strong force on this steering committee.  We had an outside consultant, couple of them; Dan Hurley who's a local historian.  We had Richard Rabinowitz who runs the American History Workshop in Brooklyn [New York, New York], was the primary consultant to try to design this center.
Story_ID: 360339
Speaker 1: And it was a combination of the steering committee, Rabinowitz [Richard Rabinowitz], myself, Dan Hurley, all coming together with lots of ideas and, ultimately, I decided, you know, what it was going to look like with all those guys' input and Chip Harrod [Robert C. Harrod] from NCCJ [National Conference for Christians and Jews; National Conference for Community and Justice].  I hired a person, a young man who worked as my assistant, and he--his name was Eric Bachmann, B-A-C-H-M-A-N-N, and Eric--I'll find a picture of Eric for you--he was also of German descent.  It kind of brings me full cycle from Werner Begaire [ph.] at Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio], but he was of German descent.  He was a college, recent college grad, from Texas Tech [Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas]; finest young man you ever want to meet, was willing--he wanted the job so badly, was willing to work for nothing, had no income but was willing to work for nothing.  I obviously paid him, paid him a little bit.  We didn't have a lot of money at the time.  We had some seed money from folks like John Pepper, and we ultimately got a couple million dollars from Procter and Gamble and that's grown to several million from John Pepper and from Procter and Gamble since then.  But at that time, you know, we were working with limited funds.  Eric came to work and worked night and day on this thing with me, right alongside of me.  Avid musician appreciator.  He loved music of all types.  So we could talk about music.  We'd talked about history.  Loved history.  Loved the stories of the Underground Railroad and would do any job I asked him.  The unfortunate thing is he didn't get to see the Freedom Center [National Underground Railroad Freedom Center, Cincinnati, Ohio] because on the eve of his twenty-seventh birthday, he was celebrating it with his parents, went up to take a shower and died of a massive heart attack while he was in the shower.  And, you know, I talked to my wife [Carole Tyler Rigaud] after this terrible event and, you know, I said, "You know, this is just--I don't understand why this happened."  She said, "Well, Ed [HistoryMaker Edwin Rigaud], you've got to understand.  Eric was your guardian angel.  He was brought here just to do the job of the Freedom Center," which is, you know, kind of a wonderful thought for such a sad occasion.  But in 1996 and '97 [1997], we laid the groundwork for the Freedom Center.  In '99 [1999], I had the idea to bring John Pepper on because he had retired from P and G [Procter and Gamble Company], as my campaign co-chair.  We went after Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] to be the other co-chair.  Everything we did, the board that I put together, all of the committees, we would always have co-chairs, one black, one white.  My second co-chair, African American co-chair is Judge Nathaniel Jones [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Jones]; was.  First African American co-chair was Dr. Lawrence Hawkins [Lawrence C. Hawkins] who was a giant in the education area.  I think he was the first African American vice president at the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio].  And Dr. Hawkins and Nat Jones, those guys were guiding lights on what the Freedom Center ought to be.  Everybody agreed that it should not just be about history, but that it ought to be about the contemporary implications of history.  It ought to be about eliminating the negative legacy of slavery.  It ought to be about inspiring young people, particularly, but everyone to become modern day freedom conductors on this current Underground Railroad--
Story_ID: 360340
Speaker 1: You know, my move from New Orleans [Louisiana] to Cincinnati [Ohio], I consider a modern day Underground Railroad move.  I mean, I was escaping the chains of discrimination in the South and in New Orleans in particular, to come to the promise land and just like the Underground Railroad folks learned when they, when the slaves escaped and came to Cincinnati they found it wasn't totally the promise land.  There were so many forces that were proslavery, but also so many that were antislavery and there was a lot of friction between the two.  And, you know, that, that's the way life was.  When I, when I got to Cincinnati in 1965, I couldn't find a house.  I couldn't find an apartment.  Every place that I would try to go to would slam a door in my face.  We sued a real estate company with the help of Housing Opportunities Made Equal [Cincinnati, Ohio], HOME, who tried to take a house off the market rather than sell it to me.  Our first apartment that we moved in after we had been steered in a black neighborhood and outgrew the apartment there, we tried to move to an integrated neighborhood, what we thought was integrated.  It turned out to be a very white neighborhood, and the guy said, "You know, I'll take your deposit, but I don't know if the owner is going to allow you to stay here."   And I said, "And why would that be?"  And he said, "Well, because we don't have any blacks in the area."  And the next day he called me and said, "I'm sorry.  I can't allow you in the apartment."  I mean, every step of the way--
Speaker 2: This is Cincinnati in the late '60s [1960s], basically, you're talking about.
Speaker 1: Mid to late--
Speaker 2: And we're sitting here in Ohio watching television on the march on Selma [Alabama], what's going on in Birmingham [Alabama] and other places, and Cincinnati is not too much and in some ways--
Speaker 1: Worse.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In New Orleans, I knew which neighborhoods I could live in.  I didn't know in Cincinnati.  I thought I could live anywhere I wanted to.  You know, in New Orleans, you knew which restaurant you could go into because if you walked in the wrong one they'd tell you, I'm sorry.  We don't allow you in here.  You come to Cincinnati, and you go in a restaurant and you get bad service.  You get mistreated, and you didn't even know.
Speaker 2: But you're getting the message, though, right?
Speaker 1: You get the message, but it's subtle and the housing thing was just incredibly difficult.  I mean, it was bad.
Speaker 2: So when, you know, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], you know, moved to Chicago [Illinois] in 1966 and took on the housing issues in Chicago, that wasn't the only northern city that had those kinds of problem.
Speaker 1: Absolutely not and, you know, steering was something--when I moved to Forest Park, Ohio which was an integrated neighborhood, I was elected mayor.  I didn't serve as mayor.  I decided I didn't want to be the mayor, but I would stay on as a city council person.  One of the first things I did was to fight against steering that was, racial steering, that was going on in the real estate industry.  Because, basically, what they were trying to do is take a very nicely integrated community and bust it up, you know, and make it all white or all black, depending on what streets you were talking about.  And the other city council members who I ran with joined me in fighting that.  The racial steering is just--I mean, I suspect it still goes on, but it was rampant at that time.
Story_ID: 360341
Speaker 1: What you're really saying is that the Underground Railroad Freedom Center [National Underground Railroad Freedom Center, Cincinnati, Ohio] is not just about the Underground Railroad of the 19th century but about reminding people of the struggles, the recent struggles in terms of race in the City of Cincinnati [Ohio] and in the north end.  Also about what to do, you know, to be prepared to do to combat those kinds of things in the future, correct?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Absolutely.  I often talk about a thing I call RIA, race in America, and to me it's as much a disease as HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] is.  And, you know, all of us have that RIA factor, but that doesn't necessarily mean it's going to become racism, just as HIV doesn't necessarily become AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], manifests itself as AIDS.  But we all are distracted by RIA.  We all struggle with it, practically, every day.  This country is absorbed in it, and to me it's one of the things that limits productivity and creativity and everything else.  It limits educational opportunities.  It limits everything in this country, this RIA, and it's about time we got over that and that we, you know, embrace one another for who we are and not be so hung up on race, which really has very little impact on our lives.  I mean, culture has tremendous impact on our lives but it's, it may be associated with race, but race is not the root cause of how we are and who we are.  That's much more about culture.  So I say, if we can eliminate RIA, and if we can get people to have the courage that the Underground Railroad participants had to stand up for what's right and not let RIA become racism, we will have made some significant strides.
Story_ID: 360342
Speaker 1: What were the features of the museum that, that are there now that you decided on installing?
Speaker 2: Well, ultimately, everything that's in the Freedom Center [National Underground Railroad Freedom Center, Cincinnati, Ohio] was something that I envisioned, either based on input from the steering committee, the board, the historians that we brought in as consultants, Richard Rabinowitz.  I was actually compiling all this and synthesizing all this into a hopefully coherent piece.  One of the things that I did was to model what freedom is, and I can share that with you.  This is actually the piece (holds and points to chart), and what it says is that we're trying to take people from wherever they are, give them the wherewithal to move to higher and higher level of freedom.  And so down at the bottom are things like racial discrimination and oppression.  Slavery is down there.  These are the things that we're trying to eradicate.  I call it, freedom from.  As you move to the middle, it's freedom of.  These are the things that we're trying to preserve and defend.  And so it's our basic rights, human rights, and entitlements and self expression.  And then at the highest levels--and these are freedom to in the middle, at the highest level--I mean, freedom of--freedom to at the highest levels are the things we're aspiring to, the things that we're pursuing and that's empowerment, then self actualization.  And I call it actualization, because it's not just about self but it's about how do I help my neighbor to be actualized.  And so the role of the freedom, mission of the Freedom Center, is really the positive movement up this ladder, up this hierarchy which is kind of like Maslow's hierarchy of needs and so wherever you find people, the Freedom Center allows you to have dialogue, to understand the historical background for where you are in these levels, and to have the courage and the inspiration to move to higher levels.  And so it's a safe house for that dialogue, the Freedom Center is, and it's a beacon for freedom for all people.  And so, we don't just have stories about slavery.
Story_ID: 360343
Speaker 1: We have stories about all freedom movements.  We do have a reminder of what slavery was in this country.  We have several of those, but we have one very powerful one that's a real object and it's called the slave pen.  Slave pen was a way that when slaves were being transported across the United States to ultimately wind up in the South to work the fields, they had to have a holding place for them after they marched during the day for twenty-five miles.  They would put them in this so-called slave pen, which is kind of like a little cabin that had chains in it and in this particular one they put the women on the ground floor and the men up on the top floor.  And it was--I mean, the basic kind of--it was a jail.  And so a farmer called me one day and said, "Ed [HistoryMaker Edwin Rigaud], I've got this barn in my property that I have a sneaking suspicion had something to do with slavery, and I think you'd be interested in it."  So we went out to see it.  Carl Westmoreland [Carl B. Westmoreland], who is just an incredible individual went out, talked to this farmer, saw the slave pen--
Speaker 2: Where was this farmer located?
Speaker 1: It's about fifty miles east along the Ohio River in a--in Mason County [Kentucky] which is near a little town called Maysville [Kentucky].
Speaker 2: Kentucky?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Kentucky, okay, across the Ohio.
Speaker 1: Kentucky.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Directly across from there is Ripley, Ohio, and Ripley had some major Underground Railroad activity.  John Parker who is a former slave who helped slaves cross the river every night, he was a successful businessman.  He had a foundry, built his own house, which is now preserved in a museum.  That's got a story behind it; great story.  And then up at the top of the hill was John Rankin who was a minister, white minister, who helped--
Story_ID: 360344
Speaker 1: So, we were talking about John Rankin house, you just mentioned that and Mr. Parker [John Parker] as well.  These were--Parker was black and Rankin was white, and Ripley, Ohio was one of the--
Speaker 2: Hotbeds.
Speaker 1: --state--hot state areas of Ohio.
Speaker 2: Yeah, if you go up to the top of the hill where the Rankin house is, you have a panoramic view of the Ohio River and Kentucky.  And that's where the candle in the window came from.  'Cause John Rankin would put a light in the window whenever it was safe for slaves to cross, and you could see it for miles and miles into Kentucky.  And then John Parker, who was not known as well as John Rankin, he would ferry his little boat across and help slaves across.  And he was a brave dude.  Carried a gun usually, and had some confrontations with folks who didn't care for slaves being taken away.  But he would walk in Ripley down the middle of the street because he was always afraid somebody would be in an alleyway and try to attack him.  Just an incredibly brave guy.
Speaker 1: In the research about that, there's been a--before the museum [National Underground Railroad Freedom Center, Cincinnati, Ohio] was opened, Oprah Winfrey's movie, 'Beloved,' based on a Toni Morrison novel ['Beloved'], based on a true life incident (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Margaret Garner.
Speaker 1: --on some level.  It wasn't completely based, but it was inspired by I guess, the story of Margaret Garner who killed her children to prevent them from being enslaved, taken back across as a slave and was subsequently--I think she was charged with willful destruction of property in Kentucky--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --for killing her children.  Some of these stories are incredible and people--'Beloved' takes place in Cincinnati [Ohio].
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Basically, right here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when Margaret crossed the Ohio River with her husband [Robert Garner] and her kids, they went into her husband's cousin's [sic.] home, Elijah Kite, who lived in downtown Cincinnati.  And Elijah and her husband, and Margaret's husband, left the home to find Levi Coffin.  Levi Coffin was at that time known as the so-called president of the Underground Railroad.  He was a Quaker, also extremely courageous.  Helped a lot of slaves.  And that's when the slave catchers and the marshals descended on Margaret at Elijah's home, cornered her, and then she said, you know, she was going to kill all of her children rather than have them return to slavery.  And she did kill one with a butcher knife, slitting her throat.  But it's because of the location of downtown and the crossing of the Ohio River that we insisted on having that prime location, right there on the river at the foot of the suspension bridge, the John Roebling Suspension Bridge [John A. Roebling Suspension Bridge], you know, the precursor to the Brooklyn Bridge [New York, New York], which they stopped building in 1863 and '4 [1864] because they were afraid slaves would come en masse during the Civil War across that bridge to escape, so they stopped building it.  They also had financial difficulty which made it easy for them to stop building it.  But, all that rich history is right here in the Cincinnati area, and that's why we picked that location.
Story_ID: 360345
Speaker 1: You probably learned quite a few--now, you were a chemist by training.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And--but I imagine, in trying to raise money for the museum [National Underground Railroad Freedom Center, Cincinnati, Ohio] and putting the pieces together you probably learned a lot of history you didn't know.  But what's the most surprising thing you think you've learned, or the most outstanding thing that you've learned?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the one that, that really struck me emotionally with regard to slavery, which I never studied in school.  Never had an occasion to have any appreciation formally for what slavery was, but the one that brought it to light of all the anecdotes was they talked about the beating of a pregnant woman slave.  And they said that there was a way, a technique, that they used, masters used.  They would dig a hole, and the woman would put her belly in the hole, and they'd proceed to beat her, so they wouldn't injure the fetus.  I mean that, that tells you what slavery was about.  I think one that's a little bit on the lighter side, that kind of helps you with the ingenuity that slaves had in the escape, 'cause, you know, slaves helped other slaves.  Free blacks did a lot of the help, you know, once they came into Ohio or other free states.  And that's little knowledge.  It's usually thought, you know, it was whites helping blacks and there was some of that, but very few whites were conductors, actually like John Parker, going across back into slavery that he had bought his freedom from for eighteen hundred dollars.  But one of the, again an anecdote, was the origin of the term, hushpuppy.  The little fried bread food.  Hushpuppy was an Underground Railroad term when slaves were escaping, they would have with them these hushpuppies, which were fried bread-type pieces, corn bread, I guess, type food that they had laced with cyanide.  And they would drop these so the hounds would eat them.
Speaker 1: I didn't realize that.  That is surprising.
Speaker 2: It's called hushpuppies.
Speaker 1: I guess it would hush a puppy up.  Good to know.
Speaker 2: So whenever somebody asks me if I want some hushpuppies, I just say, "No, no thanks (laughter)."
Speaker 1: See, I'd never heard that before.  That's something.
Story_ID: 360346
Speaker 1: But to your question about history, you know, I didn't like history.  I didn't even like it.  I had this professor at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] who would put me to sleep.  He'd read the text.  The whole class, the whole hour-long class, was him reading the text.  Everybody fell, he'd even fall asleep, you know, toward the end of the class, he'd be dozing.
Speaker 2: Did he teach black history at all?
Speaker 1: No, no.  They did not ever focus on African American history.  I mean, this was early '60s [1960s] in a school run by a bunch of Sacrament nuns [Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament].  Although, the fact that they were helping African Americans, you would have thought they would have had some of that.  But it wasn't popular.  If they had it, I didn't know about it.  But, Dr. Konkle [ph.] didn't light my history fire, it got lit by the work on the Freedom Center [National Underground Railroad Freedom Center, Cincinnati, Ohio].  And once you understand what history really is, and it's not memorizing dates.  I mean, it's about life.  I mean, it's the story of people's lives.  Then it becomes extremely interesting.
Speaker 2: But we always have the image from the 19th century of 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' [Harriet Beecher Stowe], plays with Eliza [Eliza Harris] jumping across the ice floats on the Ohio [Ohio River] trying to get to Cincinnati [Ohio] or Ripley [Ohio] or someplace across here.
Speaker 1: To Ripley.  She was going to Ripley.  To John Rankin house, by the way.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is a--I guess a place for a long time, had that historic link, you know, as one of the key places--
Speaker 1: Well, Harriet Beecher Stowe, who wrote 'Uncle Tom's Cabin,' lived with her father [Lyman Beecher] for a couple of years, three years, off of Gilbert Avenue and the house that's still there and is a museum.  And she went to Ripley.  She actually went to Maysville [Kentucky], and where her cousin lived, or just a little place next to Maysville, Washington Court [sic. Washington County, Kentucky], I think it's called.  And she stayed in Washington at her cousin's house, and Harriet was ill that summer, and she had an extended illness.  And one morning she was walking out just to walk around the neighborhood, and walked into the courtyard, where the courthouse was, and they were having a slave auction.  That's when she decided to write the book.  She saw families being separated.  She got a lot of her material from talking to John Rankin, from talking to Levi Coffin, and folks around here, and, you know, that's why a lot of her stories are based in fact even though they're fictionalized.  You know, and Elijah's one of those.  Elijah actually stayed at the John Rankin house after she escaped.
Speaker 2: Wow, so this place is rich with history.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 360347
Speaker 1: I know, trying to put together a black museum about any subject, or a museum dealing with the slavery period is a difficult task because white people don't want to hear it, black people are afraid of it.  I've know I've read, you know, comments of yours about that, and I just know it's true.  That anybody involved in history has to face this when dealing with black history in America.  You have to deal with black people who are afraid to hear it and don't want to be reminded of it, and white people who don't want to feel guilty about it.  How did you overcome that to raise the funds and to, you know, build this museum [National Underground Railroad Freedom Center, Cincinnati, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Well, the thing--that's a great question.  The thing we did was to emphasize the triumphs over oppression that these heroes were able to achieve.  So that, you know, we don't want anybody wallowing in the pain and horror of slavery, and we also are not setting out to make everybody feel guilty.  If they feel guilty, you know--if they feel guilt, it ought to be about what they are about today, not about what their descendants did.  I mean, you didn't do it, I didn't do it, he didn't do it, but if we're still perpetuating it, then you ought to feel guilty.  And so, what we want people to understand is that you can break away from this and you can triumph over it, and, you know, there's always a battle between good and evil in the world.  And, you know, sometimes evil's got the edge.  And what we're trying to do is shift the balance so that there are more people who are about good, and more people who are willing to take risks for what's good and what's right.  You know, I'm having a battle right now with some of the folks over at the Freedom Center over, you know, who should we honor as modern day freedom conductors.  And when you bring up a name like Muhammad Ali, then the concern is, well, no, he's a draft dodger.  And I'm amazed (laughter) that today, people would look at what Muhammad Ali did as draft dodging.  Draft dodgers went to Canada.  Muhammad Ali went to jail, gave up the prime of his career.  So, you know, he may not be the number one freedom conductor in America, but he's a freedom conductor.  And he showed extreme courage.  And so you gotta get people out of this PC [political correctness] mode and into being able to accept thoughts and ideas that are foreign to 'em.  And think about 'em, and then reach down inside and see where their courage is.
Speaker 1: I guess, yeah, you touched on a key point there.  The ability to explain to people that somebody agitating for freedom often has to go against established policy.  To get that--in fact, because established policy has constrained them, they have to break it up and break out of it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.  I mean, otherwise, there's no tension.  I mean, there's nothing to fight for.  You know, and I make this point that remind people that freedom conductors in the 1800s were breaking the law.  A lot of them were breaking the law, you help a slave--
Speaker 1: That's right, especially after the passage of the Fugitive Slave Act [Fugitive Slave Act of 1850].
Speaker 2: Eighteen fifty [1850].
Speaker 1: That act compelled a white man who was actually minding his own business--you couldn't, if you didn't participate in the hunt of a slave, you could be prosecuted under the slave act.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Had to actively participate in it according to that law.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And, you know, just look around today and see where the injustices and inequities are you know, are we reaching out to do anything about those?  I mean--
Story_ID: 360348
Speaker 1: We're in Ohio, this is, we're in Cincinnati [Ohio], what Howard Cosell called the Rhineland of America during a Monday night football game.  He did.  And you said you had former members of Hitler Youth working for you, and, you know, with ideas, and we had tails and other things, but we also--this is a very conservative, political section of the country.  Back in the 1800s, there was the home, Dayton [Ohio] was the home of Clement L. Vallandigham who was the major opposition to Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln].  So this is a historically conservative place.  Ohio's a Republican state not known for honoring harboring as a social change, not in this part of the century, though, it was conceived as a radical party in the 19th century.  So how did you--how were you able to get, you know, political support and economic support for the museum?
Speaker 2: I think we were able to convince people that the good that we were trying to do with the Freedom Center [National Underground Railroad Freedom Center, Cincinnati, Ohio] outweighed any of their political conservative concerns.  And we got very few people turning us down.  I mean, we've got some of the most conservative Republicans on the planet who put up significant dollars or political support to make this happen.  You know, I think part of what made that happen was a little bit of the imagery around in the whites helping blacks, which I always try to walk very carefully so that, you know, people understand.  You know, a lot of that's myth.  Here's the truth about that.  There were, you know, a handful of whites helped, but they did, they did help.  And you've got to think about would I have done it.  Would I have risked everything, property, even life to do it.  Rob Portman who is a conservative Republican, and you know, was our congressman is now with the trade administration, is the one who took the lead in helping me get the money out of Washington [D.C.].  And Rob's mother was an NCCJ [National Conference for Christians and Jews; National Conference for Community and Justice] board member, she's deceased, and reminded Rob that his family were Quakers, who actually were part of the Underground Railroad.  And so he became very, very, strongly emotionally tied to what we were doing, and he was able to convince the whole other side of the aisle that we ought to do it.
Speaker 1: That raises a cultural and educational question too, about how American history is taught.  Here we have the ancestors of the Republicans who were the Quakers and the Underground Railroad leadership of that, you know.  The Republican Party was actually created as a radical party.  And they don't understand, they've never been taught that people like Levi Coffin and John Rankin were heroes, you know, so that's part of what happened here?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: On some level.
Speaker 2: That is--I think there's always the reactionary possibilities, you know, when you cross the line with folks.  But we've got to keep pushing so that they don't have that knee jerk negative reaction when they find out, "Oh, these people were breaking the law?  Oh, well, I'm not so sure I want to advocate that."  But we are advocating that.  I mean, we're advocating whatever it takes to get people to higher and higher levels of freedom.  That's what the Freedom Center advocates.  We don't advocate any political partisan politics.  We don't, you know, try to have solutions, specific solutions, to particular problems in the community, you know, that are causing--political problems in the community that are caused from strife.  But we do advocate freedom, we do advocate people understanding their history and drawing on that, and drawing on their own internal courage to act the way they think they should act to do what's right.
Story_ID: 360349
Speaker 1: You said that, off camera, that this museum, the development of this museum made it possible for the political support to grow for the national museum they say [HistoryMaker] John Lewis was advocating.  How did that work?
Speaker 2: And I think I say that from my perspective.  I'm sure John Lewis and others might have a different story about this, but I can tell you from my perspective, Rob Portman, Ralph Regula, a number of high-ranking Republicans who were always voting down John Lewis' proposal for twelve, thirteen years.  However long, he brought it up every year and never could get the Republican support, or the conservative Democrat support.  It wasn't until we made this breakthrough creating the National Underground Railroad Freedom Act [National Underground Railroad Freedom Center Act of 2000], which formed an alliance with the National Park Service, and got funding through the [U.S.] Department of Interior.  It wasn't until we made that move that they were even willing to consider John Lewis again.  We went back to Rob Portman and said, "You know, we need more money, but we're not going to continue to get Black Caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] support unless the Republicans do something to respond positively to John Lewis' request."  And, you know, prior to the Freedom Center [National Underground Railroad Freedom Center, Cincinnati, Ohio], and me lobbying to get that act with Rob Portman, the whole notion of an Underground Railroad effort, laid fallow.  There were two congressmen, I think, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] with [HistoryMaker] Charles Blockson, who had introduced the whole notion earlier and it failed.  And we brought it back to life.  I mean, they had a big study, they had a commission on the Underground Railroad.  And it had all kinds of recommendations.  And Congress wasn't acting on any of those recommendations.
Speaker 1: Were those put forth by William Gray [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And Charles Blockson, who is the modern day president of the Underground Railroad (laughter) by all counts, an incredible historiographer with the best collection in the world of the Underground Railroad artifacts, has been off and on a friend and a foe of the Freedom Center development in Cincinnati [Ohio].  And there have been forces pro and con this development, because, you know, it's got a lot of money from corporations, it's got a lot of money from rich white folks, and there's always been a concern that that was going to influence, you know, the story.  Well, one of our main precepts is that we're going to tell the story as accurately as we know how to tell it.  And let the chips fall.  And I think Charles now has come around full circle again, and seen what we've put together and agrees that it's very accurate, if not the kind of in-depth story of the Underground Railroad he'd like to see.
Story_ID: 360350
Speaker 1: 'Cause it's not that, it's not an in-depth treatment of the Underground Railroad.  Which, you know, we kind of tossed and turned over that.  Whether it was going to be all about the Underground Railroad in-depth, or whether it was going to be more about freedom movements or some combination.  I think we wound up with a combination, and then to your earlier question, what's in there?  Well, there are a couple of films, a general film, kind of a cartoon-based film on what freedom is, and a little bit about the Underground Railroad.  Then there's a dramatic reenactment of a John Parker kind of--actually is John Parker story of helping an escaped slave in his little boat, and that one kind of gets the kids going.  'Cause it's very visceral.  And that one includes Oprah Winfrey's introduction where she's filmed in Ripley, Ohio.  I spent a whole day on that filming with Oprah Winfrey, and she had the town's people in the palm of her hands.  I mean, every break she got, she was signing autographs, kissing babies, and I'm telling you.  And we had African American producers and filmmakers and, you know, and of course we had African American architect, so, you know, we kind of brought people out of the woodwork to be a part of this.  I mean, the construction of the project was 43 percent African American construction.  You know, it--just unheard of participation by African Americans.  By the same token, we had African Americans who said I'm not going there.  I don't believe in it.  Either because I don't want to face slavery again, we shouldn't even be bringing it up, or because it didn't go far enough.  It wasn't like the holocaust museum and didn't rub your face in slavery to the point where, you know, you were sick.  It's been an incredible ride to do this project.  I mean, I've drawn on every skill that I learned at P and G [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio] and in school [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] to do it.  It's been the most growthful thing I've ever done in my life.  It's a part of me, and it's made me who I am.
Story_ID: 360351
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Yes, there are some things I would do differently.  I'm very entrepreneurial.  I think I would have--I'm also a very secure person, security minded person.  So I've got this tug between my creative side and my security side.  The security comes from having grown up poor, not having anything, and then having children and wanting to be sure that they were safe and well fed and educated.  And, you know, the security comes from having lived in the same house all my young life and going to the same school uninterrupted, you know, for all my life.  But my creative side urges--it cries out to be able to do things like paint, and play music, and run a business.
Story_ID: 360352
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your business, your plastics business [Enova Premier, LLC, Louisville, Kentucky].  That started about the same time as the museum?
Speaker 2: No, it started about two and a half years ago.  And it started about the time the museum opened, 'cause I said, I'm done.  I need to move on, and I stayed around a little longer than I wanted to, actually, as president of the Freedom Center [National Underground Railroad Freedom Center, Cincinnati, Ohio].  I wanted to go and get my last career started.  To build something, and I picked plastics, not because I have any particular interest in plastics, but because it had a little bit of science in it, it's got a lot of business challenges in it.  It requires a lot of selling, which I like to do and I have a lot of relationships that I've formed, both at P and G [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio], on the outside world, as well as raising over a hundred million dollars for the Freedom Center, going all over the country and leading, you know, meeting corporate heads and all that.  Even with the help of John Pepper, and I should mention that John Pepper has just been an incredible force in helping to build the Freedom Center and in my life.  But, I felt like I wasted some time in my young life showing what I could do entrepreneurially.  And that's what these--I've got a couple of companies that are in plastics.  One that does automotive parts, one that does consumer packaging, which I know something about from my Procter days.  And I'm having a ball starting up these companies.  I mean, it's not easy, but I also had an ulterior motive for wanting to do something entrepreneurially as an African American.  And that was, it goes back to the freedom chart again that says on the higher levels are empowerment, and part of that empowerment is inclusion in the mainstream of economic life in this country, and in this region, and in this city.  And when you look at the lack of inclusion in Cincinnati [Ohio], which in my way of thinking, that and education are the two things that created the fire for the riot.  It's people who are being shut out that have no way to express their frustration other than to vent angrily.  And we've got four tenths of 1 percent of the revenues coming from African American owned companies in the city and it's 43 percent of the population's black.  That's a shame.  In 2006, that's a crying shame.  So part of what I wanted to do was demonstrate by example that it is possible to be in the economic mainstream in the country, in the city.  And to open the door and to inspire young black entrepreneurs to join in.  At the same time, I'm working to--within the inner sanctum of white Corporate America, open those doors.  Because that's where the power base is in the city, in all of the major cities.  And, you know, you look at the history of a city like Atlanta [Georgia], you know, where Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and Maynard Jackson helped to open doors for African Americans to enjoy some of the economic inclusion.  You know, where [HistoryMaker] Herman Russell got to build the airport [Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia], and you say they had a good idea.  'Cause that helped that city to grow.  It wasn't just that they were sharing a little pie, they were growing a bigger pie.  And it's gotta happen in Cincinnati, even though it's late.  Everything happens late in Cincinnati as Mark Twain said.  So, I'm dedicated.  That's part of my mission, that's direct outgrowth of the experience on the Freedom Center, direct outgrowth from me being shut out of LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and you know, I've gotta make that mark or I will not have lived the life I want to live.
Story_ID: 360353
Speaker 1: Your business employs about how many people?
Speaker 2: Well, the way I'm structuring this business, and this is another thing that I think is important for young black entrepreneurs to learn.  You can't compete in sophisticated businesses like plastic injection molding by starting from scratch on your own and try to hire people.  Doesn't work.  You gotta go find some partners.  So I found partners in the automotive industry, I found partners in the consumer products business, and I'm sharing their production capability.  And we've got this aggressive plan for me to grow after borrowing their resources into having independent resources and structure of my own company.  And so that's how we're doing it.  And so, I've only got three full time employees directly, and I've got a couple hundred in each of the automotive and the consumer products packaging business that I'm sharing with partners.  So, you know, I've got engineering support, I've got design and development support, I've got manufacturing support, I've got sales support, I've got all of that because I've created a partnership where I'm the 55, 60 percent owner, but I've got the wherewithal of significant companies to help me make this happen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The name of the business is Enova [Enova Premier, LLC, Louisville, Kentucky], right?
Speaker 2: Enova.  E-N-O-V-A.
Speaker 1: That's it.  I forgot for a minute, and I wanted to be sure got it in here.  We didn't mention it by name.
Story_ID: 360354
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, my hope is that--well, let me talk about the concerns first, because it's a concern that I think that many African Americans who are middle class or upper middle class share.  And that is that we have far too many people who are trapped, particularly, in the inner city and to lives that have no meaning, that have--are valueless and are even worse, rooted in crime, and drugs, apathy, lack of education, misguided direction, in my opinion, and are broken.  There're broken homes, there're broken families, there're broken lives.  That's an ugly picture for far too many people who happen to be African American.  It's also true in this neck of the woods for a lot of Appalachian families.  Again it's--race, it transcends race.  Race makes it worse because of our idea.  Having said that, I do think there's a strong growing component of the African American community that it's highly successful, highly educated.  I mean, I'm seeing some young bucks out there, and mostly young males, although, some African American females are doing all right too (laughter).  But I'm seeing a lot of strength there despite the fact that there's a shortage, it still is a good population, good strong population of young, very aggressive, very bright entrepreneurial young guys mostly, but women too, out there who know how to play the game, and they're going to do well.
Story_ID: 360355
Speaker 1: My hope is that we can fix some of the fundamental problems, the root problems, in the community that's suffering the most.  But it starts with early childhood education.  You know, when I was doing the early education program, I thought the only way we're going to be able to do this effectively 'cause you got women who are single with babies.  They're working one, two, or more jobs, or they're on drugs, and not doing anything and on welfare.  In either case, we're probably going to have to take the child for some period of time out of that environment and give them the mental stimulation they need to grow successfully.  And maybe we need to start at age two and go through age six.  Well, the early child advocates told me I was crazy, can't do that, can't take children away from their parents.  And I tried to find a compromise where the parents could be with their kids, you know, significant amounts of time, but still, the educators would have the main contact.  And that didn't work either.  In my heart of hearts, I do think there will need to be a generation like that where we just separate them.
Speaker 2: That's interesting because teachers say that that's the major problem that they have is that there's no home for the student to go to.  I mean, the home part of it is not being taken care of at all--and something that would sound preposterous in another age, is now sounds like you might be right. It might have to happen like that
Speaker 1: It's going to take some major intervention, I think, to--you know, they say there are studies that abuse, and negative influences like abuse in a family, take eight generations to undo.  Eight generations.  The pattern goes on in those families for eight generations.  So when you know that, it's kind of like New Orleans [Louisiana], you know, when I said they need to blow it up and start all over again.  That was gonna fester indefinitely.  And what they recreate or rebuild, may or may not be better.  Hopefully it will be better, but that was the only way it was going to get undone, is to start all over.
Story_ID: 360356
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, again, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think that I've been a bridge builder and a conciliator, and somebody had to play that role in the circumstances that I was in.  You know, starting with P and G [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio], not really understanding or knowing, you know, black folks.  They didn't have any.  They really didn't know what to do.  And I served as a catalyst, along with a lot of other people who helped do that.  And the conciliation skills were extremely valuable to, you know, kind of forge relationships that were trusting with people who were not very trusting to begin with because they'd not experienced dealing with black people.  But race has always been there, I haven't been able to avoid it, and so I've had to deal with it.
Story_ID: 360357
Speaker 1: You know, I'm still doing this because my largest investment in life came two weeks ago when I invested, you know, literally millions, in becoming a part owner of the Cincinnati Reds.  And you'd say why in the world would you do that, I mean, are you a big baseball fan?  No, I'm not a big baseball fan.  But, it was offered by the owner, the new owner [Bob Castellini].  He saw the need to be inclusive, and he said, "Ed [HistoryMaker Edwin Rigaud], could you help me to make this an inclusive deal?"  And I said, "There's no way I can turn my head on that because what I stand for is economic inclusion and showing that it can be done by example."  And having the powers to be in the community, this is where I make my biggest impact.  I know how to deal with the high level powers in the community, to bring it all to them in a way that's palatable.  And, you know, I had my first meeting with all the owners down in Sarasota [Florida] last week, and I know how to deal with these folks.  You know, I know how to make them feel comfortable that African Americans are involved.  I've got nine members in my group who put this part of the group together, they're all African Americans.  You would not believe how excited these guys and gals are.
Speaker 2: This is the first time it's ever been--
Speaker 1: First time in the history of the Reds, and I'm not sure it ain't the first time in baseball that there's been this significant of size of ownership.  And I'd like to know that, actually, but this is unheard of.  This is breakthrough.
Speaker 2: And considering Cincinnati was in town and Marge Schott was there--
Speaker 1: Marge Schott was the owner.
Speaker 2: --was accused of making some very insensitive racial remarks.
Speaker 1: About her little monkeys, she called the players.
Speaker 2: Eric Davis and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well guess you what, Eric Davis--
Speaker 2: --won the World Series, actually.
Speaker 1: --Eric Davis, and Mario Soto, and George Foster were at the owners' dinner in Sarasota with smiles that you could not believe because I was there.  And they'd been brought in to help train the team.  And they were never asked before.  They were never asked before.  They were sitting around waiting to be asked.
Speaker 2: It's a new general manager [Wayne Krivsky], too, from what I understand.
Speaker 1: New general manager.
Speaker 2: A lot of things seem to be changing in the direction that the manager wanted them to go in.  Some of the new players too.  And Bob Castellini, who is the major owner, was a person that I knew, that I've known for thirty years, 'cause I'd met him on various boards that I'd served on.  My whole adult life has been, you know, leadership positions on boards and in the community and so I knew all these people.  I know them all.  They all know me like, you know, I'm one of their friends.  And so my biggest legacy is using that, those friendships, that I've forged over forty-two years of Cincinnati [Ohio], and sixty-two, almost three years, of life to benefit others in the community who are ready, willing and able to contribute.
Story_ID: 360358
Speaker 1: Tell us a little about your family.  You've been married [to Carole Tyler Rigaud] since those days and--
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-five, [1965].
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: We have three kids, and they're spread around the country.  Our daughter [Simone Rigaud Bonaguidi], let's see, our kids are forty, thirty-nine, and thirty-seven.  I had them one right after the other, and then I found out what was causing it and stopped doing that (laughter).  But they're all successful, and my daughter, she just got promoted, as a matter of fact, to director level at a pharmaceutical company in Phoenix [Arizona].  They live in Scottsdale [Arizona].  I've got a son [Edwin Rigaud III] who is in Boca Raton [Florida] who works for LexisNexis, as a matter of fact.  And also owns his own company.  He and his wife [Francoise Rigaud] run, and they have a--my daughter has a little girl who's fourteen; my son has a little boy who's sixteen.  He's married to a Haitian woman, by the way.  Well, they're actually divorced and talking about getting back together.  And then my youngest son [Eric Rigaud] who's also married [to Traci Slater Rigaud], but doesn't have any kids, lives in Washington, D.C., and he runs a--he's second in command for an organization, not for profit organization, Washington Grantmakers [Washington Regional Association of Grantmakers, Washington, D.C.].  And they do all the granting, coordination for all the granting institutions in the D.C. region.  It's a very unusual thing.  It's a good model.  His wife works for a program called Coming Up Taller, which is part of the president's commission on youth [sic. President's Committee on the Arts and the Humanities].  And she's a daughter of a radical Democrat, freedom fighter, civil rights leader, a guy by the name of Art Slater [Arthur Slater].  And she is like her father, and she's struggling with doing this job which is headed by Barbara Bush, I mean, by Laura Bush (laughter).  But she's doing great.  She's doing a great job.  It just so happens that I'm like the only Democrat on the Institute of Museum and Library Services [IMLS] board, which is the board that funds her program, Coming Up Taller.  And I was appointed by Bush [President George Walker Bush] to be on that.  But our kids are all really bright and doing well.
Story_ID: 360359
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I have not asked you before I ask you my last question?  I know there's got to be things I haven't asked you about.  Anything of significance I haven't asked you.
Speaker 2: No, go ahead and ask your last question (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's similar to legacy, but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How come I haven't thought about this question before (laughter)?  I certainly want to be remembered as a caring person.  You know, I care deeply about people being able to achieve to their full potential.  And all you have to do is look in the faces of young kids and know that every one of them has tremendous potential.  And the forces that cause them not to reach that full potential are very arbitrary and often malicious forces.  Or certainly are forces of neglect.  And they become victims of their conditions and surroundings.  And I, I, you know, I want to be remembered for working hard to remove those negative forces, like the negative legacy of slavery.  And I want to be remembered for advocating the development of the whole brain for every child.  I also hope to be remembered for having created some models that will survive me and help other people, like the models on freedom.  Like the model of the whole brain.  Like the philosophy of honesty, openness, fairness and fun: HOFF.  Those are the things--I mean, I think you want to have a lasting impact--I want to have a lasting impact on the success of those to come.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you very much for sharing with us.
Speaker 2: Thank you for doing this.
Story_ID: 360360
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother on the right, and her mother in the center, and my mother's two sisters.  And my mother's Mabel [Mabel Perrilliat Rigaud], and her mother's name is Estelle [Ernestine Marquez Bahm], and the other two girls are Rita [Rita Perrilliat] and Melvina [Melvina Perrilliat].
Speaker 2: All right.  We're ready.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother Mabel, roughly age twenty.  She is in the big city, in New Orleans [Louisiana] coming out of her little country hometown, and she is putting on the dog here.  She looks like a fashion model.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my mother, again roughly age twenty, it would be around 1935.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Right here.
Speaker 1: This is my mother Mabel aged eighty-eight at this point.  She is now ninety going on ninety-one.  This is my great-grandmother, Maggie McCutcheon Gray [Mary McCutcheon Gray].  And she is my great-grandmother on my father's side--maternal side, and she is the daughter of Paris McCutcheon the Irishman, who was my great-great-grandfather.  This is Dave Gray [David Gray], who is Maggie McCutcheon Gray's son and my uncle.  This is a fellow whose last name is Lochbaum [ph.].  And the Lochbaum's in my family were on my father's [Edwin Rigaud, Sr.] side, and I'm still trying to connect the dots on them.  It was a German family, somehow on my father's side.  What did you say his first name was?
Speaker 2: Morris Lochbaum [ph.].
Speaker 1: This was Morris Lochbaum that German named family.
Speaker 2: That's Uncle Bossie.  I think I know why he was called that, but I can't--this is my Great Uncle Bossie, B-O-S-S-I-E, and Uncle Bossie shows up in a number of the old photographs.  He is Maggie McCutcheon's, my great-grandmother's, brother, and he must have had some wealth because he shows up dress to kill in a lot of the old pictures.
Speaker 1: This is sister, Joanna [ph.], a Catholic nun who is a missionary.  And she is a sister of my great-grandfather--excuse me, sister of my grandfather, Albert Rigaud.  So this is sister, Joanna Rigaud.
Speaker 2: Yes, this is Joseph McCutcheon, and I think he was the son of Paris McCutcheon's son.  It's not too bad.
Speaker 1: This is Paris McCutcheon, my great-great-grandfather from Ireland.  And he's the father of Maggie McCutcheon Gray.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me, Ed Rigaud [HistoryMaker Edwin Rigaud], in my backyard with my younger brother in the background if you can make him out there, Ronald [Ronald Rigaud].  And you can tell the quality of the home we lived in, which I thought was a mansion and was actually a shack (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me, and I'm not sure what age, a picture of Ed Rigaud.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of practically the entire Rigaud clan about 1998.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: In the front or back?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's make sure that's Max there, yeah.  Okay.  From left to right is Max Rigaud [ph.], my grandson, the son of Edwin Rigaud III.  Holding Max is my sister, Myra Everett Frost [Myra Rigaud Frost], and next to Myra is my now fourteen year old granddaughter Gabrielle [Gabrielle Bonaguidi], and next to Gabrielle is Gabrielle's mother, my daughter, Simone [Simone Rigaud Bonaguidi].  Next is Simone's husband, Eric Bonaguidi.  And then finally in the front row is Carole Rigaud [Carole Tyler Rigaud], my wife.  In the rear is [HistoryMaker] Wilson Frost of Chicago [Illinois] who is my sister Myra's current husband.  Next to her is Alfaij Hydel [ph.], and he's standing next to my sister Arleen Rigaud Saul Haydel [Arleen Rigaud Haydel], his wife.  Next to Arleen is my sister Theone Rigaud, and both Arleen and Theone, and my mother Mabel are [Hurricane] Katrina-displaced folks.  Arleen and Theone are both living in Tucson, Arizona now.  Both of their homes were destroyed.  Next to Theone, Theone's got the yellow, greenish yellow on.  Next to Theone is Traci Rigaud, Traci Slater Rigaud, who is the wife of my son who is standing next to her, Eric Rigaud.  Next myself, and then in the rear is Eddie Rigaud with the beard on, and next to him, his wife who is a Haitian woman by the name of Francoise Saigernay [ph.], and they're Max's parents.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my son, Eddie, Edwin Rigaud III, who in this picture is playing soccer at Amherst College [Amherst, Massachusetts] where he studied and where he was named a soccer All-American.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of the Xavier alumni association of Cincinnati [Ohio].  And while I won't attempt to name all of these folks, let me just mention a few.  In the front row is Gary Benjamin who was the across the street neighbor of mine for all of my growing up years, and currently is in Cincinnati, has been in Cincinnati since the same time in 1965 that I came to Cincinnati.  We both were hired by Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio] out of Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], and we are to this day, still great friends.  Gary had the distinction of being engaged to both of my sisters (laughter).  Both of my older sisters.
Speaker 1: Both of them?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Oh, boy.
Speaker 2: Not at the same time.
Speaker 1: Good.  I know he would have been in trouble I'm sure.
Story_ID: 360361
Speaker 1: This is the group of musicians called the wannabes (laughter).  These are three professional guys who every chance they get play music.  Myself on the guitar, Alvin Crawford, Dr. Alvin Crawford, who's the head of orthopedic surgery at Children's Hospital [Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center] in Cincinnati [Ohio] on the saxophone, soprano sax and tenor.  I'm sorry, soprano and alto.  And Wendell O'Neil [ph.], who is also a professional in the pharmaceutical business on keyboards and piano.
Speaker 2: A picture of myself standing next to [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor from Essence magazine and Vanessa Williams and Dr. Spencer Crew who is the current president of the National Underground Railroad Freedom Center [Cincinnati, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: A picture of myself standing next to John Pepper who is the retired chairman of the board of Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio].  And now currently, the CEO of the National Underground Railroad Freedom Center and was the lead campaign person.  Standing next to him is [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte who was the co-chair on the campaign along with the next person, [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young.  So we had quite a powerhouse.  Raising funds for the--a hundred million dollars for the Freedom Center.
Speaker 1: This is Carole [Carole Tyler Rigaud] and I on one of our joyous moments for which we have many.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: I'm gonna guess this one is circa 2000, it's about the year 2000.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me when I received an honorary doctorate, now one of five honorary doctorates.  This one from the Hebrew Union College [Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion, Cincinnati, Ohio], and standing next to me is Carole and the president of Hebrew Union College.  A very important institution.  The first Hebrew college in the United States.
Speaker 1: This is my daughter Simone Rigaud [Simone Rigaud Bonaguidi], Bonaguidi now, and she lives in Scottsdale, Arizona.
Speaker 2: On the left here is my father, Edwin Rigaud, Sr. and his brother, Bernard Rigaud.  Bernard was a jazz pianist in New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my three children, Edwin III [Edwin Rigaud III], Eddie, we call him.  Simone Rigaud and Eric Rigaud, and this would be about twelve years ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: Second wedding (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me about eight years ago.
Speaker 2: A picture of some fabulous ladies attending the grand opening of the National Underground Railroad Freedom Center in Cincinnati, in which we had many, many celebrities including Oprah Winfrey.  And on the left is my sister, Myra [Myra Rigaud Frost].  Next to Myra is her daughter, Renee [Renee Everett], next to her is Traci Rigaud [Traci Slater Rigaud].  Followed by Simone Rigaud, my daughter.  And my granddaughter, Gabrielle [Gabrielle Rigaud], and Myra's other daughter.
Speaker 1: Hottest jazz guitarist in the country (laughter).  This is me playing Christmas songs on my Super 400th Gibson, which George Benson used to play.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: A picture of myself, my wife, Carole, and Eric Rigaud at Eric's wedding in Kentucky.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me and President George W. Bush [President George Walker Bush] when the president toured the National Underground Railroad Freedom Center.  The first lady, Laura Bush, had been there a couple of times prior to the president visiting.  We are standing outside the center, and he is asking me about developments in the downtown Cincinnati area and we're pointing to one of the construction areas.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're not blaming the media--
Speaker 2: Okay.  I need some help, Larry [Larry Crowe].  This is a momentous occasion.  This is the signing of the National Underground Railroad Freedom Act [National Underground Railroad Freedom Center Act of 2000], which authorized funding for the National Underground Railroad Freedom Center and for related programs at the National Park Service.  President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] is doing the signing.  I can tell you that standing next to me, second from the left, is [HistoryMaker] Charles Blockson of Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] who holds the most prominent largest collection of artifacts from the Underground Railroad era.  And second from the right standing is congressman, former congressman, Rob Portman from Cincinnati, whose family, he's a descendant of Quakers who helped in the Underground Railroad movement, and Rob was largely responsible for getting the support, particularly from the Republican side of the aisle.  Standing next to him is a person, one of the people who's most responsible for getting the Black Caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] support and that's [HistoryMaker] Louis Stokes.  And Louis is followed by Stephanie Tubbs Jones who has been a huge supporter of the Freedom Center.  This was indeed a momentous occasion.  It was about 1997, summer of 1997, I believe.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Carole, my wife and I, with Oprah Winfrey in the historic town of Ripley, Ohio, where Ms. Winfrey spent the entire day filming a segment of the film that she exhibited in the National Underground Railroad Freedom Center.  She was just magnanimous.
Speaker 1: This was a visit to Cincinnati by Desmond Tutu who is standing in the middle.  Desmond was the second recipient of our International Freedom Conductor Award, Rosa Parks was the first.  In the picture, or several people, on the left; Judge Nathanial Jones [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Jones], the Honorable Judge Jones.  Standing on the right--well, actually standing next to Desmond Tutu in the background, is Herbert Thompson [Herbert Thompson, Jr.] the Episcopal bishop in Cincinnati.  Yeah, great, great guy.  The Episcopal Diocese [Diocese of Southern Ohio] in Cincinnati gave the Freedom Center over a million dollars, and I'm on the far right.
Speaker 2: This is the great Muhammad Ali, the champ accepting from [HistoryMaker] Ingrid Saunders Jones at Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia], a check for one million dollars to the Freedom Center.  In the background on the left is John Pepper with the glasses on.  Now, John is former chairman of Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio], his wife, Francie Pepper, and standing next to me is Dr. Spencer Crew.
Speaker 1: Oh, this is a picture of my family when afros were popular (laughter).  I would say this would have been 1970, probably around 1970.  On the left is Eric, next is myself, and Carole, and in the background Eddie, Edwin III, and on the far right, Simone Rigaud.
Speaker 2: This is Carole and myself after forty years of blissful marriage.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me standing next to a painting called 'Margaret Garner' [sic. 'The Modern Medea'] by Thomas Satterwhite Noble, and it is the illustration of the event in history when Margaret Garner escaped from slavery in Kentucky and came to Cincinnati, and rather than have her children returned to slavery, killed one of her children and attempted to kill them all before being arrested.
Speaker 2: She is an inspiration for 'Beloved.'
Speaker 1: Right.  It inspired Toni Morrison to write 'Beloved' and--
Speaker 2: The opera 'Margaret Garner' [Richard Danielpour] too--
Speaker 1: The opera 'Margaret Garner' was commissioned as a result of me meeting with the Cincinnati Opera and telling them about this story.  Now, this painting was given to us by Procter and Gamble.  It was just coincidental that it hung outside of the door of my boss, and when I saw it, I said I gotta have it, I gotta have this painting.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: This is the slave pen that we talked about that was on a farm in Mason County, Kentucky, about an hour's drive from Cincinnati where slaves were being held as they were being marched through the country preparing to do slave labor in the South.
Speaker 2: This is an angled shot of the National Underground Railroad Freedom Center, and as you can see these flying curved walls are of travertine stone from a quarry in Italy.  It's the same quarry where the coliseum stone was found, and also the Getty Museum [J. Paul Getty Museum] in Los Angeles [California] has this exact stone.
