Story_ID: 620584
Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview is being conducted with [HistoryMaker] Byron Rushing, a member of the Massachusetts House of Representatives.  He is a representative--represents the 9th Suffolk District in the City of Boston [Massachusetts].  The location of the interview is at the State House [Massachusetts State House, Boston, Massachusetts] in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and the date is February 8th, 2006.  The interviewer--the interviewer is [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden and the videographer is Neculai Burghelea.  Mr. HistoryMaker, would you give me your full name and would you spell your name for me?
Speaker 2: Byron Douglas Rushing and it's R-U-S-H-I-N-G.
Speaker 1: And the first and middle?
Speaker 2: B-Y-R-O-N, D-O-U-G-L-A-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, not two S's, one S.
Speaker 2: Yes, just one S (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's, that's why we ask.
Speaker 2: One S, that's right.  I've, I've thought about adding an S (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's why we ask (laughter).  Mel, Mel King [HistoryMaker Melvin King] is changing his middle name as you know to Hugs.
Speaker 2: Oh, huh?
Speaker 1: Mel is changing his middle name to Hugs--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --legally.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You didn't know that story?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I'll tell you during the break.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'll tell you during the break.  Representative Rushing, would you tell me your date of birth and where you were born?
Speaker 2: I was born July 29, 1942, in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And how would you describe or label or characterize your profession?  What are you?  What do you do?
Speaker 2: I prefer to call myself a politician.  I'm a elected official, elected to the Massachusetts House of Representatives.  I've been in the 9th--in the state house as an elected state representative since 1983.  My first election was in 1982.  This is the only elected position I've held, but I see myself as involved professionally in politics.  I think that in, in one sense, we are all politicians, and so I think that's--and so obviously I have a definition of politics that might be different than some people's.  For me, politics is the process by which we get people to work together and to both change their minds and sometimes not change their minds about human interaction, and so in that sense, we're all politicians.  I tell young people when they come up to visit me that, that they are politicians and, and, and they became--and they became a politician the first time they got somebody to change their mind.  And I asked them to tell me who was the first person they ever got to change their mind, and almost universally, it's one of their parents.  And it was at some time when their parent asked them to do something and they were able to negotiate their parent to change that demand.  And very much, that is what we, we all have to do in order to live.  Now, what we do in our representative democracy is that we say there are so many decisions that have to be made that we really have to get a group of professionals to make a bunch of those decisions, that we can't make those decisions every day.  We can't get everybody in Massachusetts, everybody in Boston together for a big meeting, so we have rep- a representative democracy, and I'm one of the people, one of those professionals that is chosen to do that.  What makes it of course a democracy is that people get a chance, they got--they, they got the chance originally to elect me and, of course, if they don't like what I'm doing, someone else can run against me and they can elect someone else to have this job.
Story_ID: 620585
Speaker 1: Before we continue, we have a few warm-up questions, People magazine type questions which will give the viewers of your interview another slant on your--on your personality, and the first question is, Representative, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's--oh, that's an embarrassing question.  My fav- my favorite food is anything made out of pork and so I'm a--I'm, I'm a--I'm a--I--I'm one of the--I'm--I defend the pig.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Oh, that--absolutely the fall.  I love the fall.  I--it's a--it's a--it's, it--I love that--I love that change from, from warm to cool and I--and of course in New England, it's, it's, it's one of the few seasons we actually have.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure what my favorite color would be.  That's--you know, it, it--I think that that changes on my mood and on the day.  Right, right now, my favorite color is red.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's what you're wearing.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you have a, a favorite vacation destination?  Do you--when you want to escape, do you have a special place you like to go to?
Speaker 2: I think my favorite destination would be the Caribbean, all right?  I like the Caribbean.  It give--it, it, it has a nice balance between beaches and urban.  If I--if I get tired of being at the beach, I won't be far away from a--from a good size city.
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Last warm-up question.  Do you have a favorite saying or phrase that you like to use with people, young people?  Something philosophical on a day to day basis that--
Speaker 2: Oh, I have--I think I have many of those, but when I--I think that probably my favorite--it's, it's a--it's a series of phrases and it comes, of course, from that famous speech [West India Emancipation] by Frederick Douglass which he gave up in New York State that, that, that has all of those great lines that power concedes nothing without a demand.  And the part I like about that part with that, that speech is people or he, of course, said men, men may not get everything they pay for but they must certainly pay for everything they get.
Story_ID: 620586
Speaker 1: Let's start the interview, Byron [HistoryMaker Byron Rushing], by looking at your family history, your family background, and let's start with your mother.  Would you give me your mother's name and the year she was born and where she was born?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a--that's a good question, I mean about the year she was born, because my mother was born in 1898 in Jamaica and I'm smiling because, my mother is now dead, but we didn't find out her exact date of her birth until she died.  And she always--she, she, she, she, she fudged the figures a little bit.  And her name was Linda Turpin [Linda Turpin Rushing], and she was born in Kingston, Jamaica, came to the United States as a teenager, late teenager in, in a kind of 20th century version of indentured servitude.  Young women were recruited in the West Indies [British West Indies] a lot and in Jamaica to come and be what we would now call au pairs.  They--and she was recruited and came--and came to--directly to her work by the family that, that, that had recruited her and that was in a small town in Ohio and there she took care of, of, of the family's children.  And, and, and they had paid her, her fare, her passage, and so--and so she was paid, but out of her--but she was expected to pay them back the amount of money that they, they paid for her to, to get here.  And one of her favorite stories was that they assumed that it would take her about three years to accumulate--to accumulate the money to pay them back, and at the end of two years, she gave them the money to--she, she had spent so little money from her salary that she was able to, to give--to pay them back in two years, and she was able to go and she said she paid them back and left, and then she came to New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: To New York City.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's go back to Kingston, Jamaica.  Did she share with you stories about her growing up years in Jamaica (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very, very few.  My mother didn't like Jamaica.  My mother was always critical, especially of the class situation in, in Jamaica and, and, and the kind of what she felt was the just duplicating the English class system in, in the colony and, and--Jamaica of course was a colony all the time that, that she was there.  And so she was--she was not a big fan of Jamaica and didn't talk about it a lot.  She would talk about relatives there, but never talked--didn't talk about the society a, a lot.  And, and I never went to Jamaica until I was an adult.  And I remember telling her that I was getting--just making sure I had the names of our, our relatives and that, that I was going to go down to Jamaica for a vacation, and my mother asked me why (laughter)?
Speaker 1: What do you know about her parents, your maternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: Just, just that we saw--just that we knew--saw pictures of them and we never--I never met them.  Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: Do you know anything about their background?
Speaker 2: Very, very little, very little, yeah.
Speaker 1: When you visited as an adult, what family members did you--
Speaker 2: We met lots of cousins.
Speaker 1: Cousins?
Speaker 2: Right.  And, and then--and, and then my other brother [Lawrence Rushing] has also visited and then my oldest brother [William Rushing] of--has, has spent a--has, has actually went several times, and also we have relatives who went to England at the same--around the same time that my mother was coming here and he's gone and visited them, too.  I haven't done that.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 620587
Speaker 1: How many brothers do you have?
Speaker 2: I have two older brothers.
Speaker 1: Would you give me their names and when they were born?
Speaker 2: Right.  William Rushing who was born in 1937 and Lawrence Rushing who was born in 1939.
Speaker 1: And where do they live now?  Where does William--
Speaker 2: And William, Billy, lives in Hawaii and Lawrence lives in New York.
Speaker 1: And what does William do?  What is his career?
Speaker 2: He's now--he is twice retired.  He was in--he was in the [U.S.] Navy so and spent--and, and, and did his twenty plus years in the Navy and retired from that and then--and then went to college and got involved in penal work and worked at the prison in Hawaii and then is retired from that.
Speaker 1: Very good.
Speaker 2: So he's--so, so, so he work--that, that worked out pretty well for him.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And my--he's my oldest brother.
Speaker 1: Right, and Lawrence?
Speaker 2: Then my, my--Lawrence started at--went to Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York] and but then decided not to pursue a career in music and went into psychology, and he teaches at the--now psychology at LaGuardia [LaGuardia Community College, Long Island City, New York] in--College in, in, in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Queens [New York].
Story_ID: 620588
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Linda Turpin Rushing] talk about her education in Jamaica, her formal education at all with you?
Speaker 2: Just that she had gone to high--she had--she had gone through high school.  Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: She arrived in New York [New York].  Well, no, let me--she arrived here about 1916 or--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --based on my mathematics.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yep.
Speaker 1: Marcus Garvey I think hadn't quite arrived here, but do you know whether she had any--
Speaker 2: I don't think--
Speaker 1: --discussion--
Speaker 2: I don't--
Speaker 1: --or relationship--
Speaker 2: I don't--yeah.
Speaker 1: --with the Garvey movement?
Speaker 2: I don't think my mother had any relationship with the Garvey movement other than to know it--that it--you know, that it existed.  But my mother was--did not--other than her church, my mother was not involved in, in organizations.  She was very active in her church.  And the--but, but she always stayed connected--she always read about things and so she always knew about them and she always--and she never discouraged us from having the--my--me and my brothers [William Rushing and Lawrence Rushing] having conversations about anything that was going on.  So it was always--she, she always made sure that she--she always, not so much insisted that we do it, but always was very open to any kinds of discussion, so we always thought that that was an okay thing to do, to, to, to talk about politics and talk about economics and to talk about the race and the--and the--right.
Speaker 1: What year did she pass?  Do you--
Speaker 2: That was '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-six [1976], okay.  How do you remember your mother as a person, her personality?  What was she like?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember her as a very strong woman who was very--primarily interested in her family and, and making sure that her children, my brothers and I were well taken care of, and that--and, and she was--she was--maintained a, a, a discipline in the house but not forcefully and, and pretty much taught us by example and also by, again, as I--as I said by, by what she allowed us to do.  I can remember when I was growing up, I got very interested--when I was in high school [Syracuse Central High School, Syracuse, New York], got very interested in foreign movies and, and we had one movie theater where we--'cause I--we'll get to this, but I grew up in Syracuse, New York, and we had this one movie theater that showed foreign movies and, and I always wanted to go to these to see them.  And my mother had no problem with me going to see these foreign movies as long as I'd done my homework, and so I'd be able to go to these--to these movies.  And I would always run into my teachers (laughter) and they would always be surprised to see me at these places.  My mother--and that was--my--that was--my mother always thought that, that it was okay to experiment in, in, in, in education and how she raised--and, and, and what she allowed us to do.  So that always kept a, a lot of options open for me that I think other young people that--of, of, of my age were not receiving.  Right.
Speaker 1: She arrived in New York City after she finished her work with the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Ohio family--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --roughly about 1920, would you say is--
Speaker 2: About then, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, where did she settle in the city and what did she do when she got to New York?
Speaker 2: When she gets to New York, she settles in Manhattan [New York] and in--and, and this is the period that I know very little about because my mother got married--had her--got married the first time (unclear) and, and she had a child, and that child died.  And then that--at that--that marriage ended, dissolved, and she--and other than to talk about the child 'cause there was a--she had a picture of him and we always had this child; her child's name was Gladston [ph.].  We--she never talked about that, that part of her life, right.  And, and, and, I mean it took us a while to get--I can remember--I mean, I can remember when I found out what her married name was.  She just never talked about it, right.  And again, it was some--you know, it was like when I was in high school, you know, when--that's my--you know, just insisting on finding out this, this information, right.
Story_ID: 620589
Speaker 1: What work did she [Rushing's mother, Linda Turpin Rushing] have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then--
Speaker 1: What work did she have when she first came to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Oh, my mother--and I think--and I--and I assume--and I think this is--which I think I'm right here, my mother was--learned how to sew when she was in--when, when she was in Jamaica.  Sometimes I, I--that makes me think that she might have actually gone to some sort of vocational school when she was in--that--in her high school, secondary school in Jamaica, was some--had--but she--but that was--and that's what she learned to do.  And then--and that's what she started doing when she got to New York and what she did for the rest of her life.  She was a seamstress and both worked--and in, in, in New York had worked in factories and then soon started to work on her own and to, to, to, to do--to, to, to make, make clothes and alterations for individuals, right.
Speaker 1: In her early years in New York City in Manhattan [New York], where did she live specifically?  Do you know what street she lived on?
Speaker 2: I don't know what street she lived on, no.  See, I, I don't--I, I don't know where she lived until she married my--she had her second marriage which was my father [William Rushing], right, and, and then they lived--and my father was a, a, a janitor and, and then in, in New York, they would be called superin- supers, right?  Superintendents.  They--was--so that was the janitor of a big building and usually would--and usually lived in the building, in the basement of the building.  So when, when I was born, my family was living in Washington Heights [New York, New York] and in those days--this would've been--this is nineteen--in nine--in the 1940s, Washington Heights was all white.  I mean, it's--and, and, and the only people of color in Washington Heights were people like my father and families like my father (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Living.
Speaker 2: --who were working.
Story_ID: 620590
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Give me your father's name, his birth year, and his birth place, your father.
Speaker 2: Well, that's a great story, too.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My father's name is William Rushing and he was--he was an orphan and, and we're not sure when he was born, but he--the--his chosen date--now, did I--did I give my mother's [Linda Turpin Rushing] date right?  Nine, nine (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You, you said she was born in 1898.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '98 [1898], and so he was born in either '88 [1888] or '89 [1889], 1888.
Speaker 1: Eighteen eighty-eight [1888] or '89 [1889].
Speaker 2: Or '89 [1889], right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was about ten years older than she was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right.  And, and he was born in Ells--Ellsville--Ellsville, Georgia [sic. Ellaville, Georgia], all right, E-L-L-S-V-I-L-L-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  And it's a--it's a small town outside of Macon [Georgia].  And he came to New York [New York] sometime around the late '20s [1920s], early '30s [1930s], right.  And when he came to New York, his name was William Rushin, R-U-S-H-I-N, no G, all right.  At some point, he did two things to his name.  He had no middle initial when he got there and he gave himself a middle initial because people were always asking for a middle initial.  And the middle initial he gave was G and he also--and no one knows why he did this, added G to his name.  So he became William Rushing.  Now, there are people in, in, in--there are lots of Rushings in, in the South and in Texas, and I'm not related to any of 'em because I'm, I'm really related to the ones--the people who have no G.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: This is what makes our family history research so difficult.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So--and, and--so we know--and so we know--we, we know about these two--then I have this--then I know something else about that part of my family, a little bit.  I haven't pursued this, and, and that is, of course, he had already been--he had been married also and--in Georgia and had children.  And we always vaguely knew in this--in--there was always this sort of--vaguely knew that there was this--these other children, but we never found out about them as, as the, the--my, my brothers [William Rushing and Lawrence Rushing] and I until my father died, right.
Speaker 1: And he passed in what year?
Speaker 2: And he passed away in nineteen fifty--I have to get this right, '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he share stories with you about his growing up in Ellsville, Georgia?  Do you know anything about his--
Speaker 2: No, he shared stories with my older brothers but he didn't share stories with me because about a year after I was born, my parents split.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so about, about a year after my--I was born, my father--now, it is now '43 [1943] or so, there are more--a whole number of industrial jobs being opened up that black people can get because the war [World War II, WWII] has--is going on and my father moves to--takes the family--some time in my first year of life, my father takes the family--probably before I was born but I'm not--and--clear about this, but took--takes the family to--moves the family to Syracuse [New York] where he goes to get a job in a factory which is, of course, a lot better than being a super, and he goes to work for Carrier [Carrier Corporation] which was a--then making--he was into, air conditioning company, and had a big--had big plants in, in and around Syracuse, New York, and the family moves there.  And while they're there, the, the--they--my parents separate, and my mother brings us back to New York City.
Story_ID: 620591
Speaker 1: So when you came back to New York City [New York, New York], you were about one, one and a half or so.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Where did you move--
Speaker 2: And then my--
Speaker 1: Where did she settle?
Speaker 2: And we moved to the Bronx [New York].  And my mother [Linda Turpin Rushing] cannot support us and so we go on welfare.  And we are on welfare in--and, and so we--and in, in New York through until I was about eight or nine, right.  What happens is that my, my father [William Rushing] gets ill.  My father would, would visit us very occasionally, so he would come to New York and we--and, and visit us no more than once a year, and so there was very, very, very, very little interaction between us.  And in--but by the--but around 19--just, let's say 1950, he gets very ill and begins to correspond with my mother, and they--and she decides that maybe we will get--the family will get back together.  And she sends my oldest brother [William Rushing] to Syracuse [New York] to help out my--to help my father.  My father by that time has bought a house with--it was actually two houses on one piece of property, so it had--and it had--so it had a total of six apartments, so it was a lot of work to do to take care of this.  The--this was coal-fired furnaces, all of that stuff.  And so my brother goes to, to help him out.  And, and then--and then my mother decides that we will move there and we do.  And, and, and, and, and--
Speaker 1: So they hadn't divorced then (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.
Speaker 1: They had just separated.
Speaker 2: They--correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Correct.  And, and, and by--and we're there for--so we get there about '51 [1951] and my father dies the next year.
Story_ID: 620592
Speaker 1: Let me go back to the Bronx [New York]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So your mother [Linda Turpin Rushing] and your brothers [William Rushing and Lawrence Rushing] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --moved back--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --to the Bronx.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about that neighborhood that you lived in?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I mean this--
Speaker 1: What was it like?
Speaker 2: This--the Bronx, we, we lived in the Bronx around--on Brook Avenue, 1358 Brook Avenue and 169th Street, the Bronx.  This is a part of the Bronx--this is part of the Bronx that is now considered--that people still call--have started calling South Bronx [Bronx, New York], started calling the South Bronx when it started to fall apart.  Now, they're starting to get back together.  It's, it's gotten the name that, that--back to the name that I used to--knew it by.  We used to call it Morrisania [South Bronx, Bronx, New York].
Speaker 1: What is it again?
Speaker 2: Morrisania.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Could you spell that for me?
Speaker 2: It's like R- M-O-R-R-I-S-I-A-N-A [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right.  And it--and, I don't know how much New York City [New York, New York] history you know, but there was a guy named Morris [Lewis Morris]--actually, I don't remember if he signed the Declaration of Independence or not, but that--contemporary about that group of people who owned it, owned the Bronx.  And, and that's--and that's--and so there's a big chunk of the Bronx named after him.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: This is the guy who offered--he offered--this is a story about offering the Bronx to [U.S.] Congress to have the capital be there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He was gonna give them the Bronx, right?  They turned him down. They didn't want--there was no way the capital was gonna be in the North.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: All right.  And--but that's, that's--so that's the--that's my Bronx history.  But anyway (laughter)--but, but that's the neighborhood that we lived in.  We--it was--it--there in the--my mother was--had been raised Presbyterian.  My father [William Rushing] while he was--while, while they were in Syracuse [New York], had gotten interested in the Episcopal church and my parents both became Episcopalians, and my mother was, was obviously so--stayed interested in the Episcopal church so when they separated and she came back to New York, she went and found an Episcopal church for us to go to.  So we went to an Episcopal church in the Bronx that we could walk to.  It was about--and, and it was called Trinity.  We had--it was called Trinity Morrisania [Trinity Episcopal Church of Morrisania, Bronx, New York] because in the--in, in New York City, there was a famous Trinity downtown called Trinity Wall Street [Trinity Church Wall Street, New York, New York], both Episcopal churches.  And, and the--and the neighborhood--and then I went to--when I started school, I went to--in New York City, of course, the schools--the elementary schools were all numbered, and so I went to P.S. 2, Public School 2 [P.S. 2 Morrisania, Bronx, New York], and that was on Third Avenue [sic.].  And, and so that was my--I mean, and that's where I went to school until we moved to Syracuse, New York.  What int- what, what I remember about that period was when I started the first grade, the schools--and this is, of course, right--the--when I started the first grade, I'm--that's what, '47 [1947], about?
Speaker 1: Forty-seven [1947], yeah.
Speaker 2: And the schools are packed.  There are just tons of kids.  And, and, and, of course, there had been no building of school buildings all during the war and so you had this--you had this incredibly crowded schools.  And so what New York City did was to set--have children go to school half a day.  And so you went to school from very early to about lunch time, and then another group of kids came in after lunch.  So you had half--if you were in the early grades, you had half the day off.  And, and my mother worked.  Even though we were on welfare, my mother--because since she wasn't working at a factory and was doing individual sewing, for individuals--these are for, for--generally for--well not generally, solely for people in Manhattan [New York], so she had--and I'm not sure how she built up this clientele, but by the time that I can remember being in school, I, I remember my mother going to--because she took me.  She had--so, so she would schedule her day so that when I was out for that afternoon or morning, that I was out of school, she would take me with her to Manhattan.
Story_ID: 620593
Speaker 1: You were talking about your entering elementary school [P.S. 2 Morrisania, Bronx, New York]?
Speaker 2: Right.  And so one of the things about elementary--one, one of the things that I remember about elementary school is not, of course, about the school, it was what happened on--in that period when in my--that, that I was not in school because, because we had these two sections--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --of, of our classes.  And, and then I would--my mother [Linda Turpin Rushing] would have to take care of me.  And so she scheduled her work so that she went and, and did the, the fittings for her customers while I went--during the time that I was out of school and so she could take care of me so I wouldn't be home (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, where were your brothers [William Rushing and Lawrence Rushing]--
Speaker 2: --by myself.
Speaker 1: --during this time?
Speaker 2: Now, they were older and so they were in school, you see.
Speaker 1: Ah, full--I see.
Speaker 2: The, the, the older grade--the, the upper grades.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  And, and, and most of my mother's customers were in Manhattan [New York] and so she took me to these houses and, and, of course, these were all not rich but certainly middle class fa- people who could afford to have their clothes custom made.
Speaker 1: So she would go to their homes then to do this?
Speaker 2: She would go to their homes and fit them and, and then deliver the--and then come home.  We would sew all the stuff at the--in--at our house--
Speaker 1: Did you help her with some of this work in any way?
Speaker 2: No, that--I'll, I'll tell you about that in a second.  Now, the first--now, one of the things that this did was it gave me an experience that many, many of my classmates had never had, which is to see the insides of middle class and upper middle class white people's houses.  And, and then--and, and I reflect on it.  The women--for whatever reason, most of the women never minded me being in the bedrooms with--when my mother fitted them.  So, I always tell people--I mean, it's a--it was a wonderful experience.  It de-mythologized white people for me, to see all these white women in their underwear, all right.  I mean--and a, a friend of mine always said that they didn't trust me--didn't trust that this black kid could be left in their living rooms and not--(laughter), right?  So they wanted to keep an eye on me (laughter), right?  But--now--and then coming home, my mother, if she had--if there was time, my mother would always go somewhere with me.  We would do something on our way home.  Now--and this is--we went there on the--on the--on the--and then--and then, Third--there was a Third Avenue elevated train [IRT Third Avenue Line], so that's how we usually got to Manhattan, was taking the Third Avenue El and then maybe a bus and coming back.  So I--my first memories of museums is during that period.  My mother would take me if we were on--sometimes we would go to--she would just--we would just go to the Metropolitan Museum of Art [New York, New York] and we'd walk around a little bit and then out, get on a bus, and come home.  So I--and my--both of--my early memories of both the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Museum of Natural History [American Museum of Natural History, New York, New York] on the West Side were going during this time with my mother.  I mean, and so my, my visions of her--I mean, I can--are, are, are always spectacular.  I mean, I've, I've actually gone back to things that I thought I remembered and they weren't, of course, as spectacular--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --as I remembered them.  There weren't as big.  They weren't (laughter)--right?  I can--but I can remember the armor in, in, in the fine--in the museum--in the Metropolitan Museum.  I can remember the animals, stuffed animals in the--in the--in the Museum of Natural History from that time.  And then sometimes, we went to what I thought was really an incredible, wonderful thing would be--to go to the automat, and in those days, there were automats all over.  Automats, of course, were this, this funny kind of cafeteria where the food was essentially in cases and you put money in and the case opened and you took the piece of pie out or something like that, all right.  I mean, it's a--it, it, it was a--but it was just seeing--it was a spectacular thing.  And I, I think my brothers probably got annoyed with me by the--because, of course, I would come home--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and tell all these stories (laughter).
Speaker 1: When I was a youngster growing up in New Bedford, Massachusetts, I must've read about or looked at a magazine and saw these automats, and I always wanted to go to an automat--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and, and, and experience one.  And coming to Boston [Massachusetts], in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], we didn't have any automats--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --at least I knew of, you know?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And so I grew up--
Speaker 2: It was a very New York [New York] thing.
Speaker 1: --I became an adult, right?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Still thinking I'd like to experience--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --an automat.  Well, I was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] twenty years ago, twenty-five years ago, and there was an automat--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --so I did experience one--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --as an adult--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and fulfilled a, a childhood dream that I would--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --have an automat at--
Speaker 2: Well, I--my--well, my (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: My--but the last automat--I can--the last automat closed when I--when my daughter [Osula Evadne Rushing]--my daughter was around--still--was, was like--well, no, she might've--my daughter might've been in college when the last automat was closed and we went to New York and took a special trip to this automat so she would see this.  And, of course, it was real--I mean, the food was awful (laughter).  I mean, the automat pad--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was interesting.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But the food was just terrible (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 620594
Speaker 1: Your elementary school years [at P.S. 2 Morrisania, Bronx, New York] in, in New York City [New York, New York], what do you remember about the elementary--those early elementary years?
Speaker 2: Oh, the--well, the, the--probably the, the, the, the, the--what I remember most about, about elementary school was the--that it was about 50/50 Jewish and black because the neighborhood [South Bronx, Bronx, New York] that we lived in was right on--there--it wasn't integrated Jewish and black, but it was right on the edge of, of, of a Jewish neighborhood--Jewish neighborhood in, in, in the Bronx [New York] where there was about the same--generally, was about the same economic class as the black people who lived in the neighborhood.  It was probably just a little more affluent, but not much.  It was working class Jews.  And, and it--and so--and the way the district was drawn, about half the class--half the--half the kids in the school were black and about half the kids in the school were Jewish, hardly any white Christian kids.  And so the Christians were all black and the white people were all Jews.  I tell people if I wasn't an Episcopalian--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I probably would've thought that was the way the world was, that all white people were Jewish--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --if I hadn't had the experience of going to Episcopal churches--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and meeting--and, and meet--and, and meeting white, white Episcopalians.  But, but--and so that--and, and, and so the, the--there was never any complaints.  I never heard any complaints on my--from my mother [Linda Turpin Rushing] about the education.  She never--I never heard her complaining that we weren't learning stuff.  I mean, she complained about the size of the classes and, of course, the way that they had to schedule the classes, but she never complained about, about the education.  The inter- the other--I--one thing that never seemed strange to--that, that I only figured out was strange after--with my old--with my education in other places was, of course, we, we had--the faculty was about--divided about that way.  There were about, about--there were a number of black teachers.  Now, there might (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was gonna--
Speaker 2: --not have been--
Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you that.
Speaker 2: --50 percent--
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: --but there are a lot of black teachers and--but then all the white teachers were Jewish.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so, so you just--by that, although there was never any overt discussion of religion, you learned about--I mean, I learned a lot--I got introduced to Judaism very early on, just the way that--you know, the, the way that we approached holidays and, and, and just hearing it from kids my own age.
Story_ID: 620595
Speaker 1: Before we continue with your formal education and into the middle and high school, could I come back and ask you to talk about your baptism because you did mention it during the break.  Could you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --tell us about that baptism?
Speaker 2: Well, now, this--of course, I don't remember being baptized.  Now, this is of course--is all--this, this was all--this was the, the--I, I know--I mean, I've--I have my baptismal certificate, but as I said, my mother [Linda Turpin Rushing] was a--was raised in Jamaica as a Presbyterian, and there actually are a significant number of Presbyterians in the West--in the--in the West Indies [British West Indies] because--and that--that's because--and that--because there was Scottish missionaries who went to the West Indies and then there were--and there were Scottish who immigrated to, to, to the West Indies, and in the West--and, and my mother would talk a little bit about that.  And, and--because, because one of the things was, of course, in, in the West Indies, they, they--Presbyterians named--called their churches like they do in Scotland, kirks, all right, and so she would talk about that, that she went to--I can't remember what church she went to in Jamaica, but whatever it was, kirk.  And--K-I-R-K.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so, so the--so--but, so she had me baptized in a Presbyterian church.  It was called St. Augustine Presbyterian Church in the Bronx [New York] and I'm not sure--that, that makes me think that she had--even though we were living in Washington Heights [New York, New York] that she had some connection to the Bronx that, that we went to that church in the Bronx.  The person who baptized me was a--had just gotten out of seminary and his name was Edler Hawkins [Edler G. Hawkins].  And she--my mother would always keep--if she saw something in the paper about this Edler Hawkins, she would always mention it and she would say, "Oh, that's the guy who baptized you."  And, and Edler Hawkins worked his way up in the Presbyterian church and became the first head, they called the moderator.  He became the first black moderator of the Presbyterian church in the United States.  And when that happened, my mother told me about it.  And, and I actually got to meet him as an adult.  He was--he was--he was getting ready to retire when I met him and it was a--it was an interesting experience.  It was just--it was just a kind of warm ex- experience to meet this man who I'd been--heard about all the time and be able to tell him that I--that I knew what his first church was because (laughter) my mother had taken me there and he had baptized me.  And so I have--I have his name on my baptismal certificate (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I see.
Speaker 2: But when my mother came back to the Bronx from New York after my parents split, she was--she had become an Episcopalian, following my father [William Rushing] in, in Syracuse, New York, was, was--by--was interested enough in the Episcopal church that she stayed an Episcopalian.  So when we returned to the Bronx, we went to Trinity Episcopal Church [Trinity Episcopal Church of Morrisania, Bronx, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mother was very active in that church.  And so when we left the Bronx to come to Syracuse, New York, we, we continued in the Episcopal church there.
Story_ID: 620596
Speaker 1: When you moved back to Syracuse [New York], were you still in elementary school or had you--
Speaker 2: Yes, I was--so I was like--what would that have been, third or fourth grade.  And I went--and, and in Syracuse, I went to ele- I went to elementary--I went to public school in, in Syracuse through, through graduating from high school.  So I went to, what, what was Washington Irving Elementary School [Syracuse, New York].  Then, we had a--we had a--and then in, in--and that was through the sixth grade.  We had two years of junior high school in Syracuse and that was at a school called Madison [Madison Junior High School, Syracuse, New York], and then I went to high school there, what was called Syracuse Central High School [Syracuse, New York].  I recently went to, to, to Syr- hadn't been to Syracuse for years after, after I--after I--my--after I left, but I recently went to speak in Syracuse and, and all three of my school buildings are still there, but none of them are schools anymore.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: The elementary school is now the headquarters for the school system, the--my junior high school has been turned into condominiums, and, and then--and my high school is vacant and they're trying to figure out--the city is trying to figure out what to do with it 'cause it was a pretty elaborate--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --downtown building.
Story_ID: 620597
Speaker 1: How do you remember the junior high school years [at Madison Junior High School, Syracuse, New York]?  Are there any teachers that stand out in your mind that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember my--in my junior high school years, the teacher that stands out the most was my science teacher and, and I--and the--and, and got me very interested in science.  Now, one of the things that was very different when I got to Syracuse [New York] was that there were very few black teachers in Syracuse.  I mean, we probably knew the--we probably knew who they were in the whole system, all right?  So there, there were--so it was a very--so the--so the, the, the fac- there was just no black presence.  And my--and I didn't notice that very much, but my mother [Linda Turpin Rushing] talked about that and my older brothers [William Rushing and Lawrence Rushing] talked about it a lot, and so I was conscious--you know, I was made conscious of it.  The--but, but--and, and--so in junior high school, I had only white teachers, but had, had--but, but I'm--but the teachers that I remember are my science teacher, and then I remember a teacher--an English teacher who was very interested in the--in, in the fact that she thought I was a good speaker and got me interested in, in oratorical contests which were very popular in those days, and so--and, and encouraged me to, to participate in oratorical contests.  So that, that--so I was--I got support for my speaking, public speaking (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At an early age.
Speaker 2: --at an early age.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  And so those are--those, those, those are the things that stand out most for me.  Now, my brothers, of course, one brother, my oldest brother, when he graduated from high school really didn't wanna go to college, was very--my mother had--was just, just very, very disappointed about that and, and then decide--and he decided to go into the [U.S.] Navy which no one in the family was happy about.  As it turned out, he was--it was one of the best things that happened to him--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and he was able to spend the whole--his whole Navy career without ever being shot at (laughter) and, and so he would--so he had--he, he was there at the right time, sort of between Korea [Korean War] and Vietnam [Vietnam War], you know, so it--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --so--and, and, and then--but my old--my brother Lawrence, he, of course, was already interested in music when he was in New York City [New York, New York].  The Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York] had a kind of preparatory school [Juilliard Pre-College Division] and he got--he was--he was--he was enrolled there and then when he came--and then came to Syracuse, of course he couldn't do that, but when he--he graduated from high school early.  I think he was about sixteen when he graduated from high school.  My mother didn't want him to go away for--to college.  He want--he was ready to go to college but my mother wanted him to, to--she thought he was a little too young to go off by himself, so he spent--so he, he did his freshman year at Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York] and then he transferred to Juilliard.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: He went to New York after that.  So he was around, and because he was in college, a lot of his--he, he--his friends and--was living--and, and was living at home, so his friends came by the house.  So, so, so one of the things--one of the things that I remember during that period is interacting with a--with college students, and that I think had--and that had a, a lot of informal effect on my--on my education.
Story_ID: 620598
Speaker 1: Now, where were you and your mother [Linda Turpin Rushing] and brothers [William Rushing and Lawrence Rushing] living in Syracuse [New York]?  Tell me about that neighborhood.  Where did you live in Syracuse?
Speaker 2: We lived in what was--what was called the 15th Ward [Syracuse, New York].  And--now, of course, there were--the, the, the city had a number of wards, but what was unique about the 15th Ward was, of course, it was all--it was the black neighborhood and so--and that was the name that the city--that, that was the popular name for the black community.  Instead of saying the ghetto or the--or the Negro neighborhood, people just called it the 15th Ward.  No other part of the city--other part of the city--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --had neigh- neighbor--had neighborhoods--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --North Syracuse [New York], East Syracuse [New York], had neighborhoods, but--names, had names, but had a number.  We were the, the 15th Ward.  And the black community was physically between downtown Syracuse and the university [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York], and the university is a big deal in Syracuse.  Syracuse is like a big university town.  And so, so it was close to the--to the university, close to downtown, it's an ideal neighborhood, and but very poor, and, and that's--and so that--and, and that's where--that's where we lived.  And, again, when my mother got there, she--of course, my father [William Rushing] had the house, had a tiny, tiny pension in the house, and my mother decided that that's what we, we should--that, that we should struggle to live off of that.  And also, she knew that if, if, if she went on welfare, right, there would be all--there were all kinds of problems with being on welfare, right?  One is that she was married, all right, and so then you would have to deal with all those, but one thing that definitely, the wel- welfare in those days would insist on is that you give up your house.  You couldn't have a house to be on welfare.  And, and then after my mother died, I can remember people coming to her and saying that she really--af- after my father--
Speaker 1: The father died, yeah.
Speaker 2: --people--my--people came--I can remember people coming to mother and saying, you really have to get on welfare.  You're not gonna be able to, to raise this family on the money that you're getting from this--from, from--netting from this house.  And my mother just insisted that, that, that we--that she was not gonna do that and that we were gonna figure out a way of, of being independent.  So we have lots of stories about that.  We have--like, one of the famous stories is that we literally at the--after my father's funeral, we literally had no money.  We had no cash.  We had the house, no cash.  And my brothers were going through my father's papers and found some cash, right, not much, but that's--it's one of those those, you know, the legendary stories of our--of our struggle to survive.
Story_ID: 620599
Speaker 1: My mother [Linda Turpin Rushing] went to--and, and got--and was able to find a job in a, a--as a--to do alterations in a, a women's clothing store in Syracuse [New York], and that's actually what she spent the rest of her life doing.  But--and, again, she had--there were--you know, she went to this women's clothing store, my mother had been shopping enough downt- in downtown Syracuse by then to know that there were very few black people working in any of the stores.  I mean, they cleaned up.  There were very few sales people in the stores.  Now, my mother was look--not working--looking for a sales job, she was looking for--all the--all the--all of these stores would have their own--do all their own alterations, and she wanted to work in, in that--in, in that.  And she remembers going to this store, it was--it was--it--and, and having her interview and at the end of the interview, she just sensed that the woman was--that the woman was not gonna hire her because she was black, all right?  And my mother decided--and, and to, to just--to say--to talk to the woman direct- the, the woman directly about that.  And so she said to her, she--my mother tells us that she told the woman, she says, "Look, I know you've probably never had a black person work for you ever, all right, a Negro person working for you ever, all right, but just give me a chance.  You just give me a chance and I'll show you that I can work as well as anybody here, all right, and just give me the chance, and if you don't think I work well enough, just--I'll go, I won't complain, I won't do anything, just let me go, but just give me this chance, all right?"  And those were the kinds of stories, of course, we were raised on, you know.  And of course, she got--she gets hired and, and she worked there until, until the clothes--until the store closed, and then there was a snazzy--there was this what in Syracuse was considered the plush women's clothing store.  The first one--it's funny that I remember the names of these stores.  The first one was called Engel's [ph.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was gonna ask you if you remember the names.
Speaker 1: The first was named Engel's and it was a--and it was--it was a Jewish family that owned it.  And then the oth- the, the other one was called Harmon's--no, Helmer's [Syracuse, New York], H-E-L-M-E-R-S, and that was considered very swanky store.  And my mother now with a recommendation goes to get the job there and they hire her, but when she walks in to the workroom, the alteration workroom, one of the women says, "I don't know what this place is coming to," right?  And so, again, those are--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and, and that--you know, but that--enough stage whisper, so of course she hears this.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and so we--and those--and those were course of the--of the stories that we were raised on and, and, of course, what--and what we learned from that, of course, is what all black young people learned about--it, it is about racism but also how you have to--how you have to proceed, right, that what you--what you do is you just take it on, right?  You just--and, you know--and so--I mean, I, I never forgot the story of, of, of, of just, just assuming that these--and then--and then don't let people off.  Don't let white people off.  Just confront them immediately with the fact that they might be racist and test them and force them, right, (laughter) to sort--I mean, it was just so--it was just such a brilliant thing for my mother to do, you know, and of course it worked.
Speaker 2: And most people wouldn't--didn't, didn't do that.
Speaker 1: Right.  That's right.
Speaker 2: You know, they just backed up and--
Speaker 1: They backed up.
Speaker 2: --moved over.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.  You know, so my mother took the chance 'cause the woman could've gotten angry, the woman said--you know, could've said, you know, "I was gonna hire you but obviously you uppity," (laughter), you know.
Speaker 2: That's--
Speaker 1: You know, but mother--
Speaker 2: That's--
Speaker 1: --took that chance.
Speaker 2: That's a good lesson even for young people today--
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.
Speaker 2: --who still face these things.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 620600
Speaker 1: Syracuse Central High School [Syracuse, New York], tell me a little bit about your experience there during those four years.
Speaker 2: Well, in high school--one thing about the--about Syracuse High School, well let's see, first thing was, my brother had gone there, right, and of course he had been this, you know, academic star, you know, graduating early and all that kind of stuff so--and so when I get there, a lot of teachers know--remembered him, so I had--so I had--that was a--that was a curse and a blessing, right (laughter)?  And then--but by that time, I had gotten very much into being in the oratorical stuff, so I'd--that was what--one of the things I did.  But clearly, I was into--I mean, it was the academic stuff.  I was not good at sports and I wasn't--it was--it's a combination of not being good at sports but also not--I didn't like it, so I never got very much involved in, in--I, I did--I just did the bare minimum.  I did my physical education and that was it.  But I did a lot--but I--but I was involved in a lot of academic stuff and belonged to those kind--you know, the honors society and stuff like that.  The, the--what was interesting about high school was, again, we might've had one black teacher, but I don't think we had one black teacher all--during all the four years that I was there.  The--and the--and black students at the school were--there, there were a good number of black students at the school who were not interested in academics the way I was and so I found that I had lots of--more white friends than black friends.  I can--I mean--I mean, the black kids in my school, in my high school, there might've been in my class maybe four or five of us who went to college, right, so--and I--and, and about--oh, about 20 percent of the school was black, right.  And so--and, and so, so that--there, there--and there was of course no work being done to try to bring more black kids' interest, to get more black kids interested in, in, in academic stuff in, in the, you know, academic tracks, right.  So it was--in that sense, you know, it was a--you know, I, I, I saw it--I, I saw the high school as--I always felt that I was getting a good education at the high school.  I didn't feel that I was not getting a good education at the high school until I went to college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and realized and got a good sense of, of what--of what that edu- what kind of secondary education, you know, other people were getting in this--you know, in this country.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, so it was a good high school, you know, from Syracuse [New York] standards but not from the nation's standards.  But it did get me to go--I mean, I did get into college.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You graduated then, what, 19--
Speaker 2: Sixty [1960].
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty [1960].
Story_ID: 620601
Speaker 1: During the four years that you were in high school [Syracuse Central High School] in Syracuse [New York], we had another beginning of the Civil Rights Movement.  We had the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka] '54 [1954], Rosa Parks, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and so on.  How did you react to all that as a high school student?
Speaker 2: Oh, that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you--
Speaker 2: I was immediately turned on (laughter).  And again, you see, I, I wanna just say a word about my mother [Linda Turpin Rushing].  My mother didn't get act--didn't get involved in any organization in Syracuse that was doing what was then considered, you know, antidiscrimination work.  There was a small chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Syracuse.  There was no other civil rights organization in Syracuse.  There were a few churches that were--that were supporters of the NAACP, but not--black churches that were supporters of the NAACP, but not many, and I'll get back to this when--'cause I get--I get very deeply involved in the Civil Rights Movement with Syracuse later on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But in high school, when I would talk about doing--about, about this, my mother was al- we'd always talk about it, we talked about the sit-ins, we, we talked--and so that--so, so there was nothing in my--in conversations where we were--that that was being ignored or people--or my mother was ever--my mother--I can never remember my mother saying, "Oh, that's--they shouldn't be doing that or that's not appropriate," or any of that kind of stuff.  So all--so, so, so it was--that was the kind of family time, family influence that I had at that time.  Now, my father [William Rushing] had been involved with that small NAACP group.  Now, when--so that meant that he was in the NAACP in the nine--active in the NAACP in the late '40s [1940s] and--you know, and, and it was just, just the beginning of the '50s [1950s] and then he was ill, right.  In the North in a place like Syracuse to have an NAACP chapter, that meant you had some of--you--that the white people that were gonna be in that chapter were gonna be pretty either far to the left politically or they were gonna come from churches that had some kind of social responsibility piece in their theology, right.  That meant there were gonna be Unitarians [American Unitarian Association; Unitarian Universalist Association], Universalist Quakers [sic. Universalist Church of America; Unitarian Universalist Association], right, or surreptitious Communists (laughter), right, wannabes or real ones, right?  And, now--so those, those people--we never--I don't remember meeting any of those people until my father died and then they came by and--to express their sympathy that he died and also to just see if they could help out.  Two women came by after my father died to talk to my mother about a camp in the Adirondacks [Adirondack Mountains].  Syracuse, of course--Adirondacks, of course, is the big state park [Adirondack Park] in New York State, and there was a camp [Camp Unirondack, Lowville, New York] in the Adirondacks run by the Universalist church.  The Universalists eventually--the Universalists eventually became--merged with the Unitarians to have what we have now because that's the U-U in the--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --Unitarian Universalists [Unitarian Universalist Association], but they were separate churches then.
Story_ID: 620602
Speaker 1: You said that when your father [William Rushing] passed there were NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] people who came to your home.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Would you tell us?
Speaker 2: And the--and at that time, two women came who were members of the Universalist church [Universalist Church of America; Unitarian Universalist Association] who had been in the NAACP, and they suggested to my mother [Linda Turpin Rushing] that I might--that might--it might be good for me to come to the summer camp that they ran in the Adirondacks [Adirondack Mountains], and it was called Unirondack [Camp Unirondack, Lowville, New York].  And, and they had a program which they called World Citizenship Camp and--where they tried to get kids from all different kinds of backgrounds together.  And most--and they came from--mostly from various cities in New York State.  And so--and that's--and, and so my mother--and my mother said fine, and so off I go.  And, and it was one--and, and, and that, that was a very--that was very influential in, in the--in the time that I was growing up.  I went to that camp through high school [Syracuse Central High School, Syracuse, New York] became a counselor at that--at that camp, and it wasn't for--it wasn't for the whole summer, it was just for a piece of the summer, and there, I got introduced to, first, what, what they all called liberal religion, right.  So I, I, I got to meet Unit- Unitarians [American Unitarian Association; Unitarian Universalist Association], Universalists, and then--and ethical culturalists, right.  And, and then I got also introduced to this--I--to, to a--to a very pro United Nations [UN] kind of international politics.  It was the only--the only flag that flew at this camp was the United Nations flag.  There was no United States flag at this camp.  And, and then--and there was--and, and so we do all the usual camping things, but there was--for about two hours a day, one hour in the morning, one hour in the afternoon, you sort of had these seminars and, and we sat and we talked about different, you know, had people, and usually the counselors would be college students who came from various countries and they would come and they would do programs on their country or on the--on the--on, on some political issue that was going on.  It was a--and, and it was a wonderful way to meet and get introduced to a whole kind of experience and discussion that just was--would never happen in any of the public schools that I was attending.  So that, that had a big influence on me and I--and, and, and one of the--and, and so when, when I was in high school and, and we start getting this information coming--the news about what was going on in the South, my--the, the NAACP chapter was--got interested--wanted to do something, and one of the things that they decided to do was to begin to picket the stores in Syracuse [New York] that were parts of the national chains where--that were--that, that were being--sit-ins were being held at in the South.  And that was, of course, Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company] and then there was another store like Woolworths called Kresge [S.S. Kresge Company].  And so we began to do that.  And, and I remember recruiting high school students to come with me and we went out and made signs, and after school we would go down and picket the Woolworths and picket the Kresge in Syracuse.  And, of course, we would--we were--we were not asking people--we were asking people to put pressure on those stores so they would put pressure on their national office to try to get the stores to, to--and that became--of course was a popular type of demonstration that was going on around in--throughout the North against, against those stores.  The--so, so I was--so that's how I got introduced to the movement.
Story_ID: 620603
Speaker 1: And I, I can remember at that time--I never met--I, I, I didn't meet Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] during that time, but I can remember--and this was actually at, at the camp [Camp Unirondack, Lowville, New York].  They had--there was--he was speaking some place in New York, and so they had this big poster of Martin Luther King speaking, and, and so this had to--this would've been in--this is, you know, some time when I'm in high school [Syracuse Central High School, Syracuse, New York].  And I can remember this like, either a counselor or one of the ministers there came up to me and he pointed at this--at the poster and he said, "You should keep your eye on that guy.  He's gonna become a real--he's--I'm sure he's be--gonna come a leader of your race," (laughter).  And this is--this would've been about nine--like 1958.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, so--you know, and the--but I do remember seeing Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy] when I was in high school 'cause he came through on one of their fundraising speak--he'd do these sort of, you know, every night, every--a different church and he'd go, go right across raising money, and I remember meet--that's how I met Abernathy was when I was in high school, right.  So--and my mother [Linda Turpin Rushing] always--and the thing--things like that, my mother would always take me to, you know.  I mean, you know, Roosevelt--Eleanor Roosevelt was still alive of course, and, and she would come--she would be always on a, a, a--some kind of, of circuit thing doing, doing, doing something.  I remember--I remember her coming--I--the first time she came to Syracuse [New York], I remember my mother making a point after she finished speaking to take me up and have me meet her and shake her hand, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: Did you have any conversation with her or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just--
Speaker 2: --that you recall?
Speaker 1: I mean, I was a kid.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I was just a kid (laughter), "Hello" (laughter).
Story_ID: 620604
Speaker 1: While in high school [Syracuse Central High School, Syracuse, New York] and with all the experiences that you've just described, did you have any notion or idea at that point, what you wanted to do as an adult and where you wanted to go after high school?  Did you have a career kind of in mind at all?
Speaker 2: No, I, I think--I was--as I said, I was interested in science and, but I was also interested--I also had this idea that I should help people, and so--and so the connection for me was then--it must mean medicine.  I mean, I must--I, I should--I should go into medicine.  And so I--so when I went--when I went to--when I graduated from high school, I was thinking about medicine and I'd already started to think a little bit about psychiatry.  So when I got to college, that's what I was--that--that's--that was--that was in my mind.  So when I got to college, I go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], so I, I get to Harvard fall of 1960.  Now, just--let me say one thing before getting there.  One of--one of the--one of the other groups that I got connected with, because--really as I--because of this camp [Camp Unirondack, Lowville, New York] actually was, of course, the Quakers, and the--and so there were--there were--even though the Quakers weren't--didn't have any real organizational connection with the Unitarians [American Unitarian Association; Unitarian Universalist Association] and the Universalists [Universalist Church of America; Unitarian Universalist Association], there were Quakers at this camp and then there were Quakers--and there were Quakers in Bo- in the city, and, again, they would invite me to come and do things.  And Quakers did a lot of work with high school students at that time and they did it through their organization, the American Friends Service Committee.  And they had--they had high school programs that they ran throughout the country.  And they would--they--and so they--and, and they started one in Syracuse [New York] and I took part in that.  And the--and we would--and they--and they had a pro- and they had a program where they took high school students to Washington, D.C., to, you know, get introduced to the--to govern--to national government.  And then they did a--they would--they, they began, while I was in high school, a program of taking high school students to--between high school and college to Europe.  And so the summer before I went to college, I, I spent in Europe with the American Friends Service Committee traveling around.  It was called--it was called a, a, a travel seminar, and we visited several countries and we--and we met with different organizations, different people, mostly talking about peace and talking about better relationships between the East and the West.  This is--I mean, eastern, Eastern Europe, the Soviet [Soviet Union] and communism and, and capitalist countries.  And, and, of course, this was a--this, this was--this is definite--this is Cold War times in 1960.  And the, the--and, and so--and we went--and, and I can remember that the trip was con- con- controversial among the Quakers themselves.  There was some--there was talk about whether they should do this or not 'cause the idea was to go to Eastern Europe.  So, we went to Germany and Sweden, and then we went to East Germany and to Czechoslovakia [Czech Republic and Slovakia] and to Yugoslavia.  So it was a big--it was--it was quite--it was quite an experience for me.
Speaker 1: Glad you mentioned the countries 'cause I did want to ask you where you went.  That's, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Right.  And then--and the--and this was before the Berlin Wall [Berlin, Germany].  I mean, it was a--it--you could--and we were in--when we were in Berlin [Germany], we could go back and forth and so--and we spent a lot of time in, in East Berlin [German Democratic Republic; Berlin, Germany] because--and the--we--the Quaker--the Quakers in Berlin always had their meet--their Quaker meeting was always in the east part, so they make, make the people from the West [West Berlin, Federal Republic of Germany; Berlin, Germany] come over to go, you know, and that was just part of their way of trying to keep getting people to, to talk to each other.  Interestingly, one of the people on that trip was Charles Lawrence [Charles R. Lawrence III], you know, and--who, who--you know, who went off to, to, to run the civil rights education piece at, at Harvard and--you know, and, and so we were--we were contemporaries, right?  And that's--and that's actually how I met the Lawrence family because his father was, was, of course, a very--not only an important educator, but in--and--but also was a very active Episcopalian.  And so that--and that's how I met Sarah [ph.] and all of those--and his sisters--
Speaker 1: Ah, right.
Speaker 2: --and stuff was all during, during that time.
Story_ID: 620605
Speaker 1: Were you involved with CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] in Syracuse [New York] or later?
Speaker 2: That's a--so I--I'm in college.  College was--college was no big deal for me.  I'm not--I wasn't--it wasn't--it didn't--I never--I never got really connected with Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why?  Why?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I'm not sure.  I think part of it was--I think I was just--I was--when I--when I reflect on it now, I think I should--I was too young.  I really needed--I should've--I should've--I should've taken off sometime between high school [Syracuse Central High School, Syracuse, New York] and, and college.
Speaker 1: Well, why did you select Harvard?  How'd you get here?  What--
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: How'd you get to Harvard?  Why did you select Harvard?
Speaker 2: I selected Harvard because the--in, in those days, of course, I mean, there was--you know, there was recruiting, very active recruiting by these colleges and, and so they would come into--they'd come into Syracuse and go to the high schools and just say who are your--who are your best students?  And, and then--and then their alums would, you know, would, would--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --come and talk to you.  They would--and I can remember in Syracuse, the alums in Syracuse, they had like a dinner and invited these--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --high school students to the dinner.  And then they did--and they--and they had this little introduction to the--to Harvard and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: I had one--there was one student--I only knew one student who had been to Harvard that was--who had--that--at--from my high school, and he actually invited me.  I came out to see the school with--because he invited me out.  And then--and so--and, and pretty much, I picked schools because people expressed some interest, told me that's a good school.  And I applied to Harvard, I applied to Hamilton [Hamilton College, Clinton, New York], the small school in Upstate New York, I applied to Trinity [Trinity College] at--in Hartford [Connecticut], and the other people who came up to recruit in those days was Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  And Howard would come into the city and they would just go in and say, "Tell us the," the--they would go to high schools and say, "Give us the, the black students who have the best scores," right?  They'd give 'em--and they'd call 'em down and Har- at Howard had a test and they'd--and they'd call you into the principal's office and they'd say, "This guy's here from Howard and he wants to give you a test."  You sit down, take the test, an hour later, the guy offered me--
Speaker 1: A place.
Speaker 2: --a place, right.  And, and I finally--I, I mean, I tell everybody, I made the decision really on money.  Harvard gave me the most.
Speaker 1: So you had a whole package?  The full--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --package pretty much?
Speaker 2: Yep.  And I would've gone to some other school if they'd given me more money (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now were you still pre-med at the time you arrived here in Cambridge [Massachusetts]?  Were you still--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so by my sen- from my freshman year I was, and then I said--
Speaker 1: You were.
Speaker 2: --this is not gonna work.  It's not gonna work.
Story_ID: 620606
Speaker 1: And so at--so--and then--and then here, I get--and it's--my, my brother [William Rushing] in the [U.S.] Navy is living in Boston [Massachusetts] because he--by that--by that time when I'm at college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], he is on a submarine out of I think New London [Connecticut] and he decided to, to commute.  I mean, it was a relatively--and so he lived here with his wife and childr- and child and--or, in in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: And that's how I got to know Boston, was from--because my brother was living here and so I immediately--I was here a week and got to know Roxbury.  He lived on Brunswick Street.  And so, so that was a good way to get introduced to Boston.  And then as--and as I got introduced to Boston, I--you know, I, I wanted to see what was going on around the Civil Rights Movement.  I heard--I, I got--Cambridge [Massachusetts] had, had a separate NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in--then, right, and they met at St. Bartholomew's [St. Bartholomew's Episcopal Church, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  That's how I got to see St. Bartholomew's.  I just tried to find out where the NAACP was, went to a meeting, and they're in the basement at, at St. Bartholomew's.  And then someone told me about CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] because NAACP here was--I mean, it was like hard--it was not into much (laughter), right?  And this--and so they tell me about CORE and I go over to a CORE meeting and they recruit me immediately because they're doing--they're doing testing and so they're, they're looking for unemployment and they're looking for people to just apply for jobs and with white testers and just see who gets--who gets--who gets the call back, and that's how I get involved with CORE.
Speaker 2: Who was running CORE in Boston at that time--
Speaker 1: And that was--
Speaker 2: --do you recall?
Speaker 1: --is it Gartlet [ph.]?  What was his name?  Oh, I'm blanking on his name, white guy.
Speaker 2: Oh, Gartland.
Speaker 1: Is it--
Speaker 2: Arthur Gartland.
Speaker 1: Gart- huh?
Speaker 2: Arthur Gartland.
Speaker 1: Arthur Gartland, right.
Speaker 2: Gartland, yeah, was on the school committee [Boston School Committee].
Speaker 1: No, no, not--no--
Speaker 2: Not that.
Speaker 1: --not on the school committee, same last--similar last name.  Oh my goodness, it's really gone out of my head.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so the--so then, I decide I wanna go work in the Civil Rights Movement for--wanna take off and work there for a year--
Story_ID: 620607
Speaker 1: And so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you spent a year at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?  You spent--
Speaker 1: Three.
Speaker 2: Oh, three years?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then I decide to go--to take off at the end of my junior year, well, during my junior year.  And I applied to SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and I applied to CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] in the South and CORE is just more organized, so I can't (laughter)--I mean, SNCC, I just have to keep calling, keep writing, nothing (laughter), nothing, and then I get--I get this one line letter from SNCC (laughter).  It said, you know--you know--come--show up, some--I can't remember where it was, but just one line (laughter).  But CORE was a lot more organized and they wanted--they, they, they were doing work in Louisiana and so I said I'm--that's what I'm gonna do.  So I wanted to make a little bit more money.  I always came--I came home to Syracuse [New York] to work in the summers, so I'd come back to Syracuse in the summer of, this is '63 [1963].  And come back to Syracuse in the summer of '63 [1963], go--I've been working at a hospital so I go--that--no problem, I go, get that--get my job at the hospital, and, and, and I know that there's a CORE chapter; I've been told that, in Syracuse, so I hook up with them.  And it turns out that they are very much involved in the whole--in, in the whole movement around urban renewal in Syracuse and their concern is that the reloc- that the--that, that people are being relocated into another part of Syracuse and that housing is not being integrated, and so they've--and they've al--and they've started to have demonstrations about this.  They're also gotten interested in the fact--got employment and the fact that the major hotel doesn't hire black people except for cleaning, and so all of that's going on in Syracuse at the time.  And so I just--as a volunteer, you know, aft- I just--you know, I do a few things with them while this is happening.  We get more and more interested in this whole idea of urban renewal and start to think that the--that there's a bigger problem around urban renewal and that the urban renewal is a bad thing in and of itself, right, that it's destroying the black community, right, some--and that--and, and what's happening is that's--all that whole area around my house is the urban renewal area.  And, and what we learned later is that the university was very much involved, that the university did not like having this black community next to it, and what they wanted was the university to grow into the downtown and we were in the way.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.  And then my house itself where I lived, and part of this whole idea was that, that the highway [Interstate 81 (I-81)], that an interstate highway, they wanted an int- they wanted the interstate highway to come through Syracuse, and that--and our house was right on the route of the interstate highway.  So when I got--when I got to Syracuse, my--we knew that my--that our house was gonna be bought.  They'd already laid out the plans, so we knew our house was gonna be bought for the highway--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and that all around us was all this urban renewal stuff going on.  So we had--we come to this idea but it's--we come to it late, but we come to this idea about stopping urban renewal.  And interestingly, we started--we, we, we, sitting around and we--and, and, of course, the March on Washington is being planned, and, and, and you have--and, of course, you have to remember about the Civil Rights Movement is that it was not monolithic, and the Civil Rights Movement had a right and a left and a middle.  And Syracuse CORE was on the left.  I mean, it was like--it was like of, of the CORE groups that were in the North, this was a--it was very heavily influenced by university people.  The, the chairman of the chapter was George Wiley who went on afterwards--who was a chemist.  He was a chemistry professor at Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York].  He went on to organize the welfare mothers and, and became the head of the, the national welfare mothers campaign.  But he--then, he was just this professor, but we had lots of university people from the--from, from--who are coming out of left wing politics or--and they wanted to--and they were talking about structural change, and they got interested in this whole idea that urban renewal was a bad idea.  So, we're trying to figure out what we should do about going down to Washington [D.C.] or not, and a group of us decide that that's a--that's, that's too conservative id- the whole idea is bad.  I mean, it's a--it's--you're asking--you're asking the government to do what they'll never do, all right, and so we, we should do something in Syracuse on the same day.  So we decide to stop urban renewal on the--on the day of the march.
Speaker 2: The same day.
Story_ID: 620608
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, so we go out to find a place where they're tearing down some buildings.  The only building--they're, they're not tearing down any houses on that particular day.  They're tearing down a gasoline station.  So we go to the gasoline station and, and we walk onto the site and we--and, and the workers just go berserk, right.  They start yelling at us and start throwing things at us, and we tell 'em we have to close the whole thing down.  We're, of course, nonviolent, and the police come.  The police call up the urban renewal authority.  The, the, the director and two or three other people of, of, of the urban renewal authority are in Washington [D.C.] because they went to the March on Washington (laughter) and so no one can get--so they--so the whole--so they tell the workers to go home and we have our big success.  We close down (laughter)--and so we get all of this publicity and we have a big meeting inside CORE [Congress of Racial Equality].  There, there were a lot of people in the chapter who were mad at us.  They think we didn't go about it in the right way.  We didn't have enough discussion about doing this demonstration.  And now we're sort of stuck 'cause we're now in the--we made the chapter be anti-urban renewal, right, and how are we gonna do all of this with just a bunch of volunteers?  And when the school starts, they won't have the volunteers, right 'cause everybody will be in school.  And they say--they, they turn to me and they say, "Why don't you stay instead of going down to Louisiana?  Why don't you stay here, right, and you spend your year here working for us?  And also, you have this big advantage, is that you won't be an outside agitator which was a big thing then, right, always accusing all the civil rights groups of being outside agitators.  You're from Syracuse [New York]."  So, I said okay and I spent a year working, running the chapter in Syracuse.
Speaker 2: Right.  I see.
Speaker 1: I was their twenty-five dollars a week staff person.
Speaker 2: For the record, we should indicate what CORE stands for.
Speaker 1: CORE is the Congress of Racial Equality (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --which is an early civil rights organization--
Speaker 2: Back in the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: --I mean, which began in the '40s [1940s]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the North based on Gandhian [Mahatma Gandhi] principles.  And, and actually the word congress, they took because that's the word that Gandhi used for his political organization [Indian National Congress] was--in India was the--was a--was the congress.  And that--and so--and this was the Congress of Racial Equal- Equality.
Story_ID: 620609
Speaker 1: Now, you had already decided not to go back Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: (Cough) Right.  I had already decided to go--I was gonna go down to the South, so instead of going to the South to work in the Civil Rights Movement, I worked in the Civil Rights Movement in Syracuse [New York].  Now, while--during--now, Syracuse, we of course were not able to stop urban renewal, but we were able to influence urban renewal, but we were able to get involved in, in--around--had a lot of--did a--did a lot of work in integrating employment in Syracuse, and then did a--spent a lot of time with the criminal justice system.  And there was a, a, a--just an incredible amount of police brutality.  Now, the police department was already--in Syracuse was a corrupt police department, so corrupt that it had been taken over.  The state had actually put it in a kind of receivership and made them bring in a police captain from outside of Syracuse.  And--but they--but they--but that corruption, of course, they, they didn't include police brutality.  It was not part of what was seen as wrong with it and we got very much involved in police brutality cases.  So we, we started doing work that was not seen directly as a kind of integration civil rights work.  And then that got us connected to more and more organizations outside of Syracuse that were having--going through this same etiological transformation in--from, from, from civil rights as integration into civil rights as power building and community organizing.  So by the--when I left Syracuse at the end of my time there, the, the big project that we were working on was having--keeping a bus station from being relocated into the middle of the exis- of what was the vestige of the black community because we felt it would be bad--be--it was--it was unsafe and, and, and we raised early environmental concerns about the fumes.  It was gonna be right across the street from a public housing project, and we were successful at doing that.  So we--that was the kinds of stuff we were doing.  Now, while I was there in Syracuse and, and I meet--I, I meet people who were doing similar kinds of work who are connected with an organization called the Northern Student Movement, and I meet a guy named Bill Strickland [William Strickland].  He then is working--he's working in New York City [New York, New York] and I, I go several times to meetings that he's been running about community organizing and how to--and how to deal with increasing the power of black communities and not getting into any kind of integration issues.  And, and so when I'm--and, and I'm trying to decide whether I'm gonna come back to school or not and he--and--but I'm gonna--so I come back--so I--so people know I'm coming back to Boston [Massachusetts] in the summer of '64 [1964], and he says, "Well, you, you, you really need to get connected with the NSM chapter in, Northern Student Movement chapter, in Boston because they have this big, big program of, of, of tutoring kids, right, but their politics, they just can't get their politics straight.  They don't know what to do with the parents."  He says, "You really, you know, with the stuff that you've been doing in Syracuse, you should really get connected with them.  So call up this--call up this girl I know there.  She's really slick, right, she's really--you know, but she, she--you know, but the thing has sort of grown beyond her and she needs to get focused, you know, so call, call her up."  "Who is she?"  "[HistoryMaker] Sarah-Ann Shaw," right?  So I come, I call up Sarah-Ann Shaw and, and say I wanna work--I--you know, I--I'm--I wanna--and Sarah says--well, Sarah-Ann says, well, you have to be interviewed (laughter).  So I get interviewed, and I go to work for Northern Student Movement.
Speaker 1: And that was nineteen sixty--
Speaker 2: Four [1964].
Speaker 1: Four [1964], okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.  And so that--and that's my first full-time work in Boston.  I mean, I know Boston--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but this is my first full-time work.
Story_ID: 620610
Speaker 1: As you enter the Northern Student Movement in Boston [Massachusetts], what was your immediate early tasks and responsibilities?
Speaker 2: My tasks and respon- my--it was all--it--you know, it was a wonderful time.  I mean, no one had--no one had tasks and respon- we had these kind of concepts, right, and my concept while I was there, to organize the parents of the kids who were getting tutored, right.  Now, they had a big tutoring program.  They must've tutored about five hundred kids a night.  They had--and they had centers--the Northern Student Movement had centers in all--a lot of churches and the kids came there and the--and they--and they--and what Northern Student Movement did was recruit college students to come in and do the tutoring.  And so they had these--so they had these connections with all these families.  And they were--and depending on the tutor and, and, and, and the kids, you know, they got involved with, with more than just tutoring, you know, and the problems with the families and stuff like that, and so they were doing all of that kind of stuff.  But they--and their etiology was all right, but they weren't really connecting with the parents, and so that was my job.  And so the first thing I did is I started going out knocking on doors, getting people's names, knocking on doors to find--and talking to the parents.  Now, while that happened, while that's going on, and that goes on for about a month, the unions in Boston are interested in the--in trying to increase voter registration in the black community, and they come to--and they say they will sponsor a program to do voter registration in the black community, but they don't wanna give the money to one organization.  They wanna give the money to several organ- they want the organizations to get together.
Story_ID: 620611
Speaker 1: So there was to be a voter registration project.
Speaker 2: That's, that's right.  And so--and, and so--and at that time, there was an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Boston [Massachusetts].  There was the--there was CORE [Congress of Racial Equality].  There was the Northern Student Movement.  There was a group called Boston Action Group, BAG, all right, and there was--and, and that had grown out of a, a campaign that Noel Day, when Noel Day ran the kind of symbolic campaign for [U.S.] Congress and then his idea was that after running for Congress, all of his people would stay together and do community organizing.  And then there was a group called the Massachusetts Freedom Movement, and that was run by [HistoryMaker] James Breeden.
Speaker 1: Jim Breeden.
Speaker 2: And so that--and, and there was an Urban League, all right.  So that's like--and there was Freedom House [Dorchester, Massachusetts], which saw itself as part of this whole mix even though it did--had--it was--mostly did social work, settlement house kind of work.  It never--it, it, it was connected to all of this organizing work and the org- the organizations that did community organizing and civil rights work, so all of those groups existed.
Speaker 1: And then you had urban renewal starting up in '64 [1964], '65 [1965], too.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so when--so when they asked--so they asked that all the organizations be put together.  So there's a big meeting and everybody comes except the Urban League, all right, and, and so they say, "Yep, we'll do this, we're gonna form a coalition to take the money and run a coordinated voter registration campaign."  And then the next question is, who do we get to run it then?  Who's the staff person?  And Sarah-Ann [HistoryMaker Sarah-Ann Shaw] comes to me and she says, "I'm gonna nominate you."  And I say, "Well, it's not exactly what, you know--you know, I'm--but, I'm--I mean, I'm, I'm fine to do community--to do voter registration 'cause that's a good way to get into another kind of community organizing, right?  So, yeah, but why me?"  She says, "'Cause nobody knows you (laughter)."  And, and so we go to this meeting and she nominates me and people say--and she gives--you know, gives the little thing, and then turns out that--I can't remember who it was.  It might've been the NAACP.  I'm not sure who it was, but they wanted Dan Richardson to be the person.  And we have an election and I win.  And then there's a compromise.  Dan is--they say, well we'll get some more money and we'll hire Dan as the assistant director, all right.  And, and so that's, that's how--and then--and then we--and then we just--we invent a name, the Community Voter Registration Project, and I did that for the next three--for that summer and the next three summer--the next two summers.  The, the Community Voter Registration Project went for three--we do--we do it in the summertime.  And then--and then when that was over, I went back and worked for the Northern Student Movement.
Speaker 1: I see.  Was that voter registration project successful, useful?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was--it was--it was very successful.  We registered a lot of people.  And we did something that had never been done.  We, we actually introduced to the City of Boston the idea of doing voter registration in the neighborhoods.  And what we did was we--and so what we did, we and, and, and--we actually hired, we, we rented these vans, these big vans, and we would take them and we would just--and we would just decide on, we'll do this corner for two nights and then we'd move and do that corner for--and that's--and that's how--and that's how--and then we did this whole--where you--and we had our volunteers did two things.  We put out leaflets and signs for where the registration would be that night.  And then I discovered something that I did not have an experience with in New York and that is that in, in, in, in Bo- in Massachusetts, you had an annual listing of every--of all the adults and, and it was use--and in those days, it was done by the police.  They went around to every house and so everybody called it the police list.  And so you had names on the police list of people who were not registered.  And so what we did was we, we took the police list, put all the names on three by five cards and would give them to volunteers and have them go and try to visit those people, right, and it was just very, very effective.  We found out two things.  One is that the police list was pretty bad (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But there were a lot of people we found and we--and, you know, could knock on the door and say I--and, and say, you know, you're on this list and you're not registered to vote.  We have the list, you know, and you can register to vote tonight.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's interesting.
Speaker 2: Just two blocks away.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  It was very, very effective.  And so--and, and, and that--from that, we started doing work around voter education with the people that we registered to vote and did voter educ- voter education seminars in people's houses and they would invite their neighbors over and we would just--just standard kind of stuff about what to do.
Story_ID: 620612
Speaker 1: While I was doing that [Community Voter Registration Project], as you can imagine, the elected officials figured--found out about this real fast, right, and I met--I got to meet the elected officials, the black elected officials.  And most of them were just--they just wanted to find out what was going on and--but there, there was no--they didn't--there was no ease--there was no ease with us.  They were a little--all--suspicious, you know.  I mean, you have to remember the--you know, I mean, at that time, we still had Republicans in--black Republicans in the legislature.  And--but one, there was one elected official who thought this was great, right.  And he had--and, and, and in his mind, he was going to recruit us, right, and that was Royal Bolling, Sr., and that's how I met Royal Bolling which had a--which--who was definitely my teacher about black electoral politics in this city [Boston, Massachusetts].  He taught me what was going on.  I mean, he just--and just--
Speaker 2: He was on the House [Massachusetts House of Representatives] at that point.
Speaker 1: And he was in the House.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's right.  He ran a real estate agent--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --agency called Eureka [Eureka Real Estate, Boston, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --on Blue Hill Avenue.  And then it's important to underst- I guess right now we should talk a little bit about the geography.  Blue Hill Avenue was--by--in--by, by 1960, was the major place--Blue Hill Avenue and Dudley Station [Dudley Square, Boston, Massachusetts] were the major places where black people shopped in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].  Most of the stores on Blue Hill Avenue were not owned by black people.  They were owned by Jews because this had been the major--Blue Hill Avenue had been the major Jewish commercial street when that part of Roxbury was Jewish and then the part of Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts] just south of it was still Jewish.  And, but there was also a lot of vacant storefronts, and so it was a place for organizations to--for relatively inexpensive rent, move their offices.  And so the--so NSM [Northern Student Movement], BAG [Boston Action Group], CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] all had offices on Blue Hill Avenue and then--and then you had a--the few black businesses like Royal Bolling's real estate place was on Blue Hill Avenue.  And so Blue Hill Avenue, people started to call it the strip and when they were referring to the strip, they were referring to all these black organizations that were along Blue Hill Avenue from about, oh, sort of Intervale Street up to Grove Hall [Boston, Massachusetts].  And Intervale Street was, if you turned the corner, Blue Hill Avenue onto Intervale Street, you got to the mosque, the Nation of Islam's mosque [Masjid Al-Qur'an, Boston, Massachusetts] where Louis Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] was, was, was the minister.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.  I don't--I think he was still Louis X, right.  And so that was--so that's, that's the kind of geography.  And being so close together was very interesting because it did mean that everybody got to know each other.  You know, people went into each other's offices.  Even though there were--and on one hand their politics would've been very, very different, they all--they, they, they did know each other, and I think that had a big effect on how the leadership of the black community developed even into the '70s [1970s] based on, on just the--just knowing each other, right.  So that was--that was the setting for that.
Story_ID: 620613
Speaker 1: And as I continued to do community organizing for Northern Student Movement, I continued to do volunt- volunteer work as an Episcopalian.  I was--I, I came here, went to the Episcopal church closest to my house.  I lived on Maywood Street [Roxbury, Boston, Massachusetts].  I literally, 'cause in those days there was--we had this whole movement in the Episcopal church about, about--of--that, that supported community organizing, and one of the things that we tried to resurrect was the idea of the par- the real idea of the parish, of churches having boundaries.  And so I literally went on the map and tried to find the Episcopal church that was closest to me, and it turned out to be St. Anne's [ph.] which I had never been to before, which is really in Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts], right, right on the boundary of Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] and Dorchester, St. Anne's which was on Cottage Street, on East Cottage Street right off of, of Dudley Street.  The building's still there.  It's a big Spanish Pentecostal church now.  And, and so that's--and so, so I, I did that, so I stayed connected with, with the Episcopal church and a--one of the Episcopal churches, St. John's [St. John's Episcopal Church] in Roxbury Crossing [Boston, Massachusetts], wanted to hire an organizer.  They wanted to set up what they called a community information center, and so I went to work for--so after I was at, at Northern Student Movement for a while, I went to work to set up that information center with the idea that it would be run by--I would set it up and that it would be run by the people in the neighborhood once it was set up, and that--and that actually happened.  And it was a place where residents could all--could, could come and find out all the--all what they needed to know about all the different both private and public bureaucracies that affected their lives and that--and, and then--and make--could make connections with, with people who wanted to--wanted to hire people and, and so they could get jobs and, and various kinds of, of information.  And it was an interesting concept that the--that the--that the--that priest had come up with and then--and then recruited me--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to set it up.  And then while I was there, the Massachusetts Council of Churches [Boston, Massachusetts] established a commission on religion and race I think it was or race and religion.  And, and, and I--and they hired two people.  They hired Jim Breeden [HistoryMaker James Breeden] who had been at Mass Freedom Movement [Massachusetts Freedom Movement].  They hired him to be the head of the commission.  And then they hired--and then--but they wanted to do--they wanted at the--from the very beginning, they wanted to do community organizing, so they hired me to come and, and, and establish a community organizing project for them.  And that community organizing project that I established, we decided that we should--it would not--we should not be identified with any of the--with names that meant anything that had--that carried baggage.  So we didn't wanna call it a church thing and we didn't wanna say that we were part of some national organization, so we called it Roxbury Associates.  And, and I decided that I would go out and hire who I by that time thought were some of the best organizers in Boston [Massachusetts].  One of them was Chuck Turner [HistoryMaker Charles "Chuck" Turner]; I hired Chuck.  Another one was Andrea Benton, her name was, and that--and she would become my first wife.  And Andrea, Andrea I'd known from doing volunteer work in Northern Student Movement and hired her to come to be one of the organizers in, in, in Roxbury Associates.
Speaker 2: Associates.
Speaker 1: And, and then--and Roxbury Associates did--we--our idea was we'd experiment with anything.  It was just like how do we get people to talk to us so we could talk to them about organizing, right, becoming something different.  And Chuck started out by selling books.  We had this idea that he would just go--become a door-to-door book salesman, and so--black history books, right.  And, and that didn't take, but it, it (laughter)--but if you could sort of see Chuck going along with this briefcase--with this suitcase full of books.  But it--we sold a lot of books but it didn't really--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We couldn't get the jell there.  I remember Andr- we got Andrea, we thought, well, I mean, let's take a look at the established organizations here that are sort of--that, that don't--that seem to be floundering and, and not--and, and, and don't have clear succession, leadership succession plans, right.  One of them at that time was the League of Women in Community Service [sic. League of Women for Community Service, Boston, Massachusetts].  We got Andrea to start going to--and she used to come and just complain, oh, (laughter) about sitting in with these old women trying to get the League of Women in Community Service to get--you know, get, get rejuvenized, took a while but it's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --interesting that it's--it--that's happening, right.
Story_ID: 620614
Speaker 1: But, but--and then--but and then with some other organizers, we [Roxbury Associates] concentrated on the fact that the City of Boston [Massachusetts] wanted to build a campus high school and they wanted to--this was gonna be a huge high school and that this--and with big--lots of playing fields and that would be in Lower Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].  And the--and the--and the part of--and they made it an urban renewal area just so that they could build a high school.
Speaker 2: Deja vu now is coming back.
Speaker 1: Hm?
Speaker 2: Syracuse [New York], Boston--deja vu.
Speaker 1: Right.  That's exactly right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And they wanted--and, and, and this--it was a neighborhood that had--that had been neglected by the city.  Lots of people had moved out already, lots of vacant buildings had--had had lots of fires, lots of vacant land, but still about, oh, about three hundred families were living there.  And, and we--and, and they were gonna--and the city was gonna--and the urban renewal agency was gonna buy all of them out, and we started to organize them and say you don't have to leave.  You can come up with an idea.  And, and at first, people just couldn't get it.  And we started to introd- we, we--there were groups of volunteer architects that we were able to bring in and to tell them what--how they could develop housing there, and the decision was made that there was no way that we could save all the individual houses but they could all get together and build new housing in the same neighborhood.  And we were able event--and, and we were able--once we convinced them that they could do this and we found--and, of course, they had the leadership there to do it.  And, and, and once we did that, we started just putting pressure on urban renewal, and finally we were able to get the--we won and we got urban renewal to, to say they wouldn't take all the land and they would leave a big chunk of land that would be available for housing.  And then we took the next step and said--because urban renewal had already happened in other parts of Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], and some of the urban renewal projects that had happened in other parts of Roxbury were already having problems.  We said we didn't want an outside developer.  The people could develop this themselves.  If they can get the expertise that would work for them, they could develop this themselves.  And so we created a organization called Lower Roxbury Community Corporation [Madison Park Development Corporation].  We negotiated with Ed Logue [Edward Logue] who was the head of the BRA [Boston Redevelopment Authority] at the time and we, we had got all of our volunteer consultants and architects to come up with a plan that we adopted to develop housing, and the BRA bought into it.  It allowed them to build the school on less land, but to build the school and not have--not have a big--not have continual protests and we were able to, to get Lower Roxbury to build housing.
Speaker 2: And what was your specific role in all of this.  I mean, you were coordinating people, you were organizing--
Speaker 1: My job was to coordinate the people and, and then to do a little bit of the organizing myself.  But my major job of this organizing was really done by Andrea [Andrea Benton] and by Chuck [HistoryMaker Charles "Chuck" Turner] and other organizers that we--came in, but Andrea and Chuck stayed in for the whole thing, right.  Yep.  And then--and then we had other org- and then we had other--we had people from--we had--at Coop- we were able to get Cooper Community Center [Hattie B. Cooper Community Center] which was in Lower Roxbury involved.  They had a staff person named Alex Rodriguez who got involved in this.  And then the, the BHA [Boston Housing Authority] had, had--early on had a, a--an organizer at Whittier Street.  His name was Val Hyman, and he got--was--and so, so all of us working together were able to do this.  And now Lower Roxbury Community Corporation is now Madison Park Development Corporation, right.
Speaker 2: How many housing units--
Speaker 1: And now--
Speaker 2: --and people are living there today?
Speaker 1: And now--and now, there are close to four hundred, so they're actually--that--because it was built in stages and then once it got--once the first stage was successful, they were able to build more.  And so right now, they're actually more people living there than were living there when we--when we started the organizing.
Speaker 2: Do you know the figure?  Do you know how many people are living there now in this--
Speaker 1: I'm not sure.  I'm not sure.  Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Well, it's a very significant number--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --given where we were.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: No, so that was the--that was probably the most successful thing that Roxbury Associates did.
Story_ID: 620615
Speaker 1: The Center for Inner City Change [Joint Community University Center for Inner City Change], was that another organization that--
Speaker 2: Then what happened after--now, while I was doing my work in--at Roxbury Associates, the--we're--the, the, the, the war has really escalated, the war in Vietnam [Vietnam War] has really escalated.  Another thing that Roxbury Associates did, and we'd been credited for is actually while we were doing this organizing, while we were organizing with young people, we talked to them about the war a lot.  And so we began some of the first organizing in the black community anywhere in the country against the war in Vietnam, so we--so that was also going--so we were doing that also at the same time.  Now, all this--at this time, I--we all--we had a draft and so if you were in college, you got a def- a student deferment.  Now, once you got out--once you stopped being in college, once they found out that you stopped being in college, then you got--then you were on the list.  But we go back to when I was in high school [Syracuse Central High School, Syracuse, New York], being very much influenced by Quakers and the American Friends Service Committee, I was--at--when I was in high school, I really considered myself etiologically nonviolent, not only--not prac- not just for practical reasons, so I was a pacifist.  So when I had to app- we all had to apply, we had to register for the draft.  When I registered for the draft, I filled out the--I filled out the form, I said that I was--I was a cont- I was not--I was a conscientious objector.  And then they sent me this long form to fill out which I filled out and sent in, and then--but since I was in college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], they never dealt with it, they just gave me my student deferment.  But now when I was not in college anymore organizing and my name comes up, my form came up, too.  And so the--my draft board says, "Okay, you have--you, you have to go.  Your name has come up.  But, but since you're a conscientious objector, we will rec- we will--we will accept that and you can go work some place where--that we approve of, all right, for two years."  And so I say, "Well, look, I'm doing all of this work in Boston [Massachusetts], let me work in Boston."  They said, "No."  My draft board--and you never--you're draft--you always have your draft board.
Speaker 1: Your draft board is in Syracuse [New York].
Speaker 2: Your draft board is from when you were eighteen, right.  And so my draft board in Syracuse says no.  They think that that's, that's too--that's, that's not enough--that's not a proper--appropriate sacrifice; I have to make a sacrifice.  So I--so I--so they--so they send me to Rochester, New York, and--as--to work in a hospital as an orderly, and I worked as an orderly in Rochester General Hospital [Rochester, New York] from '67 [1967] to '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967] to sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 2: Right.  And so in '69 [1969]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right, in six--and so but now I'm, I'm staying--I'm, I'm--by, by now, Andrea [Andrea Benton] and I have gotten married and we're--and so I'm gonna stay in Boston, and so I've--I stayed connected with Boston all this time that I'm in Rochester.  And so when my time is coming up, people start telling me about jobs that are available.  And Mel King [HistoryMaker Melvin King] has set up the Center for Inner City Change.  And Mel has--by--now, what's happened is the Urban League has changed considerably and they've hired Mel to--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --be their executive director.  And the Urban League has worked out a rela- is building up a relationship with Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts] around doing work in--training students to do work in the city and Mel wants to have a center where there were trained community organizers, and it's called the Center for Inner City Change.  And so the center gets set up and they invite me to come and be the director, and that's what I do.  So, I come back from when I--I'm--so I'm finished up in Rochester and come immediately back to a job and I run the Center for Inner City Change.
Story_ID: 620616
Speaker 1: What came next?
Speaker 2: Then what comes next, after the Center for Inner City Change [Joint Community University Center for Inner City Change], I, I follow Mel [HistoryMaker Melvin King] because Mel goes from there to set up the--a, a program at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to--for a kind of rest and relaxation and further education for activists around the country called the Community Fellows Program [Mel King Community Fellows].  And so--and that's--and so I come to--and go, go to that.  And in between, I spent--I'm looking around for something to do at--and I do some work with--actually go with helping the then black state representatives who in those days had no staff, no state representatives had staffs, helped them set up an office called the liaison office to help them to get--to get staff, a nonprofit group that would recruit--would, would, would get money to help them get staff that would work for the--for the three of--then, was the three of them.
Speaker 1: Who were the three?
Speaker 2: Holgate [Frank Holgate], right, and then after Haynes [Michael Haynes] left, Kimbrel [Carter Kimbrel], remember him?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, and Royal [Royal Bolling, Sr.].  And of course Royal was the--was the--was the one who thought this was--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --he pulled the other two in (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then I went to--so I go to MIT with--and, and is--I'm in the first class of the fellows and--
Speaker 1: That was the Community Fellows Program?
Speaker 2: The Community Fellows Program, right.
Speaker 1: And then--and then--and then while at the--while I'm at the--in the Community Fellows Program, [HistoryMaker] Hubie Jones decides to run for [U.S.] Congress and I work a little bit on that campaign, but that doesn't work out for me.  It's not a good fit (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who was Hubie Jones--
Speaker 1: --for me.
Speaker 2: --at that point?
Speaker 1: Hubie Jones was in the Community Fellows Program.  Hubie Jones had just fin--he was--he was looking for what to do after running the Roxbury Multi-Service Center [Boston, Massachusetts], and so he was in--he was in that program.  And then one of the things that he was actually thinking about was, was politics, electoral politics, and then decides to run for the seat that Moakley [Joe Moakley] won.  And, and then another person who I had met at--when I was at the Center for Inner City Change was Henry Hampton because Henry--and Henry was, was--had some of his staff people involved with the Center for Inner City Change, and they were attempting to put out a magazine, and that was one of the projects we were working with, and so I met Henry during that time.  And when I was at MIT, Henry was trying to figure out what to do with an organization here that was called the American Museum of Negro History [Museum of Afro-American History; Museum of African American History, Boston, Massachusetts] which was a volunteer, some time they had a part-time staff person in Marcus Mitchell [J. Marcus Mitchell], which had space in Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts] that was doing work on the history of people and--of black people in Boston [Massachusetts].  And they--and they--their space was, was in a building and the--and the building asked them to move.  It was in a church building.  It was in in--it was in the original Charles Street church [Charles Street Meeting House, Boston, Massachusetts] building.  And, and so they were--they were--they were just floating around; they didn't know what to do.  And he heard that the--a building [African Meeting House, Boston, Massachusetts] that black people had built turned out to be the oldest black church building in the United--still standing in the United States which was--had been sold by black people to a synagogue at the beginning of the 20th century, that that building was back on the market, that the Jewish congregation had gotten very small and they--and they wanted to sell the building.  And so he came to me and asked me if I'd help him because he thought it would be great if we could buy this building and then the--and try--and then reinvigorate the museum.  And, and that's--and so, so all of those things are all bouncing around at the same time, and that's where I landed.
Story_ID: 620617
Speaker 1: So when I finished up at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and did a little work for [HistoryMaker] Hubie Jones and his campaign, I then went and started to work with Henry [Henry Hampton] as a consultant to raise money for--to purchase the African Meeting House [Boston, Massachusetts].  And, and then while I was doing that, I realized that there wasn't--that, that the--he didn't have a plan for how there was gonna be an organization (laughter) to really turn this into a museum (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was there a board of directors of the--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, there was--there was a board--
Speaker 2: --museum at this point?
Speaker 1: --of directors, didn't meet very often, but there was a board of directors.
Speaker 2: Did they hire you?
Speaker 1: Right.  And then--and then--and then--well, first I'm as a consultant, then we buy the building, right, and then they hire me.  Right.  And, and then two things happened.  I mean, the first thing that happens is, we buy the building and the--and then--and, and then we look at the building, and we realize the building's falling apart.  And so we then raise money to do some emergency repair work on the building and while we're doing that emergency repair work on the building, we have a workman's accident and the roof burns off and we almost lose the building.  But we're able to save the building and then begin to raise money for the building.  And one of the things I realize, it's very difficult to raise money for a building if people don't know--if there isn't anything else going on, the organization isn't doing anything else.  So I start doing some programming.  We revised the--what was the--what was the Black Freedom Trail into the Black Heritage Trail.  We changed the name of the institution [American Museum of Negro History] to the Museum of Afro-American History [Museum of African American History, Boston, Massachusetts].  We begin to do exhibits and, and get space in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] 'cause we can't use the African Meeting House.  We would get space in Roxbury and start doing exhibits, and essentially work to put it together as a--as a museum.
Speaker 2: Where was the African Meeting House?
Speaker 1: And the African Meeting House is--
Speaker 2: Where is it?  Where would--
Speaker 1: --is in Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts].  Beacon Hill is the--was--half of Beacon Hill in the 19th century, the half that you're on right now with the State House [Massachusetts State House, Boston, Massachusetts] is--was a--was the--was a neighborhood for the richest white people in Boston.  They didn't fill up the hill.  And on the other side of the hill, what they called the Back of the Hill, what the people who lived there called the North Slope, right, that part was a working class community of--was both, both white and black, where almost all the black people in Boston lived there, though they didn't fill it up until after the Civil War.  And, and they started building in that--in that neighborhood at the beginning of the 19th century.  And the African Meeting House was one of their first institute--was the first institutional building that they built which they built in 1806.
Story_ID: 620618
Speaker 1: The Museum of African American History in Boston [Massachusetts] today, two thousand [2006]--
Speaker 2: Afro--Museum of Afro-American History [Museum of African American History, Boston, Massachusetts].  We, we--that was the name that we picked.  We haven't changed it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, yeah, is certainly a, a significant and major institution in the city, and you served as the director from 1972 to about 1984, so you had a long, long tenure there--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and I think is safe to say that we probably would not have the museum and, and have the African Meeting House [Boston, Massachusetts] as the central artifact of the museum if it hadn't been for the work that you did for a long period of time as the director.  Would you say more about those years that you served and, and put this museum up front in the--in the city?
Speaker 2: I think that running a museum is very much like what teachers and professors say about their profession, is that, that you learn more than you teach, right, and, and running a museum, you know, I mean for those years, it's really--I, I just learned a tremendous amount.  I think that the--what I contributed was the insistence on seeing the African Meeting House, as you say, as an artifact and that--and, but, but by doing that and, and, and also working on refining the walking tours that, that Marcus Mitchell [J. Marcus Mitchell] and his wife had, had, had begun, we were able to have the historic preservation of African American commun- of com- African American communities become central to the kinds of work that black people think about nowadays when they think about black history.  It's really--it--in the--in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], you know, black people were not focused in on saving the buildings and you think--just think about all the buildings we lost during that period, all of the black churches that were either, you know, irreparably remodeled or sold and torn down during that period.  And so the--I--so I think that one of the things that--what I was able to accomplish with the museum was to get black people, not only in Boston, but black people interested in black history around the country interested in historic preservation of buildings and seeing buildings as artifacts.
Story_ID: 620619
Speaker 1: The other thing of, of--that we [Museum of Afro-American History; Museum of African American History, Boston, Massachusetts] did there that I'm very proud of is that we understood that we were going to have to do some of the research ourselves, that if you're going to be an effective interpreter of African American history, you certainly had to do some of the research to--into telling that story.  Now, we were able to do that again because we had the building, the African Meeting House [Boston, Massachusetts], and we wanted to know more about it, and in order to find out more about it, we had to do research.  Probably the most exciting research I think that we did at the African Meeting House and, and research that had an effect on, again, African American historiography was archeology.  The decision that we made to do an archeological investigation of the African Meeting House.  Now, we were lucky.  The African Meeting House, in a neighborhood that has very few freestanding buildings, is a freestanding building.  There're not many buildings in Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts] where you can walk all the way around the building.  And, and the African Meeting House is freestanding.  And because of that, it had--over the, the years that black people used that building in the 19th century, much of its backyard had been used as a dump, and that was where things were thrown away.  Now, a good deal of what was thrown away got preserved because it was--it was China or it was bones.  And we heard about a archeological program that had been going on in Massachusetts, sort of very quietly in--outside of Plymouth [Massachusetts] called Parting Ways, and Parting Ways was an archeological program of a com- of a--of a small African American community that had been developed after the American Revolution by free black people, some of whom had gained their freedom because they fought in the American Revolution.  But now none of the buildings were there, so they were looking for the, the, the, the sites and foundations of, of, of that--those buildings.  We were able to get in touch with the person who ran that archeological project and asked him to come take a look at what we were doing in Boston [Massachusetts], and he sent (cough), excuse me, he didn't--he did not come up, but he sent two graduate students to come and take a look, and they were both skeptical that they could find anything in Boston because they thought built--Boston was so overbuilt.  But when we brought them to the backyard of the Meeting House, they were overwhelmed by the space and that, that, that much of the material that we did not know was there had worked its way actually to the surface and is what archeologists call the surface collection.  And they were actually able to collect pieces of 19th century, early--late 18th century and early 19th century fragments of pottery that were actually on the ground, had just worked their ways up.  We had been scrape--sweeping away for (laughter), for a few months.  And, and one of those people was Beth Bower and Beth eventually came to work for the museum as our staff archeologist.  We were the first African American museum to have a staff archeologist in, in the United States.  And, and we did archeology there and then we also did archeology at other places, but that--but that archeology at the Meeting House was, was, was a significant, successful research.  And on putting together those pieces with the history that we already knew of the building was quite fantastic.
Story_ID: 620620
Speaker 1: And then I think the third--I would say the third accomplishment while I was at the museum [Museum of Afro-American History; Museum of African American History, Boston, Massachusetts] was to get the National Park Service involved with our--with, with the--with this work in the North.  There had not been mu- there had--there had been--when, when the National Park Service became involved with the sites on Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts], there had been no--up to then, there had been no national park site outside of the South that had--that related to African Americans.  And we were successful in getting the United States Congress to pass a law establishing the Boston African American National Historic Site [Boston, Massachusetts].  Now, African American--African is in that African American.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, and, and, and that allowed the National Park Service to become involved in both the support and in research and programming around African American history in Boston [Massachusetts], which they are now.
Speaker 2: Well, I was on the board when you spearheaded that, that move, and I was a little leery and a little cautious about it.  But, anyways, it happened and I'm glad it happened.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But just as an aside, the National Park Service now owns the Carter G. Woodson Home [Carter G. Woodson Home National Historic Site] in Washington [D.C.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 2: --and we are having a problem now holding on to the interpretation and the programs--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --and I just wanted to share that with you--
Speaker 1: No, and I want you--
Speaker 2: --because, because you were able to--
Speaker 1: That's right, but someone called me from--and I gave them some advice about this.
Speaker 2: Well, I told 'em to call you.
Speaker 1: Oh, right, and I think you probably need--we need to have a meeting now.  That's what I would suggest.  I think you should invite some of the people who have--at these various sites to come and sit down and talk to you because I know--because the--because--well, this is a whole other thing, but the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well you--
Speaker 1: You know, the park service is a huge bureaucracy and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --like any huge bureaucracy, they like--they like to collect (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Well, they wanna control the space and what happens to the space.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and--
Speaker 2: And you were able to--
Speaker 1: Yep and you--
Speaker 2: --not let that--
Speaker 1: --and you can--
Speaker 2: --happen here.
Speaker 1: --you can work--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you get that worked out.  That's right.
Story_ID: 620621
Speaker 1: What were some (cough) of the other major achievements during your tenure as the director of the museum [Museum of Afro-American History; Museum of African American History, Boston, Massachusetts] that you're proud of?
Speaker 2: I think that we, we made African American history in Boston [Massachusetts] for both black and white Bostonians known, and, and the--so that I think that if you talk to black--if you talk to people in Boston now and talk to 'em about black history, they'll say, well, have you--did--have you heard about the African Meeting House [Boston, Massachusetts] or have you heard about--have you been on the Black Heritage Trail?  And then we--and we've been able to incorporate that not as much as it should be, but incorporate that into all of the tourism and other descriptions of Boston.  I think that, though, for me, one of the most remarkable things that happened to me was when I was doing a tour of the Black Heritage Trail, and I used to do them on a regular basis, I was doing one for a group of young people, and a--and during the tour, there was always one kid who was always paying attention to me, never seemed to be distracted but never asked any questions.  And at the end of the tour, I just said, you know, saying goodbye, saying if they have any last questions, he finally raises his hand, and he asks me, "Why is Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] called Roxbury?"  And that for me was just great because what that kid had done is what, of course, I would like everybody to do.  He had made the connection between here's a person who's been telling me about black history and about abolitionists, but he obviously knows about history, and I have a history question.  Now, it's not about black history, but it's about where I live, and I live in Roxbury and no one has ever been able to tell me why Roxbury is called Roxbury, and he asked me that question.  Now, fortunately I knew the answer, but it also meant to me that it's important that when we talk about history that we understand we have to be talking about not only black history, but we have to be talking about history for everybody, and if we can talk about history for everybody, then we can talk about a history that, that talks about the actual and true connections that have always been among and between people.
Story_ID: 620622
Speaker 1: Well, you certainly had to follow (cough) the movement of the African community on Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts] into the 20th century into lower and middle and upper Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And in doing that, you began to research and became very much involved in helping to develop our renewal interest in the history of Roxbury, and I understand you were the president of the Roxbury Historical Society [Boston, Massachusetts], and I think that's also another major role that you played, so would you talk about the Roxbury Historical Society and your involvement with that over the years--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --even to the present I believe?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  One of the things about the history, when black people approach it is that black people, of course, have always been related to white people.  If there were no white people, there would be no black people in North America, or certainly probably not until maybe the 19th century when they wanted to come over voluntarily, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So we've all--we--our history is a history--it's always been entangled with white history, but also in--our history certainly in urban neighborhoods in the North (cough) has always been a history that's entangled with white people because we tend to be, live--very few black people in the North live in the original northern black neighborhood.  And so Harlem [New York, New York] was already built before black people moved to Harlem and Roxbury and Boston [Massachusetts] was for many years the center of the black community and Boston was a community that they moved into when they left Beacon Hill.  And when we talk about black history in Roxbury, we could talk about just the period that black people were there, but then we would be leaving out all of that kind of information, and we wouldn't be answering the questions like the young man asked me about why is Roxbury called Roxbury or why does my house look like it does?  Why do I have all these porches, right?  We didn't build those houses, right, but that history, of course, is a history that we need to know because we are there.  And so that's what the Roxbury Historical Society meant to me and what my job was with the Roxbury Historical Society, was a--which was a historical society which had been established by white people in the 1890s was to--as the white people left and left the society, was to interest black people in becoming part of that society and telling that story.  Now, our major success as a society was to--and I was able to help them once I got into state legislature, was to establish a park on the history of Roxbury called the Roxbury State Heritage Park [Roxbury Heritage State Park, Boston, Massachusetts].  And that park took over a building, an old building in Roxbury that had been built before the American Revolution called the Dillaway-Thomas House and is now working to develop programs out of that building and in other spaces in Roxbury.  And then with other people in Roxbury who were interested in the history were doing tours of Roxbury.  Roxbury is a lot bigger than Beacon Hill.  It's--if you take--you have to be a hiker to do a serious walking tour of Roxbury.  So we have been doing tours, renting these tourist trolleys, and take--and doing trolley tours of Roxbury that have been very successful.  And the number of people from outside who are interested in this has, has been--has--is--has been growing.  And it's, it's good for people from outside of Roxbury to come in, especially when Roxbury gets bad publicity in the papers around crime and it's good for them to come in and see what the real Roxbury is, that people are living there and, and get a sense of what it is.  But for me, the, the, the most rewarding part of these tours is when people who live in Roxbury take the tours and, and learn about their neighborhood in a way they didn't--that they didn't know, get a lot of those questions answered that they didn't ask, but also those tours are great because the people on those tours then talk to each other, so you go by their street and they tell you how their family--where their family was before they moved into that street, and you get a--and it's a really exciting way of, of doing history.  And we need more money so we can do these--do more of these--more of these tours which really help people from outside, but in a quite remarkable way get people who live in Roxbury now to talk to their--each other about those experiences in a--in a--in a--in a way that is, you know, informal enough so people are relaxed to do it.
Story_ID: 620623
Speaker 1: We now need to move to your present position as a state representative and you were elected to the House of Representatives [Massachusetts House of Representatives] here in 1983 was it?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-two [1982].
Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982].
Speaker 2: So if you follow my--as I say my midlife crises, this, this was--I, I was--I spent about ten years doing community organizing if you--if you count the stuff in college and then ten years about doing--becoming--running a museum [Museum of Afro-American History; Museum of African American History, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Museum.
Speaker 2: Right, so--and now--and then I had my next midlife crisis (laughter) and decided what--I had been at the museum for ten years and was starting to think about what I should do next.  Ten years is--you know, it--and, and they needed new people to move it on to the next level.  And interestingly, a name that will pop up pops up again, is Mel King [HistoryMaker Melvin King].  So Mel King who I was--in terms of my career, was involved in when he asked me to be part--to run the Center For Inner City Change [Joint Community University Center for Inner City Change], and then I'm connected with Mel King again at--in, in the first class of the Community Fellows Program [Mel King Community Fellows] that he runs.  He, after the Community Fellows Program, while he is still running it, runs for office in 1973-1972, he runs for the state legislature and be--starts in the state legislature in 1973.  By this time, I'm living in the South End [Boston, Massachusetts] neighborhood, which is a neighborhood that he represents, so he was my state representative.  And in 1980--in 1981 [sic. 1983], he runs for mayor of Boston [Massachusetts] and no one thinks he's gonna do well at all, and he does, you know, fairly well; I think he comes in third.  And so he decides he wants to run for mayor in a serious way and decides not to run for reelection in 1982.  And so the seat is open and I decide after talking to people in, in, in the South End that I'll run for state representative.  It's something I'd thought about but the pieces had never come together for me be--in, in previous years.  When there was an opportunity, I was off doing something else or--and, and so here, it all came together.  I was looking to leave the museum, I had this opportunity to do this, and took it.  And so I ran in '82 [1982] and won and, and had been--and had been in the same position un--un--until today.  The district [9th Suffolk District] has only changed because of shifts around the boundaries because of redistricting that has occurred while I've been here, but I represent most of the South End, all of the Fenway [Fenway-Kenmore, Boston, Massachusetts], the neighborhood around Fenway Park [Boston, Massachusetts] where the Red Sox [Boston Red Sox] play, and then a little piece of Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], a--Lower Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] that touches on both of those neighborhoods, and then a part of the Back Bay [Boston, Massachusetts] leading over to Cambridge [Massachusetts].  Because right now, I represent one precinct in Cambridge.  I west--I represent the western campus of MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 1: Is that right?
Speaker 2: --all right, which is another come around.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 620624
Speaker 1: So that's, that's my district [9th Suffolk District].  Most of my--most of the people who live in my district live in the South End [Boston, Massachusetts] first, then the Fenway [Fenway-Kenmore, Boston, Massachusetts], then Lower Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].  So it is a very heterogeneous district.  It's a wonderful district to represent.  It's a district that is not only racially diverse, but is incredibly economically diverse, so it's a, a, a neighborhood that in walking distance has public housing projects and literally million dollar condominiums.
Speaker 2: But this was not the situation when you, first elected [in 1982].
Speaker 1: Well, when I was first elected, we didn't--
Speaker 2: There's been--
Speaker 1: --we didn't--
Speaker 2: --a lot of change now.
Speaker 1: --we didn't think it was going to be--we didn't think it was going to change this fast in the twenty years.  The, the change had begun, so when I was elected, this neighborhood, the South End part of this neighborhood was always--already described as a gentrified neighborhood, but it was not as wealthy gentrified as it is now.  And, and, and we, we also--and part of what one of my--one of the things I work on a lot, one of my priorities is to maintain that diversity and because the early--in the early--in the 1950s, if you came into the South End as we describe the South End now, the South End was just a little over 50 percent black, and all--and the rest of it was almost all working class white.  And, but--and then--and then there was a small population, a grow--small growing population of Puerto Ricans.  Now, when we said working class white, we were talking about a very diverse group of white people.  We were talking about white people, people who identify--who identify as white but are from the Middle East.  We're talking about Lebanese as well as Irish, and lots of people in between and from Europe.  At, at one point in the '50s [1950s], the--a public school in the South End had, had about thirty first languages, different first languages spoken at home.  And so it was--and, and it was that neighborhood that began to be gentrified in the late '60s [1960s] and then really took off in the '70s [1970s].  So when I be--when, when, when I became the state representative, that gentrification had, had been--had taken hold.  As part of that gentrification, you had two things.  You had people interested in just fixing up their old houses, so you had that kind of--they were just interested in the architecture and it is--it, it--we, we represent--I represent a neighborhood that has the largest accumulation of Victorian row houses in America, all right.  The--and then you had people--but you had people who came in as sort of urban pioneers.  These were the people, white families who came in who didn't want their children to be raised in homogenous suburban settings, right.  These were the white people who when they came in put their kids in public schools, all right.  And then in that pop- in both of those populations was a, a significant number of gay and lesbian people in this--in, in this population.  Now, because of the--because of South End was the kind of neighborhood it was, there--the, the, the gays and lesbians who could never be public, right, lived there in the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s], into the '60s [1960s].  So if you were--and so if you wanted to go to a gay bar in Boston [Massachusetts] in 1950, you actually went to the South End.  Now, you would never know that, that from the outside that it was a bar (laughter), let alone gay, all right.  And, but that's--so, so--but, but that population, of course, with the--with the gay rights movement and, and--found this a comfortable place to live.  And in this mix, both racial and economic mix, it became a, a, a, a sig--there became a significant sexual orientation mix.  So all of that is what makes this community quite remarkable.  Now because there was so much activism in this neighborhood in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], when urban renewal came to the neighborhood, the activists insisted on the div- on finding ways to develop permanent housing that would be avail- that, that would stay available to poor and, and working class people.  And so there's a good deal of housing in my district where you have permanent subsidized housing that is not endangered in the community.  And that, of course, maintains a significant amount of the racial diversity and also the income diversity, not only the public housing, but the housing that was developed by CDCs [community development corporation] for poor and working class people.  So that mix is very--is, is one that we, we worked very hard to try to maintain.  Now, there are a lot of people who, who, who are critical certainly of the South End because we didn't do a good job as that as we maybe could have, but I just heard a, a kind of weird kind of back door compliment for the South End and that was someone who--this was someone who was doing studies of gentrification in the country, and they said that the South End has more subsidized housing than any other gentrified neighborhood in America.  Well, that's a kind of sad statement on one hand but on the other hand, you see what kind of neighborhood I represent.
Story_ID: 620625
Speaker 1: You are a senior senior representative today, but at one time you were a junior representative.  What were those early years like sitting in the state legislature here for you?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm--
Speaker 1: First--
Speaker 2: I'm senior in the--in the legislature in two ways I guess.  I'm, I'm, I'm senior because I'm the, the black state representative now who has been here the longest and the--and I'm also senior inside the legislature in the--in the leadership of the legislature as being one of the assistant majority leaders.  The--when I first came to the legislature, of course, I came--I--you--I came in with an agenda that was not much different from my predecessors' agenda, different emphases but the agenda was, was pretty much the same.  So one of the things that--I did not have to have a kind of fight with my constituents [from the 9th Suffolk District].  They weren't getting--it wasn't like I was--they were getting a different person.
Speaker 1: They knew what they were getting.
Speaker 2: Right.  They knew what they were getting.  And so--and so I had a, a good relationship with my constituents when, when I--at--as I--when I--when I came in.  Many times, you know, you're not sure about that when you're first elected, but I was.  And I was able to--and my job then was to spend time just learning how this place operated.  I had senior--there were black representatives that were senior to me obviously when I came in who were very good teachers.  One of them was [HistoryMaker] Doris Bunte who went off to run the--left here to become the dir- the executive director of the Boston Housing Authority [BHA].  But she was a--she was the--a state representative from Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] at the time and was very, very helpful in teaching me how the place operated.  As the--as, as the years went by, I moved up in the leadership.  I became--I was appointed to ways and means committee [House Committee on Ways and Means], I soon became a, a--I worked my way up in the sort of pecking order of chairmanships.  I went from chairman of the committee on counties, which was sort of back water committee to committee on local affairs, then committee of public service, and then committee on insurance which was a very important committee in the House [Massachusetts House of Representatives].  And during that time, though I took one piece of advice that Mel [HistoryMaker Melvin King] had given me, and that is, he said, "Don't worry about what committee they put you on, you will always find something where you can help black people and poor people, doesn't matter what committee it is," (laughter), right?  And, and as--and, and that was certainly true for local affairs, it was true for public service, and, and the--in public service, I was able--because the public service committee overseas pension funds, I was able to work with the state pension funds to get them to start investing a little bit of their money in community development in ways--in ways that they haven't done.  And, and I just read yesterday, I was just going through their website and I saw that at the next meeting, they were giving a report on alternative investments, and I said isn't that interesting, right, that that's--no--they don't even think about it. That's just a--that's just part of their regular agenda now, but that was invented when I was in--when I was chair--chairman of public service.  And then in the insurance, I was able to do a lot around--a lot of work around making insurance available--health insurance available to people in Massachusetts regardless of their health status.  Your people were losing insurance if--when they got sick; it was crazy.  And we were able to, to stop companies from cancelling insurance based on, on, on what they called previous conditions, right.
Story_ID: 620626
Speaker 1: Representative Rushing [HistoryMaker Byron Rushing], would you share with us your legislative initiatives and legislative activities during your long tenure (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --here [Massachusetts House of Representatives] and some of the major pieces that you're particular proud of?
Speaker 2: I think that--one of the things I always tell my constituents [from the 9th Suffolk District] is I can--we have a 160 members in the [U.S.] House of Representatives and 40 members in the [U.S.] Senate and, of course, bills have to pass the House of Representatives and the Senate and be signed by the governor to become law.  So I tell my constituents that I can get them anything they want as long as I can get 80 people to agree with me in this house and 21 to agree with me in the other house, all right, and the governor to go along with it.  So one of the things I want to say and I, I know this is a--this is strange coming from a--an elected official, is I have never been able to do anything up here by myself, that one of the things actually I enjoy about this job and enjoy about legislatures, is that it is--to be successful, you have to work things out with other people.  You have to--you have to do that.  You can be the leader of it, but you can't do it by yourself.  Now, when I got into the legislature, the--my predecessor, Mel [HistoryMaker Melvin King], had just done a very interesting thing.  The--in 19--in the 19--late 1970s, early '80s [1980s], people had just started to talk about whether the way we can put pressure on South Africa to end the apartheid would be to get all the companies that invest in South Africa to get out of South Africa and it was the divestment movement.  People had tried other things before.  We had had--we, we had had the, the attempt to get American corporations to act differently when they're in South Africa, that was the Sullivan principles by the Reverend Sullivan [Leon Sullivan] from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but that wasn't working.  And so people started to say, okay let's get companies out.  Now how do we get companies out?  We can get companies out if we won't invest in those companies if they're in South Africa.  Well, black people don't have a whole bunch of money invested in these companies.  We have to get big institutions like universities and churches not to invest, and one of those big institutions, of course, was government itself in our pension funds, and the--began a movement to try to get pension funds to stop investing in South Africa, and Mel tried to do that here in Massachusetts.  The pension fund said no it wouldn't do that.  The only way it would do that if they passed legislation and made them do it, and Mel got legislation passed and actually got passed--it got passed in both houses and then the governor [Edward J. King] vetoed it.  And then just before Mel left, so and--the Massachusetts legislature overrode the governor's veto, and we were one of the first two states, we and Connecticut, to order our pension funds to divest of any investments they had in companies doing business in South Africa.  So when I came into the legislature, that law had just been passed and I along with a state representative, Sandra Graham, in Cambridge [Massachusetts], we took on the task of making sure that the pension board actually did this and didn't try to get the law rescinded.  And we were very successful in doing--in doing that work.  And I got very much involved in trying to get the legislature to put more pressure on companies doing business in South Africa if we could.  And so that became one of my first legislative tasks up here and I--and, and I'm very proud of what Massachusetts was able to do.  And when Mandela [Nelson Mandela] got out of prison and came to the United States, he insisted on coming to Boston [Massachusetts], and when he came to Boston, he praised everybody in Bo- in Massachusetts for what we had done in, in the state legislature ten years before.
Story_ID: 620627
Speaker 1: Now, that led me to get involved with other ways that the state could use its influence to help people in other parts of the world.  And one of my priorities is definitely civil rights, but it's also civil rights in a broader context.  And I say--I'm--one of my priorities is really both civil and human rights.  And when I think about human rights, I don't only think about people in the United States, and so people came to me.  I didn't search out other people, but people came to me and said, look, we know of what you did around South Africa, we want to interest you in another very serious situation, and that is the lack of democracy in the country of Burma [Myanmar].  Now, I knew very little about Burma when these people came to me, but one of the things they brought me was a letter by Desmond Tutu to--that he had written to the woman who should be the prime minister of Burma, Aung San Suu Kyi, after she got the Nobel Peace Prize.  And when she received the Nobel Peace Prize, she was under house arrest in Burma and he wrote her a letter.  And in that letter, he called for people around the world to approach Burma in the same way that they had approached South Africa.  And so I said, "Okay, that's a good recommendation.  I will figure--I will learn about this."  And so what we did was to pass legislation that said that the State of Massachusetts would not buy products from any company that did business in Burma.  Now, over the years, we had found that, that--and we had done this around South Africa after we did divestment.  We had found that actually there are companies that could sort of withstand divestment pressures, but what they could not withstand is not being able to sell products, especially those companies that did a lot of, of marketing to governments, to city and state governments.  And so we used that and got that legislation passed in the--here and it's called the Burma Law [Massachusetts Burma Law, 1996].  Now, things changed between the anti-apartheid movement and when we did the Burma Law.  One of the (cough)--one of the things was that we had changed our international treaties around trade and so a number of comp- countries said that what we were doing was vi- a violation of the GATT treaty around trade, the General Agreement on, on Trade and Tariffs [General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade], that the United States had signed onto, that it established the WTO, World Trade Organization.  And then Amer- a number of American companies said that they were not--they did not like what happened around South Africa and divestment and they didn't want it to happen again around anything else, and so they sued the, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.  And my bill which passed here, was signed by the governor [William F. Weld], was, was challenged in federal court and was--and the bill got taken to the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  And interestingly, they, they won--the, the--our opponents won on a very narrow, narrow decision, on a narrow interpretation of the law, and the interpretation was that when we passed our law, [U.S.] Congress had not passed a law about Burma.  And, of course, we passed our law to try to get Congress to pass a law about Burma, but the Supreme Court said that once the Congress had passed a law about Burma, that superseded our law, so we were in conflict with the congressional law and then--and that was unconstitutional.  So we, we, we won and we lost at the same time.  But that, of course, has been a significant piece of the whole movement that has been going on, that still goes on to try to establish democracy in Burma.
Story_ID: 620628
Speaker 1: So, certainly, one class of, of work here [Massachusetts House of Representatives] and legislation that I've been involved in is legislation around civil rights and human rights.  I consider the major civil rights issue that bef- that has been before us over the past ten or twelve years, has been civil rights for gay and lesbian people, civil, civil rights around sexual orien- civil rights around sexual orientation.  And so I was one of the first sponsors of the gay rights bill in the Massachusetts legislature.  That took a number of years to pass.  A lot of people--a lot of my colleagues had to be persuaded and we were able to pass the, the--one of the first gay rights bills in the United States.  Now that, of course, led--like any civil rights bill, that leads the people that it affects to try to figure out what should happen next and what things are not being covered by this law.  And what, what gay and lesbian people found was that the law was not changing all--a number of laws that affect couples, all right, that when people get married, they get a whole range of benefits that are har- very rarely all spelled out individually but they come naturally to people when they're married.  In order for same sex couples to get these benefits, they would have to be listed and put in the special law and said same sex couples can get these benefits, and they would have to have some way that the same sex couples register, right?  And that, of course, is a, a, a way that Vermont decided to handle this.  So Vermont created civil unions.  They created an institution for these same sex couples.  Advocates and activists in Massachusetts said, "What is the significant difference between that and marriage?  Isn't marriage--," when we're talking about civil marriage, not religious marriage, we're talking about civil marriage, "isn't that what it is, is a creation of a civil relationship that is endorsed by the state that comes with all these benefits?  Why set up a separate parallel one?  Why not just allow same sex couples to enter into civil marriage?"  They, of cour- we--and, and I--and I actually filed legislation to establish civil marriage--to open civil marriage here.  But now at the same time that I filed that legislation, the advocates also went to court.  Doesn't this sound like the Civil Rights Movement to you from, from the--that affected African Americans?  Right.  And they went to court.  Now, they win the court case before we win the, the legislative case, and so we have same-sex marriage here in Massachusetts because of the ruling of the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts.  Now, what I did after that was I became one of the leading opponents of trying to go back to undo that supreme court case.  And so I worked very hard here to get my colleagues not to try to amend the Constitution [Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts] which was the only way you could undo that case, is to amend the constitution, state constitution, Massachusetts.  And so I was a leading spokesperson, had a--obviously had some arguments with, with people who were opposed to that, had a few arguments with some of the black clergy in Boston [Massachusetts] who were opposed to that.  I think that--you know, and that's part of, of, of, of this--of, of this job.  What's interesting, of course, is that almost all of the black legislators in Massachusetts voted not to change the constitution.  And as I tell the black ministers, I mean, I can understand their position--I disagree with it--understand their position from a theological point of view, but I don't understand their position from a civil rights point of view.  And--but the--but the most important thing is that their constituents are also our constituents, and none of us lost the ele- have lost an election around this, right, so I'm assuming that there's some people who go to church who hear those sermons, but do agree with us.
Story_ID: 620629
Speaker 1: Now, on a--on a day to day basis, I have to spend a lot of time with the issues that relate directly to my constituency [from the 9th Suffolk District].  Now, sometimes those issues are very interesting issues and sometime--you know, and sometimes they're--and, and apply to other people and sometimes those issues just apply to the South End [Boston, Massachusetts] and, and, and everybody else would glaze over as I talk about the fact that we have flooding problems or that a good deal of the South End is built on filled in land and we're--and we're having problems with foundations of buildings and who should be responsible for that, but I get involved in that a lot.  But on the other hand, as I said earlier, I'm very concerned that we have as good housing for poor and working class people as possible in, in, in our community.  Now, I want that housing, a lot of that housing, to be in my district.  But when I work for improving housing for poor and working class people, when I work for a, a housing trust fund set up by the state so there'll be money available for developing that kind of housing, I, of course, not just doing work for my own constituents, I'm doing work for that whole class of people throughout the state that need--that needs that.  That has drawn me, though into what I consider one of the real disgraces of the United States and the--and cities in the United States, and that is homelessness.  I mean, you and I can remember when there was no such word as homeless.  We could--you can--I can remember when almost everybody had some place to live.  We--our--we complained about the, the conditions with which we lived in but we usually didn't complain that they didn't have a roof at all, and that is something that has only happened in the past twenty years.  And we don't--and we seem to be just--buy into it, taking it for granted, assuming it's gonna be with us forever, so we set the--we--so the issue becomes, we set up shelters and we try to make sure we have enough beds available for everyone who wants to come in off the street, right, but we're not saying, no.  There was a time when this didn't exist and it doesn't need to exist now.  So I've been spending a lot of time trying to reframe the question around homelessness and to move it from how to we take care of people who--in shelters and how do we have decent family shelters, get 'em out of--out of hotels and motels and into some kind of shelter where they can get some services when, when, when--but to move it away from that conversation which is an important conversation to the conversation of how do we end homelessness?  How do we supply enough housing so that nobody has to be homeless, right?  And I find that there are not a lot of people thinking that way.  And so I've been working with people here and in other parts, in other states in the country, Wisconsin, Minnesota, who are coming up with working plans, really business plans on how to end homelessness.  So I have legislation to establish a commission to come up with a working plan to end homelessness in Massachusetts, a plan that has benchmarks like any business plan, had--will know how much it would cost to do this, how long it would take, spending this amount of money to have this accomplished, and that's one of the things that I've been spending a lot of time on--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --most recently.
Speaker 2: I'm gonna follow that initiative.  I wanna watch it.
Speaker 1: That's good.
Story_ID: 620630
Speaker 1: As we begin to wind down your interview, there's a person in your life who's been very significant in your political career and before, Frieda Garcia.  Who is Frieda Garcia and tell us about her and, and what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you, you really have to--
Speaker 1: --and how she--
Speaker 2: --interview Frieda Garcia.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That would be--that--that's--that would be great.  But the--we, we met actually when I was at the Center for Inner City Change [Joint Community University Center for Inner City Change].  She was--she was working for Roxbury Multi-Service Center [Boston, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and came there to learn to--for training and organizing and stuff, so we, we, we met at that time, but we did not become closely involved with each other until around 1971, 1972, about the time I went to work for the museum [Museum of Afro-American History; Museum of African American History, Boston, Massachusetts].  And, and then--and we have been together since '72 [1972], since--and so she is my life partner.  There's no playing around--and so--and so that's over thirty years now.  And it's been a, a, a--just a wonderful relationship and--but--and, and part of that relationship, of course, is her just strong involvement in, in, in the community.  So I've been in, in all of the personal support that I've received from Frieda, we've always had in common this work in, in--actually in, in the same neighborhood.  She is--was the director of, of the United South End Settlements [Boston, Massachusetts] which was a--which is a union of the several settlement houses that had been founded in the South End [Boston, Massachusetts] when it was all poor and working class neighborhood.  And one of those settlement houses was the Harriet Tubman House [Boston, Massachusetts].  There was one set--one of those settlement houses was established by black--African American women and called the Harriet Tubman House.  And they--and then they all came together to form the United South End Settlements.  And then the United South End Settlements built a new building which they named the Harriet Tubman House.  And, and then she went to work to direct that group of--that union of settlement houses and has been a major force in both the, the social work and community organizing and with, with special concerns for young people, daycare, and the elderly in the South End and, and the neighborhoods right around the South End.
Speaker 1: The other important lady in your life is your granddaughter.
Speaker 2: Well, first you gotta do my daughter (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry, your daughter.
Speaker 2: I have to have a daughter to get a grand--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Though I--though I--though I think that--
Speaker 1: Well, you--
Speaker 2: --there was someone that--there was someone showed--told me about a bumper sticker that said, "If I created the world, I'd have made grandparents first."
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  I didn't mean to skip over your, your daughter.
Speaker 2: And so now my daughter--
Speaker 1: And, and, and her daughter.
Speaker 2: --by, by--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --who's mo- who's mother is Andrea [Andrea Benton]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right, my daughter is Osula, Osula Evadne [Osula Evadne Rushing].  She gets her--she's named Osula because we wanted to name her--we wanted to give her a name from--that, that, that was in her--in one side of her family or the other.  We didn't want a made up name for her.  And, and then--and so we just sort of took--made a list of all the relatives that we knew and then Andrea said, "Oh, I--we had--I had a great aunt named Osula," and I said, "That's perfect," you know?  Everybody will think it's an African name and we'll know that it's--(laughter) right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so she's Osula.  And then Evadne is my mother's [Linda Turpin Rushing] middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so--and so Osula Evadne and Osula is now in her thirties and working in Washington, D.C. for Grantmakers In Health, which is an organization of foundations that do most of their funding around healthcare.  And, and she now has a daughter, and her daughter is named Mecca Evadne and--who is al- almost two years old.  So it's--and, and my daughter, of course, has been--is, is--would be the second most important or the--not even--forget the important, the second woman in my life and now my--Mecca is the third woman in my life.
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 620631
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you'd like to add to this interview that I have not asked you about?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I just--I would say one--just a few, few words about my church and the importance of religion in my life.  I came--I, I, of course, as I, I said was raised an Episcopalian and although I've been certainly influenced by other denominations and other ways of exploring God, I've always either been, from my point of view an, an Episcopalian Christian or wasn't into it at all.  And I spent a few years not being into it at all at the end of high school [Syracuse Central High School, Syracuse, New York] and at the beginning of college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I didn't think that, that, that--it, it didn't re- none of the religion resonated with me.  And then an interesting thing happened to me that brought me back to the church.  And, and I actually write about this in a paper I wrote years and years ago called "I Was Born" in a book called 'Black Power Revolt' ['The Black Power Revolt: A Collection of Essays,' Floyd B. Barbour].  The--when I was in college, the, the members of the Nation [Nation of Islam] used to sell Muhammad Speaks [Muslim Journal] at Harvard Square [Cambridge, Massachusetts], 'cause they knew that they--they knew that that was a great place to sell, you know, Muhammad Speaks and they could meet their quota.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  And--but, but I saw--but, but, but they would always--they would sell 'em away but they would always talk to the black students.  And, and, and there was one member who that I got to know pretty well, and one day he said, you know, "We're having this big rally," it was actually in the summer and I was at, at, at school, at Harvard one summer in that--in those three summers.  And he said, you know, "We're having this big rally, you really should come, and we're pretty sure the--that the--that, that the Saviour's coming.  But if he doesn't--if he doesn't come"--they used to--I mean, they used to always say this and, you know, tell you that the Saviour's coming, that's Elijah Muhammad, right?  And, and--but he--if he's--, "I'm sure that, that Malcolm X will be there," so I decide to go.  And, of course, the Savior did not come and Malcolm was there.  And this was at what is now Northeastern's arena [Boston Arena; Matthews Arena, Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts].  It was the--it was an independent--it was a--it was just privately owned arena--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --then, right there off, off--on, on--
Speaker 1: Mass Ave [Massachusetts Avenue].
Speaker 2: --St. Botolph Street, right off Mass Ave.  And so I--and I went and it was my first experience.  I had been to the--to, to the mosque, but this was my first experience with, with one of these big rallies when all--when all the people bust in.  And, and I heard Malcolm, and it--I was just blown away.  And what--and, and, and I had, like--on one hand, intellectually, I had criticisms of his speech--you know, there were things that he was saying that didn't--that didn't hang together and stuff.  It was right after they had had the, the--this, this very controversial situation in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] where they had--where the police had raided the, the mosque in L.A. and I think--and I think one of the--at least one of the members was shot.  And so--and he was trying to explain all of that and talk about it and stuff.  But what amazed me was really how he had combined his--the, the--his belief, right, his--and I really believed that he believed it, all right, that--in a way that I didn't before when I just read about him, his belief in Islam and his politics, all right.  And I thought about that and I thought about just the fact that he was able to talk to people and people could respond to that, and I thought I had something missing, that I really should take another look at my belief, all right.  And in what I'd say--at that time because I was a Harvard student, in my understanding of the irrational, all right.  And, and, and what drew--what I realized was I didn't need to even go that far.  I didn't need to go to Islam to do that.  First, I should really take a look at where I came from and what my mother [Linda Turpin Rushing] wanted me to--you know, wanted--why my mother sent me to Sunday school and wanted me to go to church every Sunday.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, the first thing I did was to--was to start thinking about Christianity and, and I stayed right there, and I realized that, that, that all of the things that could move people to be just in the world came--you could find--could, could have a basis and draw strength from, and understanding Christianity.  So that's how--and then--and then I started to go back to church at--and, and got more and more involved in those parts of, of church life that were related to social justice.  And so that's--and, and it is--actually, that's why when, when the Council of Churches [Massachusetts Council of Churches, Boston, Massachusetts] or St. John's Church [St. John's Episcopal Church, Boston, Massachusetts] asked me to come and work for them for a--you know, for a little bit a few years later, that it was--for me, that was okay, that was natural.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: I could go do that.  And that, of course, has stayed a significant part of, of my life--has been--has been my religion.
Story_ID: 620632
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you have lived your life?
Speaker 2: Well, I do have this--I have this wonderful fantasy that, that I, I have and that is that--to be able to do it again.  And the interesting thing about the fantasy, about doing it again, is I really wouldn't do--I wouldn't do anything--I wouldn't be it--be something else.  I'd be all the same things, but I'd know more, you know?  That when I went to the museum [Museum of Afro-American History; Museum of African American History, Boston, Massachusetts] I would know how hard it was gonna be (laughter) to raise all that money.  I would've planned (laughter) my life differently.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right?  I would've--you know, I would--that, that--and, and so I, I like all the things that I've done and I think that I--that I've--in lots of ways, I've been lucky to be able to do things that I've been good at.  I like the fact that I was a community organizer, I just wish that I knew when, when I was--that, that when I was twenty, I knew what I knew now.  I think I would've dealt with urban renewal in a little different way (laughter).  I would've dealt with those corrupt cops in a different way (laughter), right, if I knew what I knew now, right?  But, but, but I--but doing that, being in Syracuse [New York], doing that kind of work and for CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], doing that kind--doing community voter registration work, no I wanna do that again, right.  Same thing, of course, for, for history and, and the museum, and the same thing, of course, for, for electoral politics.  Yeah, so I, I, I look back on my life as being a, a, a good life.  I just wish I was more prepared for it.
Speaker 1: I think your mother [Linda Turpin Rushing] prepared you in, in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --many, many ways directly--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean--
Speaker 1: --and in--indirectly.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, there's--
Speaker 1: I'm, I'm reading between the lines.
Speaker 2: There is no doubt about--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --my--my moth- my mother's influence--I mean, the--you know, it's, it's, it's one of those things that the older I get, or the more experiences I have, I realize the things that point back to someth- not so much something she said as a--as something she did.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, she took you to the museums.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's something--
Speaker 1: And here you end up--
Speaker 2: --she did, exactly.
Speaker 1: --being a director of a museum--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and I think there's a connection there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, there is--
Speaker 1: You know?
Speaker 2: It--you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That, that--that's--I, I think you're right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What do you still want to do that you have not yet done?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a very good question.  Now, part of it gets back to the other question of the fantasy.  Part of it is do I wanna go do one--do, do I wanna do one of these things again (laughter)?  Do I--do I wanna do some history again, you know?  Do I wanna--do I wanna do some kind of--some kind of organizing again?  The--I think that the only thing that I would like to--the, the one thing I would like to experiment on which I've never been able to do is to, without doing anything else, write and do research.  So I would like to experiment with that.  I'd like to be able to do that while my mind is still clicking and, and, you know, it's, it's--it--and so that's something that I--that I--that I--with my next midlife crisis, I hope it gets me to a point where I can write and read, you know, write and do that--and do--and do that research.
Story_ID: 620633
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community today across the country?
Speaker 2: I think that I have two concerns.  One is, I think that African Americans need to find a way, a better way, to talk about and celebrate all of their successes.  I think they haven't figured out a way of saying that they've done well, that this is a--there was a--it, it, it is an extraordinary history.  Most--it's hard for people I think to feel comfortable enough with where they are to talk about a history that can be so tragic and our--and I'm talking about our African American history, all right, as opposed to our African history.  But our African American history is a history that begins in tragedy.  And so--and I think we need to figure out a way of saying all the incredible energy and intelligence and strength that our ancestors used to get to the place where we are right now and how that really should be celebrated and it really is quite remarkable, all right, and we should not--and not forget it, right.  And then I think we gotta figure out a way to do two things at the same time and I know it's hard, and that is to organize ourselves as--keep ourselves organized 'cause we've done this in the past and we fall ap- fall out of it and get back into it, but keep ourselves organized as African Americans, keep ourselves organized as African Americans.  And see the advantage of preserving what we have and trying to make sure that we talk to each other and we have--that our institutions are running well and that--and that our communities are running well and condemning every negative thing that we see among ourselves, right?  And then at the same time because this is a contradiction, right, work to end racism because there really is going to be nobody else out there to do this, right?  And we know what--how terrible this thing was and the--and the--and the--and what makes this a contradiction is that, of course, if there's no racism, right, a whole bunch of being black will become irrelevant, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Because most of being white will be irrelevant, all right?  And so it's a contradiction, you know, and I think that we've had to--if--you can look at times when we--you've actually--we've actually figured out how to do that, you know?  There were times when we did that and there are times when it fell apart.  You know, if you sort of look at the first half of the 20th century, I think we really were doing that.  It was that idea, you know, you could be--it was a day when you--it was okay to be a race man.  And so, so on one hand, you said, you know, you wanted to make sure black people were buying from black people and doing all these things with black people but you also had this idea of what America should be.  But then it fell apart, you see, because we had--we sort of spent too much time on what America should be without doing the race people and we find ourselves no longer having any black teachers working in those schools (laughter) and, and, and, and all of our smart doctors are going off working over there--
Speaker 1: yeah.
Speaker 2: --and we're talking about why are there--why are there discrepancies?  Why are there health discrepancies, right?  Yeah.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --we have to--we have to figure out how to do that.
Story_ID: 620634
Speaker 1: You mentioned the young man that was on the history trail [Black Heritage Trail]--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --with you and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he said why is Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --called Roxbury?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What advice do you have to those young men and women who are asking those questions?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I get--I get really cynical.  One time--one--sometimes I ask, I say, don't listen to me (laughter).  I think--I have to say--I have to say, my advice--my, my, my major advice to the young people is that you are not the future, you are the now, you are the present.  If they--if you--you can actually change your neighborhood right now.  You know, I mean, I think--I mean, you know, when you think--you know, and I've been thinking about that a lot in these anniversaries we've been having both because of the--of actual date anniversaries and because of the recent deaths about, about young people and the Civil Rights Movement.  And I think--I think about that when I think about organizing myself, that when I started organizing in Roxbury in 1964, right, when I started organizing in Roxbury, right, very--the, the older black people did not dismiss me because of my age.  And I think how many peop- I don't know, how many twenty year olds do I know right now organizing in the community?  And I think that's partly my fault; it's partly our fault, right?  I mean, that, that the--that the eld- older people, the Ruth Batsons and the Elma Lewises [HistoryMaker Elma Lewis], and Snowdens [Muriel Snowden and Otto Snowden].  I mean, I can--you know--you know, they would--they never said, "Oh no, wait a minute, no, you can't do this because you're too young," right?  They didn't--and they--you know, they, they came--I mean, they disagreed with stuff we were doing, but it never was that we shouldn't be doing anything, all right?  And I think that's what I would say to young people.  I would say to young people you could--that, it's, it's, it's now, right, and you can actually do these things now.  And you--there's all--and I'll, I'll try to tell you what I wish I knew when I was your age, but I can't tell you what to do.
Story_ID: 620635
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a--that's, that's an interesting one.  I, I think that I would like to be remembered as a person who directly and probably mostly indirectly changed people's lives, that because he was around, things are a little different in better ways for these people, a little easier for these people or they are a little more thoughtful because of things they heard him say or saw him do or because they benefited some way from something that he did, some legislation that he had his fingerprints on or some work that he did when he was at the museum [Museum of Afro-American History; Museum of African American History, Boston, Massachusetts], some organizing he did when he was in Syracuse [New York] and Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 620636
Speaker 1: The legislation to establish the Boston African National Historic Site [Boston African American National Historic Site, Boston, Massachusetts] here as--that included the Black Heritage Trail and the African Meeting House [Boston, Massachusetts], that was passed in 1980.  And this is a picture of the signing by Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.].  He--this was his, his--actually, his, his last year as a president.  As that legislation had worked its way through [U.S.] Congress, it got joined with another piece of important National Park Service legislation, the legislation for the establishment of the Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] birthplace site [Martin Luther King Jr. National Historic Site, Atlanta, Georgia].  And so it would--it, it--when it got to Carter's desk, it was one bill, and so there I am looking at Carter sign, and then on the other side of Carter, you see Coretta Scott King representing the Martin Luther King family, and that's one of her sons in, in, in the background.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good, thank you.
Speaker 1: These are the three important women in my life.  Starting from the left, that's Frieda Garcia, my life partner, and then my daughter, Osula Evadne [Osula Evadne Rushing], and then her daughter, my granddaughter, Mecca Evadne.  And this picture was taken in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: And here's my daughter, Osula Evadne, with her daughter, Mecca Evadne.
Speaker 2: And here's--this is Frieda Garcia, my life partner, and this picture was taken while she was director of the United South End Settlements [Boston, Massachusetts] at the Harriet Tubman House [Boston, Massachusetts] and that is a portrait of Harriet Tubman in the background.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Taken about when?
Speaker 2: And this was probably taken, oh, I would say about 1995 or 1996.
Speaker 1: Inside the, the South End [Boston, Massachusetts] and around Boston [Massachusetts] and now in other parts of the state, a organization that works with young people called Teen Empowerment [Center for Teen Empowerment] has been an organization that I've supported over the past several years.  And they recently had a fundraiser and asked us to be the draw and they did this wonderful evening to raise money for Teen Empowerment called Lives that Inspire a New Generation [ph.].  And both Frieda and I were honored that we were chosen to be the honorees for that evening event.  But I think it also shows how both of us by our several constituents are seen as important people in their lives in the South End.
