Story_ID: 534658
Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Fannie Theresa Rushing, it's F-A-N-N-I-E, Theresa, last name is Rushing, R-U-S-H-I-N-G.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, now, now, now, now, we don't go into date of birth, no.  That's the one thing that we won't do.  But I was born in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you care to give us the, the month and date.
Speaker 2: February 3 [1943] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an associate professor of history at Benedictine University in Lisle, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is, I was just told December 5, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In The HistoryMakers, in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Now that's, yes--
Speaker 2: Is, is this to see whether or not you're (unclear) or--
Speaker 1: How many--no (laughter).  Well, thank you.  Before we go into depth, that's just to slate it basically and to--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --let, I guess, the viewer know that, that, you know, from your mouth where you are and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 534659
Speaker 1: The thing we do before we really go into depth is to ask five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the first question is, ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I have so many, I, I don't have a favorite food.  I, I really don't have a favorite food.  I, I love chocolate, of course, chocolate cake, chocolate brownies, chocolate mousse, anything chocolate, anything sweet, those are my favorite foods.  But I like food in general.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: It used to be fall.  And then my mother [Ella Jones Rushing] died last October, and so I don't know if fall would be my favorite time anymore.  But it used to be autumn.  I used to love the autumn because I had so many wonderful memories of autumn growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blues and purples, turquoise.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Can't you see everything would be as more rather than less.
Speaker 1: Okay, do, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay, and finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, definitely not.
Story_ID: 534660
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  We'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Ella Jones Rushing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: E-L-L-A, R-U-S-H-I-N-G; Jones is her maiden name.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 10, 1907.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Holly Springs, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I can tell you that I am descended from a line of extraordinary people on both sides.  My grandmother, her name was Willie Davis Jones, was born in Ripley, Mississippi.  And when the Freedmen's Bureau came through talking about setting up schools for African Americans soon after the Civil War, my great-grandmother, Victoria Thornton Davis, decided that what she would do was to move to Holly Springs, Mississippi, so that her children would be able to go to Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi].  And at that time, in order to go to the college, students had to be entered in the preparatory school.  They had to go all the way through so that they would be ready.  And so my great-grandmother moved to Holly Springs, and my grandmother went to Rust College.  She became a rural schoolteacher.  And while she was teaching school in the rural area, she met my grandfather [Joe Jones] who was a farmer.  And my great-grandmother was very upset about this choice of a mate, and so she didn't speak to my grandmother, as she told her she would not do if she married a farmer.  And my grandmother died about two months after my mother was born.  She contracted German measles [rubella] and died.  And so my great-grandmother took on the responsibility of bringing my mother up, or we say raised, in Chicago [Illinois].  And so she brought her to Holly Springs, Mississippi, and when she was old enough entered her in Rust College.  My great-grandmother was an extraordinary woman.  She was a woman who--her husband died when she was pregnant with her fourth child.  And all of her children died before she did.
Speaker 1: Can you give us her birth date?  Do you know it?
Speaker 2: I have it written down somewhere at home, but I--
Speaker 1: You can just give us a guesstimate.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --just, 18--
Speaker 2: It would have been in the 18--
Speaker 1: --in the '70's [1870s] or anything.
Speaker 2: Would have been in, it would've, yeah, would've been in the--
Speaker 1: Eighteen seventies [1870s], eighties [1880s].
Speaker 2: Um-hm, somewhere in there, um-hm.  And her mother, Amy Thornton Nellums [ph.], of course, had been born a slave.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And her uncles, that would have been my great-great-grandmother's brothers, were carpenters and actually purchased the freedom of the entire family.  They, they worked until they had enough money to, to pay for everyone's freedom.  So, she was actually free before the ending of the Civil War.
Speaker 1: Was, were, were they enslaved in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, around the same area or?
Speaker 2: Yes, in, in and about the same area--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --around Ripley.  And her, her mother, Amy's mother--
Speaker 1: This is your great-great-great--
Speaker 2: Great-great-great-grandmother--
Speaker 1: --grandmother.
Speaker 2: --whose name was Sadie [ph.], she was indeed born a slave.  And her--actually, my mother always said that she believed that she had been born in Africa.  But it would have been her son that purchased her freedom.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he purchased the freedom of his sister, his mother, and a brother.
Story_ID: 534661
Speaker 1: So you can trace your ancestors back--
Speaker 2: That's as far as I can go.
Speaker 1: Now, how many generations is that?  That's--
Speaker 2: Let's see, my grandmother, Willie [Davis Jones]; my great-grandmother, Victoria [Thornton Davis]; my great-great-grandmother, Amy [Thornton Nellums]; and then my great-great-great-grandmother, Sadie.  Yeah, that's--
Speaker 1: So that's--
Speaker 2: Well, it's just four generations.
Speaker 1: That's, well, you know, that's remarkable, don't you?  I mean today, 'cause a lot of people can't do it.  Everybody has the same num-number of ancestors, but they don't know they, they--some, some people can't go beyond their parents, you know, in the world today.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: You know, the interesting thing is that I was born when my mother [Ella Jones Rushing] was much older.  And, as a result of that, I was always around older people.  And I always liked to talk, and I always liked to listen.  And I can never remember a time when I wasn't interested in hearing these, these stories.  And so, and now, of course, I, you know, am very glad that I did because, you know, I had that to kind of sustain me when I, I need it.  And with the death of my mother, I definitely needed that to be sustained.
Speaker 1: Now is there is a story about how the first of those brothers who were carpenters obtained their freedom?
Speaker 2: Working, working in their spare time, which was, you know, limited, but just working, working, working, being committed to being free, and seeing that as the only way of doing it.  And beyond that, I, you know, but I mean it was certainly one of those stories.  I think that our stories empower us.  And I think hearing those stories, and for those people, what must have been empowering them was hearing these constant stories of struggle and wanting to be free.  So, that's on my mother's side.
Story_ID: 534662
Speaker 1: On my father's side--
Speaker 2: Now, what's your father's full name?  Can you give us his full name?
Speaker 1: Albert Rushing.
Speaker 2: Can you spell it for us?
Speaker 1: R-U-S-H-I-N-G, first name is Albert.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: October 20--oh, I looked this up last night--October 20, 1905, I think it was.
Speaker 2: Okay, and he's from--
Speaker 1: He was from Meridian, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Meridian, okay.  All right, now what do you know about his side of the family?
Speaker 1: His side of the family, my paternal grandmother, Fannie Rushing, Fannie Burton Rushing, married Will Rushing in Meridian.  And he was--he had a twin brother.  I'm trying to remember his twin brother's name.  He was a twin.  His mother's name was Julia Rushing.  And my, my paternal grandmother, Fannie, Fannie Rushing, her mother's name was Ellen Burton, and her father's name was James Burton.  They had nine children.  My grandmother had eight siblings.  And my great-great-grandmother--oh, my goodness, what's her name?  It just went out the window.  Anyway, I have a picture of her sitting on my sideboard at home.  What is her name?  Maybe I can--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Maybe it'll come back to me.  Anyway, that's as far as I can go back on my father's side.
Story_ID: 534663
Speaker 1: Are there any stories that have passed down from that side that, that you--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --you remember?
Speaker 2: Yes, my, my great-uncle on that side, my grandmother's [Fannie Burton Rushing] brother, was a really extraordinary man.  His name was Charles Wesley Burton, and he founded Lincoln Congregational Church here in Chicago [Illinois].  He got his divinity degree at Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut] and went and got his B.A. at Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama], his doctorate in divinity at Yale.  And that would have been about 1888, I think.  And then he came here to Chicago, and as I said, he founded Lincoln Congregational Church, which is the first black Congregational church in the city.  And then he went to Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois] and got a law degree and became a lawyer.  And he was very, very influential in helping the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters when they were attempting to form a union.  When the other ministers in Chicago refused to allow the Brotherhood to meet in their churches anymore, my uncle still kept his church open for the Brotherhood.  And when he died in 1950, the Brotherhood sent a beautiful letter thanking him in memoriam for the work that he had done with the Brotherhood and for his commitment to civil rights.  It's interesting because certainly growing up as a child, I saw him all the time, but you know, then it's just your, your uncle.  And you know, you knew he was involved in, in, in doing things, but you don't have the same, you don't have the same understanding that you have as an adult.  And then one day I was reading a book on A. Philip Randolph.  And there was all of his information about Uncle Charlie and what he had done with, with the Brotherhood.  And so then I started to ask more questions and to find out more about the man.  And the man of course was an extremely interesting one.  So, yeah, those were the stories.
Speaker 1: So he, he attended Yale when probably he was maybe one of the--
Speaker 2: From Mississippi he--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was like the first, the first black person to actually attend Yale.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he, he came out of Yale in 1888?
Speaker 2: It would have been, would've, would've been around 1888.
Speaker 1: Around, around 1888.
Speaker 2: And of course what had been very important to him was being at Talladega.  And he, he developed a, a, a network of friends at, at Talladega and remained active with their alumni association.  So on both sides of the family from very, very early on there was a, a strong commitment to education and particularly from my mother [Ella Jones Rushing] always a commitment to the historically black colleges [HBCUs].  And my mother would always say, you know, when we couldn't go to these other places, we had the historically black colleges, and that's why they must be preserved.  And she spent a lot of her time trying to make sure that she never missed the United Negro College Fund Dinner, and she never missed contributing to the Rust College Club [Rust College, Holly Springs, Mississippi].  She was one of the founding members of the alumni association here.  So I, I have a real healthy respect for the, the historically black colleges.
Story_ID: 534664
Speaker 1: Tell me about your, mother [Ella Jones Rushing].  What was her personality like and what did she do?
Speaker 2: She was--you know, if you ask anybody they'd say their mother was extraordinary, but my mother truly was an extraordinary woman.  She came here in 1929, in the midst of the [Great] Depression, when she realized that even though she had this college degree, there really wasn't a whole lot that she could do in Mississippi.  And she wanted to teach school, so she came here.  But in those days, in order to teach school, no matter whether or not you had a, a degree, you had to take courses at the normal school, the, the teachers' college.  And of course she couldn't afford that, so she started working in, in restaurants.  And when she was growing up, because my great-grandmother [Victoria Thornton Davis] was a widow and trying to pay for this tuition, I found a receipt for tuition at Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi] in one of my mother's books.  And it was one dollar.  But when you think about--and I'm sure this was a partial payment--but when you think about what this woman who was a widow and was bringing up her, her granddaughter, when you think about what she had to go through to get that dollar, it's just amazing.  So my mother actually started working when she was nine years old.  And what she did was, her grandmother taught her how to plant fruits and vegetables.  And so my mother began at nine raising rare vegetables, which she would sell to wealthy people in town.  So she had a little business, and she, once she started doing that, the seed companies would send her seeds, you know, experimental seeds.  And so she always had vegetables and fruits that were not common to the area.  And so she really at a very young age had learned a lot about the soil conditions and, and how to grow these vegetables (clearing throat)--excuse me.  So, when she started working restaurants, really, the only thing holding her back was the fact that she was African American.  Because had she not been, my goodness what she could have done.  But anyway, her, her knowledge of, of fruits and vegetables and cooking eventually landed her a job at the Chicago Women's Club.  And the Chicago Women's Club, of course, was a, a premier club for elite white women in Chicago [Illinois].  And mother became the head of the dining room there.  And when one of the women, her daughter got married, and my mother did the wedding, and she had such extraordinary artistic skills that the, the [Chicago] Tribune of course was there to take pictures of this society wedding.  And they took pictures of the cake, and they took pictures of the table.  But of course, you know, they, they weren't gonna take any pictures of the person who had, had done all this, and so it was as if mother didn't exist.  And mother decided at that point that if she was going to remain in this kind of work that she wanted to go to a culinary school to, so that she could, you know, be included in this world of food.  So she wanted to go to Francois Pope's School of Creative Cooking [Chicago, Illinois], which at that time was, you know, kind of like the Wolfgang Puck of, of that era.  And of course they wouldn't accept her because she was black, so she went to the board of the Women's Club and said you know, look, I wanna go to this school.  And all of you women who are leaders in Chicago, get me into that school.  And they actually went to Francois Pope, and so mother was admitted to the school.  And once she finished with, with the culinary school, she opened her own catering business, and she did very, very well at it.  And I often think, had times been different, and had color not been a barrier, what she could have done because she was just so extraordinarily creative.  Not only was she a good cook, I mean she had the, the artistry, the flair that you associate with someone who was in, involved with food at that level--always committed to education, always committed to seeing that I had the, the very best. I'm sure I didn't know we were poor until (laughter) I was grown--and very, very connected to this community of people from Holly Springs [Mississippi] who had migrated to Chicago during the Great Migration.  So I grew up in the midst of this really wonderful extended family, not only my blood relatives, but all of these friends from Holly Springs that mother had known all of her life.  And for me, they were aunts, they were uncles that helped to shape my life, and you know, they were a part of a generation of people not only trying to defeat the Depression, but also just to, trying to survive being black in America.
Story_ID: 534665
Speaker 1: And I think about both of my parents [Ella Jones Rushing and Albert Rushing], and really how difficult it is to bring up a child in a society that is driven by the kind of biases that exist in this country, and the, the, the, the healthy attitude that, that both of them, them taught me about this, and I just think, you know, where did they, where did they get all this knowledge from?  You know, how did they, how did they manage?  Because they--my, my father was, was absolutely brilliant.  He was an avid reader.  A day didn't go by that--he would read anything he could get his hands on.  And after many years of, like many men of his generation, you know, working hard, trying to, you know, trying to survive.  He worked in the stockyards.  He then went to work in, at the Pullman Company.  And my--
Speaker 2: Now your father, now when, when did he come up to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Oh, he came very--
Speaker 2: Were they married when they came up to Chicago?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, they didn't meet until, oh, my, you know, my mother was almost forty years old.  And, no, they, they met much, much later.  But he--
Speaker 2: Is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 1: Yes, they were both working in the restaurant together and, and that's how, that's how they met.  Because my father used to say, you know, if you must work, work was extremely important, and he said you know, you do any kind of work that's honest.  And there, there is no job that you can't do and do with dignity.  And so that's how they met.
Speaker 2: Now did he have a chance to go to school too--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: No, not at all, but what he did have a chance to do, he learned to be a blacksmith before he left the South.  And apparently, the principle of shoeing horses is the same principle that you use in making wheels for trains. And so, ultimately he became a blacksmith at the, the Pullman Company.  And my father was a huge man, and (mimes lifting weights), what you'd expect of a blacksmith.
Speaker 2: Big arms and--
Speaker 1: And yes.  And even though he, he worked at the Pullman Company and he was a blacksmith, which meant the, you know, life was not really--I mean financially certainly for that time, he was doing very well.  But my father insisted on joining the union and was an avid, avid supporter of unions.  I mean he said over and over again, this is before I had any idea about economic theory or anything like that, but my father would always say working people have only one thing that they can depend on.  They have to band together.  They have to fight for what they want.  And so he became a union steward, and needless to say, was certainly persona non grata at, at the Pullman Company.  And as, you know, as soon as was possible, he was certainly, when Pullman started downsizing, as, you know, the railroads started to, to shrink, he was one of the first, the first to, to go.  And that was a devastating blow for him because he really liked the job, and he was committed to his work in the union.  And so--and he knew certainly without an education and without skills in the contemporary world that it was gonna be very hard for him to find work.
Story_ID: 534666
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did your father [Albert Rushing] do after he lost his job at [the] Pullman [Company]?
Speaker 2: Oh, he got a job kind of doing as a, you know, just an all-around person at a bowling alley on the North Side.  But it was just a devastating, devastating blow for him.  And you know, certainly they did not want me to know it, but now looking back on it, I know he was very sad during that period and just, you know, I can't begin to imagine what he, he must have been feeling.  Because by that time, he would have been, he would have been in his forties, and just in relationship to age, getting harder to find a job, but certainly having to face the, the perils of discrimination.  And, and without, without skills for the contemporary world, oh, what that must have been.  And you know, he had a, a wife [Ella Jones Rushing] and child to take care of, so.
Speaker 1: Now, how long did he work for Pullman?
Speaker 2: Oh, he must have worked for Pullman, well, it must have been fifteen, fifteen, maybe twenty years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now, so are you the only child?
Speaker 2: The only one.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did you have a lot of other relatives in Chicago [Illinois], or--
Speaker 2: Well, my, my father had came from a very large family.  He had two sisters and, and two brothers, and then of course there were a whole series of cousins, because there were nine siblings, and so, and they were certainly around.  The thing is they were, most of them were much older, and even my, even my cousins were much older.  So, but I was certainly always around both my father's family and this extended family of my mother's people from Holly Springs [Mississippi].  So, you know, I was always in the midst of family.
Story_ID: 534667
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about what was your neighborhood like?  Where did you grow up?
Speaker 2: I grew up in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], and my neighborhood was very interesting.  The reason I grew up there is because when my mother [Ella Jones Rushing] came from Holly Springs [Mississippi], one of her teachers at Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi], her grandmother had just bought a home on, on Maryland Avenue.  And so mother was going to live with, with them when she came here.  But so many people were coming from the South on, you know, like a weekly basis, the week that she arrived there wasn't any more room at that house.  And so she went to live with another family from Holly Springs.  And she lived with them, and then when I was born, the family that she was first going to live with insisted that she move to Hyde Park because it was gonna be important for me to go to a good school.  So that's why when I was two months old we moved to Hyde Park.  And on the block--
Speaker 1: Did you--yeah, did you live in an apartment or a house?
Speaker 2: We lived in an apartment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Big building or--
Speaker 2: No, it was, it was a three-flat that had been a single-family home that had been converted into apartments.  And, it was at a time when people were not happy about blacks moving into Hyde Park.  And so the building where--
Speaker 1: Is there a time now where they're happy?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, they were less happy.
Speaker 1: Well, less happy then.
Speaker 2: Less, less happy.  And so the building that we lived in had been bombed as a way of trying to encourage people to move--but on--
Speaker 1: It had been bombed?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, the, the front hallway someone threw a Molotov cocktail into to--
Speaker 1: Now where, where was this located at?
Speaker 2: 53rd [Street] and Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--but on 53rd and Maryland there was this small community of African Americans, and that's where I grew up with people who didn't want their kids to play with me, and so, early on having to face what it was to be black.  And, and, you know, I started to school I was the only black child in the school, and it was interesting, it was interesting.
Speaker 1: Now where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: I went to Kozminski Elementary School [later Kozminski Elementary Community Academy, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Kozminski, okay.
Story_ID: 534668
Speaker 1: Tell us about--before we get into school specifically, tell us about some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of the neighborhood [Hyde Park, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Well, it was a beautiful neighborhood.  And it, it's interesting because always this--there were always people looking out for you, always people, so many people to take care of you.  And I, I often think now that it, it's incredible that people think twice about saying something to someone else's child.  It, it would have never occurred to any of these people to hesitate to either discipline or reward, to hesitate to say, you know, don't cross the street, you know, you know you're not supposed to do that.  And, and so it was like always having someone around to, to take care of you.  And my mother [Ella Jones Rushing], my mother always--the reason I said I like the fall, I loved Halloween; I loved getting dressed up in all those costumes.  And there was, two houses down there was a big vacant lot.  And so, Halloween, we'd all go out and we'd rake the vacant lot, rake the leaves, and then mother would--when we came back from trick-or-treating, my father [Albert Rushing] would--was responsible for taking me trick-or-treating.  And when we came back from trick-or-treating, then my mother would light a bonfire and the, and we'd burn the leaves and roast hot dogs and, and marshmallows.  And gradually the neighborhood children started to, to come to the after trick-or-treating bonfire that, that mother always had.  So I can still remember the smell of the leaves burning in the autumn, and the smell of the hot dogs on those little sticks that we had, and the marshmallows.
Speaker 1: That's interesting 'cause nowadays you can't burn anything--
Speaker 2: Now you can't burn leaves.
Speaker 1: --in public, you know.
Speaker 2: I know.  And it makes me so angry that, you know, these people can burn all kinds of pollutants, but they stop you from burning leaves.  But the smell of those leaves burning in the fall, and the marshmallows, and the hot dogs, yeah, those are smells that I remember.  And of course my mother was an extraordinary, extraordinary cook.  And so at Christmastime, mother would always make her own homemade sausages and homemade sweet rolls.  And the smell of the pork, and the sage, and the, the yeast from the bread and the cinnamon, there is just, there's nothing that can replace that and just, just thinking about that.  And of course the other smells that I remember, my mother also always made homemade ice cream, and the, the churning, my father churning the--we had a big enclosed back porch; it was screened in all around, and we virtually lived out there.  I mean we had a bed out there; you could sleep out there.  And we eat dinner out there, and we'd sit out there and while looking at the ice cream was churning.  And oh, when that ice cream comes of that dipper, there is nothing, there is nothing like it.  So, those are some of the things that I remember growing up.
Story_ID: 534669
Speaker 1: Now what kind of a little girl were you?  What did you like to do and--
Speaker 2: Very precocious.  First of all, my, my father [Albert Rushing] had said that my mother [Ella Jones Rushing] couldn't go back to work until I could talk and explain if anything had gone wrong during the day.  And so my mother was very anxious to go back to work.  I mean of course they needed, they needed the money, so by the time I was nine, mother had me--nine months old, mother had me walking.  And by the time I was ten months (laughter), that conversation was coming, coming rapidly.  And so, and because my, my relatives were older, they used to always complain about how much I talked and how fast I talked.  And (laughter) they called me lady because I acted like a lady even though I was just a little girl and because I was an only child.  And because my father was such an avid reader, very, very early on I developed a, an extraordinary love of books, because my father was a very quiet man.  I mean he was not someone who, who talked a lot, but he read all the time.
Speaker 1: What, what, what sort of books did he read?
Speaker 2: He would read anything.  He would read anything, but he was extremely interested in current events.  I mean some, those are the kinds of things and, and magazines.  I mean we always had magazines and, and lots of newspapers around the house.  And, and he would say to me, "Okay, now, if you're gonna come in here with me, you'll have to be quiet."  And so, because I wanted to come into the room with him, I would at first, you know, just anything to, to be in there, I would start reading.  And he'd say, okay, read to yourself, and by the time--you know, I just loved books.  And then every Friday night when we went to the grocery store, my mother would buy me a book.  And so, yeah, that's what I did, I talked and I read (laughter).  I talked and I read, and times were very different than they are now.  We never had a car when I was growing up, but on Saturday after I'd finished my chores, which you always had to do your chores, I could get on the, the bus and, and ride anywhere in Chicago [Illinois].  And so I liked to see different places.  I liked to, to see what people ate in different neighborhoods, what the shops looked like.  So that's what I would do with my time.
Speaker 1: Did you go by yourself, or--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Did you have a lot of friends when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, not really, not really, because you know, there was a real issue growing up in this neighborhood [Hyde Park, Chicago, Illinois].  Many people did not want their, you know, their children to, to, to play with me.  And so no, I didn't have, no, I didn't have a lot of friends.  And once I was able to get my library card at a public library, I could go to the library almost every day, because you know, I'd, I'd go and take out as many things as I could take out, and sort of--then I'd just go back and get more.  And so for me, you know, it was a great pleasure after school to be able to go to the library, get my books, and you know, walk back home.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you go over to the Blackstone Library [T.B. Blackstone Memorial Library, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Blackstone Public Library and read everything.  By the time I was nine I had just about gotten down to Z (laughter) at the Blackstone Public Library, loved that place.
Speaker 1: What were your favorite books?
Speaker 2: Well, I would read in, in, you know, in clumps of things.  Like sometimes it would be mythology; sometimes it would be mysteries; sometimes it would be philosophy; sometimes it would be novels; maybe I'd read all the Russian novels; maybe I'd read all the, the French novels, yeah, I--anything, anything.  And whatever I was reading at the time, I enjoyed per se, you know, as, as I loved to read.  And then my mother firmly belied that idle hands were the devil's workshop, and so she thought if people were busy they didn't have time to get into any difficulty.  So, I took piano lessons, I took ballet lessons, and I took drama lessons.  So I really didn't have, I mean I didn't have a lot of friends, but I didn't have a lot of time either; I mean I was constantly busy.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers in these activities?
Speaker 2: You mean in the--
Speaker 1: Drama and ballet and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: The ballet teacher was Ms. Stiegler [ph.], and the drama teacher was Ms. Northrup [ph.].
Speaker 1: Were these courses sponsored through the [Chicago] Park District or were they--
Speaker 2: Oh no, I went to the Chicago Conservatory before it became a part--it was the, the old Chicago Musical College [Chicago, Illinois].  And then, of course, it became a part of, of Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois].  But yeah, yeah, I'd, after school, take the Cottage Grove bus down to the Chicago Musical College, have my lesson, and then I would walk around the corner to the Chicago Women's Club [Chicago, Illinois], which is where my mother worked, and I'd stay there until mother finished, and then we'd go home.
Story_ID: 534670
Speaker 1: So, tell me about school now.  You went to Kozminski Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois].  Well, what was that like, and what were your--what did you like about it or what did you dislike about it?
Speaker 2: I liked it because it was school.  And--but you know, looking back on it, and there were lots of really, you know, the, the, the, the teachers increasingly, when I think back on it, I realize that they were unhappy.  I can remember being in kindergarten, and the teacher-- whose name I don't remember, but I can just remember the, the things that she did to me--I can remember that she would say okay, whoever gets in line first in the morning, you know, when they open the door, come and give me a big hug.  And of course, as kids, you know, you all wanna be first and then you would run up.  And she'd always give, you know, whoever got there first a big or a big hug.  But if I got there first, she'd say you can just go back to the end of the line, yeah.
Speaker 1: And she would hug the next one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and I can still remember that, and you know, that was a long, long time ago.  But, so I mean I don't, for the most part, I don't, I don't have fond memories about that.  But, and I know that I had a lot of energy.  It was real hard for me to sit still.  And you know, the teachers would complain that I finished reading and then I would disturb the other children because I read faster than anybody else.  And so, no, there's, there's nothing really pleasant about that.
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers in grade school?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were, you were, you were a good student though, I take it?
Speaker 2: No, I really wasn't.  You know, I did what I wanted to do, but I didn't always do what I was being asked to do, you know.  And I talked a lot, and it, it was, you know, it, now as a teacher, it is problematic if you've got a kid who won't stop talking, and I couldn't stop talking.  And my, my report card was always littered with checks for talking, talking, talking, talking.  And they were constantly sending for my mother too because I was talking.  So, no, no, but it was the, the reading that, that I enjoyed and finding out new things.  I, you know, I loved geography.  At the school that I went to, if your reading score got to be above a certain level, you could take foreign language.  So when I was in fourth grade my, my reading score had already reached 8.0 so I could start taking Spanish, and I loved that.  So those were the kinds of things that I enjoyed.
Story_ID: 534671
Speaker 1: In high school, now where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I went to Hirsch High School [Emil G. Hirsch Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois].  That was the worst experience of my life (laughter).
Speaker 1: Hirsch now, Hirsch is--were you living in the same place or had you moved by then?
Speaker 2: No, I was living in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], but in Hyde Park they were having lots of problems at that point with drugs.
Speaker 1: At Hyde Park High School?
Speaker 2: Un-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mother decided that Hyde Park was not, not the place for me.  And so one of her friends from Holly Springs [Mississippi] had bought a home in, in Park Manor [Chicago, Illinois], and Hirsch was the, the school; that was Hirsch's district.  So my mother registered me from her friend's house and sent me to Hirsch High School.  Oh, my goodness, talk about trauma.
Speaker 1: Now in those days, what was the racial composition at Hirsch?
Speaker 2: Oh there were, it was about, all of three percent black, and the rest of the school was, it, it was nothing but white anguished people who thought that they were safe.  And now, you know, the tide, the black tide as it was called then--
Speaker 1: Is sweeping up Cottage Grove [Avenue]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And you couldn't walk down 79th Street, because if you got caught on 79th Street, there would be fights, okay.  And oh, if I thought the teachers were racist at the elementary school [Kozminski Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], at Hirsch they were just horrible.  We had a music teacher, and I remember her saying the first day, oh, the only good thing about--she said she had always wanted to be Stephen Foster and have the opportunity to have a group of darkies singing songs.  And now the only good thing she could see was that she was gonna have an opportunity to have some darkies sing for her.  Well--
Speaker 1: Referring to the students in the--
Speaker 2: Yes.  So, trouble, 'cause I wasn't singing; I mean that was it.  Well, first trip for mother up to, to Hirsch because, you know, I was not going to sing.  I mean I'm sorry.  And so, I mean it was, it was just one thing after another, after another like that.
Speaker 1: How did--now, now did your mother, was she able to make any impact on these--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --teachers in grade school or high school?  'Cause it seems--and did, did, did--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --did you tell her about some of the things that were--
Speaker 2: I would tell her when it happened, and my mother would say you're not going there for the teachers to like you.  You're going there to learn what they know, and that's what you're gonna do, so.  And the only time--I mean mother would say, you know, when they'd tell her these things, okay, you know, we'll see that Fannie does what she is supposed to do.  Now when it came time to graduate, you know, mother said you know, what--are there forms or things that, you know, you have to fill out for college?  Well, in those days, you know, they did not, you know, they certainly were not encouraging.  Even though by that time the school had, by the time I graduated from Hirsch most whites have moved out of the district, and the school was oh, I'd say probably about 75 percent black.  I mean the change was just phenomenal--
Speaker 1: So you were there during this, the, just a complete change in--
Speaker 2: Change.
Speaker 1: --complexion of, of the school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there, that was the time when on the evening news they would interview people in Park Manor and Chatham.  And I remember one woman saying that she couldn't go out on the street anymore because every time you went out on the street there were Negroes.  And it just made her vomit, and she'd have to go back to her house and vomit.  It, I mean it was an extraordinary time--
Story_ID: 534672
Speaker 1: My mother [Ella Jones Rushing] came to school [Emil G. Hirsch Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois] to find out, you know, what was going on about college.  And the principal explained to my mother that I was not college material, and therefore, you know, there had not been any discussion with me about college.  And my mother said, "Immediately after the Civil War, my mother [Willie Davis Jones] was college material, as was I.  And when I sent my daughter here, she was college material.  I want you to tell me what you have done to her in these four years that now she is not college material."  And he was quite taken aback.  And my mother said you know, either you can document for me why it is that my daughter is not college material, or we will take this to another step.  Well, they decided at that point to, you know, just give me the information about the SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Test], and, and you know, I took the test.  And when the test came back, then they were trying to figure out how I could have possibly gotten these scores.  But anyway, the scores were certainly high enough to, to get me into the University of Illinois [at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  However, once I got to the University of Illinois, I had already started participating in the sympathy demonstrations with the southern sit-in movement in high school.  And by the time I got to the University of Illinois, I started a Friends of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] chapter.
Speaker 2: Now let's go back to high school for a second--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and now, so you started, you're at this high school.  There's only, only three of you all at the beginning, and then the population keeps growing every year.  Did, were you involved in, did you ever get involved in high school activities like the things that most people get involved in high school--
Speaker 1: No, no, because--well, I did join the drama club, and I joined the Spanish club.  But in high school, by the time I got to high school, there were, there was on the one hand the extreme prejudice and racism on the part of white students.  But I had, by that time, as I said, gotten very interested in what was going on in the South with the beginnings of the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: How, how were you introduced to that?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, we had television by then.  And in addition to being an avid reader, my father [Albert Rushing] was--anything that came out in the form of news he wanted to, to hear.  And my, my father--my mother, you know, my mother would often be working late, and so my father would, would, would make dinner for, for us.  And during the week, my father cooked; on the weekends my mother cooked, and then we'd watch the news.  And on the news there would be all of these, these things going on in the South.  And I mean I was just, I was so excited by it, and my father was so excited about it.  And my father would say "Okay, it's time for this.  This is what needs to happen."
Story_ID: 534673
Speaker 1: What personal interaction did you have with people in the Civil Rights Movement in high school [Emil G. Hirsch Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois] that, that got you involved?
Speaker 2: Well, as I was saying, watching it on, on TV and, and being, you know, very, very excited to see these people banding together and accomplishing things.  And I suppose it's because my father had always talked about how important it was for people to stick together and, and to fight for what they believed in.  And, and so I think it was a combination of hearing these, these stories.  And we lived very close to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and there were black students there, but they couldn't live, they couldn't live in the dorms, you know.  And these people would, would often, you know, come to, to our house.  And so it was a combination of, of hearing just people talking about their lives, and I can remember taking the Cottage Grove bus, which went, at that time, going down Cottage Grove.  I can never, I will never forget seeing what were before Lake Meadows [Apartments] and, and Prairie Shores and all of that was built--just terrible living conditions.  And I remember the, the first ride and saying to my mother, who lives there?  You know, do people live there?  Because it was so different, you know, and I couldn't imagine that people were being forced to live like that.  And so it was a question of what I was seeing and then starting to see to this, this movement growing, starting to see these people really fighting for, for what they wanted.  And so I didn't know anyone personally, but I heard on the news that there were sympathy demonstrations going on at the Woolworth's [F.W. Woolworth Company], and that was the, the chain store, you know, dime store then--at the Woolworth's and the Kresge's, even in Chicago [Illinois] they said.  So, that Saturday, instead of going on my usual rides around, I thought I would go to the, the, the Woolworth's and join the demonstration.  That's how I got started, and I must have been a junior in high school then.  And so, from then on, every Saturday that's what I did with my time, I would go to the demonstrations.  Well, then I, you know, started gradually meeting other people who were on the demonstrations, but the lines were small, you know.  And I could remember thinking, boy, if we could just have a big demonstration, you know, and get a lot of people out here, then this whole thing would be settled.  So by the time I got to the University of Illinois [at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I was already, you know, I was already involved in, in--
Speaker 1: Just, just one more thing about the sympathy demonstrations.  I wanted to ask you what, just to be, so somebody watching just be clear what they were.  They, they were demonstrations at the Woolworth's here in Chicago to I guess highlight the fact that the ones down South did not serve black people--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --at the lunch counters.  'Cause they served black folks here in Woolworth's, right?  But--
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm getting--
Speaker 1: --but Woolworth--
Speaker 2: --a terrible cough that--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, what I was saying, I was trying to summarize it in, in a sense that the, that the demonstrations against Woolworth's as a national chain that had discriminoid-dis, discriminatary-tary pol-policies and you know, for the South that they'd been having in the North.  It was an attempt to put pressure on that national chain to change--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: -change that--
Speaker 2: Policy in the South.
Speaker 1: --that duplicity, you know, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So by the time I got to the University of Illinois, you know, I was, I knew all the people that--because then I was actually organizing, you know, demonstrations.  And so that's how--
Speaker 1: So you were organizing demonstrations in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, I didn't want jump you out of high school too fast.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now you're, you're, you're organizing demonstrations--
Speaker 2: I was--
Speaker 1: --in high school and--
Speaker 2: --I was organizing demonstrations in high school, and I had stopped straightening my hair, and--
Speaker 1: And now, now what year is this in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, this would have been in the 19--well, early, early '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty [1960], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And at that point, (laughter) at that point, people at the high school were not too happy because--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause that was really, that was odd for those days.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Though in Chicago I've heard that Dr. [HM] Margaret Burroughs, you know, did not--
Speaker 2: Margaret Burroughs--
Speaker 1: --she wore her hair natural.
Speaker 2: --Margaret Burroughs and Odetta [Holmes], we were three people, three people in all this city.
Story_ID: 534674
Speaker 1: Well, you know, the people at the high school [Emil G. Hirsch Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois], including the, the black people in high school--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, to black society, that is just--
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, and this was a very, very middle-class black community, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you're going to school in Chatham [Chicago, Illinois], you know, and Park Manor [Chicago, Illinois], you know, it's--
Speaker 1: Because the, the blacks who, who moved into the community, I mean it had actually been a working class, white community.  But the blacks who moved in, because they had to have three times the amount of money to, to buy one of these places anyway.  You know, the white people at the school were unhappy because the blacks were there.  The blacks were unhappy because you know, I was running around, 'cause sometimes I'd have to bring my picket signs to school if there was a demonstration immediately after, and I'd put them in my locker.  And no, no one was happy with me in high school.  It was--
Speaker 2: Did you have any friends in high school and--
Speaker 1: I did.  I had two friends.  We remained friends all this time.  And one of them, in particular, I mean I, looking back on it, I respect both of them for being able to swim against the tide, because I mean I was like a pariah.  You know, everyone thought that I was absolutely out of my mind.  And so for them to, to--we called ourselves the eternal triangle.  For them to, to--because you know, people were constantly saying to them, you know, what's wrong with her?  You know, why, why does she do these things?  And, and so, yeah, I did have, I did have a few friends, but most people thought I was very, very strange, so.
Speaker 2: Now when, when you were a senior in high school, did you have any idea of a career, you know, what you were gonna do as a career, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought maybe I'd be a child psychologist.  I don't know why I thought that, but I thought maybe that's what I'd do.
Speaker 2: Okay, were, were you thinking along the lines that you wanna do something that was gonna change conditions out here or--
Speaker 1: Well, I definitely was thinking I was gonna change conditions, but that was not gonna be through my career.  I mean I was gonna change conditions by being in these demonstrations.
Speaker 2: That was gonna be your life--your lifestyle was gonna be about changing--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I wasn't thinking that my career would in any way change conditions.  But by the time I got to college, I, at first, well, I loved college.
Speaker 2: And you graduated though in 1961, is that it?
Speaker 1: Around, around about there, yes, I can--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I can never actually remember.  I have to look.
Story_ID: 534675
Speaker 1: You entered the University of Illinois [at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] around '61 [1961]?
Speaker 2: Oh, and then that, of course, here again, at that time, it was--it was at Navy Pier [Chicago, Illinois].  And you could walk all day long at Navy Pier and never see another black face.  So talk about small numbers.  But the thing about being at the University of Illinois was there were all these wonderful new things to work.  And I was enjoying that immensely, but I was getting more and more involved in the demonstrations and organizing these demonstrations.  And on a demonstration one day, somebody from the Friends of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] office asked me if, since I was at the University of Illinois, if I could maybe invite a SNCC field worker to come and give a talk at the University of Illinois.  And I set about organizing that, and then that was really kind of the beginning of the end, because I had joined the Young Democrats, and I had met lots of people at the University of Illinois.  I was in heaven.  I mean I was learning all these new things.  There were all kinds of, of people to talk to.  So, I got a group of people together, and we went to student government and arranged to have a field worker come from the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee.
Speaker 1: Now what year is this?  What, what state is this in at SNCC--I mean at University of Illinois?
Speaker 2: I was--it was my, my first year.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is '61 [1961] now I guess.
Speaker 2: Something about around--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in there.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Well, we did, we did organize the talk.  A few people came, I'd say maybe twenty-five or, or thirty.  Because at the University of Illinois, you know, I was able to find more strange people or people like my, myself who were, you know, already walking on, on the other side of the street.  And once--it was Ivanhoe Donaldson who came.  And once I heard that talk, I knew that school, you know, was just of decreasing importance to me and that I really, what I really wanted to do was to give full time to, to working for the, the Civil Rights Movement.  But the first thing I did was to actually organize a Friends of SNCC chapter on the University of Illinois campus.  And so I spent less and less time actually attending class and more and more time organizing.  So, part of that organizing was a sit-in in the provost office.
Speaker 1: Now that's a (laughter)--
Speaker 2: It wasn't long too before, you know, the university said to me that I could take my show on the road any time I wanted to, and they would not be at all unhappy.
Speaker 1: Now what was the issue with the provost?
Speaker 2: You mean why were they organizing a sit-in?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, basically, it was just to draw attention to the student movement in the South and how important, and how important this, this movement was.
Speaker 1: So you didn't want anything specifically from the provost?
Speaker 2: Well, one a permanent status for the Friends of SNCC chapter, and you know, they weren't interested in having a permanent Friends of SNCC chapter.  They--you know, it--they thought that it had been enough to have this speaker come.  And--but a permanent student organization, they didn't think that that was really what was called for.  So, anyway, we, we did get the--we did eventually get a Friends of SNCC chapter on the campus, but by that time, I mean for me that just wasn't enough, and I left school.  And my parents [Albert Rushing and Ella Jones Rushing] were just devastated.
Story_ID: 534676
Speaker 1: How long had--was, was this all in the first year [at the University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, I think, I think I drug it out so, you know, it probably like was maybe eighteen months or maybe--yeah, about eighteen months or so.
Speaker 1: So we're right about '62 [1962] or '63 [1963]?
Speaker 2: Around there, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: So your parents [Ella Jones Rushing and Albert Rushing] were--didn't like it, right?
Speaker 2: You know.  You know, here my mother comes from a, a family where, you know, her great-grandmother is struggling to send her to, you know, to college and, and, and now I decide I'm not gonna go to college, they just couldn't, oh--this is the first really, this was a big rupture with my parents.  And--
Speaker 1: You enjoyed sort of a real close relationship.
Speaker 2: Oh, very close relationship, very close relationship.  I was an only child.  I mean, you know, I was--there was never a time when I wasn't with my parents.  And I mean, you know, we were like the three bears.  I mean, no, I just--you know, there was never, never a time when we weren't very, very close.  And so this was like (unclear).  And the Friends of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] chapter in Chicago [Illinois] was very involved, not only in supporting the southern student--the southern sit-in movement, but in the whole issue of schools in Chicago, because Benjamin Willis was the school sup--superintendent.  And the schools were so segregated, and they were so poor.  They needed somebody to work in the SNCC office, and so I, you know, decided to leave school, and, and I really wanted to go south.  But the concession that I worked out with my parents was that for at least a year I would work in the office here, that I wouldn't go south.  I mean my parents were not only concerned that I had left school, I mean they, having grown up in the South, were also, I mean now, looking back on this, they were fearful that I, you know, I was gonna be killed.  And that did not become clear to me until sometime later when I was teaching at a Freedom School in Georgia.
Story_ID: 534677
Speaker 1: And what we had done was we had had a Freedom School with kids from the South and kids from the North here in Chicago [Illinois] for four weeks.  And then for four weeks we were gonna go south and have Freedom School in Georgia.  And the day we got to town, a young black man had been arrested for the alleged saying something to a white woman, and it had changed the whole dynamic of the town.  People were terrified.  They were terrified: a) that this young man was going to be killed because the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] was saying that they were gonna take him out that night; and they also were now frightened that, you know, got, you got these civil rights people here, and you know, what is this gonna do?  And although people had agreed to house us, now people were, were nervous.  They were, you know, should we, you know, should we do this?  So the whole afternoon was spent trying to, you know, get things back in order in, in town, and actually see that we still have places to, to stay, and also to see that what we could do about this young man who had been arrested.  And so we, you know, ended up having a mass meeting.
Speaker 2: Now this is in what town in Georgia again?  This is--
Speaker 1: Cordele.
Speaker 2: Cordele, okay.
Speaker 1: And that night the, the Klan began its demonstration early.  And we had to go back to where we were living.  And of course, you know, in that, in, in that part of town, you know, there are no lights; there's just nothing.  I mean you're just walking in the dark.  And so we, you know, we had to get all these kids settled in in the places where they were gonna stay and then where we were gonna stay.  There were four of us SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] workers.  And when we finally got to where we were gonna stay, we knew that the Klan was right behind us.  And they started shooting.  And we, we were in the house by that time, but you know, everybody was pretty much sure this is, you know, this is it.  And I remember calling my parents [Ella Jones Rushing and Albert Rushing], and it was a kind of a way of saying goodbye.  And I remember when my, my mother picked up the phone, and I was saying that, you know, I was calling her and my mother just dropped the phone, you know.  And I am sure at this point, you know, looking back at it, I mean the, you know, the terror that she must have been feeling.  And you know, she just--my father picked up the phone, and you know, and he said you know, this--you know, what are you doing?  You know, this is exactly what we told you.  And I, you know, I said, you know, this is what's happening.  And I needed them to, you know, to make calls, and they did.  But you know, it was only in that moment, and still not entirely in that moment, that I realized that my parents were not just concerned about the fact that I had left school, that they were actually really, really concerned about my safety.  So--
Speaker 2: What, what, what calls did you ask them to make?
Speaker 1: Well, I needed them to call the SNCC people here so that they, they would then know the appropriate calls to make to the Justice Department [U.S. Department of Justice].  You know, we had a whole list of--we had a routine for what you do when this kind of thing happens, not that it was necessarily gonna do any good, but you know, that was all we had.  So, my, my mother called Sylvia and Charlie Fischer, and they were the chairs of the Friends of SNCC office--I mean the Friends of SNCC committee here in Chicago.  And you know, then they started making the appropriate calls.  So, anyway, I ended up spending oh, the next four or five years working for the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee--
Story_ID: 534678
Speaker 1: How was that situation resolved?  Now we have you in a house [in Cordele, Georgia] that's being shot up [by the Ku Klux Klan, or KKK], and your, your parents [Ella Jones Rushing and Albert Rushing] calling, and you know, so you gotta, you gotta get us out (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I mean, you know, ultimately, the sheriff showed up, and he probably took his robe off and got in the car and drove over and said well, something like, you know--
Speaker 1: Drove around.
Speaker 2: --saw that it dispersed and, and you know, no, you know, we're gonna handle this.  And, and you know, I'm sure calls had started been--being made to, to them as well, because you know, this was much, very much of a negotiation where, you know, I'm sure people were trying to avoid an incident if they could.  And so, ultimately, you know, the sheriff and you know, his extra car, they kind of stayed around the house.  But in reality, of course, this is not comforting because, you know, I'm sure, as I said, that they had just taken their robes off and come across the street in these cars.  So, but I mean I guess they convinced the other folks that still had their robes on that, you know, well, let us handle it.
Speaker 1: So the, the, just for those who may not understand this period of time, no Klansmen were arrested or detained or--
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, of course not--
Speaker 1: --or--
Speaker 2: --no, they just went on home, you know, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: They were perfectly free to stand around and shoot at the place, or, or leave if they--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, no, no, no, no, no, no charges against them whatsoever--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, even though we had the, you know, all the bullet holes to show and, and, and everything, no. And you know, I mean and at that point, I think, you know, that really wasn't even our concern.  Our concern was just sort of staying alive.  But I think we also, you know, were certain aware of the seriousness of the situation.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the major mission there in Cordele, Georgia?
Speaker 2: What we were trying to do is we were really experimenting with this, you know, this whole Freedom School concept, in other words, you know, educating people for liberation, you know, getting people to identify what their issues were, and, and, and helping them once they--helping them to realize what their own issues were, I mean, you know, what their own, what they saw as injustice and how it impacted on them, and then letting them figure out how to, how to change that.  That was the whole purpose, you know.  You study the situation, you see what the issues are, then how do you think you can change it?
Story_ID: 534679
Speaker 1: And you all had to be trained to do this, right?  You didn't just--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --jump out there and do it, right?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I mean the training, the training was the movement.  I mean there--we, you know, we evolved into this.  And SNCC's [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] philosophy as an organization was gradually evolving, you know, certainly led largely by Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] in, in that regard.  I mean, but you know, this was an education for life.  I mean I had as other people had figured out that, you know, it really wasn't a question of a hamburger.  I mean that's the way we, we started out, you know, desegregation of public accommodations in the South.  But very quickly, you know, you start to, to make the connections to see, well, you know, it's not just a hamburger, and it's not just Woolworth's, and it's not just the South.  And so at that point, we were at the realization that these issues were connected north and south, and that though there was one set of problems in the South, there were other problems in the North, particularly around education, you know.  People were not being educated in what were called Willis Wagons here in Chicago [Illinois].  And they weren't being educated in Mississippi--so helping students to, to see that and to try and figure out well, why aren't we being educated, and what can we do?  But no--there wasn't anybody training us.  I mean we were learning this as, as we--
Speaker 1: You mean there was no SNCC training for how to be a field secretary with SNCC--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or how to, how to be, how to organize at all?
Speaker 2: Nope, no.  When we did the Mississippi summer project, you know, when, when young white volunteers were, were brought into the South to work on voter registration, yes, there was a training for that.  But you know, that training just really evolved out of, of the movement itself. But no, we didn't get any training as Freedom School teachers.  I mean this--the training with, the training was the act.  I mean the act was the training as we did it, you know.  That's how we developed new methods and, and, and new ideas.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the curriculum basically came out of--
Speaker 2: Of us--
Speaker 1: --the, that, had that--
Speaker 2: --that came out of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --initial pioneering effort in the South, you know, before the summer of '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Story_ID: 534680
Speaker 1: That's my maternal grandfather, Joe Jones, and he, he's standing on his property.  And you can see that's timber from his property.
Speaker 2: About what year is that?
Speaker 1: That probably would have been, that picture was taken before I was born, so I'd say it was probably in the 1930s.
Speaker 2: And the location of the property?
Speaker 1: Jackson, Tennessee, just outside of Jackson.
Speaker 2: That's me and my mother [Ella Jones Rushing], and that's on 53rd [Street] and Maryland [Avenue].  And that would have been probably about, it was in the early 1940s, and it's here in Chicago [Illinois] in Hyde Park.
Speaker 1: Which one's you?  On the last one, which one was you?
Speaker 2: She's the baby.
Speaker 1: That's me.  That's outside my aunt's house on an Easter Sunday.  And that would have been in the early '40s [1940s] too, yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me and my mother.  Can you just kind of pan in on us and cut out the other folks.
Speaker 1: If you would just give us the commentary.  We have certain guidelines we have to follow, and I generally start with the wider thing, and then I--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, that's me and my mother.  Actually, that's at a family reunion in Chicago for my father's [Albert Rushing] side of the family.  And that would have been, oh, about 1987, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me in the early 1960s, standing outside of Window to Africa, which was one of the early shops that started selling things from Africa.  Jeff Donaldson owned it at the time.
Speaker 2: It's in Hyde Park.
Speaker 1: Okay, this my, when I got my Ph.D. at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] in 1992.  And that's my mother, Lucy Montgomery, my good friend, Avery [ph.], other woman just in back of her is the granddaughter of my mother's teacher in college.  That's the family that she was coming to live with here in Chicago.  And then standing next to me is my cousin.  And then just in back of her is another family friend who came here to go to the University of Chicago in the 1920s, and worked with E. Franklin Frazier, and is kind of celebrating with me for getting in the Ph.D.  And standing next to her is another close family friend, Mrs. Otis [ph.], who I had known since I was in elementary school [Kozminski Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: That's my mother's 95th birthday, and that's me and my mother on her 95th birthday at the party we had for her.
Speaker 1: That's a recent picture at the Association for the Study of the Worldwide Diaspora [sic, Association for the Study of the Worldwide African Diaspora] conference--well, it's after the conference, actually.  And that's, that's [HM] Rosalyn Terborg-Penn from the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland]--not University of Maryland--Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland].  And that's Joe Dorsey from Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana].
Speaker 2: And that's after that same conference.  That's, on the one side, that's Sandra Richards.
Speaker 1: If you could go from left to right.  That's how our caption editors review stuff.
Speaker 2: Okay, left to right, sorry.
Speaker 1: Your, your left, the viewer's left.
Speaker 2: The viewer's left, screen left.  That is Santiago Vayyez from, from Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan], Gladys Jimenez from SUNY [State University of New York], Binghamton [New York], and Calvin, Calvin Santiago Vayyez from SUNY, Binghamton.  And that is Evette Santiago also from Michigan State and Sandra Richards, the director of--former Director of African American Studies at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois].
Speaker 1: How would we spell Vayyez?
Speaker 2: V-A-Y-Y-E-Z.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's part of the eternal triangle.  That's my good friend, Diane McGhee, and that's the graduation party after I got my Ph.D.
Speaker 2: That's a picture at Gladys's restaurant [Gladys' Luncheonette] here in Chicago.  And it was after the Chicago--I mean the American Historical Association meetings.  And there is Aline Helg from the University of Geneva in Switzerland, Larry Glasco, from University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and then that's me and Rosalie Schwartz from UC San Diego [University of California at San Diego, San Diego, California] and her husband, Larry, who's a national labor organizer, and that's Gladys [Holcomb], the owner of Gladys's restaurant before she died.
Speaker 1: I think I heard one name that we should probably get a spelling for, that's Helg.
Speaker 2: H-E-L-G.
Speaker 1: That's my dear friend, Leon Forrest, who is now--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--Leon Forrest.
Speaker 1: That's Leon Forrest who's now deceased.  And that was my birthday.  He'd taken me and Sandra Richards out to celebrate our birthday.
Speaker 2: That is in Los Angeles, California at the Latin American Studies Association [LASA] meetings.  And that's Rosalie Schwartz from UC San Diego again.  And next to her is Maria del Carmen Barcia from the University of Havana in Havana, Cuba.  And next to her is Gloria Garcia [Rodriguez] from the National Institute of History in Cuba, and Evelyn Hu-DeHart from Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island].
Speaker 1: Hu-DeHart?
Speaker 2: HU-(hyphen)-D-E-(capital)-H-A-R-T.  And that's a panel that we just done on Cuba at LASA.
Speaker 1: This picture is one here in Chicago.  And the woman at the left is the granddaughter of Juan Gualberto Gomez, who was a leader of the Afro-Cuban struggles for equality throughout the 19th century in--I mean through, for the end of the 19th century in Cuba and served as a senator during the Cuban Republic, and that's her husband, Dr. [Aldo] Pedroso, who is a medical doctor here in Chicago.
Story_ID: 534681
Speaker 1: That's me with my back turned with David Santiago at a conference I organized on conceptualizations of race in the Old and the New World at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Now you pronounced his name the way you would if you were speaking Spanish, but it's the same spelling as, right, D-A-V-I-D?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's Mexico City [Mexico] at my girlfriend's wedding.  And what is Carlos's last name?  Oh, my goodness.  (Laughter) You know what?  I can't remember the names of any of--
Speaker 1: That's okay.  You can just say this is myself with a group of friends--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Friends in Mexico City.
Speaker 1: And the year if you remember.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was 1986.
Speaker 1: And the occasion was?
Speaker 2: My friend had just gotten married, and so she'd invited me down to Mexico for her wedding.
Speaker 1: Do you remember her name?
Speaker 2: Oh sure, Mary Kay Vaughan.
Speaker 1: Mary Kay Vaughan, did she work for Vista by any chance?
Speaker 2: No, she taught, she was professor of history at the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois] for a long time.  She's now at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay, that's another family reunion.  That's me and my mother [Ella Jones Rushing], my mother first and then me.  And that would have been oh, sometime in the 1970s, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's my great-grandmother, that's Victoria Thornton Davis.  And that would have been oh, taken in the early part of the 20th century, but I can't do it any better than that.
Speaker 1: Okay, that goes back.  That would have been, that's here in Chicago [Illinois], and it would have been ooh, let's see, maybe 1970.  And I am filming or doing a video of South Chicago for the American Anthropological Association.  And the idea was to videotape a community where there was a mixture of people, and in this case, African Americans and Mexican Americans.  And that's John, John Whitt Franklin, [HM] John Hope Franklin's son on the left, who was also working with me.  And that's Henry Martinez, who was a community organizer in South Chicago.  That's when he was a young man.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's me in about--here--1968 I think.
Speaker 1: Yes, September '68 [1968], very good.
Speaker 2: Okay and it's at some kind of black arts festival, dashiki and all.
Speaker 1: That's me, and I think that is Mexico, and I'm, I'm certain that's Mexico.
Speaker 2: Okay, year?
Speaker 1: Oh, that--
Speaker 2: Or a range of--range of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Range of years--
Speaker 2: Include the possible year.
Speaker 1: Maybe 1965.
Speaker 2: That's [HM] Bobby Rush, when he was still a Black Panther at, speaking at this conference on race.
Speaker 1: What would you suppose this year would that--
Speaker 2: Maybe '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: That's a picture of Kay Prickett, my mother, me, and Kay's mother, Mrs. Prickett, can't remember her first name.  And that would have been maybe 1963.  She was a woman who'd come to work for SNCC whose mother was just as concerned as my mother about why we were doing this.  And so we'd taken these mothers to lunch to see if we can talk about it.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's Rust College in Holly Springs, Mississippi, when my mother was a student there in 1923.  I have the picture at home, and I'm having it, I'm taking it to a conservationist, so I had these photographs taken from it in case something happens with the conservation.
Speaker 1: That's my maternal grandmother, Willie Davis Jones.  And that's, again, another picture that I'm, I'm gonna have restored.
Speaker 2: That's here in Chicago.  That's my friend, Aline Helg from the University of Geneva [Geneva, Switzerland], and that's Mary Kay Vaughan in the middle.  It's her wedding that, where it was at.  And that's me, of course.
Speaker 1: Okay, year?
Speaker 2: Here in Chicago.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, but date?
Speaker 2: Oh, that would have been oh, in maybe 1998, ninety-
Speaker 1: That's me at a conference on Cuba, along with my professor, John Coatsworth, who's the director of the Latin American Center at Harvard.
Speaker 2: Date?
Speaker 1: Nineteen--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--like early or mid--(unclear)--or--
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-one [1991].
Story_ID: 534682
Speaker 1: Yeah, and that would have been in the early '40s [1940s].  I'm an infant there.
Speaker 2: You'd been (unclear) the library or in the front--
Speaker 1: In front, in front of the house.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's my mother [Ella Jones Rushing] and her grandmother [Victoria Thornton Davis] in Holly Springs, Mississippi, out in front of the house.  And that would have been oh, in the 1930s.
Speaker 1: -is my paternal grandmother [Fannie Burton Rushing].  And sitting next to her is my Uncle Charlie [Charles Wesley Burton], her brother.  And standing in back is her other brother and her sister.  That's four-- three of the sibling--four of the siblings, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, and that's the picture of me taken by Eric Anderson [ph.] when I was, oh, that's in the 1960s.
Speaker 1: That's Bob Moses [Robert Perrin Moses] on the left, Lucy Montgomery, Al Raby, and Mrs. Hamer, Mrs. Fannie Lou Hamer, at the Mississippi Report Dinner that we did after the Democratic Convention in '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: What did you say Ms. Montgomery's first name was?
Speaker 1: Lucy.
Speaker 2: This is me here in Chicago [Illinois] in 1968.  That's a dedication of the Wall of Respect, and here is the Wall of Respect that was on 47th Street.  And it was a time when, you know, people were trying to--
Speaker 1: That's the Wall of Respect.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me in May of 1968.
Speaker 1: This is Bernard Magubane, a South African scholar and activist.
Speaker 2: Is that the author of the book--
Speaker 1: He has--
Speaker 2: "My People, My-['My People, My Vision']
Speaker 1: He has many, many--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: --many texts.
Speaker 2: Me in Jackson Park [Chicago, Illinois] at the Japanese Garden.
Speaker 1: In what year.
Speaker 2: Oh, that was '83 [1983], can tell you that one.
Speaker 1: That would have been an Easter Sunday in the 1940s.  That's my father's oldest sister, her husband, my father [Albert Rushing], and my father's youngest sister, and me down at the bottom.
Speaker 2: Is a picture of me--that's my friend from the University of Havana [Havana, Cuba], Elena Diaz, and that's me.  We're here in Chinatown [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: That's a picture of the same conference.  That's, that is an example of a different view.  That's me and that's [HM] Bobby Rush at the, on the other side of the radio there.  He's speaking, I'm listening.
Speaker 2: Is this before the murder of Fred Hampton or after (unclear)?
Speaker 1: After.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me and my cousins outside my paternal grandmother's house in St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 1: And you are?
Speaker 2: I'm right in the middle, that's me.
Speaker 1: Middle of the bottom row?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That is a high school reunion with the two people who befriended me in high school.  That's me, that's Diane McGhee, and that's Beverly Calhoun (laughter).  That's it.
Speaker 2: Can you spell McGhee?
Speaker 1: It's M-C-G-H-E-E.  I know, it's an unusual--
Story_ID: 534683
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Okay, Fannie Rushing, F-A-N-N-I-E, R-U-S-H-I-N-G.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, all right, today is July 20, I believe, okay, sorry--July 20.
Speaker 1: Two--
Speaker 2: --thousand five [2005], okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, right, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois, 1900 South Michigan [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's the--you passed that test, and--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Well, we are completing an interview that we started, I think last summer, I believe.  It may, may have been last summer.  No, it was in--oh, that's right.
Speaker 2: It was in the spring.
Speaker 1: Oh, it's--
Speaker 2: Wasn't it?
Speaker 1: Actually, it was December 2, 2003, it sure was, right, December 2, 2003.
Story_ID: 534684
Speaker 1: We were, when we left, you--we were talking about SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].
Speaker 2: Yes, we were talking about SNCC.
Speaker 1: The days in SNCC in, in the South.
Speaker 2: And well, actually, didn't we start talking about the University of Illinois [at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]?  'Cause that really sort of changed things for me.  Before I was working with SNCC, set up a Friends of SNCC chapter on the University of Illinois campus and began to realize that what I wanted to really do was not work with SNCC but to work for SNCC full-time and left school and begin to do that.  And so that really did change my life.  And I, I did that until almost the end.  And then, of course, the Civil Rights Movement was really over.  SNCC was subject to COINTELPRO [Counterintelligence Program] even though we didn't know it at the time.  And so the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now that's--just explain a little bit about what COINTELPRO was.
Speaker 2: COINTELPRO was the U.S. government's plan to destabilize civil rights organizations that they perceived as a threat to the U.S. system.  And so they began using all kinds of counterintelligence to destroy the organizations, such as placing people inside the organization that were there to do nothing other than to disrupt.  We all know now, even though they denied it at the time, that they began taping people's telephone calls, playing the telephone calls back for people, any kind of psychological destabilization of the organization.  And it was very, very powerful.  Sometimes it was not just nonviolent.  Sometimes it was actually violent.  We were not able to prove it, but certainly the death of Ralph Featherstone when the government said he was carrying explosives, and his car was detonated, and of course he died.  He was twenty-two years old and one of the real, one of the real tragedies in the movement.  And then, of course, the, the people who had been involved since the early part of the '60s [1960s], I think for most of us just the horrors of the day-to-day work in the South around civil rights had taken its toll.  And that in conjunction with COINTELPRO was really what brought things to a dramatic end for most people.
Speaker 1: Now this is something that people I think today may not realize, that if you were working in civil rights in those days, you fought on two fronts: you fought against the racists in the South and, and other places, as well as the United States government, you know, that people suppose now supported the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But, I mean in some ways I guess it did, but in a lot of ways they--
Speaker 2: But not really.  I mean one of our big complaints was yes, they might send the U.S. marshals, but the U.S. marshals didn't do anything except stand on the sideline and maybe take notes about what was happening.  But they did not in any way interfere.  They were supposed to be there to protect, but they did not in any way interfere with local law enforcement officials.  And so when you see things now like 'Mississippi Burning' or--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the--
Speaker 2: --or these pictures that portray the U.S. government as leading this valiant fight in aid of democracy, not so.  And we were certainly very, very much aware of the fact that the public voice increasingly, starting with [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson closing his speech with we shall overcome, the public voice of the government was one of support.  The private actions of the government were less than supportive.  So, yeah, it was really not having any allies to speak of, because whereas the government was saying we're gonna send somebody to help, that was not the case.  And we can also see that very clearly when the three civil rights workers were killed.  They sent people in after, when someone is already dead.  And so all of those things illuminated for us the fact that, yeah, we were fighting sometimes on two and three fronts at the same time.
Speaker 1: Did you realize at the time, or did, or did the young people working with SNCC at the time realize that they were completely unprotected?
Speaker 2: We knew we were completely unprotected.  That, we'd experienced time and again.  What we did not realize was the complexity of COINTELPRO, so thing were happening that we really couldn't explain.  And that was really a, a very terrifying experience, in some ways even more so than the direct violence, because it was as if you were imagining things, or there was strife and you didn't know where it came from, all of that.  That was very difficult, and for some people more difficult than for others.
Story_ID: 534685
Speaker 1: And so, by 1965, 1966, personally, I was burned out and exhausted, and came back to Chicago [Illinois], got a, a job working at Sears [Roebuck & Co.], where what I wanted to do was to save enough money to go to Mexico.  And the reason I wanted to go to Mexico was because when I graduated from high school, I was--I had applied to and was accepted at the University of Mexico [National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico], and my folks [Albert Rushing and Ella Jones Rushing] wouldn't let me go.  After what happened, I'm sure they wished they had just let me go to Mexico, although the Civil Rights Movement or the impact of the movement certainly came to Mexico as well, but it wouldn't have been the same as being here.  So I lived in Mexico for a while, and then--
Speaker 2: So you, you worked at Sears and actually saved up enough to go to Mexico?
Speaker 1: Enough money to take the bus to Mexico, took the bus all the way from Chicago down to the Mexican-Guatemalan border, yeah.
Speaker 2: By yourself?
Speaker 1: By myself, by myself, but I mean, you know, after the Civil Rights Movement, what was there to fear?  You know, nothing.  But looking back on it, it's that bus ride that I don't know how, how I did, and I, and couldn't do again.  But you know--so spent, spent a considerable amount of time in Mexico and then got rested enough to come back and start working again.
Speaker 2: Now where did you go in Mexico?
Speaker 1: Well, first I went to Monterrey [Mexico], and then I went to Mexico City [Mexico].  And my destination was really Oaxaca [Mexico], and that's where I spent most of the time.  And of course, Oaxaca is way in the south and completely different, all of southern Mexico is completely different than the rest of Mexico because it's there that the indigenous populations are the largest, and so it's, it's, it's a completely, a completely different world.
Speaker 2: Now did you go to the black areas of Mexico when you were there?
Speaker 1: You know, actually, the first time, no, I didn't.  In Oaxaca is also the site of the Monte Alban, one of the oldest, the site of one of the oldest civilizations in the Americas.  And at the time I was interested in anthropology, and so no, just spent the time in Oaxaca.  It would be later when I went back that I actually had an opportunity to see the Costa Chica and the other areas with strong black populations.
Story_ID: 534686
Speaker 1: Came back, got married.
Speaker 2: So when did you come--when did you go and when did you come back?
Speaker 1: Must have gone sixty--maybe '66 [1966], came back in '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: Okay, did you meet your husband in Mexico or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, no, unfortunately met him here.  And so we can just skip over that part.  I say that was my sabbatical because, you know, in part, it was really that I was still recovering from the movement.  My ex-husband was not involved in it.  And my family was very happy because they thought that that would keep me from any re-involvement; however, that didn't work.  The marriage didn't work.  The plan didn't work.  And when my father [Albert Rushing] died, he--my, my parents both had been very concerned that I left school, and so my father made me promise when he was dying that I would go back to school.  And I did that, which was the death knell for the marriage.  And while I was back in school studying anthropology, Chile happened, the coup in Chile.  And I, like many people of my age, was appalled, and I think particularly because we had gone through COINTELPRO.  I was very sensitive to a government interfering in the, the lives of people in that way.  And as you probably know, Guatemala and Chile are the two instances in the Americas where the government of the United States very proudly said we destroyed this government.  So it wasn't a matter that, you know, people were charging the government with something that they were denying.  They were saying yes, yes, we did this.  And so I got very involved in--
Speaker 2: That's when [Salvador] Allende was assassinated?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, when Allende was assassinated.  So I got very involved in that.  And then while I was finishing my, my schoolwork, I began to get more and more involved in doing support work around Chile and widened my networks within Latin American communities because all Latin American communities were supporting those people in Chile who were forced to leave the country as a result of Allende's assassination.  And one of the important things about SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] had been the kind of political training that, that all of us got in the organization.  You know, we started out thinking let's desegregate these lunch counters, and then it became a question of voting rights.  And then from that we began to see that there weren't that many differences between the North and the South.  And you know, we looked at how to address these issues in the North.
Story_ID: 534687
Speaker 1: And then [HM The Honorable] John Lewis, Stokely Carmichael [later Kwame Ture], Mrs. [Fannie Lou] Hamer went to Africa.  And so Africa and the struggles of people in Africa became very much part of the discourse that was, that was going on in SNCC.
Speaker 2: When did they go to Africa?
Speaker 1: I'm a historian, but I am horrible with dates.  I'm trying to remember when--
Speaker 2: I think I'm thinking it's '66 [1966].  I've read about it, but I, you know, I don't know.  I'm, I'm-
Speaker 1: I'm not sure it was '66 [1966].  I think it was earlier than that.
Speaker 2: It could've, yeah.
Speaker 1: I wanna say late '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the reason I say that is because when we did the Mississippi Report Dinner in 1964 here in Chicago [Illinois], we had Mrs. Hamer, we had Bob Moses, and Stokely was due to come.  But Stokely had gone to Guinea, and we weren't sure he was gonna get back in time for the dinner.  So I, I think it was from '64 [1964] on that Africa started to be important in, in our political discussions.
Speaker 2: You're, you're right I think because Bob Moses was gone by sixty--at the end of '64 [1964]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm terrible with dates.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he went to Canada to escape the draft, and he never came back to SNCC until after the [President James Earl "Jimmy"] .Carter--
Speaker 1: Well, he went to Tanzania.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He went to Tanzania, and he taught in Tanzania, and then he came back and finished the Ph.D. at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I think that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: I think that's right.
Speaker 2: He went to Canada, then to Tanzania, and then he was there for over ten years and came back.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 534688
Speaker 1: Now you went to Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: That's where I got my B.A. in anthropology.
Speaker 1: Now why were you--in those days there weren't many black people involved in anthropology.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you, but, you know, there were some people who were interested but very few actually in anthropology.  What, what drew you to anth--anthropology?
Speaker 2: Just the interest in--actually when I had originally applied to the University of Mexico [National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico], I wanted to study anthropology.  I had this tremendous interest in learning about other cultures.  And of course, at Roosevelt, [John Gibbs] St. Clair Drake had been at Roosevelt.  He was gone by the time I, by the time I got there.  But I guess my knowledge of anthropology was sort of that St. Clair Drake lived in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], and even though I didn't know him, but that he taught anthropology, and I, I knew that's what, that's what I wanted to study.  It was only after I got in anthropology that I realized, particularly at that time, that probably St. Clair Drake was one of about two or three people that were involved in the field.  But I truly enjoyed what, what I was studying.  And initially what I thought I was gonna do was I was gonna do anthropology in West Africa.  And even though I loved anthropology, I also loved history.  And so, while I was at Roosevelt I took a course, a history course, and it was on--it wasn't on Latin America.  I believe it was on Spain, and--'cause I took the history of China; I took the history of this, the history of that.  And I had a professor, Otto Picasa [ph.], who was a Spaniard.  And he had come to the United States to study 16th and 17th century Spanish records having to do with the sli--the African slave trade.  And he introduced me to this idea of the African Diaspora.  And from there, everything, everything began to change, because I wasn't gonna do West Africa.  I was gonna do the Caribbean.  And I was still gonna do anthropology, but I had this tremendous interest in knowing more about this African Diaspora in Latin America--
Story_ID: 534689
Speaker 1: --Now what is, what are we talking about when we talk about an African Diaspora in Latin America?
Speaker 2: The spreading out of people of African descent throughout Latin America.  And you've got to remember that at that point there was no such thing as Diaspora studies.  There was one book in the field written by a, a black historian at the University of Michigan [sic, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], Leslie Rout, who was also a tremendous jazz musician, which is probably what first led him to this.  That was the only book in the field.
Speaker 1: What was his last--how do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: R-O-U-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a classic in Diaspora studies now, but at the time that was all there was.  And everything else, you might find a handout here or a handout there.  There was material in Spanish about the slave trade to Spain, but virtually nothing had been done about slavery in the Americas because everyone at that point assumed that if you were talking about slavery in the Americas, you were talking about the United States, and therefore it had nothing to do with Spain.  So, that's where my, my interest in this African Diaspora began.  And my goodness, now, every year, I can't keep up with the number of books on the African Diaspora in Latin America, but that's all there was then.
Story_ID: 534690
Speaker 1: I got a job--well, I taught at St. Mary's for a while, St. Mary's Center for Learning [St. Mary's High School and Center for Learning, Chicago, Illinois], which is an alternative school.  And it was at that moment when the African liberation struggle was really becoming a major, a major issue.  It was that point when, if you had a free Mandela button, people would say, Mandela, who, who is, who is that?  Who is Nelson Mandela?  And I left St. Mary's and went to work for the Quakers, for the American Friends Service Committee [AFSC].
Speaker 2: And they were doing a lot of work in terms of freeing southern Africa in those days.
Speaker 1: They were doing a lot of work around southern Africa.  And while I was working at St. Mary's, yeah, I gave a talk one night on the importance of the liberation struggle in southern Africa.  And this man came up to me afterwards and said he had just been hired by the Quakers to head their international division here in Chicago [Illinois].  And he was looking for somebody to work on Africa.  Would I be interested?  Went down and that's, that's what we talked about, and I started to work for the Quakers directing their southern Africa program.  So then I got more and more involved in that and set up the first coalition on southern Africa in Chicago, which was a coalition of religious groups and, and others working on southern Africa.
Speaker 2: Now did you work at all with the--or did you interact with the African Liberation Support Committee?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, that's another, that's another interesting story because--it's too long to go into.  I mean now we're talking about looking back at the Civil Rights Movement, but there's another whole segment of black history that really has not been covered in, in depth way.  And that's what happened after 1966, after the Black Power movement and the division within the black movement.  Some people went in one direction.  Some people went in another direction, and there were all of these different groups.  It's a very interesting period, because it's a time of real political sophistication I think.  These were people who'd come out of the Civil Rights Movement and had developed a lot of political savvy.  I don't mean just in relationship to office holding but I mean actually being able to politically analyze what was going on.  And that period hasn't been studied very much.  And so--
Speaker 2: And in that period you got the Congress of African People and various--
Speaker 1: All-African People's Revolutionary Party and--
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Abdul--I mean McWorter-[Abdul Alkalimat, born Gerald McWorter]
Speaker 2: The People's College--
Speaker 1: All--so, yeah, all of that was going on.  And at different times people would come to the coalition and work for a period of time, but you know, everybody had their own projects going on.  So, African Liberation Support Committee, they did have a delegate to the coalition.  They didn't always come, but they did have a delegate to the coalition.  So, yeah, it was a very interesting period.  Somebody needs to write that history.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is--there should be a lot of documentation.  I mean--(unclear)--for that period of time, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That was a period with the Sixth Pan-African Congress over at--
Speaker 1: Yes--
Speaker 2: Did you have a chance to--
Speaker 1: I didn't go to--no, I didn't go to the Sixth Pan-African Congress.
Speaker 2: It's in Arusha, Tanzania like in '76 [1976]?  I think '76 [1976]. [sic, The conference took place in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania in 1974.]
Speaker 1: Yeah, something like that.  That whole period is a very, very interesting period.  And the Southern African Coalition did a lot of organizing around Mozambique.  Because you know, at that point, what we believed was going to happen was that all the other countries in southern Africa would become independent.  And then it would be possible to kind of encircle South Africa, and that would be the, the final battle.  So we worked a lot on Mozambique, worked with Bob Van Lierop, and we had a major event, five thousand people at Dunbar High School [Chicago, Illinois] for 'O Povo Organizado,' which was Bob's second film on Mozambique.  That was really, really an interesting time in Chicago, in that the awareness of Africa really, really began to, to grow.  It was actually at a--I went to a coalition sponsored event where groups from around the city came to, to have some kind of special event, and I, I don't remember what it was.  But it was there that I met people from the Puerto Rican independence movement.  And ultimately, someone asked me if I would come to a meeting representing the coalition.  And before I knew it, I was the local coordinator for the Puerto Rican Solidarity Committee, which was a national committee around Puerto Rican independence.  So I was doing southern African and liberation support work and coordinating the Puerto Rican Solidarity Committee.
Story_ID: 534691
Speaker 1: Okay. So we were talking about the African liberation effort in--
Speaker 2: African liberation--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So I'm doing African liberation support.  I'm doing Puerto Rican independence, and I, by that time, had decided that I needed to go back to school.  And so I was taking courses, but not very seriously because the political stuff just had really all my attention.  And I realized that I really hadn't progressed very far, that I still was unable to make school a priority.  I mean the political work was always the priority.
Speaker 1: Well, by this time, '74 [1974], you had your anthropology degree from Roosevelt, and then--so it's now I guess what (unclear) '77 [1977]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's in the seventies [1970s].
Speaker 1: --or something, '76 [1976], '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976] 'cause, yeah, approval was in '76 [1976].  And then the Puerto Rican Solidarity Committee wanted to have a big event in Madison Square Garden in New York [New York].  And we were very successful.  We filled Madison Square Garden with people who supported independence for Puerto Rico.  And then a very interesting thing happened.  And I was able to recognize it because I'd lived through COINTELPRO [Counterintelligence Program], and that was that once again we were under attack.  And it became a primary objective of the government to destabilize this movement around Puerto Rican independence.  And it was COINTELPRO all over again.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, now let me just ask you about this.  I don't know what, how much you know about this in Chicago [Illinois], but Chicago Police Department had something called the Red Squad--
Speaker 2: Red Squad.
Speaker 1: --which I think receive federal funds to locally, you know, implement--
Speaker 2: Spy.
Speaker 1: --some of the spying on organizations.  And from what I heard, they spied on everybody from the--
Speaker 2: Everybody.
Speaker 1: --PTA [Parent Teacher Association] to the--
Speaker 2: To--yeah.
Speaker 1: --animal support people and--
Speaker 2: They were just unleashed.  I mean you couldn't go to a meeting without there being people from the Red Squad there, and after a while you got to know who they were, you know.  I really missed the boat because when the Red Squad was decommissioned and later on there was a massive suit that, a class action suit, some people not only got their files, but they got a cash settlement because their civil rights had indeed been violated.  So, yeah, that was a very interesting time--oh, yes, definitely knew the Red Squad.  But the Red Squad was overt.  I mean you knew they were there.  They were taking pictures.  They were the ones with the notebooks.  They were writing things down, but in addition to the Red Squad, it was the old COINTELPRO stuff, putting undercover agents in organizations.  And just, it was a very difficult period and--really unfortunate because this movement in support of Puerto Rican independence was really gaining such energy.
Story_ID: 534692
Speaker 1: In Madison Square Garden [New York, New York], Ms. Baker spoke.
Speaker 2: Ella Baker.
Speaker 1: Ella Baker.  And of course at that point, I hadn't seen Ms. Baker since the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] days.  But as part of the Puerto Rican solidarity work, I would go to New York [New York] every month for a national meeting, and so I would always go to Harlem [New York, New York] and see Ms. Baker.  Well, somewhere along in there, Ms. Baker became convinced that what we needed in this country was a third party.  And she was very involved with Arthur Kinoy, who was part of the law firm of Kunstler and Kinoy, to create a mass party, a people's party as a third party alternative.  And so, of course, on one of my visits Ms. Baker talked me into going to a mass party meeting and meeting with Kinoy.  And (laughter) before I knew it, I was a Chicago [Illinois] organizer for the Mass Party.  And (laughter) there were points when I clearly didn't want--I felt I was overcommitted, but this idea was really important to Ms. Baker.  And I had such tremendous respect for her that if she asked me to do it, I felt like I had to continue doing it and so I did.  And then--
Speaker 2: Well, what as the name of the third party?  Did it have a name?
Speaker 1: It was called the Mass Party.
Speaker 2: The Mass Party?
Speaker 1: The Mass Party.  Oh, and of course, that was an interesting time too because there was all this discussion in the United States about, you know, who do you create a mass party?  What is a mass party?  Should there be a third party that's a mass party, or should there be a vanguard party?
Speaker 2: I'm sure all the nomenclature attracted more Red Squad people than ever, you know.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: It's like dropping an ice cream cone on the sidewalk or something.
Speaker 1: That's certainly true, that's certainly true (laughter).  But working for the Quakers [with the American Friends Service Committee], the Quakers had a third world coalition because you know, obviously the Quakers are basically a white organization and--but they, I have to say, they put money into creating a forum and a newsletter where people of color who worked for the Quakers could get together.  So, this was like, you know, dying and going to heaven for me, because then I could reconnect with old SNCC people, Phil Hutchings, Michael Simmons, [Gwendolyn] Zoharah Simmons.  We had all ended up somehow in this, this third world coalition.  So, that was a, that was a, a really good time, because being in the third world coalition made it easier to do organizing on, on both southern Africa and on Puerto Rican independence because you could do all that through the coalition.  And I became the director of the southern Africa program for the Quakers here in Chicago.  And I did that for three years.  And when the funding ran out, the Quakers asked me to go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to their national office.  And I couldn't do that because my mother [Ella Jones Rushing] was getting older, and I couldn't leave Chicago.
Story_ID: 534693
Speaker 1: So I had to look for another job, and I got a job at Rosary College, which is now Dominican University [River Forest, Illinois].  And it was to direct a program for minority students.  And, and there was a lot of testing involved in, in that for admission, and then I really felt the inclination that I needed to, I needed to know what I was doing with this and what the debates were about testing.  So, I got a master's in, in education, ed psych.  And by the time I got the master's, I realized that any university, if you don't have a Ph.D. there is--people won't listen to you.  And also I really felt that I had done, I had really done everything I could at Dominican.  You know, I had created a comprehensive program.  But you know, I wasn't challenged anymore, and that was when I decided to go back and get this Ph.D.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] for a Ph.D. in, in history, right, in--
Speaker 1: Well, initially I was gonna do the Ph.D. in history--I mean I was gonna do it in anthropology.  And by that time, through my southern African work and reconnecting with Phil Hutchings, who was one of the founders of the Venceremos Brigade, I had started entering into discussions about Cuba and meeting people who were involved in Cuba support work.  Well, that took me back to this interest that I had in the African Diaspora.  And also, you know, in that moment, that was before--that was the glory days of the Cuban Revolution.  And so people were coming back and talking about Cuba as if it was heaven, you know.  And so I thought, you know, I'd like to, to find out more about this, and I'd, I'd like to see it, I mean--(unclear).  And what was being said at the time was that they had come to grips with the whole issue of racism, and racism was dead.  And I wanted to see someplace where racism was dead.  And so I got very interested in that and decided that I wanted to do anthropology in Cuba.  Well, the people at the university were not supportive in the anthropology department.  They said it would never happen, that, you know, I wasn't gonna get into Cuba.  And so, they were unwilling to support my research in the anthropology department.  And I did not know personally, but John Coatsworth was in the history department, and I knew of him through my work on Latin America.  And so I, you know, I went to talk to him one day.  And he said you know, you can do the exact same thing in history that you can do in anthropology, and we had this long conversation.  And I had always loved history.  He was willing to support my research completely in Cuba.  And so, instead of getting a Ph.D. in anthro, I got a master's in anthro and entered the Ph.D. program in history.  And I, because I had always liked history and had enough courses, I needed to take about four or five courses to complete what I needed for a Ph.D. in history, so that's how it happened.
Speaker 2: Now, I suppose that--well, was there ever a question that you would focus on Latin American history or--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, I knew that that's what I wanted to do.  I mean when I was studying anthropology, I was gonna do anthropology in Latin America.  At, at first I didn't know that it would be Cuba.  I probably figured that it would be Mexico because I had spent time there, and also because there's a big program in Mexico and in Peru, and I wasn't interested in doing Peru.  So, but by the time I went to history, no, I definitely knew that I wanted to do Cuba, and I wanted to do Latin America.
Story_ID: 534694
Speaker 1: Now some of the courses you've taught have been the African Diaspora in Latin America--
Speaker 2: That's a course that I designed.  As a matter of fact it was the first course of its kind in this city [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, that's 1492 to 1895.  It's kind of a survey course I guess is the whole thing and then--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --then you've got Social and Political Movements in Latin America; the African Diaspora in Latin America; Class, Race, and Power in Brazil.  Did you have to--do you know Portuguese as well as Spanish, I mean, fluently--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I taught myself Portuguese.  I never studied Portuguese formally in school.  The only languages I--well, I did try German, but I was quite unsuccessful at that.  But I studied French and, and Spanish, but Portuguese I taught myself.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the fifth one is Identity in the, in the Diaspora: A Tale of Two Cities, Havana [Cuba] and Chicago.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a paper I wrote--
Speaker 1: Okay, oh, that's a paper.
Speaker 2: --comparing Cuba and--comparing Havana and Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what--well, let's see.  Let's start at the top of the survey, and just, just to give us, just give us some of the highlights of what your, your--'cause this is a field that, that not a lot of people, not a lot of black people take any history of black folks in Latin America.  And--
Speaker 2: Well, always students are very, very surprised that there are people, black people outside of the United States.  I, as I said, the, the Diaspora course is one that I created, actually all those courses are ones that I created.  When I went to Benedictine [University, Lisle, Illinois], I mean the reason that I was hired there was to develop a Latin American studies component, and, and that's what I've, I've done.  But the courses, you know, look at the experiences of people of African descent throughout Latin America.  And as I was talking to this, this woman from Colombia--she's here to testify before Amnesty International--was talking to her today, people have absolutely no idea that anything is going on in Colombia other than drugs, drugs, drugs, drugs.  And they don't even understand that in any kind of serious way.  It's just, you know, they're all doing drugs down there.  And the other very serious issues, people have no, no idea what's going on.  So, in the course, you know, we try to talk about issues other than drugs.  We look very much at the changes in the African experience over time in, in Latin America and what industrialization has meant, what the coming of the TNCs [transnational corporations] has meant, what this has meant for Afro-American culture in these regions.  So we do, in all these courses we do Mexico, we do Colombia, we do Brazil, we even do Bolivia because that's someplace where people really--black people in Bolivia?  Yes, black people in Bolivia.
Speaker 1: Now isn't that the country that black folks were expelled from sometime during the--there's one other country I've--is it Bolivia that some--
Speaker 2: You know--
Speaker 1: --one of the founding fathers of the country expelled all the blacks from the country, or tried to.  Is--
Speaker 2: Well, that would be just about any place.  I mean the attempt to--the policy is called blanqueamiento, or whitening.  And this was official policy of most Latin American governments to try and get rid of the black population and encourage European immigration.  And so the government would pay for Europeans to come to whiten the population.
Speaker 1: That's similar to what the United States did with the Homestead Act [Homestead Act of 1862] I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, in the U.S. the, the, the white population was so overwhelmingly large because the U.S. was always fearful that a Latin American scenario would develop where whites would become the minority, because whites are the minority throughout Latin America.  I mean there is not a country where--Argentina, Chile are those countries with the largest European populations.  But you name it, there is no such thing as a country in Latin America where Europeans are the majority of the population, although they certainly control the majority of the power.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But no, Bolivia, the, the black population is small.  It's probably one of the smallest but definitely there.  Ecuador, black population quite sizeable, and Ecuador is one of the most promising areas in Latin America for, for blacks.  But Costa Rica, terrible, still terrible conditions for blacks in, in Costa Rica.  So, the courses, and even when I do the survey courses in general Latin American history, I always include the component of the African Diaspora because it is so often left out of the traditional histories of Latin America.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a major, major part of the story.
Story_ID: 534695
Speaker 1: Now, there's a lot of confusion in the, amongst African Americans as to who is an African American.  It goes all the way back to when we were colored and Negro, you know, when--a typical example is Ebony magazine's baseball survey every year.  Some years you see, you know, for instance, the [San Francisco] Giants had Willie Mays and then Orlando Cepeda would be beside him.  The next year you wouldn't see Cepeda anymore.  And the thought was he's not really black.  He's, he's what, a Dominican or whatever, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and today there's still confusion--
Speaker 2: Oh sure.
Speaker 1: --about that.  People look, is Sammy Sosa black or isn't he, or is he--
Speaker 2: Well, he definitely is.  I mean because to say that one is Latino does not say--or to say that one is Dominican, well, it pretty much assures you, that you're of African descent because the European population is so tiny in the D.R.  But--I mean after all, the Dominican Republic is the other half of the island of Haiti.  I mean, come on (laughter), what else, what else could Sammy Sosa be?  You know, so, but yeah.
Speaker 1: And people get confused of race and nationality--
Speaker 2: And nationality.
Speaker 1: --and so, and language, and all those things that get confused.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So we go over all those things in the, in the course, you know, the distinction between race, nationality, ethnicity.
Speaker 1: There, there's a movie where Richard Pryor actually changed his hair and gave himself a name to be considered a Latin ballplayer, which wouldn't have been a Negro in the eyes of--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Was that 'Bingo Long?'
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Bingo Long,' right, right, right.  He was trying to pose as a Latino, which is--
Speaker 2: Yes, when he was trying to break into--before Jackie Robinson, yeah, yeah, um-hm, yeah.  We did a--we had a group of international students at Benedictine [University, Lisle, Illinois] last weekend.  I did a walking tour with them in the black community through historic Bronzeville.  And we went to the Negro League Cafe.  And of course, you know, these, I think these kids couldn't imagine that there was a time, because they identify African Americans with sports.  And so, explaining to them that African Americans couldn't play baseball in the national leagues, couldn't play basketball in the national leagues, and, and so it was really interesting for them to, to see just how segregated things were and what the--why the importance of the Negro Leagues.
Story_ID: 534696
Speaker 1: What are the--and I was reading one article--I mean it's a, it's an interview with you when you--where you were--and this is--it's so, so many of us know so little about Latin American history that this question wouldn't occur to most people.  But, but the question of, did, you know, black history in Latin America start--or, or did the liberation of Latin America start with Antonio Maceo [Grajales] and [Jose] Marti, or did it--you know, who, who really was the root of the liberation struggles there in Latin America?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's different for every country.  It's different for every country.  In Mexico for example, the people who were involved in the independence movement because, although [Miguel] Hidalgo [y Costilla] is certainly the figure that you see all the time, just as important to the liberation of Mexico is [Jose Maria] Morelos [y Pavon], and Morelos was half Indian and half, and, and half African--Guerrero, again, half Indian, half black.  I mean these are the, these are the fathers of independence--
Speaker 1: He was the first [sic, second]--
Speaker 2: --in Mexico.
Speaker 1: --president of Mexico, right, Vicente Guerrero.
Speaker 2: Guerrero, yeah.  In Venezuela, again, blacks were very, very involved in the struggle for independence.  And of course, that struggle, much earlier than Maceo, because you know, the struggle doesn't begin, although at least in the communities of African descent it begins in 1812 with the conspiracy of [Jose Antonio] Aponte, because Aponte was definitely fighting for both independence and the end of slavery.
Speaker 1: Well, well, tell us something about Aponte, because we, hardly anybody in our--who's gonna be watching this has heard of him before they hear you say it here.  And they--
Speaker 2: He's such an interesting figure.  This man was a free black.  He was a carpenter in Havana [Cuba], and he was also a priest in the religion of Santeria.  And he was, in addition to being a priest in this very important Afro-Caribbean religion, he was also the head of the cabildos de nacion, and the cabildos de nacion were these organizations that were supposed to be along ethnic lines.  They were originally intended to kind of divide the population of African descent.  And their stated purpose was to provide burial according to ethnic traditions.  But in point of fact, these became organizations through which people of African descent in Cuba were able to organize for the duration.  They helped to pay for the price of, of freedom for, for slaves.  And so Aponte was also the head of the cabildo, a cabildo that was dedicated to Shango, the, the god of war.  And what is so interesting about Aponte is that he was able to connect with cabildos throughout the island of Cuba, not only the Yoruba or Lucumi cabildos, but all the different African ethnic groups.  And in addition to that, he had made contact with the Haitian generals that had fought for the independence of Haiti.  And they had promised that if an uprising took place in Cuba, they would supply both guns and resources, and military support.  Well, the conspiracy was discovered before it actually happened.  But that is the real basis of the independence movement in Cuba.
Story_ID: 534697
Speaker 1: This is interesting when you, you know, Haiti, the Haitian Revolution is basically sparked by Boukman Dutty.  He's a Vodun priest.
Speaker 2: Vodun was very important in the uprising in, in Santome, Haiti.  And Santeria was important, not, not just Santeria but the cabildos themselves, these very, very powerful organizations.  But it's interesting because Aponte, through his prestige from the fact that he was a Santero, that he was the head of the cabildo, and what this shows us is that people of African descent had their own internal sense of who they were.  It was not just determined by the world of slavery, but it was determined by what they believed to be important.  And what they believed to be important was this connection with the Orishas, with the gods.  Because if you were connected to the gods, then, you know, were living a life that is lived in harmony, not against the world but in harmony with the world.  And that was very important to people, and so Aponte was able to do this organizing that had it not been discovered, would have led to the independence of Cuba and the end of slavery long before 1898.
Speaker 1: It, it also makes you think about the Gullah Jack and Denmark Vesey rebellion too, Gullah Jack being a, a like a priestess of hoodoo or--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --whatever they call it.
Speaker 2: Spiritualism, sure, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But they were discovered too and didn't get a chance to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you know, people will say oh, that wasn't successful.  Well, but in point of fact, it was, because people learned.  They gained skills from even abortive uprisings, and so you know not to do the same kind of thing again.
Speaker 1: All right, so this is--then--well, I've been told by people that are in their seventies, eighties now, they can remember when the time when a lot of people were named Maceo in the black community.  And I didn't realize the connection until recently, you know, that--
Speaker 2: I didn't either, I didn't either.  As a matter of fact, my mother had a good friend, and, and her name was Maceo.  'Cause I mean, you know, when you move these names (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Sometimes we don't know what gender it is or who it was.  But the Maceo name--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a friend of mine from Texas was saying that when he was a kid a lot, a lot of people were being named Maceo because they remembered the Cuban revolutionary--
Speaker 2: Revolutionary.
Speaker 1: --Antonio Maceo.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't know if it's pronounced--what, what--how is it pronounced really in Spanish?
Speaker 2: Antonio Maceo.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Maceo, but bring it here, it's Maceo.
Speaker 1: James Brown tells him to play (laughter) on his horn and stuff, you know.  But that's the--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's very important.
Story_ID: 534698
Speaker 1: We were just ruminating on the power of religion and spirituality in getting some things done.  You were describing--could you describe again the scene of people--you were saying that the people of Cuba that today you asked how many still believe in Santeria.  And you were told?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, some practice but all believe.  So, and, and, and it's very interesting, in this country, someone of European descent is not likely to have ever seen, participated in, or know about predominantly black religions, even if they're Protestant to me because the Protestant, white Protestant churches are different.  But in Cuba this not the case.  I mean even people who are of European descent are very, very much aware of what the beliefs are in Santeria.  And I mean even if someone says oh no, well, you know, I don't believe in that kind of stuff, but they still know what the practices are, and they, they know what the beliefs are that they are at least giving lip service to not believing in.  But it, it's surprising to me that there this is, yes, it is an Afro-Cuban religion, but it, it is something there.  It's part of the total society and not just Afro-Cubans, and even at the level of practitioners.  I was in Regla, which is a little suburb across the bay from Havana [Cuba], and there is the church of the Virgin of Regla.  But of course, we know that the Virgin of Regla is also the Orisha Yemaya, the goddess of the sea.  And it makes sense because you know, you have to take a little boat to go across to Regla.  So, yes, it is a Catholic church, and there is a Catholic priest.  And--but it certainly makes more sense to the people that this is the home of Yemaya there on, on the other side of the sea.  And you'll find just as many people of European descent filling the church as you do of people of African descent.  Now you can say that, you know, they're there for the Virgin of Regla.  But when the virgin comes out dressed all in blue, and even though the priest is carrying her in procession, you know that for the audience, they are there to celebrate Yemaya.
Story_ID: 534699
Speaker 1: We were talking I think before the, before we started recording today about the political--well, slavery, the end of slavery.  And that's a, that's a part of what you teach I think that a lot of people don't know too when--
Speaker 2: Eighteen ninety-eight [1898], so amazing, so amazing.
Speaker 1: This is in Cuba, right?
Speaker 2: This is in Cuba but also, Brazil, 1898 too.  And so it's really interesting, particularly in regard to Brazil, when you get all this in the 1950s when you start to get this image of Brazil as a racial democracy.  How on earth could there be a racial democracy in--when slavery had barely been over, hadn't been over a hundred years at that time.  And I'm sure those slaves didn't think they were living in a racial democracy.  But you know, people are very, very surprised.  They associate slavery with the United State.  And when you say to them slavery in the Americas didn't begin in the United States.  Slavery in the Americas began in the Caribbean and then on the mainland of Latin America.  And it was a full, more than a hundred years before slavery developed in, in North America.  So, if you're gonna look at slavery, you can't just look at it in the U.S.; you have to look at it everywhere in the Americas 'cause it existed everywhere from Nova Scotia [Canada] to Patagonia [Argentina].
Speaker 1: We're talking about a history of slavery that lasts, what, five hundred years?
Speaker 2: Almost, almost, yeah.
Speaker 1: From the 14-late 1400s to--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --the 1500s to--
Speaker 2: From, well, there, the, the blacks who came with [Christopher] Columbus were by and large free.  And so, and with the first expeditions that came from the Iberian Peninsula, most of those people were free.  Now when slaves did begin to come, it's about the 16th century.  And they're coming not from Africa.  They are coming from the Iberian Peninsula because initially it was forbidden to bring slaves by both the Spanish and the Portuguese who were not Latinos, meaning that they were--that they'd been on the Iberian Peninsula long enough to be either Spanish or Portuguese speaking and at least nominally Christian.  And it's only gonna be mid-16th century when people start to come directly from Africa.  But yeah, almost five hundred years.
Story_ID: 534700
Speaker 1: Well, what other aspects of this history, and I know it's a lot of history there, but, but what other major thing do you think that African Americans would be surprised to know or need to know about--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --Latin American history.
Speaker 2: I, I think they very much need to know how endangered these communities are throughout Latin American.  And in each of the countries that we go through, for example, we were talking earlier about looking at--having your daughter look at 'Quilombo' before going.  Think about this quilombo--quilombo in Palmares, the only independent black nation there inside of Brazil.  And if you begin with 'Quilombo' and then look at 'Black Orpheus,' the way the favelas looked in the 1950s, and then say, what you see in the 'City of God' in 2000 [sic, 2002] is the exact same favela that where 'Black Orpheus' was filmed.
Speaker 1: Oh, I have a question.  As we watch these, recently too--I wanted them both recently--I was, you know, telling my daughter the same thing, that, that these are--this, this is pretty much the same place outside of Rio [de Janeiro, Brazil] that, you know.  And--but I wondered as I watched it, you know, have, have, had things deteriorated that much in terms of the violence or was--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --or was the depiction in 'Black Orpheus' a, a kind of a Walt Disney version of a favela, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, certainly it is a very sanitized version of life.  But, in the 1950s, the habitation of the favelas was really just beginning, I mean this move up the--pushing people out and up the, up the mountainsides.  So, no, it was nothing like what you see in the 'City of God.'  That is something, and, and think about it.  Because 'Black Orpheus,' released in 1950--must be '58 [1958], '59 [1959], really at the end of the '50s [1950s].  And so in less than, in, in less than fifty years, this total disintegration is taking place.  And what we see in the 'City of God,' I mean, is just genocide, just absolute genocide.  And that was not what was happening in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: And there's a documentary that accomplished--that, that, that accompanies the DVD version of--
Speaker 2: Of the 'City of God.'
Speaker 1: --'City of God' that, that they'd go to the favela and you, and you--I mean the police are afraid to go in it.  I mean there, and there are regular gun battles on the outskirts between the gangs and the police.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And if they have to go in, the go in with tanks and you know.  It's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so that's what people have to understand.  And this is true whether it's Brazil, whether it's Colombia, whether it's Puerto Rico.  I mean my goodness, my goodness, the situation in Puerto Rico, I mean there are some places where poor people, they have to pay the gangs to enter in and out of their own homes.  So, all these communities are under siege, just as, you know, the African American community is under siege here.  And, and that's what we have to understand, that this is a worldwide phenomenon and that we really need to unite to fight against it so that we do not see that if the transnationals are moving onto land in Colombia that it's not our concern.  It is our concern because these are other communities of color that are being marginalized in the same way that, you know, we're being attacked.
Speaker 1: Now what do you think of this?  In the, in the documentary I saw, they--people who were in the favelas were trying to explain something about governance, in a sense.  They said that the government of Brazil won't take care of us.  And these young men out here, as violent, as mean as they are, they're taking care of us--I mean they're taking care of that neighborhood.  If you need something you go to them, and they get it for you.  You tell a politician, you'll never get it.  It's--is there--what do you think about that?
Speaker 2: Well, always, you know, whenever you have an underground, whether it's here or whether it's there, yes, I am, I am sure that sometimes the drug dealers, you know, buy a pair of shoes for a kid.  But by the same token, the kid will probably end up wearing those shoes to run drugs for the dealer.  And so, I mean, we have to (laughter), you know, we have to ask ourselves even if people perceive that there being taken care of, are they really, or are they just--is this just really contributing to--it's not that they don't have alternatives in this.  They do have that as an alternative, but is it really taking care of them?  I mean it's--they're under siege, that's what it is, and I don't see a way out, I don't see a way out.
Story_ID: 534701
Speaker 1: And also, you know, raises the question of, as this administration here in the United States gets more conservative, you know, you see in Brazil an administration with basically no social services, you know, and the result seems to be the favela crisis and all that.  You know, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, there, there are not gonna be any social services here pretty soon either because they really are being eroded.  There is no such thing as a social program that hasn't been cut back.  And they simply can't deliver in the way they once did, whether it's an education or medicine, either it be physical or psychological.  So I mean we are really heading toward a crisis.  And in a society that values violence, you know that the solution is always ultimately going to be one where, you, you know, you just go in and shoot people down.  I don't know if you've seen the Without Sanctuary exhibit at the [New York] Historical Society [New York, New York], but it is really a very, very powerful exhibit.  And people need to understand that the same kind of violence is being done as during that period of time, I mean just when you, when you look at what's going on in the community.
Story_ID: 534702
Speaker 1: Now you're currently teaching at Benedictine--
Speaker 2: Benedictine [University, Lisle, Illinois].
Speaker 1: --University, right?
Speaker 2: (Nodding yes).
Speaker 1: And, and you've been involved in--oh, tell me--I didn't--oh, tell me about the Black Radical Congress.  I know you were, you were involved in that at a certain point.
Speaker 2: Well, yes, I was.  I mean, but the Black Radical Congress is kind of, it, it's not where it was when we had the conference here.  What is that now?
Speaker 1: It's in '98 [1998], I think, yeah.
Speaker 2: Was it '98 [1998]?  Was it that long ago?  Yeah.  I was certainly--I saw the Black Radical Congress as a period of real hope.  And I don't know what happened.  I think in some ways a kind of base organizing that needed to happen didn't happen.  And organizing is something that's very difficult to do.  Most groups, most people are not willing to do it.  And consequently, it's hard to have a movement unless you're gonna do that hardcore day to day knocking on doors, working with people.  That's what we learned in SNCC, and that's what we learned, was the way you, you, you build movement.  Most people now aren't willing to do that.  And so the Black Radical Congress had a great start, but it--the base just wasn't there.  It certainly could have been if people had been willing to say, okay, I'm gonna take two years and really do nothing but organize this.  So, that was the end of that.  But now, as a result of two things, right now I see my major focus for my work is putting together this conference and this resource and documentation center, which kind of brings me back to where I started and that is preserving the history of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] in Chicago [Illinois], and its relationship to SNCC nationally, and the growth of the Civil Rights Movement here in, in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, now name this and be real explicit (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  The name of the project is: Tell the Story, the Chicago SNCC History Project 1960-1965.  And it came about when a friend of mine called me and said, have you read Stokely's [Stokely Carmichael, later Kwame Ture] book?  And I said, "I got it for Christmas, but I haven't read it."  And I would say to anyone, if you haven't read it, sit down and read it, 'Ready for Revolution,' not the older one.  And of course he wrote it as he was dying.  But I had the most extraordinary and most powerful feeling when I was reading this book.  I thought that Stokely was sitting down in the room talking to me.  And this was not an out-of-body experience, it's just that it was so powerfully written.  And over and over again Stokely says in the book--Kwame Ture-"Brothers and sisters, those of you who were there, write your history."  If you don't, he says, other people will write it for you, and it will bear no resemblance to what happened because they don't understand what happened, and so they will make up things.  And he says that over and over in the book, if you don't write your history, people will write it for you.  And so I really became convinced that there was a very important period of the history in Chicago that was missing.  It's not in the books.  And the role of SNCC in that was key.  And I was thinking, you know, we really need to do something about this.  I have all of these documents at my house that are yellowing with age and falling apart.  And I thought these things need to get someplace where they're gonna be taken care of.  They need to be digitalized.  They need to be, they need to be gotten out of here.  And I said I'm sure that other people have these things as well.  And so I talked to my friend Sylvia Fischer, and she said well, you keep talking about it.  Why don't we just do it?  And then Jim Forman [HM James Forman] died, and I thought, my goodness, if we don't do something soon there won't be anybody left to tell the story.  So there is some urgency to this project, and therefore we decided to do a, an--to create an archive, a resource and documentation center specifically on SNCC and the Civil Rights Movement in Chicago, and to launch that with this conference October 21st and 22nd at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 534703
Speaker 1: Now, this is really important.  As you said, there was a lot of--I wanna ask you, as a historian, you're probably familiar with a lot of the work about SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].  And I think I first really--I mean other than reading headlines in the '70s [1970s], and you know, bumping into people, I really didn't read anything serious about it until Taylor Branch's book, 'Parting the Waters.'  And that, that gave me--and I'm not sure--you know, some people had said oh, he's, he's right on the money, and some people say he's not.  I mean, David Halberstam had a book called 'The Children,' where he tried to do it for this young people in SNCC like Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] and others.  And there's been a biography now of Ella Baker, done by one of her--
Speaker 2: [HM] Barbara Ransby--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Barbara Ransby, right.
Speaker 2: --very good.
Speaker 1: It's another one too, a shorter one by--
Speaker 2: Joanne Grant--
Speaker 1: --Joanne Grant.
Speaker 2: --who also died this year.  And that was another thing.  She, she and Jim [HM James Forman] died within two days of each other.  And I thought, oh my goodness, what--you know.
Speaker 1: Yep, some of--
Speaker 2: The--
Speaker 1: --a lot of the SA-SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] people have written their books, like [HM The Honorable] John Lewis and, and [HM The Honorable] Julian Bond and others--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, John Lewis is actually SNCC.
Speaker 1: John Lewis is actually--yeah, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's right, yeah, he is, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yes, and so is Julian (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, Julian, yeah, he--you're right, you're right.
Speaker 2: So is Julian.
Speaker 1: I don't know why I just wanna make him--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: --SCLC.
Speaker 2: Well, John Lewis was a minister.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, and so John was probably one of the most friendly people to SCLC in SNCC.
Speaker 1: I tend to think of him as SCLC because of that.
Speaker 2: Because--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But you're right.  That's right, he sure was SNCC.
Speaker 2: No, he's, he was the chair of SNCC.  The one that I like best is Cleve Sellers' 'The River of No Return.'  I use that all the time when I'm teaching that and Mrs. [Fannie Lou] Hamer's 'This Little Light of Mine.'  Because I think those really--and Jim's 'Making of Black Revolutionaries,' Jim Forman's 'Making of Black Revolutionaries.'  Those books, and now I add Stokely's [Stokely Carmichael, later Kwame Ture] to it, really capture, I think, the essence of the time.  Cleve's book really, very clearly documents the power of the Civil Rights Movement and the way it compelled you to be a part of it in a way that I think young people can understand because he was a young person when he was writing this.  And Mrs. Hamer's 'This Little Light of Mine,' I mean that's, that's wonderful.  It really gives you some insight into how someone born in Mississippi into this very oppressive system is able to come forward in the midst of the Civil Rights Movement.  And of course at the technical level, Charles Payne's the, "I've Got the Light of Freedom: The Organizing Tradition' in--SNCC and the organizing tradition in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And that's Charles--
Speaker 2: Payne ,P-A--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Y-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's good.  I mean it's good to have recommendations from somebody that was, was there.  I know I asked Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] about the films.  You know, there's one called 'Freedom on My Mind' he thought was good.  But there's another one that I think [HM] Danny Glover directed called, oh, has freedom in the title too, but it has a character actually playing a Bob Moses type, though the name is changed and, and they have other people, you know, that are clearly characters in SNCC, you know, working--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Have you seen 'Fundi,' the one on Ms. Baker?
Speaker 1: No, now that's been around awhile.  It's hard to--I know I've, I keep missing it.
Speaker 2: It's at the University of Indiana.  I mean, you can rent it from them very reasonably.  And there are some older ones.  'I'm Gonna Walk the Streets of Greenwood.'  I don't know where those films are now.  But it really gives you a sense of what the South was like in the '60s [1960s] and what civil rights workers encountered as they began to do this organizing.  But 'Fundi' is excellent.
Story_ID: 534704
Speaker 1: I know there's a white woman who was with SNCC back in her college days named Mary King--
Speaker 2: Mary King.
Speaker 1: --who wrote 'Freedom Song.'
Speaker 2: Yes, 'Freedom Song.'
Speaker 1: And she, she goes into an analysis about the split of SNCC at the end, at the end of the '60s [1960s], how things split up and you know, just--
Speaker 2: Yes, Mary King's 'Freedom Song' and Jane Stembridge--I can't remember what hers is.  I mean there's a lot out there.  And then there's Clay Carson's [HM Clayborne Carson], which I think is, you know, historically, as a historian, it's very good.  It's one of the most boring books I've ever read, and it's hard to make the Civil Rights Movement boring.  Only an academic could do that (laughter).  So, I never recommend it.  And of course Howard Zinn's 'SNCC, the New Abolitionists,' that was a much older one.
Speaker 1: Is that a pretty good--
Speaker 2: It's okay, it's okay.  For me, Cleve [Sellers], and Jim [HM James Forman], and Stokely's [Stokely Carmichael, later Kwame Ture]--now the AARP people will say that Stokely's last book is not a good one, because he doesn't really talk about that part of it in depth.  But he's at the end of his life, and clearly he realizes what formed him politically was SNCC.  And so, that's really what he talks about, and then you really do get a sense of his own personal development and growth.  And if you, you know, read the earlier stuff with Charles Hamilton, 'Black Power,' you know, it's, it's so different, because this is a man at the end of his life who's able to look back and reflect, a real tragedy.
Speaker 1: You remember that he would always admonish any crowd he spoke to, to organize.  He'd say, you know, if you, if you don't like the AARP, join the Panthers.  If you don't--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --like that, join the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  He said get in the Urban League, do something--
Speaker 2: Yeah, to do something.
Speaker 1: --you know, get in your church, organize something, organize.
Speaker 2: But don't just sit around and complain, yeah.  Yeah, we lost two really impressive people.  I mean Forman and, and, and Stokely were very unusual in that they were not hustlers; they weren't using the Civil Rights Movement to catapult them into anything.  They really were committed.  They were revolutionaries.
Speaker 1: Now we have-Chicago [Illinois] has a few people.  I mean [HM Reverend] James Bevel and, and Diane Nash still live in the Chicago area--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --though they're not together anymore--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --hadn't been for many, many years, but--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --but--
Speaker 2: I talked to Diane yesterday.  Diane and I of course are very close.  Bevel is another thing.
Speaker 1: Bevel is SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], as opposed to SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], I know that, yeah.  Now is, is Diane Nash still writing her book?  She's writing--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She's still writing her book, and, and that's why she's not interested in, in doing, really not interested in doing interviews or anything.  She is gonna be at the conference.  But the conference is gonna be structured as the sessions will be roundtables so that it's just open discussion with, with people.  There won't be formal presentations or papers but just a roundtable discussion with the audience.
Speaker 1: Well, that's probably interesting.  I mean that's a good thing in some ways because most of the time when we have conferences where there are formal presentations, people have discussion questions rather than (laughter)--they wanna make a statement rather than--yeah, your answer anyway, so it's a unique to have a conference where they don't have to worry about that.
Speaker 2: About that.  Yeah, well that's what this is gonna be.  And of course we'll have the SNCC Freedom Singers, who sang at Jim's memorial in Washington because he, he wanted that.  And so they're gonna come out and be a part of this conference.  And what we hope people will understand is that the music of the Freedom Singers came out of very specific historical situations.  I mean they didn't write this abstractly.  They wrote 'In The Mississippi River' when they were dragging the river looking for the bodies of [Andrew] Goodman, [James] Chaney, and [Michael] Schwerner.  They wrote 'The Ballad of Medgar Evers' in that moment.  And so we wanna show people the connection between the music and the movement.
Story_ID: 534705
Speaker 1: Tell me what--we always ask this question: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: That people will take this tremendous history that has been formed over these many, many years and use it to shape a society that is better than what we have, to use it to create a society where the concerns with violence, with poverty, with illness do not exist.  And sometimes I think about the kinds of things that we did in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].  I mean, you know, we were just very, very young, 17, 18, 19, 20 years old.  And the projects that, that we took on shows you that young people have the power to create any kind of world that they, they want.  And when we think about something like the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party [MFDP] and the challenge to the Democratic Party by the MFDP, it changed the whole political history of this country, certainly in relationship to conventions.  I mean even though in '68 [1968], what was attempted here was to slow the process, to change the process.  Never again can we go back to having conventions that do not truly represent all the people in this country, whether they be black, whether they be Latino, whether they be Asian, women; you simply can't do that anymore.  And that's a direct result of the kinds of, of work of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party.  And so when I think about that, I think, my goodness, you know, young people today have so much more than, than we had in terms of an accumulated history.  Go ahead, make your world the way you want it to be.  And in the material for the conference, what we keep saying over and over again is, come study this history, use it.  It's your patrimony.  It's what belongs to you to make the kind of world that you want to make.  And I guess that's what my greatest hope is, that people will really take advantage of what they have to make something better.
Story_ID: 534706
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at everything that you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently in life?
Speaker 2: No (laughter), no, no, no.  I mean even things that were hard--for example, when I went back to get my Ph.D. I was an old woman already by the time I went back.  And perhaps, I mean some people would say well, you know if you had stayed in school when you were nineteen or twenty, you know, you'd be in a different place economically, professionally, than you are now.  But actually, the U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] was so difficult, had I not had the experiences that I'd had in the Civil Rights Movement, I don't know if I would have been able to do it.  I mean I saw people of color come to the university, have a nervous breakdown while they were there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, University of Chicago leads the nation in student suicides I believe.
Speaker 2: Well, I--
Speaker 1: That's what I heard anyway.
Speaker 2: It's, they're right behind Northwestern [University, Chicago, Illinois] (laughter).  And--but, so, yeah, I mean I'm, I'm sure that maybe there could have been things that I--that my, my life would be different if I hadn't--but I would not trade the experiences that I have had.  My goodness, dropping out of school meant that I met Fannie Lou Hamer.  It meant that I met and worked with Ella Baker.  No, wouldn't do it differently, wouldn't do it differently.
Story_ID: 534707
Speaker 1: What did your family eventually say about, about your--well, now you had a lot of different, you know, incarnations in terms of, you know, what you focused on and what you were doing.  But it's all, it's all part of a stream, I think, of activism and, and digging into the past and trying to find--you know, make sense out of that, you know.  But what did, what did your, what is, what is your, what does your family consist of now, and who does it consist of, and, and what, and what did your parents [Albert Rushing and Ella Jones Rushing] think of your--
Speaker 2: Well, of course my, my parents, both of my parents are dead now.  And the dropping out of school was just very, very difficult for them.  And both of them were, you know, very, very unhappy.  And I realize now it was because they were worried about me, and they were worried about the long haul too, you know, what was gonna happen in the end.  So basically, my immediate family is, is all gone.  And I--so my, my aunts, my uncles, everyone's dead.  So I mean I do have cousins who are scattered about, but that's about it.  And you know, they (laughter), they have thought various things about my, my travels through life.  Most of them kind of shaking their heads, well, what's that about?  So, you know, but that's how families are.  Families don't ever, you know, really--they see you as little whatever.  They don't see you as the adult that you are, so, yeah.  I--they--I think that at this point, they are resigned to, if there is something unusual I'm probably doing it (laughter).
Story_ID: 534708
Speaker 1: Well, when you look back on your life at this point, also, what, what would you consider at this juncture to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that legacy, I don't think I've gotten there yet.  I'm still working toward that.  I mean I have a lot of things that I need to accomplish hopefully before the end.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: I certainly want to do some writing.  I wanna do some writing on Cuba; I wanna do some writing on the African Diaspora; I wanna do some personal writing about myself and my, my family.  And so I think that that's the period in my life that I'm getting ready to, to go into.  I established a scholarship in my mother [Ella Jones Rushing] and my grandmother's [Willie Davis Jones] and my great-grandmother's [Victoria Thornton Davis] name at Rust College in Holly Springs, Mississippi.  I wanna continue to, to work on that project and make sure that that fund grows.  It's something that my mother was very, very committed to, the sole question of education.  And she particularly thought that the historically black colleges [HBCUs] were extremely important.  She used to always say, well, you know, when we couldn't go to those other places, what we had was the historically black colleges, and they have to be preserved.  And so I wanna do that.  And if we can talk about legacy, what I would want to do is to see some of those things accomplished before I die.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is--I generally don't ask this question, but this is a--since you're actively involved in preserving the history of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and were a part of it, what do you, what do you consider to be, as a historian, the legacy of SNCC.
Speaker 2: Oh, this tremendous political education that over 250 young people got in their pivotal developmental years.  And this legacy, this tradition of organizing, door-to-door organizing with a political emphasis.  That's the greatest legacy, I mean, what we learned about struggle and about how to build a movement.  The local institutions, such as the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party, that's the legacy of SNCC, and it's a tremendous, tremendous legacy.  And I don't say that just because it's something I was a part of.  I say that objectively.  I mean I think all of the major civil rights organizations have made their contributions.  We cannot deny the contribution of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in the desegregating of schools.  And, and that's an important history.  But clearly, in the case of SNCC, it is a politicization of young people and the building of organizations, the learning how to organize a social movement for social change that's the legacy of SNCC.
Story_ID: 534709
Speaker 1: Now before I ask my last question, is there anything I haven't asked that you think that we need to address before--
Speaker 2: No, I think this time we pretty much covered it all.  I think we picked up where we left off and, and came through.  Yeah, I think the important periods--yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, there's one thing that I didn't ask.  I didn't ask you to reflect on the, on the, the success of the, of the freedom struggle for South Africa.  I mean I think that we are really--I mean what, what did--what's your feeling about how that turned out and--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think the future is yet to be written on that one.  And I am hoping that the same fate will not befall South Africa that has fallen to the rest of the countries in Africa, suffering under a neocolonialism that is every bit as devastating as colonialism was.  And I hope that they will be as successful in ending neocolonialism as they were in ending colonialism.  'Cause you know people forget that the colonial period in Africa is a very short period of time.  It is really not until the 19th century that the colonial period begins.  And by mid-20th century, it's over.  It's one of the shortest colonization periods in all of the world.  So I hope that all the countries of, of Africa will be as successful in ending neocolonialism and being truly sovereign and independent nations.
Story_ID: 534710
Speaker 1: Well, our last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As an educator, an organizer, and, and someone who's committed to social justice.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much.  I'm sure you will be.
Speaker 2: Thank you, thank you, and thank you (laughter).
