Story_ID: 12191
Speaker 1: My name is Julius Richardson.  And --
Speaker 2: You have to give your whole name.
Speaker 1: My name is Julius Laconia Richardson?
Speaker 2: You have to spell it too.
Speaker 1: J-U-L-I-U-S, L-A-C-O-N-I-A, R--Laconia, Richardson, R-I-C-H-A-R-D-S-O-N.
Speaker 2: Your birth date?
Speaker 1: Third of March, 1921.
Speaker 2: And your--today's date?
Speaker 1: First of April, nint--2001.
Speaker 2: Your profession?
Speaker 1: I'm a professional golf instructor.
Speaker 2: And where are we located?
Speaker 1: Where are we located?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Here.
Speaker 2: 1900--we're in Chicago.
Speaker 1: 1901, Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 2: 19, 1900 S. Michigan Avenue.
Speaker 1: Oh, this--okay.  1900 S. Michigan Avenue.
Speaker 2: Okay, at the offices of The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 1: The office of the HistoryMakers.
Story_ID: 12192
Speaker 1: I want, once again, to ask you what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: I would say a variety.  If I have a choice, I like the flavor of--I like peanuts and I like okra.
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I would say brown.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Springtime.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Florida.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Like what, for instance?  I can do anything I make up my mind to do.
Story_ID: 12193
Speaker 1: First, I'd like for you tell me, do you know what Laconia or where that came from, your middle name?
Speaker 2: Oh, my middle name.  My Aunt Rosie named me.  Julius Laconia Richardson.  And the reason that she used Laconia because it was taken from Greek mythology.  It means a mythical laughing boy.  And my--and I think she was certainly interested in giving me a Latin name and so she used Julius.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your father's name, if you would tell us your name and tell us about him?
Speaker 2: My father, his name was John Richardson.  My father's occupation, he was a coal miner.  My father was a very, very industrial man.  He was a very, extremely hard worker.  He was, he was boundless in energy.  He never, never, never got tired.  And I guess that I may have inherited some of that myself because I--and he, he was a very good family man, well loved in the community.  And a very good man.  In fact, I thought so much of my father, I'm still trying to fill his shoes now.  He, he was a very kind man.  Your--my wife thought well of him and everybody else Blythdale, the little coal mining town that I grew up.  And I've never seen him miss a day of work.  And I'd never seen him stop working, even when he'd come out the mines sometimes.  We had a little farm that we had--my brother and I used to work for him and he would come and get us started, and, and then he would leave.  And he'd come back.  Now, it's one thing about my father, if he, if he told you to do something, you'd better do it.  No question.  And if he promised he was gonna work for you, he would.  He was, I think, among the Richardsons and his sisters were all, they all was crazy about him.  They thought that he was at the end of the world.  And the people that, in Blythdale [Pennsylvania], when he died, the funeral procession was miles and miles long.  He was loved all up and down the valley.  He was--he would always--he loved to travel, and that's probably the reason I enjoy traveling so.  He would always go and visit our relatives every year, and we were fortunate enough in growing up that we had an automobile.  And he also had a business, early enough--when I was young.  He had a beer tavern and--
Speaker 1: Let me ask you to talk about his family and what he talked--you know, where he was from originally.  You know, where he grew up and what you know about his side of the family.
Speaker 2: Well, I know that his father, he was a minister.  He was a school teacher.  And my father's from a little town in Alabama called Burnt Corn, Alabama.  And my grandfather was a very, very strong disciplinarian.  And I always heard the sisters of my father and the--and said that he was, he was a very difficult man.  I mean he, he was a very demanding person.  And, in fact, he's responsible for all of them leaving home when they were old enough because he, he worked them.  And back in those days, you know, they--the more children they had, the bigger the farm that they would have.  So having a lots of children was an advantage during that particular period because--and during the time that most farmers, the more children they had, the larger crops they could harvest.  And he had, during the time, cotton was very prominent there and every one of the girls worked in the cotton field.  And he was more or less sharecropper.  And they had to go out in the field every day.  And, and one of my early experiences in going to Alabama, my mother took us there.  And I recall going out into the field, and I had saw all the white cotton, and I had asked them, can I go and pick some flowers?  (laughter)  They--my cousin, he thought I was crazy.  And where did I come from (laughter).  And wanted to know where I come from, wanting to go out and pick some flowers (laughter).  And they he was trying to get away from that.  And my--I went, I went to visit Alabama twice.  Once with my father and once with my mother.  And it was a great experience, busting open watermelons, in, in the field early in the morning.  They was nice and cold and eating peanuts, climbing trees and--it was one of the most exciting periods of my life, you know, when I was a youngster because riding the mule.  And my Uncle Bud, you know, he played several tricks on us.  I remember he put us on mule, and the mule threw Albert off.  And he ran home and, hollering, and said that mule, that mule, that mule had, had a hat on.  You know, he had this harness on (laugher).  And so, it was--things like that.  I remember eating Muscatine, that's sort of a grape-type food.  And I just had a wonderful time on that vacation.  Then we'd sit around at night, and they sang songs.  And, and then they would roast peanuts and they also would throw potatoes into the grate and we'd get those out.  And it was different than any way--and they thought we were--they often would kid us saying, cause my mother always dressed us up, you know, when we were small.  And they'd, they'd--and once in a while, they would say, they look like Sears & Roebuck boys (laughter).  We had the little clothes and pants on.  So that life we had was, was very interesting (unclear) enough.  So--
Speaker 1: Did your father share any stories about growing up, his growing up with you?
Speaker 2: Oh, he shares--the story he shared that he worked very hard, that his Daddy was, was a very strong disciplinarian.  And that's all they did was work all the time.  And when he got 18 years old, 19 years old, he left and came to Pennsylvania.  And he worked as a construction for about 2 years, and after the he finally started working the mines.  And he worked in the mines.
Story_ID: 12194
Speaker 1: I was born in Greensburg, Pennsylvania.  And then we moved to Jeanette [Pennsylvania].  And after we left Jeanette, then we went to a place they called  Wheeling, [West] Virginia, Beach Bardom.  And we lived in Elm Grove [West Virginia], and there was a mine there and a mining camp that they called Security Hill.  So we lived on Security Hill during that period, and my father would work and I remember as a little kid growing up that we did--well, we did what kids always do, just play, have fun.  And my Aunt Rose, she lived in that area.  We would visit quite frequently.  And then I remember while we were in Wheeler, as a young man, that my godmother took us to Wheeling Downs.  They had the racetrack there.  And we would go there every year because she worked on the racetrack.  And we would go there, and she--we would spend--and going to the different barns where they--I don't know what her job was there.  But we spent a lots of time there, during my early life.  And after we left Wheeling, then we went to a little place called New Kensington, Pennsylvania.  New Kensington was near--the coal mining camp was Kimbock, but New Kensington is in, right out from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  And my father worked there and I remember listening to--I remember I was about 5--4, 5 or 6 years old and we stayed in New Kensington for a year and a half.  And they had mine explosion.  And my father was scheduled to go into work that evening.  And he decided that he wasn't going for that particular evening.  And the mine blew up.
Speaker 2: You were talking New Ken --
Speaker 1: New Kensington.  New Kensington.  And after that explosion, it was terrible.  It was horrible.  As a little kid, I can remember the wives and the kids, they were at the temple where they were bringing these men out, you know, on stretchers.  In those days, it was, it was kind--quite common for mines to explosions, you know, because of the coal dust and the gas that would form in the mines.  You know, they had trapped doors in various places where they had air circulating through the mines sometimes.  But this explosion, it just ripped throughout the mine.  There were 300 or 400 people who got killed there.  And no one was, came out alive there.  That's one of the largest explosions they had in Western Pennsylvania.  And after that, we moved to a little coal mining--another coal mining town which is called Black Thorpe, Pennsylvania.  Now, Blythdale was very, when we were at Blythdale, I can recall we loaded up all our goods and wares, we were on the truck, and we packed up at--well, they loaded, we loaded up that day, and we started out.  And we--it must have been late evening before we headed toward Blythdale, probably about a 3 or 4 hour ride, 2 or 3 hour ride to, from that part of Pennsylvania to Blythdale.  And we arrived that night, there were--there was shooting, and shooting going on.  And I was wondering what in the world was going on in this little town.  And they, you know, during that period, they used to--Friday night or Saturday night, I'm thinking maybe it was a Friday night or Saturday night, the miners would get off and they would go to someone else's house.  And they'd gamble and shoot dice and, and they would be drinking all night long.  And this went on for, throughout the weekend.  And the next day, the men go back to work, you know.  And I thought we were in the Wild West (laughter).  And so, so, and then finally we were enrolled in school.  A little--we had about--it was two floors.  And the first and second grade was, it was together.  And we had the third and fourth were together.  They had a teacher for third and fourth.  And I think when we got to the seventh, the sixth, seventh and eighth, we had individual teachers.  And it was--it remind of, you often hear of the one-room schoolhouse, only this was much larger.  And I remember my teacher, Mrs. Fremont--my first teacher's name was Mrs. Fremont.  And then, and I found her, you know, to be a very, a very nice person.  And during my early days in school, I did very well in the lower grades.  And so when I reached about the 6th or 7th grade, my father sent me to--he wanted me to have a good education and so he sent me to Cincinnati, Ohio to stay with my Aunt Willie.
Story_ID: 12195
Speaker 1: I'd like you to talk about your mother and her background, and then I'll come back and I'll pick it up through this whole of Cincinnati.  But I want you to give us her name and, you know, where--what you know about her growing up and who her family was and all of that.
Speaker 2: Well, my mother, she was a Poindexter.  Now, the Poindexters and the Richardsons --
Speaker 1: Can you spell Poindexter?
Speaker 2: P-O-I-N-D-E-X-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: And can you spell Blythdale.
Speaker 2: B-L-Y-T-H-D-A-L-E.  Blythdale, Pennsylvania.  My mother was from the same area that my father was from, Burnt Corn, Alabama.  The interesting thing about the Poindexters and the Richardsons, the, my mother--my father married a Poindexter who was my mother and his sister married a Poindexter also.  So in my family we have a lots of double first cousins as a result of the marriage.  But my father probably came up in, first, before my mother.  And then my mother came up about two years after he was here.
Speaker 1: I want you to first talk about your mother and what you know about her background, who her family was, where she fit in the family, that type of thing.
Speaker 2: Her, her mother's name was Hattie Poindexter.  And I know that I knew her, her brother very well because he was in Pennsylvania also.  The other Poindexters were in Cleveland, Ohio, her other brothers was in Cleveland, Ohio.  I didn't get a chance to really get to know them until I was about 10 or 11 years old, but during the early period, the only one that I knew was Jack Poindexter.  And he lived in Greensburg, Pennsylvania with them, the same town they lived in when my father [John Richardson] first came to Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Did she share--your mother's name first, you haven't given her name.
Speaker 2: Marie Richardson.
Speaker 1: Did you--did she share any stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  My mother, well, my mother was a very, a very attractive woman.  And she, she was a, a very, very, very dainty in her ways, not dainty in, in size, but she was a dainty, very meticulous person.  Her clothing was always--she was always--her dresses was all very well starched.  And also she was, she liked crochet knit, and she played the piano.  And when she was a young person, she played in the choir, for the choir.  And she was an excellent cook.  Everybody knew Marie. And she would get up early in the morning, 2:00 or 3:00 o'clock in the morning and cook because we also had boarders during the period that I was growing up.  And my mother would get up.  We had two men that, that roomed with us.  They were coal miners.  That was a common thing for people to take in roomers during that, those days.  They'd come in and, and we had a house which had about one--we had 2 sides to this house.  And so we put the, the roomers in one side of the house and she would cook for all of them.  And when they'd get up in the morning, she'd get up.  My mother would get up around 2:00 or 3:00 o'clock in the morning because the men had to be at work around 4:00 o'clock in the morning.  Miners had to get, be at work during the period, and they'd work all day.  And she would pack their lunches, which I mean about 3 or 4, 3, 3 lunch buckets sometimes, she'd pack.  And when she'd cook bread, she, she may be baking bread that morning, it'd be 4 or 5 pans of bread because the miners ate a lots and, and, and mostly men.  We all ate a great deal.  So she would--and in the evening, she would have the meals ready for everybody.  And she loved to can.  Now, during my early period, we used to go and pick water buckets full of strawberries and, and blackberries and apples.  And my mother canned everything that was cannable, even rabbits.  She would can rabbits.  She, she was a great homemaker.  She was a--and she was another person, everybody loved Marie too.  That's an interesting thing.  Both my parents were lovable people and everybody would--our house, sometime was like 5th Avenue.  People would come into our house and sit down and eat all the time.  We always had visitors at our home.  In the morning, I know that she--my dad had about 20 hogs.  So in the morning I used to have to get up in the morning and take the slop, which they called slop, and take it out to the pig pen and feed the pigs.  And then give me--and during the time, what we used to do, not only that, we used to go around to the neighbors and collect that bucket for of, you know, leftovers, you know, like they'd put it in the bucket.  And we'd go around and gather it up and feed the pigs with it, see.  Feed the hogs.  And I'll tell you in a minute about some of the things that I did which I deserve to whipped about because of--little things that kids do sometimes.  For about a week or 3 or 4 weeks, I would walk out about--and the pig pen was just about a mile from us or three quarters of a mile, that we had to carry this slop.  So I'd carry it across the field to the pig pen, sometimes I, I'd only be about a hundred yards away, and I'd throw it in, dump it in the water (laughter) and come back.  And then this went on for about 2 months and my dad went out there and hogs was looking real thin (laughter).  He said, "Boy, what in the world have you done with these pigs?"  I said, "I don't know, Dad."  He said, "Yes, you do know.  And you know what happened there."  My, my Dad was--well, I, I was sort of a mischievous kid.  I, I got into a lots of trouble.  I, but my mother would--she never, she, one thing about her, she would tell him, you know.  Because if I, because I was bad about going out and, and staying and never coming home, I mean at the right time for supper for something like that.  And my dad, she'd tell my dad if he was working midnights.  See, during that time they worked 3 shifts, sometime they'd work a period early, from--they called it the midnight shift, which they called the graveyard shift.  And then they had the regular morning shift and the afternoon shift.  So they--it was 24 hours that they worked in the mines, around the clock.  And there'd be periods that he'd be on midnights and things like that.  But when anything like that happened, she would save all the information, all the little things that I did wrong and when I would get a whipping, he would say, and then he'd begin to list them to me.  Dad, you, said, you didn't do what I tell you, didn't you.  Said, that your mother told you to do this or your mother told you to bring in the water.  See, when she got ready to wash clothes, see, we had a--we had to go to a well.  And after a while we finally put a pump in.  We had to pump the water up, and we used Number 2 tubs, you know.  We had to fill these tubs up every night for her.  So that means we had to make about 15 or 20 trips, getting 5 gallon water buckets, carrying 2 at a time.  And that was about 150 yards that we had to carry that water bucket.  Now, that was our chore.  And every--another chore that we had every, every night we had to cut wood and get in the coal and set the fire in the store for my mother when she got up in the mornings, see--
Story_ID: 12196
Speaker 1: We would always have to, you know, fill up the tubs.  And these tubs were very heavy.  And my dad [John Richardson]--when we were small, he would, he would put the tubs on the, on the stove and so that we--see, back in those days, we used to boil the clothes.  We boiled them, see.  And you'd take white clothes, and you would separate them.  My mother [Marie Poindexter Richardson] was good for--some people would never separate their clothes.  But she'd separate all her whites.  And, and I can recall that she used bluing and bleach in all her white clothes.  And she always used starch.  Now, can you imagine back in those days, she's washing all those clothes and ironing for all those people, and starching their shirts and everything.  So you can see the kind, how women had to work, how hard they had to work in those days.  And even when I even think back, and I understood and I was there watching this, but I, I begin to wonder, I say, how in world were they able to do all of that.  You know, I can even say it now.  But she, but they started at 3:00 o'clock in the morning and they'd working until night, until she got ready to go to bed at night.  Then she had time enough to crochet and knit.  And some of her crochet and, and knitting, my wife has now.  She, she saved some of the things that my mother had, and she was great for saving things.  I remember she, she would save coins.  And for many years we had coins that were worth money, these big large pennies.  And back--and another thing I'd like to mention.  During that time, they had what they called the coal mining store, the company store.  Now, the company store, they would, the men could get things on credit.  You didn't have to pay.  You could, you didn't have to have the cash.  And maybe if you were out of work, they would carry you, but see the company store and the company houses that we lived in, they all belonged to the coal companies, see.  So you would often hear that I gave--I sold my life to the company store, you know, the songs that they was singing though because even the men were--well, I guess in one sense, even though you were being paid, you ended up spending your money that you made, giving it back to them.  So although most people, when they'd go out on strike, my father managed to be fortunate enough to--my mother all the canning and, and things that she did, we always had plenty food.  We were never without food during that particular period.  And we were very fortunate.  We didn't have--my Dad, by him having the business and also having a, working the coal mine, we were much better off than most other coal miners.  In fact, it was often said that we were wealthy, you know, growing up.  But we didn't know what poverty was.  Everybody knew in, in '29 [1929], but my mother was, I would say she was very frugal.  And she--there was one period in our life growing that my dad got into the gambling with the other fellows.  And I know she--I could hear her say, Johnnie, you just can't keep losing money at these poker games.  He'd go there and sometimes he'd go to sleep and somebody slick that would try to beat him out of his money or either take his money (laughter).  He'd sit up there and go to sleep and they'd reach over an grab his money or something like that.  But growing up, my mother was, was--she was a very, very much of a lady, if, if you can--during that period.  And there were so many women that lived there and they--by all the miners and they had some women living in that town, and they were, you know, that you'd call roustabouts.  They were something else.  But all in all, they, but the people there were still very close, even though they had their arguments and fights on Friday nights.
Story_ID: 12197
Speaker 1: Blythdale [Pennsylvania] was, it was near the steel mill and also the coal mine and the steel mill, McKeesport, Homestead, Clairton, all very strongly industrial towns, Pittsburgh [all Pennsylvania].  See, in, in that area of the--and there were more coal mining towns.  There was Smithdale right across--there was Smithdale right up the river.  There was Scott Haven [both Pennsylvania].  All these were coal mining--there was a cluster of coal mining towns, see, in the Western part of Pennsylvania, where they had the anthracite region.  See, they provided coke for the coke ovens where they melted the steel in the steel mills, see.  So it was, it was--that place was full of coal miners and steel mill and, and they would go from one coal mining camp to the other, see, on, on the weekend.  And Blythdale seemed to be somewhat of a hub in that respect.  We weren't that far, we were 3 miles from Clar--we were 3 miles from--9 miles from McKeesport.  We were about 7 miles from, from Elizabeth, and Western, about 2 miles.  And not too far from Greensburg and Jeanette or Pittsburgh, about 19 miles from Pittsburgh.  So this area was--we had a lots of work.  Work was plentiful although people were--and they, until they formed the unions, they were really just, the coal, the owners of the coal mines and steel mills, Carnegie Steel and all those, they, actually, they worked people.  And then not only that, see, it was a mixture of--in that town, we had a lots of Italians.  We had a lots of, from Czechoslovakia and all these people that come over there, they came from Europe and that was their trade when they came from Europe.  So that area was very booming, industrially.  Pittsburgh and all the surrounding towns had steel mills so Blythdale was out of the way, and they could get away from the policemen in town.  So they'd come out there, and that's where they'd have these, have all these big parties, stay up all night gambling and, and drinking.  And everybody flocked to Blythdale because even back there when--I know you heard of Louis Armstrong and Cab Calloway, Chick Webb and, and B.B. King was there later on.  But B.B. King wasn't among the first, but all the old artists used to come to Blythdale.  And they--so it was a very, very popular coal-mining town.  And we were right on the river.
Story_ID: 12198
Speaker 1: When you got 6th grade, your father sent you to, to Cincinnati to be with your Aunt Willie.  But I would like to give your father, his, you know, where he fit in the tree and what his sisters' names were.
Speaker 2: Well, he had 4 sisters.  Let me--his oldest sister was Aunt Rosie and she lived in Wheeling, West Virginia, which was only about 90 miles from us.  We used to go there quite frequently.  And his other sister was Willie, who lived in Cincinnati.  That was the one that I was staying with when I went to Cincinnati.  He sent me to stay with her.  Then my--his other sisters, there was Aunt Irene, Aunt Celestine, Aunt Lula and then he had a brother, which his name was George Richardson, my Uncle Bud.  During this period, well, there was a lots of things happening during that period.  I went to Cincinnati, first I went to Cincinnati.  I was about, I was in the 6th grade.  And I start--and he was hoping, by sending me to an all-Black school, because in Pennsylvania during that period, the schools were mixed, see.  There was no discrimination in the schools there in Pennsylvania.  So he felt that I could get a better education so he sent me to Cincinnati.  And I started in grade school there.  And then after that, I stayed there until I was in junior high.  And I went to Harriet Beecher Stowe, which an outstanding black high school in Cincinnati, Ohio.  During that period was one of the down turns in my youth.  I got involved with a group of kids that were sort of--wasn't the right kind of company for me to be with.  And, and the city as all cities are, wasn't what--and my aunt was working during that period.  She was, she used to bake.  She was, she used to bake pies and things for restaurants and things.  So during that period, my, my aunt wasn't always home in the evening when we came from school, see.  This would never have happened at home, see.  And so, some time she'd get around 5:00 or 6:00 o'clock [p.m.], tell us to be there, but I'd still be out in the street, shooting marbles, even shooting craps (laughs) and gambling like I used to see in Blythdale.  I had the opportunity to do it then (laughs) so I, I started, you know, doing things like shooting crap and if the--and maybe milk wagon come around, we'd run and steal milk off the milk wagon and steal eggs and sell them to someone (laughter), you know.  So, but in the meantime, I was a member of the Boy Scouts.  And my Aunt made me, made sure that I joined the YMCA. My dad [John Richardson] had sent enough money for me to join the YMCA and become a part of the Boy Scout troop and also on Sunday, we did go to Sunday school every Sunday.  My Aunt made sure I was at church.  But that didn't take care of the time when she left in the morning to go to work, and I left in the morning to go to school.  So by me being the kind of person I was, adventurous.  Now, my brother, Albert, he wouldn't, never got into anything.  But me, I was adventurous. I always wanted to see and used to stay out in the street at night.  So I got into a little trouble.  And they caught one time in one department store shoplifting.  So I, during that period, I--the police got me and brought me home.  And then after, knowing that that was my first offense and knowing that I was a Boy Scout, and my aunt explained all of that to them, they let me go.  But that was one of the down periods in my life.  And I learned a lots in the streets, you know, because I wasn't used to that.  But, I knew what was going on in life, but I never did indulge.  I wouldn't have indulged in that if I'd been around my father.  So we were able to get along--get away with a lots of things.  But then I finally got so bad, I started skipping school.  I was going to Harriet Beecher Stowe so they took me out of that school.  And I went to Wood--Woodard High in Cincinnati.  And I didn't do anything during that period.  I came back to Pennsylvania.  So that year I came back.  I was about 16 then.  And, no--yeah, I stayed with Aunt Willie for about two and a half or 3 years.  And I was getting ready to go to high school.  And, yeah--2 years.
Story_ID: 12199
Speaker 1: I enrolled in high school and played football.  You want me to talk about that? Okay, when I came back from Cincinnati [Ohio] I would, I went to West Luten High.  And my dad [John Richardson], you know, was--he told me I had to straighten up my, my way of life.  He said, you have to get yourself together, young man.  So I started school, and I did well in my first year in high school.  And then later on I got, got to the place I started playing hooky then.  And I'd go and slip and come to school and put my lunch up on, and go to the pool hall, take my lunch into the pool hall there.  And I'd put it up on the shelf and get me a pool stick, and I'd be shooting pool all day and setting pins and make little extra money so I could shoot pool with it.  And then one evening, he came in and he caught me.  And that was the worst whipping I ever had in my life (laughter).  Well, it got to the place where I knew I wanted to--although I was a good student in my first year of high school and a good student period, when I was younger.  I had good grade, but when I went to, when I went, came back from Cincinnati, I guess I had a taste of life.  And shortly after that, that was the time when went on the hobo trip.  No, let's see, when I came back, oh, let me see.  When I came back from Cincinnati, after--I can recall that I was not interested in school anymore.  And I begged my dad to let me go into the service.  And then what had turned me around, after I read the Iliad and the Odyssey in high school and Gunga Din, and it was so romantic to me that I wanted to go out and, and see the world.  So I begged and begged my dad.  So he finally said--I was, I think I was a sophomore then.  He said, "Well, you might as well go in the service because you're not doing the things that I'd want you to do."  So that took me into the service.
Story_ID: 12200
Speaker 1: You went into the service.  What did you, how did you end up choosing which one to go into?
Speaker 2: I heard about West Point, New York.  And I heard that they had a calvary.  And by me--I'm thinking about the "Charge of the Light Brigade", I said, boy, this is the place for me.  So when I got in the service, I was introduced to horses.  And naturally, during that particular period, being, see I could say that that was in 1940 and the war [World War II] hadn't broke out.  And the fellows that were in the service then were, were well-seasoned troops.  And I reached a point, you know, that I was among more professional soldiers, and by me being a young, wild recruit, and the it wasn't many like it was in World War--when the war broke out, it was just--you may not be a, a soldier may not come in until every 5 or 10 years.  So I stood out like a sore thumb.  I mean I'd get in line, and they would attention and I'd be looking around.  Somebody hit, and the next thing I know they're hitting me upside the head.  I couldn't get, couldn't get my clothes on as fast as the rest of them.  I couldn't get those boots laced up in time, enough.  I'd go out there half dressed.  And the commander came to me one day.  He's says, "Sergeant, take this son of a bitch over to Lake (unclear).  He's no good (laughter).  He ain't doing nothing but messing up my troop."  And that--I mean it was tough.  They would have me do things like, if I smoked a cigarette or something--I was smoking then, and if I had a cigarette and dropped it on the ground, they'd make you dig a hole 6 foot feet and 6 foot wide and bury it.  And, and then on top of that, like you may be half the night digging up, and next morning, you had to get up.  And it was tough.  It was absolutely unbelievable.  I didn't think that--I said, this is the worse place in the world.  It got so bad there until I wished that I had never joined the military.  But after about 4 or 5 months, and I got well orientated to things and things began to change and I began to appreciate riding horses.  And we not only rode horses, we also played polo while were at West Point.  And I got pretty good at what I was doing so, but the first part of my service career was horrible.  It was terrible, unbelievable.  And it was, and by being young and among them, I stood out like a sore thumb.  I just couldn't--clothes were never right.  I was--nothing was ever right.  You had to polish your buttons.  I mean it was spick and span.  You had to have things-- your--when we had our inspection, you had to role up every piece, your underwear and socks.  You had to have them all neat and lined up in, in the foot lockers and everything.  And your bed had to be so tight till they could drop a nickel and it'd bounce up.  During that period was much worse than what it was after the kid--fellows came in during World War II, but it was tough.  Anybody will tell you going through your early training in the military is unbelievable when you first get in.  And mine was even worse because I was among--the only one. So I stood out like sore, a sore thumb.  I mean I was, I was what you'd call a misfit, if there was ever one (laughter).  And that's what I felt like.  But after a while, I finally was able to get up early in the morning and make the--and stand at attention.  Then I got to the place where I began to like the calvary.  So then we were transferred to Fort Leavenworth, Kansas.  And they were bringing the calvary together.  Then when World War I, things were beginning to--it was pretty certain among, you know, those that was on top of things that the War was getting to break out.
Speaker 1: World War II.
Speaker 2: Two, yeah, World War II.  They were getting ready to break out because the, they had sunk a couple of the American ships that were supplies to the Germans when they were running their--when they were in war with England.  So it was pretty evidence that we were--the war going to start.  So I was in Fort Leavenworth, Kansas then.  And during that period I was in Kansas, one of the pretty sad periods among black troops during that particular period, for--they would have, most of them were orderlies, taking care of the officers and things like that.  That was when we were in Fort Leavenworth, and, and I say it was a pretty sad state because we were, instead of being soldiers, we were more or less orderlies, you know.  And that particular period wasn't, wasn't too good.  But at the same time, being in the calvary was, was sort of ideal for me at that time because I became a pretty good horseman.  And I did enjoy riding.  And when would have maneuvers, was one of the periods that I really enjoyed during that period of time because we had to fire from the horses.  We had to run, we'd jump in some (unclear) fire.  These horses have to be combat ready, and we were--and when the war began and when the became more evident, then they began to bring in other recruits into the calvary.  And about another, one year, after we were there one year, the calvary was broken up.  And we were all sent to different parts of the country.  I went to Camp Crowder, Missouri for a short period.  And when I was at Camp--not Camp Crowder, I went to--not Camp Crowder, Missouri.  I went to--oh, up here in Michigan.
Speaker 1: I have a question for you.  You have said that you were Buffalo Solider.  At what point was that?  Was that when you were at the Calvary or when?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?  Why would they call them Buffalo Soldiers?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the 10th Calvary was, was one--it has a very outstanding history.  They were the ones that fought the Indians going--when they were, when we were moving West.  The calvary fought many battles at, there at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas.  This was where the, was the base for the calvary, Fort Riley and Fort Leavenworth.  And when the, when everybody was moving West in covered wagons, the calvary was the one that fought off the Indians.  And they also fought with Teddy Roosevelt's Rough Riders.  And they also fought in the Spanish and American War.  They have a very outstanding history.  And they called them Buffalo Soldiers because at that time, their hair, the Indians said, they called them Buffalo Soldiers because they thought their hair looked like Buffalos (chuckle) during that period.  And that's where they got the name from.  But my stay in the calvary was--after I left the calvary, then I was sent to, it's up here in Michigan, Fort--
Speaker 1: Is there a Fort Maine--
Speaker 2: No, (unclear) isn't this a shame.  But I went, I went to Michigan.
Story_ID: 12201
Speaker 1: When they mechanized the calvary, they, they broke it up.  And so they kept--some of them went into, I'm trying to--the 24th, I, I know it's the 24th or 25th.  Now, where the other troops went, they were, they mechanized the units.  Instead of--got rid of the horses, and they still went on.  There's a Cavalrymen, see, but they were horsemen, you know, during that period, see.  I went in during the period where they still had horses.  If the war had of broke out during the time that I first went in the service, my--I would have had a horse, a rifle, a hand grenade and a pistol and a saber.  That's what we would have had to fight with when I went in.  If War had of broke up, that's what our unit had.  But shortly after the war in Europe, they began to mechanize the calvary and, and a part of the 10th Calvary, some of them was transferred from the calvary.  So I ended up going to Michigan, just for, I would say, a station, a replacement station.  And from there I went to the tank destroyers.  I went to the 95th Tank Destroyer in Texas, Camp Hood, Texas.  And during that period, they were training to fight, getting us prepared to fight in Africa.  And we had a colonel here from--this is when we began to get white--or black officers.  I was slated to go to Officer Academy School.  Something happened during that period.  It was difficult for a soldier from the East.  Now, the Southern troops had a better chance to go to Officer Candidate School because the officers didn't like us Northerners, see.  It was difficult for--that's one part that I, I could elaborate on, but I won't get into that too much.  But during that period, it was pretty tough for--if you were from Pennsylvania, places like that.  It was difficult for you.
Speaker 2: Could you elaborate on that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, did you see the "Soldier's Story"?
Speaker 2: You can't refer to me, but go on.
Speaker 1: In the "Soldier's Story", it pretty well explained the difference between Southern troops and, and troops that were from the North.  They--and most of the officers in the Army were Southern officers.  Most of your officers were from the South during that period.  And, and the Blacks that were from, from the East, it was very difficult.  They more or less, there was a little difficulty that existed among the Military people, you know, in our society.  You know, the, the Northern white and the, and the blacks and the Southern blacks.  At times, you know, they would favor them a lots.  And that was pretty well understood.
Speaker 2: Would they favor them because they knew how to behave and, and they were used to it, or would they favor them, I mean what are you saying?
Speaker 1: I would say favored them because they would be more inclined to fall right in line, see.  That was a difficult period for, even more difficult for Northern troops because as soon as the officer found out you were from Pennsylvania or that part of the country, it was, you were, you were handled much differently.  But shortly after that, see,--but before--let me mention something that happened to me in the 10th Calvary because it's my first experience as a soldier.  I was, during the latter part of my--just before they, the, we, we disbanded the Calvary, I was sent to Maryland--I was sent to, to Georgia to pick up a prisoner.  And that was in 1942.  And I was--left Fort Leavenworth, Kansas and at that time I was a troop--I was on train, a colored train, out of Fort Leavenworth, Kansas.  And when I got to what they call the Mason Dixon Line, I, I think I was somewhere near Memphis, Tennessee or something.  I was on my way to Georgia.  I don't know what, what train that I was on though, but I know it was a troop train.  And I asked for--they had issued me, the government had issued me a ticket with a Pullman.  And I had the opportunity for a berth in the Pullman car.  You know that's with a sleeper.  And so when I, when I was on the train for a while, they had all the blacks in one train there.  When they changed trains, all the trains were in one coach, and they're (unclear) usually a smoker, with the shopping bags and grocery bags and, and some carrying sandwiches and things on.  And we were all crowded up in that little car.  So I had my sidearm on.  And so I went to the conductor, and I told him, I said that I want my berth.  No, it was a Pullman, it was a porter.  The port, the porter came to me and came through the car.  I said I, I have a birth.  He said, you have a berth?  He said, where?  I said, here.  He said, "Blacks do not, blacks do not ride in no Pullman here.  Not here!"  He said, young man, (laughter) said, "I don't know what's wrong with you, but you can't have no Pullman."  I said," I have a ticket."  He said, "I don't care what you got."  You can't--I said, "where's the Conductor?"  So I had my sidearm in my--I had took it off, and so I put it back on, my pistol and everything.  And I strolled back through the car, and going through and sitting up there lounging in the cars and, and nice pillows, nice cars.  And the more that I went through, the further I got into those different cars, and I passed the dining car.  And I passed the, I passed the club car and the officers are in there drinking and having a good time.  And I finally, just about before I got to the caboose--now, I done went through all of these cars and, and they have nice linen on the pillows and everything.  Now, I'm getting angry now.  I said, and so I caught him, and we met in that little part of the car, where the car is connected at.  So I stopped and I said, "Are you the Conductor?"  He said, yes.  He said, "What can I do for you and what are you doing back here?"  I said, "I have a right to be here."  I said," I have a berth and I'm ready to go to bed."  You can't do that here.  I said, "I've got Government orders."  I said, "I want my berth.  Here's my ticket."  He said, "I'm sorry.  You can't have your--so I had passed the club car, and I saw those officers.  So I went back to the officer and I saluted him and said, "Sir, I'm going to pick up a prisoner in Georgia, Fort McPherson, Georgia, and I have my credentials here.  And they won't let me have,"--he said, "Where's that Conductor at?"  So he--me and him both went there.  So we argued back there.  And so finally he said, this trooper will have to have a place because he's got to pick up a prisoner.  And he needs to be back, and he needs to take him back in two days.  So he'll have to have a place so he can sleep.  So finally the Conductor told me to go back to my car.  So I went back, and I waited and waited and didn't no one come.  So I went back there again.  And I caught him again.  I said, "I want my berth."  And so he said, "You go back.  I'll come and get you."  And so we argued for--he said, "You go back.  I'll come and get you. " So I went back, and he gave me a whole compartment.  I probably--this may be.  I was probably the first black that ever rode a train in the South.  I believe that that can be documented that I was the first one who ever rode the train in the South.  So then--
Speaker 2: You meant a Pullman?
Speaker 1: A Pullman, yeah, Pullman in the South.  So then I went to, I went on to Fort McPherson.  I picked up the prisoner.  In the meantime--no, before I got to--I, I stopped in Birmingham and went out to Tuskegee.  They had what they call the Service Club.  So I went out to the Service Club there and the USO, that's what they--United States (unclear) Club.  They used to have a club for, all over the place, every large city had a place where troops could go and, and for, you know, different things, entertainment, coffee, dance.  So they had a little dance going on at Tuskegee.  So I stayed there that night.  And I--the next morning, I got up and I was eating breakfast in Birmingham [Alabama].  I came, left the hotel.  It was in the black hotel.  It wasn't much of a hotel, but it, it was quarters.  So, because we couldn't get a hotel anywhere else.  So I got up that morning, and I was getting ready to leave after I had came out of the restaurant.  It was two military policemen.  They came up to me, and they said, soldier, you have to put those side arms aside.  Now, during that period, in World War II, a black could not carry a gun in the South if he was off base.  They had mostly white military policemen.  And they were the only ones that carried firearms.  Now, here I was with a firearm on, and he said, what are you doing with that firearm on?  And I said, I have orders.  He said, well, let me see them.  So he looked at 'em, and he said that, you will have to put that firearm away.  I said, I am not going to put it away, and I reached for my jacket--I had a Mackinaw jacket.  I reached for my gun cause I was getting ready (chuckle) to shoot him.  I was very, I was very upset.  And so--because I never had experienced that in Pennsylvania.  I didn't experience it in Pennsylvania because that didn't exist during that particular time.  So he just, he backed off of me.  And I went on and caught the train in Birmingham and went Fort--to Atlanta, Georgia to Fort McPherson.  See, Fort McPherson is right in Atlanta.  It's right in the cit--just about in the city of Atlanta.  So I went to Fort McPherson and I picked up the prisoner, and I came back.  I had such a good time when I was at the USO in Birmingham.  They're out of Tuskegee [Alabama].  So I went back that evening, but I put the prisoner up, and took him to jail and put him in jail.  And then that next morning, I went to get him.  And when I went to the jail to pick him, there was two--some black fellow that had been picked up for vagrancy.  And he hollered to (unclear) says, "Sergeant, Sergeant.  This nigger want to talk on the phone to his sister."  And he said, "Let that nigger stay in there."  And then at that time, I was just walking up, and he looked around at me, and he said, "What do you want?"  I said, "I've come to pick up the prisoner that I brought here."  He said, "Where you from?"  I said, "I'm from Pennsylvania."  "I thought you were a damn Yankee" (laughter).  And so, and so then I--he gave me the prisoner.  And then I asked him, I said, "how was it in there?  How did they treat you?"  He, and he told me about how, how bad they treated him, how they mixed him in with others, criminals and everything.  And so I said--he said, they were getting ready to put some shackles on me.  And I said, I said, you know, I said, "I'm going to tell you what I'm going to do.  And you have to promise me.  I'm going to, I'm going to take the handcuffs off of you.  I said, we're going back to Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, and I said, if you run, I may shoot you.  I said, but I'm not going to take you back that way."  So I took that fellow back to Fort Leavenworth.  And that was my first experience.  See, growing up as a kid I'd say in Pennsylvania, we didn't have, we didn't have that kind of experience.  I went to a white school.  And it was different than what it was for, than it was in the South.  And I wasn't, I wasn't used to that.  And I prayed to find--I was ready to die there.  So, and then from that incident, I always refused, I would not take an assignment in the South.  Actually, I didn't go to Florida until I was out of the military.  But during the period that I was in the service, in the, the farthest South I went was Texas.  And that's because, and we went to the 95th Tank Destroyer.  But that was the period that, my first experience with that kind of discrimination and, and my first experience in the South.  And it's a wonder I, I came out alive though, really.  I, I think back some time.  How did I ever get by with that, see, because, even strolling through the car.
Story_ID: 12202
Speaker 1: With your experience in the service, I mean when you first signed up, how long did you sign up for.
Speaker 2: I signed up for--the first time was 3 years at that particular period.  And when I first signed up, when I went in the Military, you were only getting $19 a month.  And out of that $19 we had to buy our, all our shaving gear, our toilet articles and everything with the $19.
Speaker 1: So what made you decide that you wanted to stay in the Service after, you know, a rocky start at the beginning?
Speaker 2: Well, after, when I--the 95th, this experience with the 95th Tank Destroyer was one of the most, proudest moments of my military career because they brought in a, a group of black Officers.  And Colonel Mann, he was a colonel from Chicago [Illinois].  He was the commanding officer of our unit there, our regiment.  See, we had the 95th Regiment there.  And they were preparing us to fight in Africa.  And very few people realize it, but they had a lots of combat units that they were preparing to go to Africa.  But when the war broke out in, when the war broke out in Europe, and, and the Desert Fox, (unclear) they caught him which they would--and when they defeated him in Africa, they felt that, that Africa would be a better climate for black troops to fight.  See, but very few people realize there were very few--and no combat units in, in Europe.  See, they had combat units in Italy, but there was no combat units in Europe.  Most of them were service units, like Signal Corps.  I was in the Signal Corps.  (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Now, what--you're saying, not Europe.  But isn't--Italy is in Europe.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean the, they fought in Germany.  See, they fought in Germany. There was no combat units.
Speaker 1: Well, what made you decide to stay on in the service, that's what I'm asking?
Speaker 2: Well, after the war was over.  I was ready to get out.
Story_ID: 12203
Speaker 1: When I was in the service, I had gotten a girl pregnant.  And, and during that particular period, I wasn't even aware that she was pregnant.  So finally, my mother wrote and told me that, that my first wife, Mary Louise, was pregnant.  And I was at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas in the calvary then.  So I sent for her.  And my mother also said, it's your child.  I've seen the child.  It looks like you.  So you're going to marry her, and which I did.  And I sent for her and she came to Fort Leavenworth, Kansas.  And during the period that we were there, and we lived off base, and like I said, the first 18 months that we were together there--and that was the only time that we were together as a marriage was 18 months.  And that's my youngest daughter, Rose Marie, she brought her with--
Speaker 2: Oldest daughter.
Speaker 1: Oldest daughter, Rose Marie, she, she, she was the, born--she was about a year and a half or two years old then, a year and a half.  No, she wasn't that.  She was about 7 months old when she came to Fort Leavenworth.  And I'd say our marriage was very good during that period.  And then she got pregnant again.  And I had a son.  And he was born when I was overseas, by the name Julius Richardson.  He was, they named him after me, Julius L. Richardson.
Story_ID: 12204
Speaker 1: I was shipped overseas after I went to Texas.  I was shipped overseas, and then I was transferred to the Signal Corps.  And after I left the Tank Destroyer, after the war [World War II] was over in, in Africa, they transferred my unit, they transferred all those fellows into Service Units.  Most of the blacks who were in combat units, went to service units.  They thought we would be better prepared to fight in Africa because of the hot weather than, than the white troops, see.  And so, then when we were sent to Europe, I was in the signal corps and I went to Fort Dix, New Jersey.  Then I went up to Boston [Massachusetts], and that's where I left to go overseas and--from Boston.  And one of the worse trips I ever had in my life (chuckle).  Yeah, it was in December, December, around December the 4th, 1944, I think it was.  And we were on the sea for 21 days.  And it was in December and that Atlantic is ugly, it can get rough.  Waves as high as 20 feet.  I got so sick until I thought I was going to die.  And by us being on the troop ships, see, they had three decks of us.  They was lining up on decks and you'd be in hamlets.  And people were throwing up on each other.  And you'd go to the dining room, people throwing up.  I regurgitated and I was thin when I got off that ship, it looked like I had two .45s on my hips.  And I, my cheeks, I think I would put cue balls in them to shave with (laughter).  I said that was the worse I ever--and one, one of the sailors, I was so sick I ran up on deck there one night.  And he said, "Soldier, you kind of sick, aren't you?"  I said, yes.  He said, "Ah, it's not that bad.  I've seen where they wash you overboard and wash you back over again."  I said, "I hope it washes me over board and let me go" (chuckle).  When I--it was so bad, actually, when I came back from France, I started not to come back.  That's how bad it was.  On my--and they were sending back by ship and some by airplane.  But, see, being among the first to get out because I had been--I had a lots of points because I had been in the service before the other fellows.  So they send those home first.  The war was over in Germany.  And my experience in Germany was kind of rough, but all wars are tough.  We, I landed in, on Omaha Beach, D, plus 18.  And we--most of our men were lost by mines.  We were a pole line construction unit.  What we did was rehabilitate telephone lines.  The, and then we'd rehabilitate the German lines, so we had to learn how to throw a Germany transposition in the wires for communication and hook it up with the, those existing German lines.  When they moved out or we were being pushed back, so we'd connect the American lines.  And really, so we had to learn how to throw a German transposition.  Well, we were pretty good pole climbers.  I mean we had to climb up that pole, fix it and come right back down.  We were sitting ducks, like pigeons up there on a telephone pole, changing wires with--it was pretty rough.  We lost a lots of men by--I would say that we three fourths of our men.  And during the Battle of the Bulge, we lost the rest of them.  But it's a funny thing, and I guess that's part of my character.  After the baptism, and after I saw so many dying, it got to the point where I didn't put much value in life, and I never think I was coming back again.  But during that period, then I, I--finally, we ended up Hamburg, Germany.  And after the, the Battle of Bulge.  Now, in the Battle of the Bulge, everybody had to fight during that period because we had--the Germans threw everything they had at the American troops.  And so the only thing that we had to--they had to call everybody to fight.  But as combat troops, most of the people in France were black.  Most of the black troops, soldiers were either combat or non-combat units and also they were, had a lots of trucking units, which they called the Red Ball Express.  They were more--there was mostly us.  They got a lots of recognition because they kept the supply line going to [General George] Patton's 3rd Army.  See, I was in the 3rd Army.  And I was in the 9th--seventy--my 7--95 Signal Corps, 95th Signal Battalion, yeah.
Story_ID: 12205
Speaker 1: What year was the war over, in 1945?
Speaker 2: July 7th.  I, I was, I was discharged July 7th, but I left Europe in June, around June the 25th.  I left Europe, coming back to the States, and when they told me that I was coming back by ship, I told that I would rather--you know, they'd say, you have to take the ship back.  And I'm going to tell you how much I was affected by that first trip.  I--when we were sitting in port, the ship started rocking, and I started feeling like I was getting seasick (laughter).  And I tried, I tried very hard, but the trip back was a most pleasant trip.  We, the sea was calm all the way back, and I landed at Norfolk, Virginia.  And then we landed in Norfolk, and then I went to, they shipped us to Fort Dix, New Jersey.  And I was discharged.  And when I, when I got back I headed straight for home.  I caught the train out of New Jersey.  And I caught a bus from McKeesport [Pennsylvania].  And I went to, and I went to--to Blythdale [Pennsylvania].  At that time, they had buses running from McKeesport to Blythdale, Pennsylvania.  So my mother [Marie Poindexter Richardson] met me at the bus, and she started crying.  And I said, why are you crying?  I said, the war is over and I'm, I'm alive and I'm healthy.  She said--I said, "Why are you crying?"  She said that, "We didn't tell you, but E.G. is pregnant, had, had another child since you, when you were overseas."  And that very devas--was very devastating because during my time overseas, I met a couple of fellows that I will never forget, Carl Brock, a very brilliant fellow, and I thought he was the most, brightest fellow I'd met in my life.  And we were talking all along.  We're going to college.  And I had already planned on going when I got out, going to college.  And I met another fellow from New York.  And we all were planning on what we're going to do with our families, all the great things we were going to do.  I said, I'm going to become an attorney.  I had all these grand ideas of my life.  And I'm going to prove to my parents for the first time, what kind of son that they've got.  I wanted to impress them.  I thought about them.  I said, I--we would often talk and discuss the things that we're going to do.  And so when I got off that bus, and she told me that, the whole world seemed like it came apart.  And so then I went home, and she said, I asked her, "Where is she?"  And my mother said, "Well, she's with, she moved. And she's staying with her sister."  And I said, "where are the kids?  She said, she has the children."  And I asked her, I said, "Where's the other baby?  Her sister has it."  So then, naturally, I--for a long time, I didn't know how to take that.  So I started running, going out at nights and staying out and stay out all night, go out to a club and stay out all night.  There were lots of speakeasies in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  Sometimes I would go in there and, and I had a friend by the name of Ceyfus (ph.).  And we just started running.  And then finally, one Sunday morning, my dad told me, he said, "Julius we want you to have car back here."  They knew--they, they didn't anything to me about staying out and going.  They understood what was going on.  And so that Sunday, I woke up that morning, and I was in a, a club, which it was called the Washington Club.  And I went to sleep and I woke up and I looked out.  And it was daylight.  So I jumped up and got in the car, and on my way back--and I got to just about to McKeesport, hit a telephone pole, cut it down, went up into a gasoline station, knocked over two pumps.  And I was jammed in the car.  They had to cut me out of the car.  That, when I got out the car, I called my father.  And I told him, I said, he said--I said, the car is tore up.  I said, it's completely demolished.  He said, are you hurt?  I said, no.  He said, well, thank goodness, you're not hurt, said we've been worried about you.  So I--he, he said, I'll come and get you.  He come and got me, and that was in, right out, that's right as you cross the bridge from Blythdale.  You may have been there before.  But anyway, I, that night I was laying in bed and the trees and the, I mean the, the limb, in the tree and telephone pole, I could see and just, it, it, and I just started shaking.  It was sort of an aftershock.  I was bothered at first.  It was an aftershock.  And I laid there that night.  And I thought.  I said, well, this is it.  I'm not going to do any of this anymore.  So I enjoyed at Pitt, Pittsburgh Academy at Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.  And I had dropped out in the 11th grade.  So I went and took my 2 years in 1 year.  I finished up at the Pittsburgh Academy and got my high school diploma.  And I enrolled in the Pitt University [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  My whole life had changed.  It was education was my prime goal.  I was going to become an attorney.  So then, about that time, I was, had moved back to Pittsburgh because I was closer to--I was riding the train every day so I wanted to be closer.  So I stayed with my friend, Ceyfus Braggs in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.  And I started to work at Westinghouse.  And I was going to school.  And finally, one evening I was going to work, and the police, the sheriff came and said, we have an arrest for you for non-support.  And that was a moment in my life that I, my--and then they carried me and they put me--they took me back to Westmoreland [Pennsylvania] town and they put me in jail.  The first time I ever been in jail.  And they told me, said that--and then I called my parents.  And they said, we're coming to get you.  I said, I don't want you to get me.  I said, "I'm going to--I do not want no--I'm going to stay here. " My dad said, "No, it's your son."  I said, "But she didn't even let me"--I said, "All she had to do was tell me.  She didn't let me know."  Now, that's one time I was pretty hot.  That's the only time that I really was upset with her, very upset with her because I did attempt, during that period that, while we were, I was in Pittsburgh, I did try to go to her.  And I told her I'd thought it over.  I said, "Now, look, I said, I was overseas, and, and she got pregnant."  And I said, "A lots of that happened during the war."  And I went to her and I--we sat down and talked.  And I told her, I said, if I, "If we move from here we can get married, and we, we can move from here.  And we, we will, we can make our life for our self, if we can just move away from here, from Blythdale. " I said, "We can take a life somewhere else."  She said no.  And after that, we never did, that was the end of it.  And so that's when I--then during that period, they--I was paying child support, and I had to stop going to school.  And I, I started to work for Westinghouse, and I was also working at the Theater Candy Company.  And so the job the Theater Can--Westinghouse, it closed down.  And so I went to work full time at the Theater Candy Company.  And then when the Korean War broke out, I was in the Reserves so I went back into the service.  That's how I got back in the service.  And that interrupted my, my education because at that point, it was--then when I got back in the service, things changed.  I went on to--I even enrolled and went to school while I was in the Service.  So I, I went to the University of California.  I went to Carson, Carson Junior College.  I went to University of Maryland, and I would take courses at every base that I went to because I was determined to get my degree.  So when I got out, I was wanting to teach school.
Story_ID: 12206
Speaker 1: I was working in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and I met, I was--no during the time I was going to Schenley High [School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], see I took, I doubled my courses when I was at Pittsburgh Academy.  I was going to Pittsburgh Academy during the day and I was going to Schenley High during the night so I could speed up and get my high school diploma in a year's time.  I took two years in one year.  And I got through that pretty good.  Then I enrolled at Pitt.  But during that time, I was staying in Pittsburgh.  I was rooming at a place, Schenley Heights.  And I ran into--no, no.  I met Margaret--let me, my wife, the way I met her first, while I was going to school at, high school, in Pitt, I would ride the train every day.  And some evenings I'd ride the train back.  But one day, I missed the bus so--I missed the train.  So I had to come back on the bus.  And I stopped at a restaurant in McKeesport [Pennsylvania].  And it was at, it was sort of a, a beer place and restaurant combined together.  And I was sitting there drinking milk.  And a fellow came up to me and said, you're drinking milk, said--and he sat down and talked, and said, this is no place to drink milk.  He said, have a drink.  I said, well, I'm not drinking anything.  And he said, you must be a pretty nice fellow.  Then he told me about, I know a nice--and we just got to talking in general.  And so he said, I know a nice young lady for you.  I said, well, I'm not looking for any nice young ladies now (chuckle).  He said, but this is really a nice, nice girl, said, she, she lives in Duquesne [Pennsylvania].  So a month went by and I looked in my pocket, and I found this telephone number and everything, and it said, Margaret Barfield in Duquesne.  Well, Duquesne is about 12 miles from, from Pittsburgh.  Well, I done tore up my car, didn't have a car either.  I un tore up my dad's [John Richardson] car.  So I, so I said, a fellow by the name of, oh, let me see, one of my friends in Blythdale [Pennsylvania] took me to see your mother on that first meeting.  And she was coming from music lessons.  And so we, I went to her house and then we went from there down to the church.  She was in the choir.  And so I met her, and I met my parents and everything.  So I started calling her.  And I'd get on the phone, and she'd talk real nice and everything.  And, but every time I'd get around her, she'd clam up (laughter).  And so, finally, I did--we went out, started going out on little dates and all I'd do is carry her to have something eat and everything.  And then finally, she told me the, her age, and, and then I told her she's too young.  I said, I--it wouldn't be fair, I said.  So we sort of broke it off.  But I went to Pittsburgh after that, and I met her Aunt Sis when I was working at Westinghouse.  And I met Sandy and I met Aunt Lil.  And I had met the three of them, and they thought I was such a nice person.  So finally I mentioned, I said, "I know a nice little girl, but she's too young for me."  And they said, "Who is it?"  And she said, "That's my cousin."  And so, well, and then Sandy went--and then finally after, I went into the service.  Margaret and I never did go out anymore.  I went into the service.  And then in 19--I was on a special mission in the Pacific on the first, underwater explosion by the atomic bomb.  I went to the Marshall Islands.  That was on this special trip.  They were going to--and while I was on this Island, I was there for two years, now, I met other girls in California that I took out and I liked and everything.  And I had thought about my life, and I had said--my sad wrote me a letter and said, son, said, you need to really get married again.  And I thought about it, and I said, maybe so.  I said--and I started thinking about the, the girls--I'd met 3 or 4 girls I used to date.  But it was nothing but--and no one, I'd never let anyone get close to me, you know, because I wasn't going to ever get married again.  So finally, I, I wrote.  And my Dad met, knew her, or somehow or another she met my father.  And he started--no, I came back.  Oh, when my mother [Marie Poindexter Richardson], my mother--when we came back from Johnson Island, my mother had--was terminally ill.  So I came back--I drove all the way from California without stopping, all the way, day and night, driving.  And when I got to Blythdale, my mother was in a coma.  So I, I--well, she didn't know anyone for a while.  Then finally, she regained her conscious.  And, and she started getting better.  So we started going up--I was off for 30 days, on a 30-day leave.  And I thought about Margaret, and I went over and started, and took her a couple of times.  She was older then, see, about--she was grown.  But when I first met her, she was 9 years younger than I was and I was 20 something.  I don't know.  But she was, she was still not--but she had put her age up.  (Laughter)  And so I, we started going out and dating again.  And then I went back to California.  And then finally we started calling each other.  And then my father started going around, seeing her, and meeting her.  And he told me, said, she's a nice girl.  I think you should marry her.  She'd be the one for you.  And so finally I got assigned to Pittsburgh.  I got assigned to [Fort] Indiantown Gap [Pennsylvania].  And then from there, I went to Pittsburgh.  I got a transfer to Pittsburgh.  And then I started at Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] again.  And that's when we began to start dating again.  And that's where we got--and then I was assigned at the, at the, the missile base at, in Pittsburgh.  And I was stationed at South Park.  So we started going together, and I was going to school at night.  And, and then pretty soon, we, we got married.
Speaker 2: So what were your thoughts at that point about what kind of life you wanted to establish?
Speaker 1: Well, at that point, I had, I'd made up my mind then that I was going to get married.  And when she--and, in fact, I'd told her that either now or never, you know, when we were dating.  I said, "We're going to either marry now or we'll never get married."  So we got married.  And, and my--what I wanted then was a family.  And my whole life I, I guess this is the time in your life when you begin to take everything into account and all the things that you've gone through.  And I knew that I had a very strong family.  My mother and father was, like I said I, it was--I could not have found, I don't think any kid had a better childhood than I had.  And I wanted the same.  And I wanted for--and they wanted me to have children.  And so that was my goal, to have a family, raise them, educate  them, and make sure that I could do just half as good as my father did for me.  And so that brings me to this point (laughter).  And I think looking back over my life that I, I'm very proud and very happy to know that I was able to fulfill my life by seeing every one of my children get an education.  That was my ultimate goal, that everyone would get, at least go to college.  And that was my plan.  In fact, to the point before I really retired from the military because I got married while I was in the service, see.  Me and your mother [Margaret Barfield Richardson] got married in 1953, and I was still in the service.  I had 6 more years to do.  So it was my determination that everybody was going to get an education.  In fact, I to, for it so strongly till I went to Belleville College and took a course in Education, took a class in Education because I was going to make sure that every one of my children went to college.  And during that period, I went overseas--during the period I was in Pittsburgh, we had our first child.  And her name was Julieanna Richardson.  And I was so elated, until I can remember--I go back now, I think about that particular afternoon.  It was storming and raining, thundering, lightening.  I'm sitting there, looking and thrilled to death, the rain and nothing didn't even bother me.  I had fixed, I had your room all fixed up.  I personally decorated your room myself.  And I said, this, this girl here is going to be something.  And so your mother, being very young, and not very much mature during that period of time--we had moved to Pittsburgh to a little apartment.  But she was so close to her mother until she decided that she wanted to still go to church in Duquesne [Pennsylvania].  And I told her, we're going to church in Pittsburgh.  I'm not going to church in Duquesne.  But I let her continue to go in Duquesne.  And when I started to church in Pittsburgh, and fur--in fact, she finally, her and her mother, worked it out where her mother got an apartment Duquesne, so I ended up staying in Duquesne.  And that was during the early part of our marriage.  And I, and then it got to the place that, and when I was at South Park in the South, it was one of the worst assignments I ever had and for a long time in the service.  And then finally I was transferred to Fort Scott Air Force Base in Illinois.  And at that--no, before that.  Before I went to Scott, after--while we were in Pittsburgh, I got an assignment to, to France in 1956.  And I went to Europe, and I went to France, and finally, I sent for your mother.  And she, she didn't want to come.  She was so attached to her mother, so I had to send the Red Cross and have her come over.  So when she got over there, then my second daughter Sabrina was born in France.  She was born in Perigeux, France.  And when we left France, I was a--I got another--I went to the, to the Signal School, Fort Monmouth, New Jersey.  And I was, had an assignment of Washington, VA, Walt--working at Walter Reed and in television and radar.  That was my training, television and radar.  So I was assigned to Walter Reed Hospital [Washington, D.C.], not--I was assigned to Walter Reed and we were piping from John Hopkins--not John Hopkins.  Is John Hopkins--what's that hospital in Washington?  But anyway, I, we were piping a television program into the operating room from the hospital.  And then after that, I was--gotten another assignment.  I finagled another assignment to Pittsburgh, and I stayed there for 2 years.  And then I went to Fort, I went to Scott Air Force Base in Illinois.  And that's where my golfing began.  And we'll talk about that.  Then I decided during that period that we were not together, I got involved in golfing.
Story_ID: 12207
Speaker 1: While I was in St. Louis [Missouri], I, it was two things.  I didn't have my family with me so I got involved with golf and I got involved with the races.  I liked to go to the races, and another thing that I enjoyed doing.  So if it wasn't a golf course or the races--and then I had a part-time job working at a TV shop in, in St. Louis.  The Austin Brothers.  They had one of the largest TV shops in St. Louis, so when I wasn't working, when I'd leave the base some Saturdays, I'd go up there and spend the whole day in their office repairing TV's for extra money.  But that extra money that I was making, I was losing at the races.  And the, the TV and the golfing is, is, was my whole life.  And I'd come home practically 3 or 4 times within--I would say I made about 6 trips from, from St. Louis to Duquesne [Pennsylvania] to come to you all the time.  I couldn't get your mother to move out there and she was so attached to her, her mother.  And I knew that you were always in good care.  I didn't worry about that part of it because when I'd come home, she'd have you all in one bed, nestled up under her just like a hen with her chickens (laughter).  So I knew that you weren't--you were being cared for.  You weren't lacking anything as far as food and clothing and everything.  So you (unclear) comforts.  So, but when I got out the military, this here attachment with her mother was coming to an end.  I'm, I was determined that that wasn't going on.  So I went back and I told--and her mother was, had terminal cancer at the time, Ms. Barfield had terminal cancer.  And your mother [Margaret Barfield Richardson] was taking care of her.  So when I told, announced that I'm taking my children, and they were upset.  Her aunt, her, her sister, your mother's Aunt Sis, was very disappointed.  I told her, I said, look, I said, my children are coming with me.  I said, they're not going to be here in Duquesne .  I said, I'm taking them with me, and I said because there's no work here and I've got a good job.  I'd just got a good job at Aerospace Guidance Center in Newark, Ohio.  And I said, I'm taking my children.  So at that time, it was around July or August.  So my next trip back, I took you--I took Julieanna.  I took Sabrina and I left Gail with her mother in Duquesne.  And I knew that was going to get her to leave home for the first time because I was, was not going to bring you up in Duquesne .  And I was not going to live in a place where there was no work.  So I started work in Newark, Ohio at the  Aerospace Guidance Center.  But when I got out the military, I was just recently out of the military, I had stayed at home for about 6 months before I got this job in, in Newark, Ohio.  And I, but when I got out the military, I did have a job with--I had several job offers.  I had one in Alaska, had one in California.  And when your--by your, by my wife, Margaret, by her husb--her mother being terminally ill, I went back there and I stayed for a while until I ran out of money.  And after I was out of money, then I had to find employment.  So then I had--went to, I went to the old Post Office Building in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  And there was an advertisement about a job at the Aerospace Guidance Center, was opening up a job in Newark, Ohio that was calling for Electronic Engineers, elect--technicians in Aerospace Guidance Center with like, radar and (unclear) weight propagation.  And see I saw that I qualified for one of those positions because when I was in the military, I was working in radar, a repairman, and I ran a little radar unit.  So I went to Newark and went to the employment office there.  And they hired me right on the spot.  Now, this was a very technical unit that we worked at, the Aerospace Guidance Center.  They calibrated missiles for the Air Force.  And during the time that I was there, I would--the short period I was there before school started, I would come back to Pittsburgh.  But when I arrived in Newark I didn't have one nickel.  I was completely broke.  And I met some people that were friends of my father in Alabama, and they were called the Peryears (ph.), and they put me up at their house until I got my first paycheck.  After I got my first paycheck, I went to a used car lot--I went to the bank.  In the bank, the fellow I sat down with, he said, well, you don't have any credit rating.  I said, no, but I've got a good job.  And I'll pay you back and so we talked a while.  He said, you look a fellow, a nice fellow.  He said, we're going to loan you the money.  So I opened up an account with Newark Trust and borrowed enough money to buy my first car.  And then I used to come back every weekend to Pittsburgh, and go over there every week.  I would go, drive back to Pittsburgh from Newark, Ohio to visit my wife and kids.  And I did that for, for about 6 months.  And after school term was over, I went and I took Julieanna and Sabrina with me.  And we, and I had found an old house that it was so, it was so worn down until when I tried to paint it, every time I put a coat of paint, it sucked it up like it was a blotter (laughter).  I must have made a hundred trips up and down that ladder trying to get the house ready for them.  So I started off very meager.  And so finally, I got my children enrolled in school.  And I sent for their Aunt to help me while my--Margaret [Barfield Richardson], my wife, was taking care of the, of her mother and my other daughter, Gail.  And so I enrolled my kids in school and not, not only that, but I also got deeply involved in the community in Newark.  I had made up my mind when I got out the service whatever community that I would go to, that I would become actively involved and working with people.  So I went to a church, the Second Presbyterian Church in Newark, Ohio.  And the minister there, he and I had a long talk.  And there was another black minister in Newark.  I went to see him.  And his name was Reverend Barnes.  And there was another minister in Newark.  He was at the, he was at the Baptist church.  And I was preparing for my family and to live out some of the dreams and aspirations that I had planned for.  I was going to make sure that we had a real family, that we were really going to get together and make up all those years that we were not together.  So during that period I got involved with the Boy Scouts, was the first civic activity that I undertook.  And I worked with the Boy Scouts and developed one of the most outstanding troops in, in Ohio.  It was written in the Newark Advocate for having such an outstanding troop.  Then finally, we had our United Way parade.  And I had my Boy Scout to parade in that, and I had took these kid--these kids that I had in my troop were from, among single family home or broken homes.  And there were about 3 boys in this troop when I first took it over.  Within a, a short span of time, I had built it up to 30 boys.  And I had a doctor in town, a very prominent black doctor by the name of Dr.--
Speaker 2: I was gonna say Barnes, but that was Reverend Barnes.
Speaker 1: It was doctor, what was his name?  Well, --
Speaker 2: That's okay.
Speaker 1: Well, anyway, I can't remember his name right now, but he was a very prominent doctor.  He was so excited over what I was doing there till he agreed to examine all my Boy Scouts free.  So we had a couple of car washes and everything, and I got all my, our troop uniforms and then we went out to a camp by the name of Fallen Rock.  And I kept them out there for a couple of weeks.  And during that period, when I brought them back, I--in taking these boys, see, some of them were so--I had such a disciplinary problem with them, I ended up taking them through the same kind of training as if they were in the military.  And I was--they had to have the same kind of inspection.  They learned how to drill.  And so when I brought them to Newark, and the put on their United Way, United Way parade, you would have been amazed how well those boys marched and drilled.  But after about 2 years with the Boy Scouts, I found myself on many different organizations.  Finally, I was sitting on the United Way board and the Mental Health board.  I was involved with the Council of the Churches.  I served on the, on the Celebrity Speakers Club, and as a result of that work with the Celebrity Speakers' Club, Newark being a very conservative town at the time--
Story_ID: 12208
Speaker 1: How did you sum the Newark [Ohio] experience?  You know, and also the times that were happening then cause it was the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Well, it was the '60s [1960s].  It was during the time of Civil Rights Movement.  And I was very active in, during that period of time because at that time, we had, Newark being a very, very conservative town and the blacks in Newark, their greatest experience was working as domestics, work in people's homes, maids and things.  There were very few professional people in Newark.  I think we had one doctor, one attorney and the two ministers.  That was it as far as the black community was concerned.  And I saw the lack of, saw the need, a great need in that particular city.  And the children that were going to high school, didn't go any further than high school.  Very of them were going to college at the time.  So I rolled up my sleeves and got very busy in the community.  I was a member of the Celebrity Speakers Club, and we began to get a lots of Civil Rights leaders, like Julian Bond.  I invited him to Newark, Stokely Carmichael.  We had him at Ohio U [Ohio University, Athens, Ohio].  We had--
Speaker 1: At Dennison University [Granville, Ohio]
Speaker 2: At Dennison University.  Then we invited Dick Gregory.  He came to Newark.  And the fellow that wrote the book "Black Like Me".  When he came to Newark that evening, Monday evening, we all had the affair at the YMCA.  And when he left, there wasn't a dry eye in the house.  I'm trying to remember the author of the book [John Howard Griffin].  After he told his story about him posing as a black person in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And he had something injected into his skin that made him appear darker, and he told his experience as a black man, every White person in that auditorium was in tears.  And Newark began to change a great deal.  And I would say that I served on practically board that existed at that time.  In fact, at my, my time at the Aerospace Guidance Center, I was often let off from work where I could take part in civic activities, such as United Way Board and Mental Health Board.  And during that period of time, we had had--I was at Newark Air Force Station.  We brought the Equal Opportunity Employment Law into the facility.  And I had a professor from--we had a civic meeting and we had a professor from Wilberforce College [sic, University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  And it was black person that was the mayor or Xenia, Ohio.  I can't think of his name at this moment, but he came to Newark and we in, invited all of the--Reverend Barnes, myself and others got together and invited most of the civic member in Newark, the Mayor and everything.  And from that meeting, things began to change in Newark.  I--ask me.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, I--you don't keep--I can ask questions  The thing that I want you, you--so Newark, because I want to get out of Newark.  Your, your daughter, your last daughter was born there, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Kim.
Speaker 1: Okay, she's going to get short (unclear) (laughter)
Speaker 2: Kimberly Lee, Kimberly Lee,  Kimber, Kimberly Lisa Richardson.  My youngest daughter was born in Newark in 1966.
Speaker 1: And so then you decide that all this time you're working really as an extension of, you know, of the military in many ways.  You're, you're civilian, but you're working in a, in a military (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Civil Service, (unclear) under the civil Service job.
Speaker 1: And then you decide to move to Columbus [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how did you sum up your Newark years and your whole development?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I would say that my Newark years was very exciting, very interesting and very civil orient, oriented.  I had--my children were, they were--all of them attended Newark High [School, Newark, Ohio], except my Julieanna, my oldest daughter.  She was a very bright, one of the brightest students, I say in the family.  I have to say that.  She was accepted at Interlochen Art Academy up in Northern Michigan.  She got a scholarship there.  And I was excited about that because she was so, she did so well in the theater.  When she was in Newark, she was in several plays and she showed a lots of great possibility in that particular area.  And she was a very good student on top of that.  So she got a scholarship to study at Interlochen.  And in the meantime, there's a lots of things that I worked very closely with Dennison University.  I was able to integrate at Dennison University because prior to--during the '60s [1960s], there were no black students going to Dennison.  And I was instrumental in, in getting some of the first black students into Dennison University.  And Jesse Jackson also was one of the Civil Rights leaders that came to Newark, Ohio.  He was at, he was at--there in--during the time that he was with [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.], he came into Newark.  He was charismatic and just took the town by storm.  And I --
Speaker 1: So, do you, so you're saying, so, your years in Newark were, were very civic-minded and exciting.  It sort of opened up.  You were, you've had--accomplished a lot of the things you set out to do?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.
Story_ID: 12209
Speaker 1: You move to Columbus [Ohio], and what is that?  I want to understand the Columbus experience.
Speaker 2: Well, how I got to Columbus, when I was in Newark, after I retired from the Aerospace Guidance Center, I went to work for Peoples Life Insurance in Newark, Ohio and, on a part-time basis while I was at the Air Force Station.  And so I sold life insurance, and I worked at the  Aerospace Guidance Center during that period.  And I was going to school for the life insurance business.  And I took some courses at, at--at--
Speaker 1: Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: No.  I took--it was in, in Newark.  In Indiana--
Speaker 1: Indiana, Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana].
Speaker 2: Purdue.  I took some courses at Purdue University in the life insurance business.  And because my next venture was to continue to work because I had, at that time, I think I had two, two girls in college, you and Sabr--Sabrina and Julieanna.  And I knew that I would have to continue to work.  There was no time for me to retire.  And so I, I went to work for--finally, after I retired completely, I dropped Peoples Life Insurance Company and went to work for Metropolitan Life [Insurance Company].  So I went to Columbus and I was hired.  And I went into an office in that community from Newark to Columbus for about 3 or 4 months.  And then finally I found a place, a home in Newark--in Columbus, Ohio.  Then I took residence in Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: So you--in Columbus--and you start working for State Farm [Insurance Company] at that point, right?
Speaker 2: No, for, for Metropolitan.
Speaker 1: Oh, Metropolitan, I'm sorry, I'm sorry.  Okay, right, right.  Okay, for Metropolitan --
Speaker 2: But I took my, I took my, took some of my insurance courses at, at State Farm while I was in Newark, like my --
Speaker 1: Well, this is the thing.  You were--when you selling insurance, you were intrigued with the whole sales--I mean what made a good salesman.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  So what did that bring out in you that, you know, hadn't been brought out before?
Speaker 2: Well, I--it, it--in selling insurance, it made me, to learn to really understand people and not--because insurance is a people business.  And I really, during that period that I was in the insurance business, I made the Million Dollar Roundtable, Leaders Conference.  I, then, in, in one year, they made me sales manager for Metropolitan Life.  And I, the insurance business gave me a good insight into people because I had a pretty good insight.  My, my experiences have always brought me--during the height of the Civil Rights Movement, if I go back to that, you know, my association as far as Black and White and I had reached a point where I didn't have those kinds of problems that others were having because I had, I was one of the first group that was integrated under the [President Harry S.] Truman administration while I was in the service, see.  So my, my racial work in dealing--integrating and mixing was not difficult for me.  And then it wasn't difficult for me to sell because most of my customers in Newark were white.  And I had no difficulty there at all.  And then my experience, military experience and civilian experience made it easier for me to sell because a lots of young white--blacks that would come into the business couldn't make it because they didn't know how to deal in the, in the white world, you know, which I was very capable of doing, you know, during that period.
Story_ID: 12210
Speaker 1: All this time you've been working very hard and putting, making sure you, you know, put your kids through school.  And, and, you know, they go on; they graduate from school.  You have still a youngest one that is, you know, at Ohio University [Athens, Ohio].  But--this, you retire and what does that mean for you retirement at that point, cause this is really your second retirement.
Speaker 2: This is--
Speaker 1: The third.
Speaker 2: There's no retirement for me.  See, so after I finished with--I got my last daughter out of school, my oldest daughter at the time, just, just at the point of my retirement she had, was working for a, a law firm in Chicago by the name of Jenner & Block.  And we had made several trips up there.  And so shortly--about after a year or 2 with Jenner, she decided that--she was hired as the cable administrator for, for the city of Chicago [Illinois].  And her, another attorney by the name of John McGuire was, was instrumental in bringing in cable into the city.  And so I, shortly after experience, she decided that she would open up her own business.  So she opened up a company by the name of 'Shop Chicago'.  And we thought it was such a great idea, so I--my wife and I talked about it.  I said, we should go up there and help Julieanna.  So I came to Chicago to work with her and it ended up where I spent about 6 months running up and down Sears Tower, all over Chicago getting tickets (chuckle) and everything, passing out business plans and trying to collect enough money to get her initial funds for this start-up company that she had.  And I stayed with her during that period.  And when she was well organized, had everything in place, and she was out to, a little town in the--
Speaker 1: Elmhurst, but it doesn't matter.
Speaker 2: She moved into a little town, Elmhurst, with her company.  And she was set up.  And the name of her company was Shop Chicago.  And she had come up with a clever idea.  She had a logo, a shopping bag coming out of the City of Chicago.  And she was ready to go.  Well, after about--she did very well.  She struggled along for about 3 or 4 years, and finally, the, that particular market, Sears and all the other companies were in it at that time.  And so they went belly up and so she hung on in there until the last minute, and she decided this wasn't going to work.  So she switched over into the production business, SCTV.
Story_ID: 12211
Speaker 1: I really was into golf when I left the military.  I did very well.  I was--had reached a point where I was a very good golfer and had dreams of becoming a professional player.  But when I got out the military, I was in a terrible accident and this accident here, sort of impaired me to a point where I had to quit playing golf for 5 years until I got to Newark.  And so it was always in the back of my mine, even when I was working at the Aerospace Guidance Center.  There was a, a fellow that had a driving range, and in Newark, Ohio.  And actually, it was in Heath, Ohio.  Heath is actually where the plant was located where I worked at.  The Newark Air Force Station was Heath, but we always referred to it as Newark Air Force Station.  But during that period I ran across--I, I used to go to this driving range, and I became very friendly with the person.  And he had reached a point where he was ready to get rid of the driving range.  And this prominent doctor, Dr. Burton, in Newark, I had asked him could I have, could he help me to get the money to purchase this.  And what I had in the back of my mind, I was going to use this driving somewhat as a way of, of educating my children when they'd start to college.  I said they could come to the driving range, pick up balls, do their summer work there, and we could have a family business.  So it was always in the back of mind, and I wanted to do this so bad.  And so finally after my last daughter was out of school, when she had finished at Athens, Ohio, U [Ohio University], and at the time I had made the trip to Chicago to work with my daughter, Julieanna.  I went out to the military base.  I went out, I went out to the--
Speaker 2: You were saying, you were talking about how you, you were trying to get the driving range, and then--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I was trying to get the driving range, but I was unfortunate.  The doctor never gave me the--he couldn't, he, he told me, said I will vouch for your, your name.  He said, but I couldn't lend you that kind of money.  So but that was one of the things that I had planned as far as back then.  That's one reason that I wanted to get into golf.  But during that period after I retired, I--before I retired from Metropolitan [Life Insurance Company], I was teaching part time at one of the driving ranges in Columbus, Ohio.  And during that period when my oldest daughter, Julieanna, had started up her business, and I came to Chicago [Illinois].  And I worked with her until was pretty well on the way, and I told her, I said, well, farewell.  It's in your hands.  I'm leaving.  So then I went out to, out to the Naval Base in, in North Chicago, Great Lakes Naval Base.  And they had a tournament going on there.  So I played in that tournament and I shot a 68, 67, which was an excellent score.  And I won the tournament.  And during that time, they asked me, say, I--it was a fellow that I gave a lesson to, that was running the Pro Shop.  And he was the manager of the, of the Golf Course.  And so he asked me would I, would I give him a lesson.  And so he was impressed with his lesson, he had two working for him at the time.  So I told him, well, you have already have someone here.  He said, I'm going to get rid of them.  He said, will you take the job.  So I thought it over.  I'd retired from the missile base, and I retired, I had retired from Metropolitan Life.  And so I thought it over, and I said, well, why do I have to think this over?  I'm here in Chicago and my daughter's here.  I said, and I'm retired.  So I took the job and so I got involved with it.  And every year I would, I would go to, I would go South.  I would go and trav--I traveled all over the country.  During that period of time, my wife was working with oldest daughter, Julieanna, with her business.  And I would--every year I would take a trip South.  And I would teach in the South, and then I started working with the Ben Hogan Tour before it became the Nike Tour.  And I began to make a great deal of progress in my teaching.  And so finally, I, I, came back one year after about 4 or 5 years of teaching at the base, and I ran into a--I noticed an add in the paper, the United States Golf Teachers Federation.  Even though I was a pretty good teacher during that period because when I was in the Military, I had fellow by the name of Jack Grout.  Jack--Richard Grout, Richard Grout was a teacher of Jack Grout.  Richard Grout's brother, Jack Grout, taught Jack Nicholas.  And so I began to work the, and so I had pretty--I had a great deal of experience in the military, but I had, didn't have the credentials of P, of the PGA.  Well, to become a PGA, you had to become an apprentice under some professional golf instructor of a, of a golf course.  Well, that was utterly impossible during my time, when I got out the military because if you could caddy at a country club, you'd be okay.  But you couldn't, it was, that was out of the question, me every becoming a, an apprentice, working under another pro.  So I, I decided that I would go into teaching on my own.  And I did very well and, and then finally, the opportunity came when they had this United States Golf Teacher Federation.  So I decided that I would, I would go, attend their school.  And when I attended the school, I came of there with flying colors.  In fact, they, they told me that I moved the school another notch.
Story_ID: 12212
Speaker 1: Tell me what you like about the game.  Why has this game captivated you in so many way?
Speaker 2: Well, the game of golf is, it is probably the most difficult of all sports.  And my first experience at golf in learning it, is a friend in, in Pittsburgh, his name was Johnny Waters.  And he was the one that actually introduced me to the game.  And, and being the kind of person that I am, Johnny told me, he said, that, "Julius, why don't you go and caddy," go--I, he caddied and he played too.  But he caddied and played.  He said, "Why don't you come with me one day to play golf."  So I went and so finally, I decided, I said, Johnny, I don't want to play that game.  I said, it's stupid.  I said, it's a sissy game.  I don't want to play this.  He said, come on and go.  So I went with him.  And I said, and I saw the ball flying out there so pretty and curving and everything.  I said, "Johnny, let me try that."  So I took the club and I said, there's nothing to this game.  And so I swung at the ball.  I missed it.  I swung at about 20 or 30 times.  I couldn't, couldn't get the golf ball.  And so Johnny, naturally, he fell out laughing.  And he said, "I told you it was tough."  And he laughed at me and, and so I went right back to Scott Air Force Base [Illinois].  I went back there, and I had a pro there.  And I started working with him, and I told him, I said, I'm going to learn to play this game.  And even though Johnny had started with me, teaching me, but I never could beat him.  So when I got to Scott, I finally came back.  In two years, I beat, I beat Johnny playing golf.  And from then on I had the bug.  This game is addictive.  It's the kind of game that is challenging.  It's the kind of game that you can't master.  It's the kind of game that, you will always--it's similar to life.  Golf and life are two--you have a lots of--in life, you have a lots of obstacles to overcome.  In golf, you have a lots of obstacles on the golf course.  You've got the sand trap, you've got the water and you've got a difficult thing in this game, a target game.  And just imagine, you're trying to put a ball 5 or 300 feet away into a cup that's not as large as a coffee cup in one or two or three strokes.  I said, that becomes an awesome task.  Then it's a game that you can play and enjoy it.  You can play it by yourself.  I just fell in love with it.
Speaker 1: Now, what makes a good golfer?
Speaker 2: To make it, become a good golfer, there's three qualifications that you have to have.  You have to be physically fit.  And you have to have a determination to practice.  No one would ever become a good golfer without practice because it's a game that's--everything about golf is unnatural.  The, the instinct for anyone that's trying to play golf, there's certain instincts that he has.  If you give, take 10 people and give them a golf club, and you'll find out that all of them would, would proceed at--no one would ever grip the club properly.  No one would ever stand at the ball properly.  So everything in golf, you have to, it has to be learned.  And it's just that our instincts are not--you, it's everything you do in golf, it has to be learned.  And it takes a lots of work because the human body is not constructed to swing on a circular plane.
Speaker 1: Now, what are the elements to learning to be good at golf?  What are the things that you have to learn too?
Speaker 2: Well, the first thing you have to do is to be able to set up the ball properly.  The next thing that you have to do, you have to have the proper grip, posture and you have to be able to, well, to make the proper turn.  And all of this here has to be taught.  And if anyone is not willing to do it, anybody can learn how to hit the golf ball.  To become proficient at it, it takes a lots of work because it's so unnatural.
Story_ID: 12213
Speaker 1: First of all, I've been told for many years that I had the ability to, to teach.  And I, and even when I was with the United States Golf Teachers Federation, they voted me Teacher of the Century.  Last year, I was voted Teacher of the Century.  And out of that group--see, for years it was just about impossible to get to this position because the PGA was the only one that would recognized by Golf Digest.  So one of the members of the, of the United States Golf Teachers Federation wrote a letter to Golf Magazine stating that we are the largest teaching organization in the world, and that we have never had none of the member.  Besides, it was sort of a closed thing.  If you weren't a PGA member, you wouldn't be eligible, you weren't eligible to be nominated in that position.  So after this letter went to Golf Magazine, out of the 5,000 members with the United States Golf Teachers Federation, they were permitted to select 10 of their members.  And so out of the 10 that were, that the Golf Digest let them select, and I was selected from the United States Golf Teachers Federation.  I beat out the 5,000 there.  And, and with Golf Magazine, there were 25,000 teachers, and I was selected--the 100 was taken out of, top 100 teachers was taken out of 25,000 teachers that they, that they selected from.  And I, yes, I, I was the first and probably it'll be a long time before--that we will have another one because, unless, you know, they, more would join the United States Golf Teachers Federation.  And then they may have a better opportunity to make it, see.
Speaker 2: Now, let me--how did that feel?  I mean you started teaching in earnest in what year?
Speaker 1: Earnest, in, in 1988.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you were how old at the time, 72?
Speaker 1: I started at 72, and then, and, and from 72 to 81.  88 (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: You were 68, 62.
Speaker 1: No, earnest, when I--no, when I first started, I was 78.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I --
Speaker 2: You were 68.
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight, yeah, 68, when I really started teaching earnestly.  And so, in, in 12 years I was, I've moved up to one of the Top 100 in the country.
Speaker 2: Well, isn't that pretty amazing, at 80, that you have this, this whole new designation?
Speaker 1: Well, I'm going further.
Story_ID: 12214
Speaker 1: I have other goals to reach. I'm writing a book.  I'm--will be written up by Golf, by Golf --
Speaker 2: Magazine.
Speaker 1: Not Golf Magazine.  I'm being written up by Readers, Readers Di--not Readers Digest --
Speaker 2: People --
Speaker 1: People, People Magazine.  They want to do an article on me in, in, this May.  And not only do I have that book, I'm ready for a sequel.  It's coming right out after that book.  I have planned on another book.  I hope to write two books within the next 3 years.  And, yeah, I guess you've heard the Harvey Pennick, have you heard of him?
Speaker 2: (No audible response).
Speaker 1: Well, he's an author of what they call "The Little Red Book", "The Little Blue Book", "The Little Green Book".  Now, I'm going to write "The Little Black Book" (laughter).  And we've talked about it, and so I, I, I feel that this is--we're going to have a book out on the market in the next--and then another thing that happened here since I've been designated that, I've been getting offers from different places in the country.  And one of the largest golf, golf club owners here in Chicago is Frank Janicik, have asked me would I work at one of his courses.  And that would be--I'll be working at Saint, at Pine Meadows this year.  And I will also be working at the, the [Great Lakes] Naval Air Station because--Naval, the Naval Base because they have been, they were responsible for giving me my first start here in Chicago.
Story_ID: 12215
Speaker 1: Wherein lies the genius of, of Julius Richardson?  What makes you tick or, or what has made you excel?
Speaker 2: Well, the pride that I have in, as a father to, to keep my children stretching and reaching for greater things.  And I have a philosophy that I'm not going to wear out--"I'm not going to rust out, I'm going to wear out."  I, I feel--I'm excited about life.  I--as I was when I was little boy, and I guess that's still instilled in me.  I'm excited about every day that I wake up.  And I particularly like to be around young people.  I don't like to be old people.  And, and right now, I have lots of things I have to do in life.  And I will always, as long as I can move, because when you stop, you're dead.
Story_ID: 12216
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about who have you--you have certainly served as a role model for several people in your life, but who has served as a role model for you?  And I, I want to ask you that general question, I want to ask you as it relates to golf?
Speaker 2: Well, Carl Brock, the young man--his name comes to mind now.  Carl Brock was in the service with me, the fellow that I thought was so bright.  And, and being very young, and after my military experience and when I was coming back from overseas, Carl and I used to talk about some of the things--and he was, he was going to study law.  And he was a very brilliant fellow.  And he kind of set the spark.  But I can always go back to my father.  And he was, he wanted so much for me to do certain things in life.  And during that period, it was unheard of for, many Blacks to go to college during the time I was coming up as a young man.  And he, his desire was for me to go to Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] during that time.  And, and then--and when I reflect back on and think about, you know, that a lots of this here was to, really to make him feel good about me.  And the thing that I regret--he did a chance to see me marry.  He didn't get a chance to see some of the things I was able to do when I was, when--during my marriage and, and the, and the things that I did when I was Newark [Ohio].  But I would say that my, I'm just a person that wanted to make his father proud.  And also, what kept, keeps me going is to set an example for my children.  I still want to set an example because I feel they have the potential, the have the opportunity to, to reach great heights.  And so that would be my crowning glory to see them succeed in life.  And I believe in that very strongly.  And I believe that you can do anything that you set your mind to.
Speaker 1: Now, what about, what in the golf arena, who have, who has most inspired you?  They could be black or white or both?
Speaker 2: I guess I can truthfully say that, that inspiration comes from within me, a person that don't like to become a failure at anything (laughter) that he does.  I think that is, that was a part of me, not any particular individual because golf is a game that, unless you're a young person, you don't have many role--now, if you're younger.  But I got into golf when I was in my 20s.  So it wasn't, it wasn't--it was a thing that just popped me, and said, boy, this game, I'm going to try to--I'm not going to let it defeat me.  And, and it was, it's the challenge of the game itself.  It's the nature of the game itself.  But I didn't have role model there, but there are young people coming up like Tiger Woods that begin to play golf.  He would be a role model to them, but there was no Tiger Woods when I was coming along, see.  And even if I, even if, even if there were a Tiger Woods during the period I was coming up, because Charlie Sifford was playing on the [PGA] Tour then.  And I was nev--but it was just the fact that the game just caught my fancy and I, and I like the challenge of.  It's something that you'll never master.  So it's just, it's just like when I was a young man, maybe trying to capture a young lady's heart.  You can run at golf all your life and you can love it, but it won't love you back.  So you'll always be running to catch up with it (laughter).
Story_ID: 12217
Speaker 1: Well, it brought me in contact with many people as I traveled around the world, meeting all, people from all walks of life.  It's very interesting experience.  And then the satisfaction that I get out of other people teaching and to watch the expression on their face when they first hit the ball.  And to, to meet people that say that they've gone to other teachers and, and not able to play the game, that's exciting for me.  I know, I feel that anyone, if they can walk because I was fortunate enough and I was working at Jackson Park [in Chicago, Illinois], which I worked for the [Chicago] Park District at one time in my golfing experience.  I used to work with the Lutheran Hospital.  They used to bring their patients out there, and they'd stand, they'd be--some of them would be strapped to a board.  And I would find ways of them hitting the golf ball.  I got a one-armed man that can play in the '70s.  I've got people with prosthesis that can shoot in the '70s.  And these were exciting moments when you can take people that are handicapped--which I don't believe no one's truly handicapped, is able to play this game.  And the--it's a long, it's a life-long search.  Even in writing this book, I'm still looking for a way, of all the books that were ever read, of all the books that I've studied and the things, the many things that I've read about golf, I feel that I've come up with, with a concept that will make golf much easier for people to learn.  And I truly believe if we get this book post, published, it may even turn around the way that golf is being taught.  And the reason that I say that, that most people teaching golf will start most of their students with a bucket of balls and a golf club.  I've come up with a different concept.  I believe that--I, it's just like, and I feel this is just like taking a person and giving him the Concerto in C minor in, in a piano lesson and have them to play it.  Through trial and error, that's the way we learn golf.  But the method that I'm using and the method that I have been--made me so successful in getting my students to turn around in a short time, is that I've come up with a way that they master each step as they go along.  And within 7 to 8 lessons, I can get the average person striking the ball pretty good, providing that he's willing to practice or he or she is willing to practice.  And if they would practice and do what I say, I can take anyone and have them playing golf in a short time, where I run into people who have been playing for 30 and 40 and 50 years, and they've been playing all varieties, and haven't made no improvement, see.  But I have took those people in a short time and turned their game around.  But my method of teaching is quite different than the way that it's being taught today.  There is nothing new about golf, but it's the system that I use that made me successful in my teaching.  And how did I come about that?  Because every time that I would leave and go South every year, and I would have people I worked with, and I'd wonder, I'd say why is it so difficult?  Why can't we get people to play this game sooner?  And so finally through experiments and trials, and the (unclear) errors for, through, through my students and listening to them, I've always said that my students have been, have made me the teacher that I am because their problems have become my problems.  And I've found solutions to their problems.
Story_ID: 12218
Speaker 1: I find that, that after the many years that I've studied and teaching, and I probably--I feel very strongly that I've probably taught as many students in the 12 years than anybody in the country because my program has been--at one period, I was teaching 7 days a week, 8 hours a day.  Not 8 pupils a day, but I would go from 8:00, sometimes 8:00 in the morning till 8:00 in the evening, and maybe 10 hours a day or 12 hours a day in teaching.  And I've been doing this constantly for the past 12 or 13 years.  So I've taught a lots of people, and I have a great insight and concept about the golf swing, which I have come into my own and found my own way of doing it.  And I've come up with some revolutionary thoughts about how the game should be taught.  There are lots of good teachers in this hundred.  And I've, I have a writer, his name is Mark Garrison.  And Mark had, is getting excited as I am about what we're doing.  It'd be his first experience at a book and also my first experience at a book, but it was a little while before we began to click.  But now, he's beginning to, he's beginning to feel and get a part of me.  He's beginning to see Julius Richardson in a different way than we first started out.  We have several articles already for 'Golf Magazine' and every time we get together now, we get excited about the sequence that I'm taking him through and the method that I'm using and, and the way that I conduct each stage of my lesson.  My first lesson that I give a student is--in fact, I will not let my student hit the golf ball until about the 4th or 5th lesson, be he's not eligible for it, see.  And if I get a well-seasoned player to come to me, he will not hit the ball if he cannot line up at his target.  So I stop him from hitting the ball, if you can't line up at your target.  So my beginners will perfect the grip, their position over the ball.  They have to be able to master this.  When they come back to me, I expect them to do it.  I have a saying on some of my lessons and I say, "what I'm teaching, I can teach a gorilla".  And that somewhat inspires them to say, well, I don't be as--be like a gorilla, say I'm going to learn how to play this game.  Also, I have such threats as "If you don't get it this time, I'm going to put you in the cage and the gorilla out."  I find that, that--and, and when my students come to me, I tell them right up front that I don't want them embarrassing me.  And I do expect them to practice.  And if you do what I tell you to do, I guarantee you'll be able to play this game.  But, now, some would come to me and say well, I didn't have time to practice.  I said, I have a different method.  I said, when you go home at night, and you lay in your bed or you get up in the morning driving your car to work, I want you to think about your lesson.  I want you to think about the moves that I gave you.  I said, there is no excuse.  You do not have to be on the golf course to learn to play this game.  Now, one of the things that helped me to come into a different method of teaching, when I was in Newark, Ohio, just before my youngest daughter graduated from, from Athens, Ohio, I took 5 people into our dining room which had mirrors in it.  And I started to teach them without a golf club and without a golf club and without a ball.  And during that Spring, I took them out to the golf course.  And every one of them was able to perform with a great degree of satisfaction.  It brought me to the point where if I remove the golf ball, I can get my pupil's attention, and they begin to learn.  But they become so engrossed with the golf ball until there's very little learning to take place because they want to hit the golf ball.  So I've had to remove the golf ball.  In fact, I may have one part of this book where I show an illustration with me erasing the golf ball and the golf club because if I can get the ball out of--this way I can teach them all to feel.  And if you learn to get the feel of the golf movement, it's easy.  But now, I have any number of drills--I must have over 120 different drills that I can give people coming to me.
Speaker 2: So you believe the game is as mental as it is physical?
Speaker 1: It is.  And, and, in one of my articles that I wrote, I mentioned that I don't know whether it's, whether it's 80 percent mental or 60 percent physical or 80 percent--but after the game is learned, then it's all mental.  I have devised a 7- step lesson plan, which I take my students through.  And on the 4th lesson or the 5th lesson, depending upon the progress they make, I will let them hit golf balls.  Now, a lots of my, lots of teachers ask me how can you keep people that long without hitting the golf ball.  Well, it's a salesmanship that I've used in convincing them.  If they want to learn to play this game, if you and I can work together--and do you really, are you interested in playing this game?  Well, if you do it my way, I guarantee you'll get better.  I guarantee you will learn it.  And I find that it's not too difficult for those that really want to learn.  They're willing to go my way.  So I don't know.  Maybe I'll call the book "The Richardson Way".  I've not decided on, which way, but I, I intend to change the way that golf is being taught.  That's my goal.
Story_ID: 12219
Speaker 1: What are your hopes for African Americans in the field of golf?
Speaker 2: Well, I have a plan for that.  I am hoping, through the United States Golf Teachers Federation, that I can begin to recruit other Blacks that are pretty good--that would have the possibility of making good teachers.  I have another goal.  I want to get with the black colleges, throughout the country, and may have the opportunity that I can get them to begin to give scholarships to students and build good golf teams.  And from this here, United States Golf Teachers Federation, at the college level, they can send in some very good teachers.  At one time, and it's still in the back of my mind, if age is not creeping up on me too fast, I had thought about starting a golf school of my own.  And I've given some thought to it.  And the people that come to me, I would teach them my method, and I'd feel better if I could do that.  Then I could take young kids in the inner city and they could be taught properly.  And, and also I'd feel that some of the colleges across the country--and we--see, to track these kids, they have a lots of junior programs for Black kids all through the inner city, all over.  But what has happened, the reason they haven't been successful because there's no one that have to track these kids, unless they get into high school or get into college, they're lost, lost in the shuffle.  But they should learn--if someone would take these kids and put them in junior programs across the country like Tiger Woods' dad did, and if we get the parents involved in that, and if they've got a kid that can play golf early and, and have potential, then that dad or mother can get them into junior tournaments because it's not difficult for them to do that, see.  And there's a lots of opportunities for that, but we have to begin to track these kids because as soon as they get in high school, then basketball becomes the thing for black kids.  But Tiger is really getting more, getting them more involved in it though, but there is some difficulties because golf is a very expensive game.  And in basketball, all they need is a hoop and (laughter) and the, and a pole and they can start playing basketball.  But in golf it requires a lots of money though.  But I feel we can get more involved, and I think we will get more involved in it as soon as we get better qualified teachers.  And I think that is beginning to happen.  We have a lots of good black players that can become teachers.  So eventually, I think that will happen.
Speaker 1: You've also been a, let's say a student of the, of the Black community, and I'm wondering what your hopes are for the Black community?
Speaker 2: Well, my, my hopes for, for the black community is beginning to recognize that--and I use myself in the example.  If we would take stock our self and recognize one thing, that within, within us we have great pars.  We have the ability to do anything that you want to do.  I have never let that be an excuse for my progress.  And I don't feel that, if we would use our inward ability to achieve things, we can do it.  And I do not believe in depending on someone else.  And I don't think anyone--we should teach our black children that you can do anything if you set your mind to it.  The way may be a little more difficult, but I think in some respects that'd make me even better and make me reach and be more determined to achieve.  The things that I've set out to do in life, I've always been able to do it with a great deal of satisfaction.  And I still feel the same way at 80 years old.  I still think that I've got great things to do, and I don't think no one can stop me from doing it.
Story_ID: 12220
Speaker 1: And what do you think makes a good teacher?
Speaker 2: A good teacher is someone that is willing to, it's someone that can take a person and teach them how to make, to improve--see, and my philosophy in teaching is to make my students the teacher because I think we're capable of teaching ourselves if we had certain guidelines.  I have never been a strong believer in, and I believe in motivating people to a point, but I believe that--and I'm not only speaking about golf, but every walk of life.  You can become your own teacher if, if you had the proper direction.  To give you an example, with, with Julieanna, my oldest daughter, or to give you an example, that you can take a child and get them started to learning and get them interested in learning and motivate them to the point where they get excited about what they're doing.  And the rest is easy.  The whole idea for anyone that wants to learn to do something is to get that person excited.  And in my teaching, I tried the same thing with my students.  I tried to get them excited about what they're doing, and I tried to give them the, the format.  And I expect them to teach their self, especially in any physical skill, you have to be your own teacher.  Can't no one teach you how to walk.  Nobody taught you how to ride a bike.  Every physical skill that you learn, you had to teach yourself.  And that's true with any sport, and it's very true with golf.  So my philosophy is to make you the teacher, and from there on, it motivates you to the extent, and I give you a lesson, and you teach yourself how to do it.  I don't teach you.  I give you the information, and I observe you and guide you along.  I consider myself more of a coach than a teacher.  I coach you along.
Story_ID: 12221
Speaker 1: What would you think your mother [Marie Poindexter Richardson] would say if she could see you now?
Speaker 2: She'd boy, that boy, and I was brought up, he's always been a dreamer.  She'd say, he was a dreamer when he came into this world, say, and finally, he took those dreams and put them into reality.  And I'm still dreaming.
Speaker 1: What would your father [John Richardson] say?
Speaker 2: He'd be smiling.  He'd be smiling.  He'd be happy. He really would be thrilled.  He'd be excited.  You know, he'd say, well, you always had the ability and finally, you found yourself.  He'd say that I found myself because when I went on the hobo trip, that's what he said to me.  See, I ho--I took a trip when I was 12 years old, and I--or 13, I took a hobo trip.  And, and when I came back off that trip, he said to me, he said, "I guess you had your experience, haven't you?"  And he just shook his head.  He didn't even whip me for that particular thing.  But I guess he would be thrilled to death.  I could see him--you could see him smiling (unclear) if you was looking at the back of his head.  He'd be happy.  And he would be excited about all of you, my children, all 4 of them.  He would be excited about them.  And he would be very pleased.  If they could just see--if they were out in outer space, looking back on, they'd say, I can't believe, say, he finally turned it around.  But I was a good student until I got into the 8th grade, until I went to Cincinnati [Ohio].  And that was my downfall.
Story_ID: 12222
Speaker 1: Give each of your children a message--I need it to be very short for each one.  Would you, what, including your wife, what message would you give?  You can start with your wife [Margaret Richardson]?
Speaker 2: Well, I would tell her, honey, you're 70-some years old.  And you have a lots of talent.  You could put that to use because you know, my wife--one time, there's a Magfield, her and --
Speaker 1: Olive Magfield.
Speaker 2: Olive Magfield from, from the same area, they both were taking music at the same time.  And at that time, I thought your mother was better, and she never really fully developed her voice.  And I would also tell her that she has a lots of skills she could use now.  She can go back teaching.  She could be teaching music.  Okay.  For all my children, I would say that you're still young--
Speaker 1: Each person.
Speaker 2: Each person.  Well, I would tell the two, the three--I'd tell Kim who is married.  I'd take my married children.  I take Kim, the youngest first, I would tell her that what would please me to no end is to achieve the things, as far as education, and attempt--and do the things that I did with your daughter, and look at yourself now and say to yourself, what do you--would like for her, and find out what she likes to do and help her to do it.  And I would do that each one of my--Sabrina, the same thing.  Both my daughter that are mar--my three daughters that are married.  I would say to Gail, Gail, you go ahead on.  You, you're very good in your, in the area that you're working in.  Education is your field, and I think you're well suited for it.  I would tell her not only to broaden your experiences in the field of education, but I would like for her to broaden her mind in the world.  I would like her to become more a part of the world, even though she's very--she's very religious and Christianity is her, is her daily bread, but in life, there's other things that she can do that I would appreciate if she would just become a part of the world.  And, and in her teaching, she can do a better job in bringing young people and to learning the secular world as well as the spiritual world.  I would say--
Speaker 1: Could you say anything more to Sabrina?
Speaker 2: I would say to Sabrina, you have one of the best opportunities to raise a family because you and your husband both have went to very fine schools.  There's no excuse for your daughter not being able to reach the same heights or further in education as you have.  I would say to them that, to Sabrina that she has talent that she have--she's not using, and that she would need to take, begin to look at herself and recognize some of the skills and things that she have because if she looks at my life when I was young, there were parts in my life that I did not--I wasn't achieving.  But I discovered myself at the age of 30, and from that point on, it's been me trying to make something of life and something of myself.  And if you do this, I would say, Sabrina, if you do this, when you look back on your life, you can look back without regrets.  But if you don't go and do all the things that you can do, you'll look back on your life and say, I wish that I had done this; I wish that I had done that.  With Julieanna, the oldest one, she's been--all her life, she's been a good student.  She's succeeded in school, in all her school work.  I would say to her that I think is reaching the point in life where she's about to do one of the most outstanding things that can happen.  And if she pulls this off, and I am sure she will, that it'd be one of the greatest contributions that anyone made in this century for black people.  And the reason that I say that is because I've always felt that a people without a history is a people that are lost.  And she--and if you have something to draw on, it can move a whole generation of people faster than they have in the past 35--in the last hundred years.  It's giving them the opportunity to see others do, and they can say, I can do it too.  Where do we get our--you asked me earlier, what makes a good role model?  Who was my role model?  And I mentioned to you, there's a fellow by the name of Carl Brock.  Now, if Carl Brock was able to motivate me, think about all these people are, that you're--that my daughter is interviewing and, and the young people can look at that and say, I can do it too.  So I'm excited about the work that you're doing.  And I would be excited about Gail or Sabrina or Kim.  If Kim succeeds in having a very fine, healthy family, and her children are achievers, I feel that as much credit would go to her as I would give--I give everyone the same, whatever particular that they're into.  And I feel that what you're doing is, is so important for mankind as a whole.  But I wouldn't care--if they're successful in their marriage, I'm thrilled with that because I think one of my greatest achievements of all the things that I've been able to accomplish, the thing that I'm more excited about is the fact I was able to put 4 girls through school.  And I was able to put them through without any serious problems.  I was able to do this here, and that was my contribution to society.  And if every family in the world could get their children educated and make them decent citizens, this would be a better world because the family is the smallest segment in society.  If you have a strong family, you have a strong society.  And I feel if each one of my children, just do some of the things that I've been doing and be successful in their marriage, that they have made the greatest contribution that you can give to society.  So, it just happened that--
Story_ID: 12223
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?  It's the last question.
Speaker 2: My legacy is I'm still working on it.  My legacy haven't finished.  I still have things to do.  So maybe in my next interview when I'm flat on my back, I'll (laughter) tell you that, but the old man got too many legs  yet (unclear) and I'm still running.  So I, I--my legacy is still something that is still not completed.  And maybe after I finish, and I've got one breath left in me, I can tell you how I feel, I'd want to be remembered.
