Story_ID: 12224
Speaker 1: State your name and spell it for us, and I need your date of birth, your place of birth, today's date and we'll go on from there.
Speaker 2: Today is the 11th--there's something significant about the 11th of September, and I don't know what it is.  Oh, it's--I know.  It's election day.  Oh, today, in New York.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Oh, I didn't know that.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, now that I've got that out of the way.  Now, I can on and proceed through the day.  So you want me to--
Speaker 1: I want you to state--
Speaker 2: Lloyd, L-L-O-Y-D, George, Richards, R-I-C-H-A-R-D-S.  I was born in Toronto, Canada on June the 29th, 1919.  Today's date is September 11th, 2001.  And I'd like to have you give the location we're at, the address of where you are, and your profession?
Speaker 1: We're in New York City in my home on West 95th Street.  I am, gee, I am a director.  I am a teacher; I am an actor, still have my union card and whatever else people ask me to be.
Story_ID: 12225
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's very interesting.  I can go from one end to the other on that.  I've got a lot of favorites.  I love the lobster and I love spareribs.  And they go on from there with that.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to know what your favorite color is?
Speaker 2: I think blue and forest green, getting to that shade of blue that can turn green.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I think the fall is my favorite.  It's certainly not winter even though I'd have said winter as a child and or summer, but neither one of those now.  Spring is wonderful.  I love spring because everything's coming to life, but fall is a wonderful time for me because everything is ripened and harvested--and I love the foods of the fall.  I love wonderful vine-ripened tomatoes and corn right off the cob and off the stalk and apples and things like that.  And so, yes, I enjoy myself in the fall.  That brings together food and other things.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to also know what your favorite place to vacation is?
Speaker 2: We have done very little with vacations, and--because I spent thirty--we spent thirty, ooh,-six, seven, eight years in the summer at the National Playwrights' Conference.  I was artistic director of the conference.  And so that took care of all the vacation questions.  So we never got a vacation spot, place or home.  So vacationing is something we did little of in terms of making plans.  And then I would find myself in my work being all over the world and very interested in getting back home.  And so I guess I could even say one of my favorite spots for vacation is the backyard.
Speaker 1: And do you--favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't--if you ask one of my acting classes, they would let you know that I have certain questions that I ask, and they would consider them my favorites and would attach them to, to me.  And they have to do with doing and want.  What do you want?  Where are you coming from or coming to?  Why?  Why now?  What are you coming to do and what do you want from it?  Those are key questions that are on my lips a great deal of my life.  So I guess they are the phrases that come out of me.
Story_ID: 12226
Speaker 1: We were talking earlier about your mother.  And I'd like to have her name, and I'd like you to tell me what you know about her family and her growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother is Rose Isabelle Coote, C-O-O-T-E, Richards, who was born in Jamaica, British West Indies in--I forget the parish exactly.  But I heard it enough so it should be indelibly on my memory.  She was one of a good flock of children.  And she was one of the younger ones, next to the youngest.  And she was raised mostly by her uncle who was Sergeant Major of Police in Kingston at the time.  And we are now talking about the early 1900s.  And she grew up there.  Her mother died, and eventually as people did from Jamaica in that time, she left Jamaica and went to Canada.  And there she met Albert George Richards, who was a Master Carpenter.  And he was from Jamaica.  And they were married there, and they had four children in Toronto, my older brother, Allan, who is deceased at this point.  I am the second, my sister, Joyce, who died last December.  It was a big shock to me, and then my next brother, William, and Maxwell.  And the only persons left from that, what seemed to be a large family when we were growing up, is myself and my brother, William.  He is an attorney in Detroit, and we're the, we're the two that are left from that brood of the family.  So there were actually five--was it five--
Speaker 1: Four boys--And one girl?
Speaker 2: One girl, right in the middle.  And we used to consider her a rose among thorns, or I got that from other people, I think, but I did, I accepted that.  She was a very lovely human being, and I felt very close to her.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your father like, sir?
Speaker 2: A very quiet man.  I always, for some reason or other, remembered Daddy with a, with a hat on.  And it may be that there was one picture in the house of him with a hat on.  So I remember him more from the picture than I maybe remember him from real life.  But he was a meticulous person, and he loved Maxwell House Coffee.  And the--that's how, I think, my next brother is named Maxwell.  Frederick Edward Maxwell, and, of course, I was Lloyd George.  Now, the Lloyd was for the Prime Minister of England [David Lloyd George], and we were British subjects at the time.  And the George, people think was for Lloyd George, but that's my father's name, Albert George.  So, I don't know where I started from to get on that tack, but then wandering through bits of family thoughts.
Speaker 1: But you're not wandering, so this is exactly--now, but I--your mother then, was she the more strong-willed or was she a more predominant force?
Speaker 2: She was a very strong person.  My mother, she became blind by the inadequate treatment of a doctor.  And she became blind when I was, what, a teenager.  And this was before--or it was after my father died.  My father died when I was nine.  And my mother became blind shortly after that.  And so--but she was the one--she had raised five children.  She took in washing.  She did other things.  And my sister, you know, her, her knees never touched the floor.  That was one of my mother's stipulations, and she was a person who if, if something was wrong, she'd pick up the telephone and call the Mayor, you know.  I, she was known throughout the city for--that she would be there.  So she was always there.  I know on Thanksgiving, we'd been--we could not sit down to dinner, although there was always a big family at dinner, but in our home, we could not sit down to dinner unless there was a stranger at the table.  And I spent many of my holidays out at the, at the local hospital where she would cook a dinner and serve dinner for a ward out there at a place like that.  She was a person who collected for the--she felt the inmates in the prison didn't get enough fruit and didn't have decent underwear.  So she would collect those things, the contributions for that and take it out to Jackson Prison.  And so she would get letters from prisoners all the time, those who were sincere and those who were trying really to rip her off in some way.  But she was a very generous human being and a very strong human being and a very religious and committed person.
Story_ID: 12227
Speaker 1: What were some of your other early memories of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, the memories of growing up?  Snowballs and snowball fights and going to the beach and Belle Isle.  In Detroit, there's Bell Isle, and you hear very little about that except that that was the, the spot that touched off one of the race riots during the, the war.  In Detroit was the Belle Isle Bridge.  But that's a wonderful island where you could--eight miles long and--(phone interruption)--
Speaker 1: Is it far from Belle Isle?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no.  I didn't--oh, that was in Detroit.  Detroit.
Speaker 1: We moved to Detroit--
Speaker 2: Okay, how old were you when you moved to Detroit?
Speaker 1: Four.
Speaker 2: You were four, okay.  So, now, why would your parents move from Toronto to Detroit?
Speaker 1: Well, if you remember that time, that was the early twenties, 1920s.  They, and Henry Ford was just beginning, and he sent out flyers all over the Midwest that he was paying--and I forget this for fact, whether it was $8.00 a day or $5.00 a day.  It was possible to earn that, and people flocked from--to Detroit.  And we were a part of that migration.  My father [Albert George Richards] went ahead first, and then my mother [Rose Isabelle Coote Richards] followed with four children in tow.  And we came by train from Toronto to Detroit and moved on to--I believed we lived at Forest Avenue and, in a house that there're other members of the family or the extended family, my mother's family lived in.  My father had one sister, Una, Una Hendricks.  And so we lived in Detroit.  So all of my schooling was in Detroit in the public school system of Detroit and the high schools and Wayne [State] University.  I went all the way through graduation in, with my B.A. at, in Detroit.  So, yes, we went to Belle Isle, and that was, that the Sunday outing.  You know, you take the car, when I'm, we're with my father, and you, you fix the rice and peas and the chicken and the potato salad and the, with that, and you go out and you try to get there early enough to get a parking spot by the water, on the water side.  And a beautiful island, lovely island.  That was the place to picnic, and it--and hot nights, go out there cause it was no air conditioning in those days.  You'd go out, take a blanket, lie on the grass on Belle Isle.  Well, Belle Isle is very strong in my memory.  I spent a lot of time there.
Speaker 2: So your father worked for Ford Motor Company.
Speaker 1: Eventually, he did get a job at Ford.  It wasn't as easy as the flyers said it was.  You had to, you had to, first of all remember that you were a black person.  And the, the flyers did not say blacks also or would include you.  It was, you went and you took your chances.  And so he was a carpenter, and did carpenter work, but then he, he finally--and it worked out that if you went to the white church, you had a better possibility of getting a job at Ford because there was one black man who was the top black man at Ford, although he was, he was probably more fair than Mr. Ford himself.  He was a big man, and he went to St. Matthews Church.  And so people flocked to St. Matthews Church to get close to Mr. Marshall.  And if you got close to Mr. Marshall, you might be designated for a job.  Well, my father did get a job out there.  After he died, my younger brother, William [Richards], he was admitted into the Ford--Ford had a training school for young boys, I don't think girls were involved.  And my brother, who was one of those after my father died.
Story_ID: 12228
Speaker 1: You are of West Indian background, and, you know, you were, you moved to a place where a lot of the blacks that were in that city were coming from the South, two different sort of cultures.  And I'm wondering if you were aware of that at all, in your family or did it show itself in any way?
Speaker 2: It didn't show itself that I remember, in the family.  It, I was very conscious that Detroit was a place where people from all over the country, with all kinds of feelings and beliefs and backgrounds came together, and where it affected you was in school in the fact of what neighborhoods you might have to go through to get to the school that you wanted to go to.  And I remember Sampson [Elementary] School was perched right between what turned out to be the black neighborhood and the white neighborhood.  And you, you were aware of the fact that on--that you did not go into that neighborhood alone at strange times because other young people might see fit to, to beat you up.  And anyone coming into your neighborhood was also fair game.  But, yeah, it was, very conscious.  Later, I was--after the Second World War when I got back from, I had a job as a social worker.  And then I encountered people who were just coming up from the South, black and white, and the, their attempted adjustments, which were very interesting to, to a city, to plumbing even, and to--there were people who did not know the difference between the toilet and the, the basin, what they were used for.  You encountered all levels of, of, of intelligence or knowledge which kind of indicated to you where that person that might be from, and certainly where not.
Speaker 1: Now, were you--you know, a lot of West Indians, there's a promulgation of West Indian heritage, did that occur in your family later on?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, my family was West Indian, and there were, at times, there weren't as many West Indians in Detroit as there are now or might be now, or certainly are--there are more West Indians in Brooklyn than there are in the West Indies, yes, we know that.  But the, the migration wasn't that large at that time.  But it meant that the family, in a way, stuck together, where there're--and you're, it was that, that nucleus was our nucleus, the Coote-Richards nucleus, well--I always knew was a center or a home, as it were.  Yeah, but, but now I had friends who, from all over, and people from the South or people--well, that's mostly where they came from.  And then there were the Detroiters who had been in Detroit a long time.  And I can't point to any one of them at the moment, but I know they were there.
Story_ID: 12229
Speaker 1: Are there any sounds or smells that you associate with growing up?
Speaker 2: Sunday dinner, holiday dinner, the smells that are identifiable.  You knew it was Sunday if you had rice and peas.  We had that every Sunday, regardless.  And usually, and chicken.  And if you saw a turkey, it was Thanksgiving.  And the smell of cooking turkey and mixed with baking pies are a wonderful combination of smells that I encountered throughout my life, very pleasantly.  And there's a wonderful anticipation about smells, you know, that you're coming to something.  They announce ahead of themselves the possibility of something happening, and you knew what it was, and you could hardly wait for it.  And the, and the smells altered.  The smell of cooking roast turkey changed as the bird is, is cooked through.  And any of the other smells.  And I spent a lot of time in the kitchen with my mother [Rose Isabelle Coote Richards].  And I learned to cook.  I enjoyed that and being there.  And, of course, if you're there, you get to lick the bowl, you know, when the lemon meringue was made, when other things.  There was always a little left in the bowl, and you watched carefully to see if someone was going to leave something in the bowl for you, my mother.  And she would leave a little something, but that was always what a finger could get something out of the bowl.  And anticipatory tastes.
Story_ID: 12230
Speaker 1: What type of child were you, Mr. Richards?  Were you quiet, shy?  Were you rambunctious?  Were you well mannered?  Were you--?
Speaker 2: I, I was well mannered, and I, and I had--my mother's older sister, Aunt May, who never married.  And so her name was, her family name, my mother's family name was Coote, C-O-O-T-E.  And I can always remember Aunt May saying, you are a Coote, and a Coote does not do that.  And that's it.  That was enough of that.  She really--not controlled, but she gave you standards to live by.  She was the carrier of the family standards, and she imposed them on my cousins and us.
Story_ID: 12231
Speaker 1: Tell me what elementary, what junior high and high school you went to?
Speaker 2: Oh, I went to Sampson Elementary School from the--from kindergarten.  When they took me to kindergarten I cried.  I didn't want to stay in that room with the kids.  And I went from there to McMichael [Middle] School, to Northwestern High School, and from there to Wayne [State] University after--yes, Wayne University.
Speaker 1: Now, Wayne University is now Wayne State?
Speaker 2: It's now Wayne State, but it was then Wayne University when I went there.
Story_ID: 12232
Speaker 1: I want to go back to what type of child.  So you said you were, you know, you were well-mannered because you had a lot of, you know, expectations, a setting of standards.  But what, were you a person who lived inside yourself or were you, you know, a loner or did you play a lot with your brothers, I mean I'm just trying to understand.
Speaker 2: We played a lot together, and I played a lot with, with people on the, on the block.  And we had groups, and we got bicycles when we were young.  When we were old enough to ride a two-wheel bike, we got a two-wheel bike.  And, oh, that was fun.  On the block, we used to--in the evenings when people--before air conditioning, when people used to come out (phone ringing)--My wife got it.  In the evenings, when people used to come out and sit on their porches to be cool cause the house was so warm, we would ride our bicycles up and down the street and do tricks to entertain the people on their porches.  We used to do that.  And I ran with gangs and--not gangs.  Well, you know, there were packs of young people that hung together.  And I had, by the time I got to high school, I had very close friends, Ed Gillard, Joe Shannon, Buddy Jones and others.  And we used to hang out together and rollerskate and, or--yeah, in that time, you--the evenings were, were festive in a different way than they are now.  And there was no television to stay inside for, and radio was just in its infancy.  And so you ended up doing things in the evening to get out of the house where you didn't go in 'til it had cooled off, you know.  And it--so you'd ride the bikes, rollerskating or that sort of thing that we used to do.  They used to--I remember flocks of young people rollerskating in certain areas at night.  And so you'd put on your skates and you'd skate over to there, and you'd see all your friends and all would-be friends and whatnot who were coming out to exercise on rollerskates.
Story_ID: 12233
Speaker 1: Who was influencing you?  Were there teachers in school that influenced you?  Was there someone else in the community that influenced you?
Speaker 2: Well, there were teachers who influenced you.  I don't remember exactly what the influences were, but there were teachers you'll never forget.  There's Ms. McManus, I'll never forgot her.  And if my sister [Joyce Richards] was around, she'd remind me of some others who I think I'd never forget, but I've forgotten them.  I haven't really forgotten them, if anything jogs my memory.
Speaker 1: Now, were there--in school, what--did you take to any course, you know, any subjects or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't develop an ambition early.  What I did, I guess was, I was impressed by the things around me.  In my community, I was very active in the church.  I became the youngest vestry member ever in my church, which was St. Cyprians Episcopal Church on the West Side of Detroit.  And so I was active in that kind of way.  And I--and everybody thought I was gonna be a minister.  I did have a slightly melodious voice, in a way, and I used to read the lesson, and in church as the youngest vestry member, I was, also had been an altar boy and those things.  And it, it was the--given to me the privilege of reading the lesson in  church on Sunday mornings when I was a certain age.  And that was a very important thing in my life.  It was one of the key things, that and during--I guess it was intermediate school, I was introduced to William Shakespeare.  And I was one of those selected to--we were told by our teacher, you not only study the text and read the text, but you memorize it, or at least portions of it, and you speak it aloud.  And certain people would be selected to speak it aloud in class, in front of the class.  And I was one of those selected.  And I, it was a very powerful moment for me to be in front of the class and to speak beautiful language and meaningful words to people who were interested and eager to, to hear.  And the same was true with the Bible, in the Bible stories on Sunday; the beautiful language, meaningful thoughts, and people who were eager to, to hear and to respond.  And that, those were really, that was the beginnings of, I take it, the beginnings of my interests in the theater.  And I was really hooked by the best, you know, Shakespeare and the Bible, I mean where do you go from there.  And--
Speaker 1: Now how old were you, sir, at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, in my early teens.
Speaker 1: In your early teens.  And what, so that sort of--you had a, you felt like you had a gift, and that was encouraged early on.
Speaker 2: That was there.  I didn't, I never thought of it as a gift I had.  I felt that I liked it, not that I had a gift for it.  Other people may have said I had a gift, but I never thought of that like that.
Speaker 1: Now, so in high school were you involved in any theater or productions that--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, none of them, oh.
Speaker 2: Well, let me see.  Well, and, you see, I was in a high school that was mostly a white institution.  And so those clubs existed and those things existed, but there was no, no entrée for a young black person to become involved.  So it--you don't.  I did become involved--there was a club in my neighborhood, an adult club with, I guess the more middle class of the community were members of the club, the doctors, lawyers, other people like that, called the Nacirema Club.  "Nacirema" is "American" spelled backwards, you know.  And, and they used to put on plays.  At some point, someone asked me to be in one of those plays.  I, I was in one.  And that I think was my first experience on the stage.
Speaker 1: And you were in high school at that point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in the higher part of high school.
Story_ID: 12234
Speaker 1: Your schooling in the community--you lived in a black community, but the schooling was in definitely an integrated environment?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: And it sounds like more whites than blacks.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the Detroit of that day, was there any racial tension or was it just that, you know, people yet weren't there in a lot of numbers?
Speaker 2: They're, not at that time, there was not racial tension.  There was racial acknowledgement in the fact that we're separate from you and that you didn't go into certain neighborhoods at certain times or you knew you might be mistreated if you were caught there.  And they knew that they might be mistreated if they were caught in your neighborhood.  Well, it was, that kind of tension existed.  It, and it all flowered a little bit later on.
Speaker 1: You know what strikes me too is that Mary Wilson, in her book, she went to Northwestern [High School], but it was all black at the time--
Speaker 2: Yeah, at the time she went, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, about, in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: That's how that neighborhood changed.
Story_ID: 12235
Speaker 1: When it's time for you to graduate, was there any thought that, you know, about going on to college or was that just assumed?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, it was, it was thought.  It was assumed, and you were expected to do it.  Well, my mother [Rose Isabelle Coote Richards] expected it.  My older brother [Allan Richards] had not gone to college.  He felt it was his obligation after my father [Albert George Richards] died, as head of the family, to get a job.  And so he got a job and I was expected to go to college.  And so I enrolled at Wayne [State] University.  And my mother was that determined and no one had, from our family had been through that before, that I was one of the few people, I believe, whose mother went with him to enroll at college, you know.  She had been there when I enrolled everyplace else.  So enrolling in college, my mother was a part of that.  As a matter of fact, she may have been very helpful in getting me employment at the college.  At Wayne, I used to run the elevator for a number of hours every day, a couple hours and that helped with my tuition.
Story_ID: 12236
Speaker 1: And your father [Albert George Richards] died when you were how old?
Speaker 2: Oh, around nine, I believe.
Speaker 1: Oh, your father died when you were nine, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your mother [Rose Isabelle Coote Richards] became blind when you were what age?
Speaker 2: Oh, I forget.  It was very, very shortly after that.
Speaker 1: And you have a lot of extended family also who were--?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  And then she, she--when my father died, other members of the family, the extended family offered to--there were five children at that point, to take one or two of the children to raise.  And my mother said, no.  She said, she would not split up the family because I think that was a consequence of the fact that she, as a very young person, had been split from the family and raised by an uncle.  And she didn't want any of her children to go through that experience.
Story_ID: 12237
Speaker 1: When you were at Wayne State [University], what were you majoring in?
Speaker 2: Pre-law.
Speaker 1: In pre-law, oh, that's right.  That's right cause your mother [Rose Isabelle Coote Richards] had--
Speaker 2: Yes, so I'd, you know, looked at it.  You know, there were--at that time, if you looked around the community, who was respected, who was making money, what do you shoot for?  You know, you'd never--there were no bankers that came to our house to, to dinner, no stockbrokers.  And, you know, as a young person, you, you look around you and you find the things that you can aspire to.  Well respected people in the community were the minister, doctor--I remember Dr. Simms.  He was our family doctor.  And he would come to the house.  And he was a very respected man, and lawyer.  But you--that's what you were exposed to.  And then there were teachers and social workers.  And that was it.  That was, nobody was talking finance.  Nobody was talking the stock market.  Nobody was talking, because those--and those became areas that you did not look to.  You did not hear people like that talked about at the dinner table or you did not meet them at the dinner table cause that's where kids, young people are forming their judgments about what they can be.  Uncle so-and-so is a, I could do that.  I could be like him.  Uncle, you know, the man next door is a, you know, well, he works at the Post Office.  I guess I can be like that, yeah, good job, the Post Office.  Well, those were the things that we were exposed to.  And you formed your judgments on that.  Well, law seemed to be, after doctor, the second best.  And by that time, I also, with my dramatic inclination, I had heard of and read about Clarence Darrow.  And that, I could see myself, as a Clarence Darrow, standing up for justice and an in--unjust situation in a courtroom, which was always envisioned as quite dramatic, and pulling the fat out the fire at the last minute.  That, so giving up on doctor, I sort of liked to do, go to law school or to be a lawyer.
Speaker 1: So, now, so that pretty much stayed--when did you, but you started acting more, and I'm, did you(simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did a little of that.  I did--there weren't many places to do that.  I, I took part in that type of activity in school when I could. At Wayne University, they had a wonderful department, speech department, as it was called then.  You could call up that university and get a speaker or a reading or a program of readings on any side of any subject, you know.  And, and the students got experience from that, you know.  We would go out to a women's club or whatnot and we'd get $5  And we'd do a, a program of readings, you know, or talk on something.  And it was a very active, very good program.  It got you out into the community, and you got money for it, and you tested your ideas or yourself in those situations.
Story_ID: 12238
Speaker 1: So, in 1943, you graduate, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: But what are you prepared to do at this point?
Speaker 2: Go into the Army.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right.  Okay.  You got drafted?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, I--no, I didn't--
Speaker 1: You didn't, you voluntarily went.
Speaker 2: Yes, well, I--my brother [Allan Richards], my older brother, again, as was the wont, he was early in the draft.  He had a small number.  And he was called up right away.  And I had, I got a student deferment until I graduated because also I was part of my mother's [Rose Isabelle Coote Richards] support.  I was working then full time at the [Wayne State] University as a janitor.  And I, that kept me out of the Army.  And then I finally figured, I said, you know, if, if I go in the Army, they're gonna put me in the infantry or in, what--driving a truck.  That's what they were putting black people doing.  But that, but there were openings for blacks in the Air Force.  There were people who were going into pilot training.  Now, I researched that.  That was a twenty-seven thousand dollars education that pilot training gave you.  And you learned how to fly a plane.  And I had always read, there was Pulp Magazine, Sky Birds and whatnot, but you, and you ran around as a kid (roaring airplane sound), making like an airplane.  And I--so I said, why don't I do that?  It will, they won't take me right away, so I will not go into the Army immediately and getting an opportunity to finish some of the things that I'm doing.  And I will go and get an education, and there'll be at least so many weeks before I go into combat when it comes.  It seemed like a very smart thing to do.  So I volunteered for the Air Force.  And I was accepted for pilot and/or bombardier training.  And eventually, my time came.
Speaker 1: Did you fly?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I, I never graduated.  The war ended before I finished.  But I started out flying, had my experiences in the airplane and flying around.  I met some wonderful guys, you know, and there was me--in our group, there was the, the young man who had been part of the development of the, I think it was the E6B computer, which is a computer, a small black computer that you had in the airplane where you could put the figures together and it would tell you how much gas you had to--how far you could go and things like that.  And he had been that.  There was, there was a teacher of math.  He was wonderful.  He taught--cause we had to learn, we went from addition, subtraction through, up to calculus in ten weeks, you know.  And he would teach with the chalk in one hand and the eraser in the other.  And he would put it up on the board, and erase it, and you had this much space to get it in.  And he would take a problem, and he'd put it up there.  And he'd say, "This problem will be on Friday's examination."  He'd erase it, and put it up again.  "This problem will be on Friday's examination."  The third time, "This problem will be on Friday's examination, and somebody's gonna miss it."  And which was true, and so my buddy and I, what we used to do is, at night, we would put blankets over the window because you were at lights out at a certain time, and we'd turn on the lights.  And we would teach math.  We'd try and teach math.  And that, you know, cause that kind of thing you did, which, we didn't do it because of that.  We did it, but it was the kind of thing that binds people together, which is very important when you're in that kind of a situation, where the person on your wingtip is, has your life in his hands and you have his life in yours.  You get to be very close in that way.  And so we went through that, and the, the war ended while I was in--or the middle of my training.
Story_ID: 12239
Speaker 1: So when the war ended, did you come back to Detroit?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then so, what did you start then doing?
Speaker 2: I needed to get a job.  So I, I looked around for a job, not very hard, you know.  And I finally saw an ad in the paper where the Welfare Department needed social workers.  I said, oh, that's an idea.  But I, I don't want to do that.  And I'm not trained for that.  So, okay, they will reject me.  So I applied, and took whatever tests they had.  And they said, can you go to work tomorrow?  I said, no, I can't (laughter), I told them, no, I couldn't go to work.  And they said, when can you go?  I said, two weeks.  And I didn't know it was--cause I just didn't want to go to work.  And they said, fine.  And I became a social worker.
Speaker 1: And how long were you a social worker, sir?  How long did you work in that field?
Speaker 2: I forget the years exactly cause that became all tied up--
Speaker 1: Let's see.  You probably were--how long, you were in the service for maybe three years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, two and a half years, three years.
Speaker 1: So like 1945?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: And then you worked as a social worker from nineteen--for how many years?
Speaker 2: For--I came to New York in '48 [1948].
Speaker 1: Forty-eight?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 12240
Speaker 1: What prompted the move here to New York?
Speaker 2: What happened in Detroit was that, at that time, I was, I was a social worker by day, and we, some fellow students and I, we had started a theater in Detroit, The Actors Company.  But before The Actors Company, we started as These Twenty People, who--we had gone to school together, and we loved the theater.  And we wanted to do theater in the summer.  And so, we banded together, and we got the city of Detroit to permit us to use--it was, there was, there's a--was a big house in the middle of River Rouge Park.  And it had a large living room.  So they permitted us to use that as a stage.  And we put on 'Hedda Gabler' that summer.  And I played Judge Brock.  I was a relatively well-known character during those days.  And so I did Judge Brock.  And it was--and out in the park.  And so when the fall came, we decided to hang together, stay together.  And so we changed the name to The Actors Company.  And we found, oh, a space at the Michigan Showmen's Association, which we rented and converted into a theater space.  And it had no stage.  We built a stage.  We built backdrops.  We--for lights, we didn't, couldn't afford lights, so we put thousand-watt bulbs into Number 10 tin cans, and that made us a stage.  And in the first year, we put, I believe it was seven shows in the repertory.  And I acted in some, and I directed one.  I directed 'Oedipus'.  And at the same time, I joined the Paul Robeson Art Guild, which was a mixed company--I was the only black in The Actors Company.  But a mixed group of, of actors, and a few, I'd say three blacks in it, which were doing politically active, social theater.  And so I was working with them.  So my--and I got, I was invited to do a disc jockey show at a local station.  So I--my day was full, you know, I had the--get up in the morning and go to, to work at the, at the, doing social work, and in the--and do my interviews in the morning in the office.  And then in the afternoon, I'd go out into the field.  And I would always manage to leave the field--I'd left a little early--and go to the actors company where we would rehearse.
Story_ID: 12241
Speaker 1: Can I understand something about These Twenty People--
Speaker 2: Yes, sure.
Speaker 1: Were they sort of on the fringes themselves or were they--(laughter), just, you know, cause sometimes people, artists were sort of on the fringe, you know, or they were leaning towards Communism or they were, you know, sort of--?
Speaker 2: I never heard Communism mentioned among those people.  The Paul Robeson Art Guild was much more inclined to be that.  They were socially conscious people and did socially conscious work.  And, but The Actors Company (loud phone ringing)--The Actors Company were students out of Wayne [State] University and who had come together there.  And much as we could have become, what, a Steppenwolf [Theatre Company] of its day, it was an excellent group of people cause they were people who were also doing the shows in Detroit.  Detroit here was the number four city in radio in this country.  And so, The Green Hornet, The Lone Ranger and several other shows originated in Detroit.  And these were the people who were working on those shows.  Also, Jam Handy did training films in Detroit.  And these were the people who were doing the film.  And it's--so, it was, there was, there were very talented people there.  Well, I was with them doing radio in the university, which was beamed out over the network stations and except, I was not hired for any of the professional work.  I was working with the same people, you know.  Finally, I got into the union.  I had--besides my disc jockey show, I had--(cough), excuse me, I had a show on Sunday morning called, 'A Little Church in the Air,' sponsored by the Council of Churches.  And I was the narrator on the show and introduced the choir.  I was the only black person on the show.  But I was the face of the show.  I don't know how that came about, but I was doing all the non-money work, you know.  And I did get, well, I got a disc jockey show.  That, the producer was a black man, and he did pay me something.  And, but I had a full life.  My gosh, I was getting up in the morning.  I'd go to the, do my job at the, social work at the welfare office.  And in the, by the afternoon, I was either at the theater rehearsing or whatever and the evening I was doing a show.  I'd do the show and go to the radio station, do my disc jockey stint and then go back to the theater because we had to work, and build the sets or whatever, set up the--for the next day.  And then after that, we would go off and go to my house and raid the ice box.  So the company or the core of the company would end up there.  That really was what my mother [Rose Isabelle Coote Richards] understood about theater.  My mother was blind at that time, but young people being hungry in the middle of the night was something she understood.  The raiding of the ice box was something she understood.  The, the theater part of it, she came to understand because many things came from that.  But I'll never forget, one time I was acting in, in a Molly Kazan play called the, 'The Egghead' and with Karl Malden and, oh, other wonderful people.  And we were on the road before coming into New York, and we were in Cleveland.  And she came down to Cleveland to see the show, and I had her come down.  And she had a wonderful seat in the center of the theater in about the eighth row or like that, and, to see this play that I was in.  I even had billing, my gosh.  And I, I had--there was a point in the show where I was doing was a tirade at, at, to Karl Malden, and it, it centered on my father [Albert George Richards] eventually.
Story_ID: 12242
Speaker 1: I had wanted to ask you a couple of questions that I didn't get to ask, and that was, it was hard for me to sort of conceive of you being the only black person in this troupe.  And my question was, because we had even started to talk about non-traditional roles, were you, in the things that you--did you play any non-traditional roles, you know, within this troupe?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes.  I played Judge Brock in 'Hedda Gabler.'  I played, I directed 'Oedipus.'  I, of course, I forget some of the other roles I did.  But there were not, they were not plays with black characters in them.  And, and I was functioning in them.  And it--I was not one of the--they were all good actors.  And I was not the least of them.  And if they were, really, if we were casting according to ability and, to do a particular role, then there were roles that I had the ability to do.  And if--I remember one young woman in the company, she said, "Oh, when my father saw the show, he had trouble for a few minutes because you were black, and then he said, he forgot it."  And he just related to the character, which was what we had believed.  And I was not aware of whatever they may have been going through relative to their friends or families, but it didn't effect what we were doing.  I--the first I heard about it, other than that, that I just mentioned, was Michael Tollin was, who was in the company, he was doing a talk on me for the Players Club.  They invited me to a Pipe Night.  That is when, at the Players Club, which was probably the oldest club in New York of theater persons, he mentioned in his introduction that, you know, he had worked with me in Detroit in The Actors Company, and I was doing everything.  And he said, there were, you know, they did have to confront some questions about my being a black person in the company.  But we did it.  And they were not disturbed by whatever questions they had.  And the audiences all seemed very satisfied with the work.  So, that's what I knew about it.
Speaker 1: But, Mr. Richards, are you saying that this was--it all seemed perfectly normal at the time.  I'm just--you know, this is, this is--are you saying it all seemed normal, and no one was trying to make a statement.  And you found this group of people at Wayne [State] University, and--
Speaker 2: In the, it was not theater about making a statement, other than the statement that was in the play, you know.  And we were not a theater that was about that.  We were doing great plays and that we all loved.  And we just did them, you know, and we didn't raise the question ourselves.  Nobody seemed to raise it, at least in my earshot, and I was an important member of the company.  That's, that's the--and that was something, as I say, I'd been doing for, for so many years now, that when it comes up these days, I guess I am a little tired of it.  It kind of comes up every ten years.  A new generation has to, in some way, come to terms with that factor, you know.  And I say that all art of the ages belongs to me, along with other people, but it's about mine.  And I don't feel any compunction about doing it, you know.  I see white actors doing Russian roles.  Well, they have--by what, what, what right do they have to do it any more than I do, you know?  Or than anyone else?  It belongs as much to me as it does to them.  And so I do it.  The art is for all of us.  And I--unless it is making a statement about that, then you might cast for that.  Other than that, it has to do with the ability of the actor to really fulfill, fulfill a particular role.  And it seemed that I was capable of fulfilling a number of roles that didn't have to be black.  And see, it's interesting that after that or after a season of that, the theater at Wayne University kind of approached me again, and said, we're setting up our season for next year, and we would like to consider you doing--and I said, "Forget it, I'm on my way to New York; I'm gone."  And it was okay, they had begin to, begun to come to terms with that on some level.  But it was, it wasn't something I was spending my life about.  It was incidental in the act of creating a piece of theater art.
Story_ID: 12243
Speaker 1: Were you deciding on New York as a place that you had to be because, you know, you wanted to be in theater or was--you know, earlier you had said your mother [Rose Isabelle Coote Richards] was saying, well, why do this, you know, and your--and, you know, you had this sort of strong urge to do it.  And so I'm just wondering how--?
Speaker 2: Well, New York, at that time, you know, there was no regional theater, yeah.  And I talk about The Actors Company being a really wonderful company, that in later years might have been called a regional theater company.  But it wasn't, you know.  It was community theater or university theater.  And the place for theater was New York.  And you had to come to New York and make it in New York.  And I am, I understand there were, what was it?  Somewhere around, up to 500 persons a day who came into New York to make it in theater.  So it was, it was the place to be.  And so everybody in the company understood that, felt that, knew that and, from time to time, a member would leave the company and go to New York.  And we all knew it, understood it and wished them well.  And ultimately, my time came.  When it came, I was, ooh, involved in two theaters, my, my job as a social worker, and my radio shows.  I was involved in all of that, and I got a phone call from James Lipton.  James Lipton had been, we had been in class together.  He was an excellent radio actor, and he had gone to New York.  And he called me and said, Lloyd, it's time for you to come to New York.  He said, there is a show being cast on Broadway.  It has a number of, we were--what were we then?  Negroes.  I think we were Negro then, Negro-character men in it.  I know the director.  I can get you a reading.  It goes into rehearsal--I know it was a short number of weeks.  He says, it's time for you to come to New York anyhow.  I said, fine, yes.  So I went around and I started, I wrote resignations, I gave resignations to all the things I was doing.  I, I said, I'm going to New York.  Everybody understood that, everybody in the theater understood that, that it was my time to go.  And so I bought a footlocker.  I, I called and made a reservation at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] on 135th Street, which was very expensive--inexpensive and a good place to be.  I bought a train ticket, and off I came to New York.
Story_ID: 12244
Speaker 1: I got to New York, got the Y [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association].  I called Jimmy [James Lipton], and his wife, Shirley, who was a wonderful person, very helpful.  And so, you know, he arranged and told me when to go to the theater and to meet the director, who was a very well-known name, who I won't name at this point.  And I went down, and I went to the stage door, and I was ushered in.  And a rehearsal was in progress.  And I saw that the director was on the other side of the theater.  When the, it broke, you know, I started across the theater, through the seats.  And he was on the other side, and he looked, and he looked at me.  And he started to shake his head.  And I, I'd come too far to be turned back by the shake of a head.  So I just kept coming.  And finally he said, "I'm looking for old men."  I said, well, I have played, and I started to list all the--Judge Brock, Teiresias in Oedipus, this, that, the other, that I had done.  "Old men," he said, "I'm looking for old men."  And I kept on coming and kept on talking.  And he finally said, it again, "I am looking for old men", and he pointed to the stage.  And I looked up there, and there sitting around on their break were about a dozen or so old men.  And I understood.  That was, welcome to the professional theater.  Forget it.  You're not in the regionals any more where you can, you were acceptable to do character men in that kind of a way.  And that was that.  And so I, that was my first lesson.  And Jimmy had gotten me an audition for the Actors Studio.  I auditioned for the Actors Studio.  I didn't make it.  I wasn't selected.  They were impressed by my work and this, and that and the other, but I was not selected.  So I started trying out for radio cause I'd done a lot of radio at Wayne [State] University in Detroit.  I had directed, I had acted, I had, whatever.  And so I began to go up to auditions.  I learned the value of the third floor at NBC at that time.  That was an actors' hangout.  And it was because they had a very, there was a large lounge up there.  So actors would sit around there, and the reason they sat there was because directors would go from studio to studio and pass through there.  And so you had a chance to try and accost directors with your picture or your whatever.  And I, there was a--strange things that happened to me there that I finally understood.  You'd be talking with somebody, and they wouldn't be looking at you.  They would be kind of looking beyond you.  And you're trying to talk to them, and I finally understood what that was.  They were trying to spot the director who might be going.  They weren't ignoring me.  That was, their life was at stake.  So, Shirley and Jimmy taught me how to get pictures or where to get pictures and how to make rounds.  And the most important thing about making rounds is to, how to take rejection.  That you don't take it personally, that people who are casting have an image of something they are looking for.  And you either come into that, walk into that frame and are that image.  Or you're not.  And you're not being rejected always because of your talent or your ability or one thing or another.  You don't fit the image for it.  And so that, that I learned and became conscious of.  What we were supposed to do is, you know, trudge the streets and go to casting offices and try and leave your picture or, and watch the trades and see if anybody was casting anything that had a part that you might be right for.  And there was very little that I was right for--I went up for an African once, but I wasn't right because I wasn't African enough.  Well, you know, (laughter) you got it from all ends, not tall enough, not short enough, not old enough, not African enough, not whatever.
Story_ID: 12245
Speaker 1: I did my time.  And I worked off-Broadway.  There I became even a fairly well-known off-Broadway actor, you know, which meant working for nothing.  I really had to get a job.  Well, I--having been in the Army, I had the 52-20.  We called it the 52-20 Club.  If you had been in the Service, you got $20.00 a week for fifty-two weeks.  I also could, through that, get some lessons.  I took French over at Berlitz and, and trudged the streets and met the people who were also doing that, and who were doing things off-Broadway.  You'd pick up little jobs here and there.  One job that I remember very much was counting Ms. Rheingold ballots.  We--they were all actors.  And we'd sit around in this room, and everybody was a bit hungry.  And I remember I used to take Lifesavers to those sessions and give people Lifesavers so that they'd have a little dextrose at least.  But, and there were some of us who had come from Detroit, who were making it, you know, pretty well.  Russell Beggs, a very good writer.  And Russell used to have me over to dinner quite a bit.  And if he wanted to entertain, which he didn't know how to do, I would do that.  I would, oh, order this, that and the other.  We'd fix this, that and the other for people we both knew from Detroit, who had come to a party or event or whatever.  But, and, and there was a group of Detroiters who had come and who had gotten an apartment on the East side, in the 50s on Third Avenue.  And there were four or five of them living in that apartment.  And so we would all pool monies and, and get food and, and make dinner for everybody.  So each of us didn't have to run out and spend money trying to find dinner.  That was the life we were living.  And in the meantime, I got, some off-Broadway shows, and hung on that way with some wonderful people.
Speaker 2: I want to know, what year are talking about that you came to New York (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: I came to New York in 1948.
Speaker 2: And are there people that actually moved to, to Detroit with you at that time?
Speaker 1: Moved?
Speaker 2: I mean moved from, with you--I mean from Detroit?
Speaker 1: From Detroit--
Speaker 2: No?
Speaker 1: Not with me.
Speaker 2: Not with you, okay.
Speaker 1: But a number of the actors that I knew from Wayne [State] University, both in radio and from stage, they had moved to New York.  So they were the basic group that I moved with.  It was the Detroit group.  And there were no black actors among them.
Speaker 2: James Lipton, was one--had he come from Detroit?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, we went to school together, you know.  He was one of the actors who used to work the Green Hornet, the Lone Ranger, the what not, you know.  I was the only actor in the group who wasn't doing these shows, you know.  And it was, there was a lot of work going out of Detroit, out of Chicago at that time.  And I was only doing the freebie work.
Speaker 2: So did you find, when you came here, were you discouraged at all?  Or was New York exciting in this whole, you know, way of sort once you learned the system and the whole thing of rejection and, did you find New York exciting?
Speaker 1: Oh, New York was an exciting place because it's a place where something might happen.  You never knew when it was going to happen, you know, where it would become your time.  And you just kept at it, kept after it.  And after a while, I had done an off, an off-Broadway show with Paul Mann.  Paul Mann directed it.  Paul Mann was a teacher who had studied with the group theater or had been a part of the group theater.  And, oh, gosh, I forget the title of the show right now.  But he asked me, after the play was over, if I would come and teach with him.  He said, he had noticed my way of work, my technique, and he thought it was excellent, and he said, I--he would take me as an assistant to teach with him and learn his way of teaching and do some teaching.  So I said, yes, and I went to work with Paul.  Well, there were a lot of--Paul--there were a lot of students who came to Paul because I was there, you know.  And they, in a sense, wanted to study with me.  And I brought people to Paul, and he had a very good group of people who were studying with him and paying him for lessons.  And I was his assistant.  I would register people and things like that and occasionally teach a class, you know.  And I would get paid, a rather meager sum for teaching a class. Well I met a lot of people that way.
Story_ID: 12246
Speaker 1: You said that here you were working with Paul Mann, and he was--you were recruiting people.  Now, why would people want to come?  How are you such a good recruiter for him?
Speaker 2: Well, well, if I, if I was in a show, you know, and people appreciated the way I functioned as an actor, you know, they--and they knew I was teaching with Paul, they'd say, can I study with you?  And I'd say, you have to register with Paul.  And so they would come, not that everyone that went to Paul Mann, came through me, not at all.  And a number of students that came from all over the place, cause he had that background as the group theater.  And he was kind of the bad boy, you know, there was Lee Strasberg and there was Stella Adler and there were [Sanford] Sandy Meisner and the rest of them, who were teachers.  And Paul, I think he had been a young member of the group theater, and one of the latter ones and kind of a rebel of the group, in a way, and he had, he worked with [Konstantin] Stanislavski in Russia at some point.  And he--as had other people in the group theater.  And everybody came back with the message.  They had the truth of it.  Well, Paul had his own which was different from others.  And so he was a little bit--when they started the Actors Studio, Paul was not invited to teach with them--
Speaker 1: You're hitting your microphone.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's what's that.  Well, where do you want me to start?
Speaker 1: You were saying when Paul, you know, they came back fully--
Speaker 2: Yes, they came back with their own version of what Stanislavski meant when he said, which is what it is, you know, everybody interprets what he meant when he said it.  And Paul had his own.  Well, what I found about Paul was, Paul was an excellent, absolutely excellent basics teacher.  He was not the, the best advanced teacher.  And that was because, I feel, he couldn't let go.  You know, he had to hold on to people.  So he couldn't permit whatever was their own talent to flower, as such.  He had to control that talent.  Well, I taught with him for a number of years, and finally, I--well, I got a job on 'Mr. Jolly's Hotel for Pets,' a running part on a radio show, my first running part on a radio show.  And that changed things a little for me cause now I had a regular, running job.  At that time, I was working at Paramount Pictures as--now, when I say I was working at Paramount Pictures, you'd think I was working in pictures, no way.  I worked at Paramount Pictures in New York, which was the--I think it was the fifteenth floor of the Paramount Building or what used to be the Paramount Building, with the dome on top, which were the Executive Offices.  And I got a job as the waiter in the dining room with--it had one chef, an English chef, and me, the waiter, the executive dining room on the fifteenth floor of the Paramount Building.  And so that job was--I'd come in, in the afternoon and Pat, the English chef, would be there.  And he'd be started, and he'd have ordered all of these wonderful things from all the best stores in New York.  And I would set the table.  There was one long table and the chair at the head of it was for Barney Balaban  when he was there, but the chair was there, but the chair was there whether he was there or not.  And to his right was Adolph Zucker, who was one of the real founders of Paramount and the whole thing.  They were there, and then all of the vice presidents had spots at the table.  And it was very, very interesting to me that everybody knew where his spot was, relative to where the head of the table was.  And I worked there for many years, and it was a job that I could structure any way I wanted, except my hours were 12:00 to 3:00, lunchtime.  And it was right in the middle of the theater section.  If I needed to go out on an audition or anything, I could go if I could get back.  Or I could bring someone in to substitute for me.  And it was my job to--I got freedom on that job.  (Knock on door interruption).  So it was a wonderful job.  And they served the best food, and so, and I could take home the leftovers if I wanted, which weren't always leftovers, you know.  And I had a little blue bag, a little blue hand athletic bag.  And when I'd get home on--by that time, I had found a little apartment on 56th Street, near 8th Avenue, where I could walk anywhere.  And so friends of mine knew that I had food.  It might be venison, it might be steaks, it might whatever it was.  And they could always come there and get a meal.  And I, once a week I would probably have people over to dinner.  And we would--there was a liquor store next door.  And they were theater buffs in the liquor store, so I could go over there and get a jug of wine, you know, and at a good price.  Or, and, so we, we ate well, at least one day a week.  And I, and Paramount was something I didn't have to worry about.  And I lived at that level even when I was doing better.  I made a rule for myself.  I said, you live at the level of your last job, not your current one.  And that permits you to put away a little something for when you didn't live at that level.  Now, it was--Paramount was wonderful for me.  And I heard later that Adolph Zucker, who was the old man, he used to walk from, down from 59th Street, where he lived to, to the Paramount Building.  And he could hardly make it, but he was in every day.  And he said, you know, that waiter that we had here for so many years, he walked right out of here and directed a Broadway show, which was really what had happened.  I--and I kept that job right up until the time that I directed 'Raisin in the Sun.'  As--but it was an interesting and an interesting play.  And very wonderful people.  I met a lot of wonderful people.
Story_ID: 12247
Speaker 1: When I got my first, my first Broadway show, I had auditioned and auditioned, and I got this job.  And--
Speaker 2: What show was this?
Speaker 1: This was 'Freight'--
Speaker 2: 'Freight,' okay.
Speaker 1: --which is a one-act play that went on with another one-act, 'A Phoenix Too Frequent'.  And it was at the Fulton Theater, which is now the, oh, I forget.  It's in Shubert Alley or just about.  And I--when I got that job, and I, my agent had negotiated billing, I was gonna get billing above the theater with other people, but my name would be there.  And I--so that, you know, you walk up and down that street day after day, year in and year out, and, you know it's the street where you want to belong, but you don't belong.  You don't belong because the street in some way has not yet accepted you.  Broadway has not--you've, you have ambitions for Broadway, but Broadway is hard and resistant, and it doesn't necessarily accept you because you want to be there.  And when I got this show, I said, "I'm on Broadway".  And so I determined to see my name above the theater, so I walked down Broadway from 56th Street, knowing that when I rounded a certain corner and looked up, I would see the billboard above the theater, and my name would be on it.  Well, I walked down Broadway, and I looked up, and there it was.  'A Phoenix Too Frequent' and 'Freight' with so and so, so and so, so and so, and Floyd Richards.  I stood in the middle of Broadway, and I cried.  Come all this time and all this way and there it was, Floyd Richards.  That--well, I complained to a number of people who apologized and said it would be changed by the next day.  And, of course, it was.  Someone went up there and changed it.  The background was yellow, and the excuse me, (cough) the lettering was black.  Well, they had painted out the F and put in an L, but yellow that they used to paint over the F was not quite the same yellow that was in the rest of the poster, so it was always--and if you looked closely there, it, it didn't quite belong, which was a big lesson, you know.  It teaches you actually the, the fickleness of it and that the, in, that it's a very transient thing, that it is not, you got it, you know, you've got to get it and get it and get it again to got it.  And that was my introduction to Broadway.  That's how I got there.  And it was a long haul, a very interesting haul.  I met some wonderful people on the way up.
Story_ID: 12248
Speaker 1: Sidney [Poitier] was a young actor, a very talented young actor around town.  And he, he came to Paul [Mann] to study.  And Paul gave him a scholarship because he couldn't afford it.  And I--Sidney and I became friends.  And I used--would teach his class occasionally.  And he was impressed, and we'd have coffee at time at "after class."  Now after class, you may know it by another name, but it's when class is over, you go out and you get a cup of coffee with the class and hash over everything that went on in class.  And they call that after class.  Well, at after class one day, we were splitting a hot dog, Sidney and I, because we couldn't afford one each, so we got one and split it.  And in that evening--somewhere in that evening he said to me, he said, you know, if I ever do anything meaningful on Broadway, I would want you to direct it.  And I said, yes, yeah, it's the kind of wonderful things that people say to one another, that are a manifestation of their aspiration, you know.  And it's, yeah, and whether it ever happens or not, you never hold people to it cause that--it means all of that at that moment that it's said.  And it was years later that I got a call from Sidney that said, I'm going to do a play on Broadway, and I'd like to put you up as a director, what?  It's written by a woman, you know her, I didn't.  What do you think?  I'll send you the play.  So he sent me the play, and that was the beginning of my involvement with 'A Raisin in the Sun.'
Speaker 2: That's an amazing story.  So that's how it came.  It was actually he who called you--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --about (unclear).
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, he did.  He did.  We, yeah, he had a good theory--Sidney, he had been through so many things.
Speaker 2: He, by that time, he had had his, he had already had his Hollywood début?
Speaker 1: Yes.  He was, he was going into 'Porgy and Bess' at that time.  And, yes.  And that was a whole part of the beginning for the 'Raisin in the Sun.'
Story_ID: 12249
Speaker 1: Up to this point, you're helping teach, and you also are acting.  What I don't understand is how you transitioned really into directing?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, I was directing before I came to New York.  I was directing in Detroit, but when I came to New York, I said, it's gonna be hard enough for me to try and make it as an actor, you know.  I'm not gonna try and also make it as a director.  So, I, I put directing aside.  But in the summer, people in Detroit who had, people who were producing summer theater, would have me out to direct in summer theater at Northland Playhouse, particularly.  And before that even, oh, gosh, I forget the producer's name, who I knew from Detroit, and a very good guy.  And he knew me as a, a good director as well as an actor.  And he was doing summer theater in Saginaw, Michigan, and he invited me to come up to Saginaw and direct up there, which I did.  I had a wonderful time with wonderful people doing summer theater.  And, yeah, so I was directing, but I wasn't seeking directing in New York.  I was seeking acting in New York.  So it--I was hardly known as a director in New York.  I was known as an actor.
Speaker 1: So really during your time in Para--you know, when you were working at Paramount, you were still mainly, you had that radio show that you said you worked?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked on that for a while, I did that.
Speaker 1: And were you still doing off-Broadway during that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, absolutely.  I worked with some wonderful people, Frank Silvera, Jimmy Edward, Jimmy--James Edwards, was it James Edwards?
Speaker 1: James Edwards (unclear).
Speaker 2: He was, he had done some films and made a name in films.  We did some off-Broadway work together, you know, and had a wonderful time doing it.  Frank was a excellent actor, wonderful actor and a good, good friend.  And Jimmy, oh, and then, you know, we'd do a number.  We did the, the play about the Scottsboro Boys.  They show that on and off--over in Hells Kitchen.  And that was an experience because we were in a neighborhood where we were not welcomed.  We were in a neighborhood where--we were in a building where there were polka dances above the floor of the theater, you know, on weekends.  And so that floor above would, would rock and the heels would clump and we would act and everything below.  And one night, even the, some of the people who had been dancing quit dancing and came down to the theater and stood in the back and took folding chairs and threw them onto the stage.  We went through that.  They had the--and at that time, we had to sometimes fight our way to the theater, you know.  And it was then that I learned that a Coca-Cola bottle, an empty Coca-Cola bottle, if you held in your hand was considered a weapon.  If it was in a bag, a paper bag, it was not a weapon.  It was a Coca-Cola bottle that you were returning to someplace.  So you always made sure to at least have one of those in your hand as you walked the, the blocks from 8th Avenue to wherever we were performing--I forget the name of it.  And so that--we used to fight, have to fight our way to the theater and in the theater.  And then there was, we were working on the West Side--East Side at one point, some little theater that was in a basement, underneath a bar.  And 'Longitude 49,' we did that, which was a play about longshoremen.  And Frank Silvera was in that.  And it was, and Frank, and there was another actor, a white actor who used to always be in those off-Broadway shows too.  By "those," I mean plays with social conscience and something to say.  And Frank used to toss a few all the time, and this, the stage was that small.  It was as wide as a, a brownstone.  And there was this, a bar in the basement.  And Frank--and you had, to get to the stage, you had to go through the bar and climb up a very tight flight of stairs.  And Frank used to spend his time in the bar until he had to go on stage.  And there he a, they had a thing going as to how many Slivovitches you could down in an evening.  And Frank was a good downer of Slivovitches.  And, but he was an, a wonderful actor, you know.  And it was--I did hear a story, [Elia] Kazan, when they did the movie 'Viva Zapata!', in one scene, really tried to see how tanked he could get Frank while he was doing a scene, while he was shooting a scene--and to get a certain, whatever he wanted from Frank.  And he fed Frank liquor till it was coming out of his ears practically.  And Frank was drinking it and on his feet, you know.  And I always, I guess the line that I associate with Frank Silvera mostly, was--well, he was West Indian too, and I say "too."  I am not West Indian.  My parents were.
Speaker 1: You're West Indian.
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm a West Indian, Jamaican descent and Frank was.  And I just loved his line.  He'd do some readings, and in one of them, he said the line, "Better belly bust and good bitter ways", you know, and I would just howl at that because it was, it was so Jamaican.  But it was a wonderful accent, you know, a lot of those experiences off-Broadway with James Edwards and, oh, I--it's a shame to forget the names, but that's what, forty years back.  But they were wonderful people, and equity library shows that I did with excellent people.  Now, equity library shows, very often it was the out-of-work actors.  And some of them were very name actors that would end up in an equity library show.
Speaker 1: Can you give an example?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, there was one actress, character actress, and I can't remember her name now, but I went into--she came backstage after a show I did.  And I saw her coming toward me to, obviously to congratulate me or say something.  And I looked at her, and I knew her as well as I knew my aunt.  She looked like one of my aunts, as a matter of fact, and I couldn't remember her name.  And I was in a panic.  And, of course, I had never met her.  I had just associated with her on the screen, that I knew her.  And I, I always had trouble with names.  I don't--I have an excuse for that when I'm teaching.  I say, you know, it's very confusing.  I--somebody is introduced to me as a particular name.  Then I spend the next eight hours watching them behave for me in another name, under another name.  And so I'm more associated with the name that they are on the stage than the name that they have in life cause I don't see them that much in life.  But on the stage, I see them all day long.  And so I just don't bother to remember names anymore cause it doesn't do me any good.
Speaker 1: I'm not the best at names myself so (laughter).
Speaker 2: I know.  I was walking down the street with my wife once, and we were in rehearsal.  And, you know, I forget the title of the play that was rehearsing at the same time.  And we were walking down the street.  And I see this woman coming toward us, and I, I--Barbara, who's my wife, is, helps me a great deal with this.  This woman was coming toward us, and she looked at me.  And I knew she knew me, and I knew I knew her.  And I said, Barbara, who's that?  Who's that?  Who's that?  And she said, "Anne Bancroft, idiot." (laughter).  And I mean, (laughter) that's how far gone I was.  And Anne was, I just loved her work so.  And, of course, I knew who she was.  But I knew her as character names and never addressed her as that.  Now, if she was in a magazine, I would probably remember her name, but in person, no.
Story_ID: 12250
Speaker 1: I want to ask about 'Raisin in the Sun.'  So you're saying that literally, Sidney Poitier recommends you  or he had--so can you tell that story because Lorraine Hansberry is really a nobody at that point, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And no one's really--she's out of Chicago.  No one's heard of her, but tell that, tell the story.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, Sidney sent me the play, 'Raisin in the Sun.'  And I read it.  I read it with Barbara [Richards].  One night we just sat on the bed and read it.  And we laughed and we cried, and whatnot.  And so I told Sidney, yes, I'd be interested.  He said, well, you should meet Lorraine, and that--no, you should meet the producer, and then Lorraine.  And if they say, okay, then, okay.  So I did meet--I met Lorraine first.  And she and I hit it off.  We had the same inclinations in playwrights and what we liked in the theater and things like that.  We, we had a very good meeting.  And I went on to meet Philip Rose, the producer, who had never produced a play before.  And so I had more experience than any of them.  Phil had never produced a play before.  Lorraine had never had a play she had written produced.  Sidney had never been the star of a Broadway show.  Nobody had any experience.  I'd at least been on Broadway, even if it was a little part in 'Freight' and a very decent in Molly Kazan's play, but I had, I had more experience than anyone.  And so Philip, I met him, the producer, and we got along.  And so, yes, we'll do it.  And Lorraine had just been told, quite justly so--this was a year before we actually went to rehearsal.  This was December, I forget the year.  And--
Speaker 1: '58, do you think it was '58?  The play was on Broadway in '59 [1959].
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine, it would have been '58 [1958].  But Lorraine had been told that her play was really in her first act, and that she should consider rewriting it cause the play she had written, by the second act, they were in the new house.  And it was a play about their problems in the new house with the neighborhood.  And she was told her play was really in the struggle of Walter Lee to become a man and what it took the family, within the family.  And she had accepted that, and she was ready to do a very major rewrite on what she had written when I came into the picture.  And so I started to work with her on that basis.  We would meet once a week or once a month and focus on a particular scene.
Story_ID: 12251
Speaker 1: We would work [he and playwright Lorraine Hansberry].  We would meet and discuss what she had written.  And then she would rewrite, and then proceed and go on.  And we worked through the winter in that way.  And we would meet occasionally with the producer and with Bobby [Robert Nemiroff] her husband, who was very involved and very concerned.  And, but the play was progressing, but the, and we, I would meet with Philip [Rose], and we would go to the theater or her office trying to get a theater.  We were scheduled to go in rehearsal in September and to come into New York (interruption)--
Speaker 2: Sir, your right hand, sir, your microphone.
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, yes, sorry.  We were, we were scheduled to go into rehearsal in September and go out of town and come into New York later in that fall.  But we couldn't get a New York theater.  We would go and sit in the theater owner's offices and try and get a theater.  We couldn't get a theater.  In the meantime, Philip had signed contracts.  So there was a date in September where money starts to go out.  And the money wasn't coming in.  None of the smart money was invested in 'Raisinb [in the Sun]', not at all.  The--so it was, Philip was having great trouble raising the money.  And so he was looking to the fact that he might have to bring in another producer, an experienced producer who had available money, which somewhere in the summer, he decided he was going to have to do because the--September was coming.  So he, he called me, and he talked to Lorraine about it.  And he said, if I take in another producer, they are going to want to have artistic say.  And will you and Lorraine not cut me out.  And I said, of course, you know, it was tearful thing.  We all had--that we would stick together.  And I, of course, in the back of my mind was the fact that if a money producer came in, I might not be in, you know, I'm next to go or first to go or whatever.  So I--we said that, and committed to that, and he was, Phil was at that verge, I don't know exactly what point, of having to give in to another producer.  And September was coming around and Sidney [Poitier] was working on 'Porgy and Bess.'  And Philip got a phone call that the set of 'Porgy and Bess' had burned down.  And they were going to have to delay, and would they permit--would we permit a delay for Sidney and postpone our rehearsal so that they could finish the movie.  Well, that was a relief because it, it permitted us more time.  So, where we were supposed to go into rehearsal in September, we actually went in, in December.  And the last money came in the week of rehearsal.  It was, when you think of it now, $75,000 was not a lot of money, but it was a lot of money in that time.  And I think the biggest investment was either $3,000 or $4,000.  Excuse me (coughing).
Speaker 2: That was a lot of money--$75,000 was a lot of money.
Speaker 1: Yes.  I think the largest investment was made by Harry Belafonte who may have invested two or $3,000, I forget which, cause they were all poker buddies, Sidney and Phil Rose and Harry, he was part of that.  And so we were scheduled in rehearsal in December.  And we went in December, just under the wire.  And we worked during rehearsal, and shaped the play more and it--finally, Lorraine came to me--there was a wonderful role in there that, I think Bobby Nemiroff put back into the, the musical of the woman upstairs who would--and that was played by, oh, what's the wonderful actress who went to the west coast, and she had that robust laugh, ha, ha, ha, ha, Richards--
Speaker 2: Not Beah Richards?
Speaker 1: Beah Richards.
Speaker 2: Beah Richards.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Beah Richards, okay, Beah Richards.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was wonderful.  And she had the last line.  She'd come in, when she heard about the--that the family was moving, and she had the line where she said, "I, I can see it now in headlines in the paper, Negroes invade Clyburn Park, bombed".  And (laughter) that would bring the house down.  And she was great.  But Lorraine said to me, one day, she said, that part works, but it doesn't work for the play.  It's experientially redundant, and it takes away from [Karl] Lindner in the last act, the white man who comes.  And so we discussed that, and I agreed with her, and that part was eliminated.  And it was so sad because Beah was so wonderful in it, you know.  And it was--so 'Raisin' was a fantastic experience.  We went--we finished rehearsals in New York, and we went to our opening in Philadelphia--no in New Haven.  We had half a week in New Haven and a week in Philadelphia.  That's all we had.  We didn't have a New York theater.  So we went to New Haven.  We opened in New Haven, and the audiences loved the play.  We went to Philadelphia.  We opened to half a house.  By the middle of the week, the house was full and 50 percent of it was black.  And that was really one of the first times that the, that blacks had come to the theater in that kind of numbers.  And they--one woman said to me, you know, they tell me in my neighborhood that there's something going on down here that concerns me.  And I had to come to find out what it was all about.  And that's really so much of what has kept black people out of the theater as an audience, because they don't see much of themselves there.  They're not reflected there, you know.  And so it's impossible though to go from going to the theater and seeing yourself reflected in some way, and then seeing it in other terms, in somebody else's play, you know, and one you can relate to that there.  But otherwise, you're dealing from the fact of exclusion and not that really the problems, the human problems of the world are mine too.  And, oh, yes, they are like somebody else's.  You know, you are dealt with as an excluded human being.  But 'Raisin' was wonderful.
Story_ID: 12252
Speaker 1: Could we talk about the casting and how, you know, because you have such a wonderful cast, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: But can you talk about how--?
Speaker 2: How we got it together.  Well, we started with, of course, with Sidney [Poitier].  And Sidney was friends with Ruby Dee and what not.  And so she--I considered--Ruby wanted to play Diana's [Diana Sands] role, Beneatha [Younger], oh, so badly.  And I think to this day, Ruby is still angry with me that I didn't (laughter) cast her in that role.  But Diana Sands auditioned, and she was wonderful.  I am--it's so sad that we lost, the theater lost Diana Sands, a beautiful actress, a wonderful actress.  And so we were looking for a mama.  And I said, I saw a woman, you know, we went to Hollywood, and there were wonderful actors out there, but they hadn't been on stage in so long, you know, the Hattie McDaniels and the rest of them, wonderful, wonderful people, wonderful actors.  But the stage, and to, and to commit all those lines and what not.  They weren't ready to do that.  And I had seen, oh, what's her name, who did Mama?
Speaker 1: I'm trying--see, I'm--it's escaping me, who did Mama.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's like, it's going out (unclear).  Claudia McNeil.
Speaker 1: Claudia McNeil, right.
Speaker 2: I had seen Claudia do 'Simply Heavenly,' I believe it was.  And, and I said, you know, that's a person that I think could do it.  And so Lorraine [Hansberry] said, I think so too, probably right.  But let's bring her in, and let's read her.  And so I brought Claudia in, and she read for Mama.  And she was terrible.  She was not good.  And Lorraine said to me, she won't do.  I said, Lorraine, I think she will do.  I said, let me take two weeks with her.  I will work with her over a two-week period, and bring her back in.  We'll see.  And I worked with her for a couple of week, and I brought her back in to read.  And she did.  And Lorraine said, yes, that's her.  And that's how we got her.  And, of course, [Louis] Lou Gossett was, I had seen him when he did the part of a young kid on Broadway, did some wonderful work.  And he came in and read, and he got that part.  And, and the others were, you know, sorting through people and bringing that--back people who had run into at one time or another and reading them and reading them.  And finally, we got a cast.
Speaker 1: And you said, six--how long did it take to cast it because you also said you did six, you know, you had--
Speaker 2: Oh, we went, we were casting all spring.  It took us about ten months.  I was casting from, you know, early in the year, after I had been designated as the director, we started doing some casting, we'd see people.  And then we'd stop and we'd see people some more.  And finally--we, we saw a lot of people for it.
Story_ID: 12253
Speaker 1: It went from, you said, Philadelphia to New Haven?
Speaker 2: No, to New Haven to Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Philadelphia, and then to New York?
Speaker 2: Then to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Then to Chicago.
Speaker 2: See, we, we only had the week in Philadelphia.  When we got to Philadelphia, we--at the end of that week, we had no place to go.  The show would have closed, could have closed there.  We'd have been stuck out there in Philadelphia, with nothing to do, no place to go.  And the--but the word started going back to New York, you know, and about the show, from the time we left New Haven.  And so people, the money people from New York were coming to see the show.  And where I had been told by later theater owners, you know, there is, people will not come to see a play about a black family, you know.  And the, but when they began to hear about the show and the audiences, they came down to see the show, and finally, they offered Phil [Philip Rose]--they said, if you will go--the Shubert [Theater], if you will go to--we don't have a theater, but if you will go to Chicago for eight weeks, we will underwrite the show against the loss.  And you can come into New York, and we'll have a theater for you.  And that was it.  That was what would--happened.  Otherwise, we'd have closed.  We were so close to closing that show.  It really was amazing.
Speaker 1: So what kind of deal with the Schubert at that point in time, were they owners of the Schubert or who did that?
Speaker 2: Well, it, that was Phil Rose.
Speaker 1: Phil Rose, okay.
Story_ID: 12254
Speaker 1: How did [Philip] Phil Rose and Lorraine [Hansberry] come to know each other?
Speaker 2: I guess through Bobby [Robert Nemiroff] cause Bobby worked for Phil.  Phil was a record producer.  And Bobby Nemiroff, her husband, worked for Phil Rose.  And they played poker every week, and it was a whole group of people that played, Sidney [Poitier] and Phil and, and some others.  And Bobby was her partner.
Speaker 1: But was Lorraine, was she--she was living in Chicago, weren't they Chicago-bound or were they New York--
Speaker 2: They were living in New York.
Speaker 1: In New York, okay, okay.  I see.  Chicago likes to claim her as their own.
Speaker 2: Well, she was born there.
Speaker 1: Right, right, (laughter) but in never having left--
Speaker 2: And Chicago actually, Lorraine's father [Carl Hansberry] was a real estate broker and actually the, the play--why they, why they went to the new house, by the second act, that's what Lorraine was interested in because the--according to her, well, she felt that because her father fought a restrictive covenant case to the Supreme Court and won, he was branded and ostracized by the real estate interests in Chicago.  And she blamed them for his death.  And so that was very much a part of her interests.  So it was, I don't know where she met Bobby, but she was writing, had been writing.  And, you know, it was through the poker games, things went around, more than chips and money.  And I, who didn't play poker, got included in the artistic element cause I had had a relationship with Sidney.
Story_ID: 12255
Speaker 1: You come to New York.  Does it ['A Raisin in the Sun'] open to rave reviews in New York?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was--people who remember it, consider it one of the most stunning openings in theater history.  It was, oh, it was--well, see, in developing that play, in the work that we did on it, that play had originally, so strongly, been Mama's play.  But it was very hard to rewrite it and make Walter Lee's play cause it--and even now, you notice the way the play is, it's very tricky.  Walter Lee is on in the first ten minutes of the first act.  And then he's gone off the stage.  He comes back at the end of the second act, and he has to carry the play from that point on.  And that wasn't easy.  It wasn't easy for Sidney [Poitier].  That, it wasn't easy, it wasn't easy for Sidney to, to do that, you know.  And it was--so it was a lot of work that went into that, and it was--and so it was in the writing, had to do it, and the, and the performing had to do it, and when we opened in Chicago to decent reviews, Lorraine [Hansberry] came to me the day after we opened and said she was, she said, "I'm gonna, I'm going to New York".  I said, oh, when will you be back?  And she said, I'm not coming back.  And the fact was that she had been informed that there were warrants out for her, that there were--they had written up violations on--she had inherited property there.  And so they were all these violations on the property, that she felt strongly were actually in positions from these people who really hated her father [Carl Hansberry].  So she was going to be arrested.  So she left Chicago with, we still had eight weeks in Chicago.  And I said, there's a lot of work to do.  How are we gonna do it?  And we worked it out where, what we'd do, I'd watch the show every night, of course.  And after the show, I would call her and tell her what was, what I thought went wrong, and what I thought it needed.  And she would do whatever adjustments in writing she wanted to do and would call me the next morning with whatever new lines and new ideas.  And we'd discuss them, and I would take the new lines and take them to rehearsal and rehearse them, and we did that for eight weeks, you know.  Now, the, the measure of the play, there was a meter in the play.  Sidney was the top star.  And he had the last curtain call, and Claudia McNeil had a single curtain call before him.  And she would get an ovation, and then the applause would drop after her ovation when Sidney took his call.  And he was the star, and he was the lead, and he was the play.  So that was my measure.  I said, when I will really know that we have achieved what we're working for, when Sidney's applause, when they appreciate what Sidney has done, what that character has done as much as what Mama's is.  And in the last week that applause drew even, and Sidney's applause topped Claudia's.  And I said, okay, we're ready for New York.  And we went to New York.
Speaker 1: And what did the reviews say here in New York?
Speaker 2: I don't read reviews.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh, I don't believe that.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, I don't read reviews.  I don't remember that, I did, you know, but a very, a few, there were a few critics who I respect.  And, and I read them to find out what they think, not just to find out who likes me and who doesn't.  You know, I, I just, I just can't stand it.  I've always been that way, you know, about reviews.  And so, I may later read some of the reviews or something, but I'm not a review hound at all.  But it was, there was, oh, when the curtain came down, it was an ovation that just wouldn't stop.  And finally, excuse me, (coughing) Sidney had to call me to the stage from the audience.  And I went out, and then he called Lorraine and she wouldn't come.  And he jumped off the stage and went and got Lorraine and carried her onto the stage.  And it was, it was, yeah, one of those motion picture-like finishes.  It was--and we went to Sardi's after that, and I had never been to Sardi's--I had been to Sardi's, but not for an opening night party.  They do opening night parties different now.  They have them in different places.  And so when I walked into Sardi's, I heard applause.  And I was looking around for who they were applauding, and it was me (laughter).  They were applauding me.  And I couldn't believe it.  It was, you know, it was that, it was Broadway, different from the time that I'd walked down Broadway and saw "Floyd Richards" up above there.  I had arrived, finally.
Speaker 1: You had arrived, and you had, and you had arrived and as a director.
Speaker 2: Yes, the director.
Story_ID: 12256
Speaker 1: Why do you think 'Raisin [in the Sun]' was such a special piece?  You know, why is it good American theater?
Speaker 2: It's good American theater because it's well-written drama.  It has, you know, the characters are, are defined and definite and have depth.  And they have, it's--and it is not just a play about black life.  It's a play about the striving for, for manhood, of a young man and the achieving of manhood, which is both achieved and bestowed, not bestowed as much as acknowledged by his family, you know, and which is a thing that permits him to be what he is and can be, and is.  And it's, it's something that people can relate to from any culture.  And that's what they saw in it, people saw in it, and black audiences certainly.  And white, white audiences too.  They saw themselves in a, they saw the struggle of a family 'cause many families have similar struggles, you know, in many walks for life.  And this is what good art is about.  It focuses on one element, but it's resonance is unlimited.  And it's, it's about aspiration.
Story_ID: 12257
Speaker 1: She [Lorraine Hansberry] had that one good play in--I mean she had other plays, but that was her really one good play.  And she, her life was sort of cut--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, cut short.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But it's very interesting, the story of how the two of you worked together.  That doesn't happen all the time either--
Speaker 2: No, it--
Speaker 1: --that the director is able to play that role.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the producer, you had a producer who was sort of hands-off--
Speaker 2: (Laughter)--he was--
Speaker 1: And he was this person (simultaneous), he wasn't meddling around.
Speaker 2: He wasn't hands-off--
Speaker 1: He wasn't?
Speaker 2: He wasn't hands-off, but he wasn't hands-on.  But he was very interested and he had opinions.  And I listened to his opinions.  But he was not a pressure person.  It's--there were a lot of instances where he demonstrated that, that he was a good producer, and that he had faith in the artistry of the people he had selected, you know.  And we had a lot of things we had to work out and did work out, but he had faith.
Speaker 1: So this really catapulted all of you, really, to acclaim.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Every--actually, everyone who was in that was blessed in a lot of ways.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: They had to be.  The actors, the, you know, you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did Phil [Philip Rose] go on to direct, to produce anything else?
Speaker 2: Yes, he produced many things.  As a matter of fact, he just published a book called, 'You Can't Do That on Broadway.'  And there's a book party somewhere this week or next week.  I couldn't make it because I was doing something else, and I haven't read the book yet.  And I am--his version of 'Raisin' may be different from mine, but I think he comes from, everything he did, they told him he couldn't do it.
Story_ID: 12258
Speaker 1: Let's go on to August Wilson, okay.  I know he won't talk to you about it, but you had a long relationship with him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that, the play was 'The Egghead'.
Speaker 1: So, 'Egghead', I think she, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and guess who my understudy was?
Speaker 1: Who was it, who?
Speaker 2: James Earl Jones.
Speaker 1: No way (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, his first Broadway--
Speaker 1: Well, what year is this?  She said, early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: I guess it was.  It was when I was still acting.  It was--no, I was, it was--because I, it was a year after I got married because I, either right after the show, I went on my honeymoon.  I guess it was, yes.
Speaker 1: So you hadn't done 'Raisin [in the Sun]' at that point?  No--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, this was after 'Raisin'.
Speaker 1: I thought you were, meant--
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, wait a minute.
Speaker 1: I thought you were married when you did 'Raisin'--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --cause you said you and your wife [Barbara Richards] were sitting on the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I was married.
Speaker 1: Right, you said you wanted her to read that script.
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: So you still were acting.  I can't believe you were acting still--
Speaker 2: Not after I started directing.  This was before--
Speaker 1: It was before?  Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, it was before, okay.  So 'Egghead' was actually before.
Speaker 1: Before, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So it was before, but after 'Freight'?
Speaker 1: After 'Freight', yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  And James Earl Jones was your understudy, wow.  Okay, oh, I should stop talking, okay, so let's just continue.  I'm talking.  I don't want--okay, anyway--oh, that's interesting, cause you play--didn't you play a villain?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes, okay, that's right.
Speaker 1: In the, I forget why I was a villain.  I know that I had been Karl Malden's student in school.  And I, oh, I was putting down my father [Albert George Richards] because he was not liberal enough for, or something.  I think--well, I forget the story.  But it was that kind of a story, and Karl was wonderful in it.  And I had to audition for it, and I got the part.  And it was, and they told me they had this very good actor to understudy me, who was James Earl Jones.  And it was, it was--we went out of town with that play.  And I know I used to come in.  It was wintertime.  The ceiling on the set was very low, and so the lights were very low.  And I came in, back to the school, to this professor.  And I let him have it.  I forget what I said, and I jumped up on the table even, which brought me closer to the lights.  And I was wearing an overcoat, and I was perspiring like I'd lose ten pounds every couple of minutes.  And I did this whole thing on my father, and my mother [Rose Isabelle Coote Richards] was sitting in the center.  And she's blind, and she--so she could just hear.  She couldn't see.  And there came from the center of the theater in a clear bell-like tone, "Not his father."  My mother had said that (laughter).  And I, (laughter) oh, boy, and I--she let it be known that I was a Coote, and no, no way.  And my father was Albert Richards, and no way was he anything that I was talking about.  And that was interesting--
Speaker 2: That's cute (laughter).
Speaker 1: --to me.  It's very cute, very cute.  You asked me what kind of person she was.  That's Rose Richards, you know, right in the middle.
Speaker 2: Of the play.
Speaker 1: There was not a person who did not hear that line.  That was not a mumbled line.  That was not a swallowed line.  That was an articulated line.  And I heard it up there.  And I didn't apologize, but I would have.  I said, of course not my father, but my father.
Story_ID: 12259
Speaker 1: Let's go on at least to talk at least about--how did you and August Wilson come together?  I mean you directed other things, but I've wasted--I've, not wasted because it was wonderful storytelling.  But how did the two of you sort of come together--?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --even after you did Paul Robeson?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, I did--I was, I was Artistic Director of the National Playwright's Conference.  And finally I read a play.  One of my--I'd get, oh, I used to get, toward the end I'd get 1,500 plays a year.  And I didn't read them all.  I had readers who read it and wrote reports on it for me.  And then I would evaluate the reports and send plays on for further evaluation.  Eventually, I read all the plays that were the finals.  And what caught my eye, I got a report from a reader.  And it intrigued me.  It was a report on 'Ma Rainey's Black Bottom'.  And so I went ahead and read it, you know.  And it--I was taken by it.  I knew the characters.  I understood them.  I had met them all.  They were very real for me.  And what it was talking about was very real for me.  And so I passed it on with my approval, and it was selected.  But it was the fifth or the sixth submission that August had made.  You know, I had--and he kept submitting, year after year.  And once I understand, he didn't trust that we were really reading his plays, so he was submitting the same plays twice and found out that no, his plays were being read.  Well, August had had trouble writing dialogue.  He was a poet.  And to transfer from poetry to theater is not simple.  And there is very little dialogue in poetry.  So it--the voice suddenly struck me.  And so he was accepted.  And I remember when--at the first meeting--we had to first meet the playwrights, I'd never seen him before.  I'd never seen a picture of him, and didn't know him.  He knew of me, knew who I was, and had submitted really because he wanted me to do his plays.  And so when the playwrights gathered, there were a few of them I knew, and many of them I didn't know.  And so I had to try and figure out which one of these people is August Wilson.  And that was not easy.  He did not look like the voice that I had heard.
Story_ID: 12260
Speaker 1: You said, he [playwright, August Wilson] did not look like his, you know, like you could not pick him out.  No, he did not look like he sounded.  He sounded like he sounded--when I first spoke with him, and heard his voice, I knew he was August Wilson.  But when I looked at the array of people and the array of playwrights, I did not spot him immediately, no.  It was the, characters, they're very real.  I had met them all in the barbershops, on the streets of Detroit, all over.
Speaker 2: You know what's surprising to me is that I consider him very much, you know, when you say he started out as a poet?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: So you're saying after working and working with himself, the voice came out of these characters because he reminds me almost of [Eugene] O'Neill in many ways in that he is very realistic, you know, the conversations are very realistic conversations.
Speaker 1: Yes, um-hum.  They are very--well, I, someone--the thing that I have heard him say was that someone told him about writing a dialogue.  He said, you don't write dialogue.  You listen.  And he began to listen to people.  And that, the dialogue came out of that.  And when I met him and knew him, August was writing in, in bars and restaurants or food joints, you know.  He would go around where he lived and go from one place to another and sit and write.  And he would be hearing people talk, you know.  And so he began to really hear dialogue, rather than write dialogue.  And I think that that is, if that's the way it happened, it's a very valid way for it to have happened.  And whoever said that to him did a good thing.
Speaker 2: Now, which of his plays, do you have a favorite of his plays?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, you don't.  Okay.
Speaker 1: It's like asking, you know, it's that old thing about, which child do you love the best?
Speaker 2: I know, I know.  But you, okay, I mean, but the two of you were definitely almost inseparable, really an inseparable pair.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But this is, what I--you know, but the other thing that strikes is, well, except for LeRoi Jones [Amiri Baraka], but his was, you know, out of the, you know, a little (simultaneous), I mean you worked with the two, what we consider the two greatest black playwrights--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean really, you know--
Speaker 1: With Lorraine [Hansberry], yeah, yes, yes.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: I've been very fortunate.
Story_ID: 12261
Speaker 1: How you came to be with the National Playwrights Council?  How did that--
Speaker 2: The National Playwrights Conference?
Speaker 1: Conference,--
Speaker 2: Well, when George White was beginning the conference, you know, in about the second year of it, when they decided to do plays, they--rather than just discussions, they selected two plays to be done, one, 'The Bird, the Bear and the Actress', and the other was 'Nathan Bedford Forrest'.  And so they asked the, the playwright who he wanted as a director.  And he had seen my work.  He had been advanced playwriting student at Yale [University] and had seen my work come through New Haven.  And he thought, given the nature of his play, that I would be wonderful for the play.  And that's how I happened to get the call from George White to come up there and do the, this play.  I'd never heard of the playwright, had never met the playwright, didn't know him.  I didn't know George.  I didn't know any of them, but it was an intriguing offer because it was an offer to come to a place I had never heard of, Waterford, Connecticut, and do an epic play of the Civil War written by a playwright who I'd never heard of.  And the whole thing was to start in six weeks in a theater that was yet to be built.  Now, that's the kind of thing that'll get me, you know, (laughter), I--well, I will respond to something like that.  And I, I did.  And I ended up at the National Playwrights Conference, and a couple of years later, I became the Artistic Director of the Conference, and I was there for thirty, what, thirty-four, thirty-five, thirty-six years, what is it?  And during that time, many things happened.  I was concerned that black playwrights be encouraged because at that time, black playwrights were not submitting to, to the theaters throughout the country.  And I had to demonstrate in some ways that, that blacks were invited to submit or they--the invitation included them.  I also brought black actors up, and as a part of the company, and not always doing roles that were indicated for a black actor, but to use very talented people.  And I had wonderful actors who came up there and worked for me.  And ultimately, one for playwrights.  And we did bring Derek Wolcott to the States for the first time with his company.  He came up there.  I went to Africa, and I got Wole Soyinka just after he had gotten out of, of solitary, and invited him and his company.  And that was a journey that, that really (chuckle) was amazing, I--cause I was going to Africa.  And I told my eight-year old son, if I'm going to Africa, you're going too.  And I had word that, from Wole to come, but I had never spoken to Wole because you could not--that's what colonialism became to me.  You couldn't speak direct.  We were hooked up in England or someplace like that, and he talked through an operator somewhere.  And I finally ended up in Africa, and I brought Wole Soyinka back, and I did get my eight-year old son back with me.  And we developed a relationship, and a friendship and as I did with Derrick.  And both of them are Nobel Prize winners.  So I've, I've really--and I got Athol Fugard yeah, and it is--while I was at Yale.  And I have been that fortunate that I have been able to work with such major talents as that.
Story_ID: 12262
Speaker 1: How did the relationship with Yale [University] start?  How did that come about?
Speaker 2: With Yale?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Well, I guess through my relationship with the O'Neill [Studio] and various people there, and particularly, George White, who's an old Yalie from way back, and one year he even had [A. Bartlett] Giamatti up for the summer to lecture.  And that was before he became the president.  And when Robert Brustein was going to leave, they were interviewing people to replace Bob.  And I was invited to interview, which I did.  And it was very interesting because very few people in the theater at that time had the background, both in training and in the professional theater that was important for a position like that.  And I think I was one of a couple people who had that kind of a background.  And I met with Giamatti, and we hit it off.  We did.  And they invited me to become Dean at, and Artistic Director, which I did.
Speaker 1: Now, what are the things that you're most proud that you accomplished, you know, with the drama school and repertory theater?
Speaker 2: Oh, I thought you were going to say that I've accomplished.
Speaker 1: No, no.  That's easy (laughter).
Speaker 2: The [Yale] Repertory Theater is difficult.  The--I think the thing that I may have done, see, I've always had in relationship to my relationship to the theater, a social consciousness, okay.  And I think that led me to things, to people like Athol Fugard and Wole Soyinka and Derek [Wolcott] and, oh, various other playwrights, who I considered--William Shakespeare who I considered to be the playwrights of my theater, playwrights in residence.  They were the base, you know.  And then I was concerned with new work and developing new writers.  And that's when August [Wilson] came along.  And he came along at a point when I had at my fingertips control over various steps in a playwright's development.  In other words, I could find somebody at the O'Neill.  And then I had instituted a program of, of new work at Yale called Winterfest and then the regular season, and I could take playwrights from one of those venues to another and increase their exposure and give them opportunities to work on their work and assist them into doing that, and their, to the extent that if they did not succeed, it was not failure.  It was just a learning step.  And it's that--that was a very potent and fortunate time in my life and get me--gave me the opportunity to service the needs of certain developing artists who I respected.  And that was the core of my work there, you know.  And in addition to which I cast according to talent, like any, other things like that, which brought interesting highlights and sidelights to the work that we were doing.  And I did manage to have what I consider a top faculty in the Drama School.  And so the, the applications for the Drama School increased by a great number from the time I came to the time I left.  And the applications from actors of color or ethnic actors increased.  And I never--a few things that I didn't get to in my ten years that I wanted very much to get to, and didn't get done, one, being the extension of dramaturgy training.  And I think that, again, was one of the areas where we were still hooked into the, the European theater modes, that, and we were not training people really with a knowledge of what's happening in the Orient, what's happening all over the world, you know, and not just eastern and western European theater.  And I brought, tried to bring, I wanted our developing dramaturgy and future artistic directors to know more about African theater, more about Japanese theater, more about Spanish theater, Mexican theater, even, and that I was just getting started on in any major way.  And my time was up, my eleven years was up.  Actually, you get a five-year contract as a Dean, a non-renewable one.  And if you're really--they like you, then they give you a second.  But that's the end of it, you know.  Well, I was in my eleventh year when they finally said, you know, we've gone past two contracts with you.  We can't do that.  And, you know, it may going fine and it may be happily breaking the rules, but we are breaking the rules.  So you got to go.  So I had to leave.
Story_ID: 12263
Speaker 1: You're still going strong at 82, you know, we were just talking, but were your--
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm 82.
Speaker 1: We were talking about how you're still--I mean you're still teaching in three places.  And I can barely fit in this interview, and I'm wondering, what is it still you want to do with your, you know, career?  Do you still want to do the things, you've launched so many different careers of people, but I'm just wondering what you haven't done that you'd like to still do?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things, I think that there's one thing that would get me back into the theater and that's if I read a playwright that I had to produce, I mean have to.  The--there are things that I get that I could do, yes, could do, not do, yeah, right, but I have worked with geniuses, you know, and I'm looking for my next genius cause it's, it's work.  It's a lot of work.  It's blood.  And to spend it, I want to spend it on something that's worthwhile, not just something that pays a bill, but something that, where I feel that I've achieved something in the doing of it, you know.  I've achieved something for the theater, not just for myself, you know. And I, I feel that, pretty clear with those three playwrights, with Lorraine [Hansberry], with--actually, with Athol [Fugard] and with August [Wilson], those were like achievements for the theater.  And if I can do that again, I'll do that again, you know, no, no doubt.  I want to say thank you--
Story_ID: 12264
Speaker 1: What would you like your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I have a legacy now that I am quite pleased with.  I have people who I've worked with that I love, and they feel, I feel they care about me and care.  That is a legacy.  I have my family that I really love, and I have a grandson.  And I think the world of him and my two sons.  I do, and I think that that's possibly the most important thing I've done, and at least I feel strongly about that.  And that's--I think I have my legacy.  I think that's it.  If I can think of anything else, I will, I'll let somebody know, I guess, but I've been working on these other things for a long time and they're there.
