Story_ID: 12598
Speaker 1: State your name and spell it for us, including your middle name. Your date of birth, your profession, and today's date and location.
Speaker 2: Okay, ready? Frank Ross, R-O-S-S. Really, it's Frank Kenneth Ross, R-O-S-S. And I'm the managing partner for the firm KPMG for the mid-Atlantic area.  I was born July 9th, 1943.
Speaker 1: And you should--You can look at me. Feel free to look at me.  Also, then I need to have your profession.
Speaker 2: I'm a CPA [certified public accountant] by training.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can we have your present title? You know, and role?
Speaker 2: Present title is really two titles.  I'm the managing partner for the Washington, D.C. offices of KPMG, as well as the area managing partner for the mid-Atlantic area.
Speaker 1: And today's date and where we're located?
Speaker 2: Today's date--August--,
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) April--,
Speaker 2: April--
Speaker 1: --25th.
Speaker 2: --25th.
Speaker 1: 2001.
Speaker 2: 2001. Today's date is April 25th, 2001.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And location we're at?
Speaker 2: We're at Washington, D.C., 2001 M. Street.
Story_ID: 12599
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: Favorite food?  I guess it's rice (laughs).  Simple as that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is red.
Speaker 1: Oh red, okay. Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Favorite--well I really don't have a favorite destination.  I like to go on cruises.  So I would say cruising.  And going to different cruise ships is more my favorite vacation versus, you know, the Caribbean or something like that, or an island or something.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is--I'm gonna say two times of the year.  I like the spring, and I like the fall.  I like the fall for the colors, and I like the spring just for the freshness that it brings.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A favorite saying.  I have quite a few favorite sayings.  It all depends on the mood (laughs). But I guess if I had to pick one favorite saying, it's probably something like, "All things are possible under the sun."
Story_ID: 12600
Speaker 1: Your mother's name was Ruby, right?
Speaker 2: Was Ruby.
Speaker 1: Ruby.  And if you could tell me what you do know about her.  You know, her background or about her period.
Speaker 2: Okay.  She was a nurse by training.  She was one of about five children.  She was the--I think the second to the youngest of the five children.  She was born in Saint Kitts in West Indies.  She married my father at a relatively young age.  She's not--You know, in her early twenties.  That's about it.
Speaker 1: Did she ever talk about her parents and growing up in Saint Kitts?
Speaker 2: Not that much, no.  No. I think what I learned about my grandparents is very little.  And that they were both on my mother's side, you know, they were just workers in Saint Kitts.
Speaker 1: And now your--your mother she passed away--were you twenty-four years old when she passed away?
Speaker 2: I was about thirty years old.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Thirty years old.  Okay.
Speaker 2: My early thirties when she passed.
Speaker 1: And--okay, let's go to your father.  Your father, Reginald was it?
Speaker 2: My father Reginald Ross was a--an overseer on a plantation. A sugar cane  plantation.  The way I had--the way it's been described to me, an overseer on the plantations were the individuals that, in effect was, you know. They were the ones responsible for managing the plantations.  I guess in today's environment, you would call them a for- --you know, foreman of the factory, or plant manager in that sense.  So that's what he was doing. And he actually--he was from Antigua.  And I have a sister who was by his first marriage in Antigua.  And then he left Antigua, and moved after they separated.  Moved to Saint Kitts, and that's where he met my mother.  And they got married.
Story_ID: 12601
Speaker 1: Did you know your [half] sister in a--?  That's why I was curious.  I mean 'cause I know I heard the four boys moving.  And I was thinking that there's a daughter, you know.  So do you--did you know your sister growing up at that point?
Speaker 2: Growing up, I did not know her.  I think we met--probably I was in my--her daughter--I met her when she and her husband came to the United States when their daughter was born.  So that was about thirty some years ago.  So I was in my early thirty--probably in my late twenties when I first met her.  I'd heard about her.  But we had never met until that time.
Speaker 1: Was she able to fill any blanks for you at all?  You know, in terms of background. I know you were born on Saint Kitts.
Speaker 2: She was not able to fill in that much as far as the blanks are concerned. But, you know, she would fill in little things like tell you on her side--more her side how she knew my father [Reginald Ross], and how her mother knew my father.
Speaker 1: Now do you--how old were you when your father passed away?
Speaker 2: I was nine months old.
Speaker 1: Oh that's what I thought.  Okay--.
Speaker 2: And there were four boys.  And I was the youngest.  And there was about a--I would say almost a year and a half in between each of our ages.  And I was four months--nine months when he [father] died.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you have really no recollections of--do you have a recollection of him?
Speaker 2: I have no recollection other than what I have been told.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So here's your mother [Ruby Ross].  She's been widowed and she has four young boys.  So tell the story, you know, at that point.
Speaker 2: Well the way I've heard it, and the way really--the way it is--it was, I suppose is that several  things happened.  One, my father if you could imagine, you know, he is the over seer in this large plantation.  He's responsible for helping people get jobs.  You know, he was looked very much as a real--I don't want to say power but somebody with a lot of influence on the island.  And then when he died, the way I understood is that my mother was left with a lot of , quote, friends deserting her.  You know, the--she was left totally alone.  People owed my father money, you know, all of a sudden,"What money?"  Things like that.  And she was really--you know it was really a tough period of time for her.  And one good thing is that she did have a house that my father owned.  But even that she ended up renting and she moved to the countryside to become a nurse in the countryside of the island.  But as we got older, we had different relatives in the United States.  Some aunts--several aunts who in effect would say, "I would take the oldest one." Or you know, why bring the--"I'll take the oldest two."  Or, "I'll take the oldest one."  And the other one would say, "I'll take the next one"  etcetera.  But my mother always said that there's gonna be all four together or none at all.  And she waited until finally I had an aunt [Annette Swanston] and an uncle that weren't married,  but lived together.  The uncle was my aunt's uncle.  So it was a, I guess, second generation type of relationship.  Who was then able to bring us, including my mother, to the United States.  This was in the early '50s [1950s].  Probably 1950 or '51 [1951] I think it was.
Speaker 1: And you were how old at that time?
Speaker 2: Well I was about six years old.  Probably five and half, six years old at that time.
Speaker 1: Do you remember that?
Speaker 2: Well I remember the plane ride.  I remember the first time I had a chance to look at television.  To see a big train coming on television.  I remember getting into my uncle's car.  The driveway was a steep driveway.  So the car was on this driveway going down.  And I remember all four of us getting into the car.  The first time we'd really gotten that close to a car.  One of us took the wheels, one took the brakes, one took the ignition.  And next thing we know, the car's in the middle of the street.  And my uncle is coming running out after us.  You know, I remember those type of events.  I do remember coming to the United--the first time seeing snow.  We landed at [John F.] Kennedy [International] Airport in New York at a time when there was a lot of snow.  It's actually due to--the flight that brought us was delayed a day because of a snowstorm.  So you can imagine all of us coming there with the, you know, tropical clothes on.  And having relatives meet us with the heavy coats.  Which they all gave us.  All looked alike, etcetera.  It was a good experience.  We enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: So here you are.  You and your mother and your brothers and you are in a new country and new place.  And--what--tell us about this, you know, this period of time growing up. Your early years.
Speaker 2: Well there were a couple of things during this period.  First with my mother  [Ruby Ross]. My mother, I guess having gone through a lot of period--a lot of problems and just withstanding a lot of the pressures that she was under, couldn't--didn't really--I guess couldn't really stand it in the United States.  She got sick.  And after about two years, she had to go back to the West Indies to Saint Kitts. Where she moved, you know, probably two years after she brought us here.  So that's one thing I do remember that she did have to go back.  And she ended up staying there.  And she eventually died over there in Saint Kitts.
Speaker 1: So you think it was just the move here that was too much for her?
Speaker 2: Well it's a lot.  You know, at that age you hear a lot of different stories.  I would say looking back on it, it was the move here.  It was the opportunity--not the opportunity.  But it was the feeling that, you know, you have all this pressure being built up on you as a young person.  And now all of a sudden it's relieved.  You get a sense of relief.  And, you know, I guess her reaction to that was, you know, her getting sick.  And ended up, you know, just thought it was best to go back to the West Indies.  But, you know, so that's one experience that I do remember.  I have an uncle who was a Methodist minister.  Reverend K.G. Swanston who would always come over to the United States.  He saved up his vacations.  I think Saint Kitts followed the British policy of you had about four weeks every year.  And instead of him taking his four weeks vacation every year, he saved them up for five years.  And this where he came over to the United States, every five years.  And spent several months, you know, with us in the United States.  And I do remember that.  Because it was good, you know, having him--seeing him.  And he told us a lot of what, you know, a lot of the history about a lot--It was a lot about my father. [Reginald Ross]  And what type of things my father did.  And that sort of thing.  So I do remember that.  He actually had, I think five kids.  And one is a dentist, one is a veterinarian, one is an engineer, two are schoolteachers.  So as he would say, he didn't do so bad for a country Methodist minister, you know.  But he still had time for us.  Looking out for the four boys in that sense.
Speaker 1: And so was your--was he your--he was related to your mother or father?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) He was my mother's brother.  He was the youngest of that group.
Speaker 1: Now your aunt and uncle.  What were their names?
Speaker 2: My aunt was Annette Swanston, my mother's sister.  And the uncle was Henry Phipps.  Now my uncle was older as I said before.  He was actually on disability.  He was a carpenter.  And he was one of the first blacks to be admitted to the carpenter's union as a full carpenter.  I'm not sure the exact title.  But he was like a full carpenter.  Worked on such famous buildings as the Empire State Building.  He had a chance to work in Annapolis [Maryland] building the [United States] Naval Academy  in Annapolis [Maryland].  And I think in the mid [1940s], he ended up, as he puts it he would tell you,"It's a co-worker jealous ended up causing him to have a serious accident.  Which prevented him from working again.  But in--but, you know--but by that time he had already built three houses in Nepperhan [New York] and Yonkers [New York] where we moved to that he built himself.  He bought the land, built the houses.  And sold two of them, and lived in one.
Speaker 1: Now Nepperhan is spelled--how is it spelled?
Speaker 2: N- E- P- P -E- R- H- A- N
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: It's Runyon--it's now called Runyon Heights [New York neighborhood in Yonkers].
Speaker 1: Okay, good.  'Cause, you know, we--and then just for (laughs)
Speaker 2: Runyon Heights in Yonkers right off Tuckahoe Road.  That's good story there too.
Speaker 1: What is the story?
Speaker 2: Now down the road we'll get to it, I'm sure (laughs).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay, okay, then the other thing.  Phipps was it spelled P-H-I--.
Speaker 2: P-H-I-P-P-S
Speaker 1: And your aunt's last name?
Speaker 2: Swanston. S-W-A-N-S-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so they really became your surrogate parents in many ways?
Speaker 2: They were my surrogate parents. More so mine I guess than most of my brothers.
Story_ID: 12602
Speaker 1: Tell us about your life, you know, growing up at this point.  You know, what--I'd like to know what schools you went to.  And, you know, and even just some, you know, childhood memories that you have growing up.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well I went--it was interesting.  This is in the early '50s [1950s]. Early 1950s in Yonkers [New York] which is one of the most conservative northern towns.  And I say that because we came to this country,  went to School number 1 [School 1, Yonkers, New York].  Which my oldest brother [William Ross] would have been--was in the sixth grade.  My other two brothers [Winston Ross and Clarence Ross] would have been in the fifth grade at the time--that time. Or fourth grade at that time.  And I was probably in the second grade.  My grades may not be exact.  But the interesting thing is that here you had the public school that the typical graduating class of the sixth grade was five people.  I think when my brothers--when my two brothers graduated, they were probably only besides them two or three other people in the class.  It was a very segregated community in that there's a--you know, the old adage of the railroad tracks?  On one half you see a black community.  On the other half you see a white community.  Except here you also had a major road.  So you had the railroad tracks.  You also had a major road which on one half was white.  The other half was black.  And then you had another community, which butted up to our community.  But there was about less than a third of them--less than an acre or two separating the communities.  So the roads were run from the main road into our community and then they would stop.  And we happen to live on one of the streets that it stopped on.  And then if you walked through the woods a very little ways, you would pick up on another road that would start right up and continue.  And that was another white community called Homefield.  The only trouble is to get to that road, you had to go back to the main road.  You had to drive about a mile or two miles and come back in that way.  And it was interesting because people would come through the neighborhood.  You know, they'd make the turn.  They would want to go to that other side and we'll be on the street playing. And they'll ask you,"How do you get to this such and such a street?"  And we just look at them.  And we'll just shake our heads and say, "Oh if you could go through the woods there, you'll be right where you want to go.  But since you can't, you have to go back the way you came.  Back to the main road and go around a mile, two miles, three miles, and come back." It took them about fifteen extra minutes.  All because of that communities' association--home association bought the property.  And they deeded it in such a way that the two communities will never meet. So that's one very vivid example.  That the school was a school that closed when I was in the fifth grade.  When I was in the fourth grade they closed the school.  Because it just didn't make sense to have a school with just a handful of kids going to it.
Speaker 1: See that's what I--wait, I'm confused about that.  When you said five I was like, maybe he means there were only five black students.
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  You had a school--this school--the grades would have, consist of, as I said, my brothers graduating class, you know.  And there were only about four or five students in that graduating class in the sixth grade.  And my class we probably had--probably eight, seven to eight students in the second to third grade.  But that was a school that was number one.  It was, you know, it was a segregated school.  We were lucky if we had one non-black student in the school.  I think there probably was one or two that showed up, you know, because their parents didn't want to send them to Catholic school or couldn't afford to send them to private school.
Speaker 1: You know, this is very--I find this very interesting.  The only reason I say it is that--I mean everyone we've interview in the North who has lived in the north has been in integrated schools.  I mean--you know, I mean they were--so this was--
Speaker 2: This was Yonkers back in the '50s [1950s].  And that was probably the last segregated school in the city.  But then continuing on, I went to the fifth grade to School number 5 [School 5, Yonkers, New York] which was a good school.  I mean it was fully integrated now.  It had the students from my community, which was on one side of this main street called Tuckahoe Road, and now the students on the other side which was the all white students community and that went up to the eighth grade.  But then, you know, another interesting thing that I remember is graduating in the eighth grade, getting ready to go to high school.  Now being the youngest, I had my three other brothers.  One went to the commercial high school [High School of Commerce, Yonkers, New York], took up retailing, retail merchandising.  Graduated from there, and went into the Marine Corps.  I had the two other brothers that when they both were in the same grade.  One went to the commercial high school.  Took up retailing,  retail merchandising as it was called.  The other one was a type of a person that could put a radio together when he was in the elementary school.  Actually put a--built a radio himself.  You know, he'd be the type that would be on--participate in the science projects, etcetera.  He ended up going to the trade and technical school. Saunders [Trades and Technical] High School [Yonkers, New York] for the trade and technical part of it.  Now he went there more for the trade side, but ended up doing the technical program because that's what he wanted to be.  It was now my turn.  And was interesting in that even though we had them in different schools, we had the same guidance counselor.  And this guidance counselor--the same guidance counselor, they got theirs at junior high school.  They had her in junior high school. I had her at School 5  in the eighth grade, which was equivalent to junior high school.  It's time to go to high school.  And as you talk with her about going to high school, her first recommendation to me was to go to Commerce High School [sic, High School of Commerce, Yonkers, New York] and become--you know, learn how to be a sales clerk. I understand--now looking back in retrospect I understand what she was doing.  She was trying to make sure you get--you come out of school able to get a job.  Her second choice was to go to Commerce to become a cook.  Her third choice for me was to go to the trade school, Saunders.  Take up auto mechanics or carpentry or something.  And all I had in mind was to follow my classmates.  And go to the same school they were going to which was the academic high school, Roosevelt High School [Yonkers, New York].  I didn't know anything about anything else.  I had no other interests.  I just wanted to go and follow my classmates.  And go to the school they were going to.  And she refused to sign off on that.  And had my aunt [Annette Swanston] come up there.  And she was giving all the reasons why.  And then finally I just said, "Well if I said I wanted to go to Roosevelt High School to play football, would you say I can go?"  She said, "Oh well why didn't you tell me that in the first place?  Yeah I'll sign you up."  So she signed me up to go to Roosevelt High School because I wanted to play football.  And Roosevelt High School had a good football team.  Then I said, okay well my--all my classmates happened to be taking five majors.  You know, they were taking language along with the basic courses, science, math and all that.  But they were also taking a language.  So I said, well I'm gonna take a language too.  She says, "No.  I don't recommend it."  I said, "Well do you have to approve it?"  She says, "Well, no.  You could do it.  But I'm not going to approve it."  I said, "Okay.  Well then don't approve it.  But I'm still going to sign up for a language course with the rest of my classmates."
Speaker 1: So I want--I have a question before--.
Speaker 2: (Off-camera discussion)
Speaker 1: Okay, I have a question before we, you know, get to high school and that's about the--I'm back on this--they had--were your teachers in the segregated, you know, School number 1, were the teachers black or white?
Speaker 2: They were mostly white.  There was one black--maybe one black teacher.  But the others were white.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so a total of how many people were in this school then?
Speaker 2: You sound amazed.  But it really was as I said. It was just a handful of--we'd--the only students in that school were the students that came from one side of the tracks in Nepperhan [neighborhood in Yonkers, New York].
Speaker 1: And they closed down the school you said in the fourth grade.
Speaker 2: They closed it down when I was going to the fifth grade.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay.
Speaker 2: Fourth and fifth grade.
Speaker 1: So, so--.
Speaker 2: So I was there for two years before they closed it down.
Story_ID: 12603
Speaker 1: I want to know what family life was like.  You know, with your--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay.
Speaker 1: What kind of--you know, what was the messages you were hearing at home? What--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I think it was pretty strict family.  I mean my aunt [Annette Swanston] and my uncle [Henry Phipps] were I would say relatively strict people.  You know, they weren't the type that would constantly spank you.  I think I might have gotten one spanking growing up that I can remember.  But they were pretty strict.  They set down what I would say some pretty strict rules.  There was a neighborhood church. A Methodist Church, an AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion church that we went to.  They went to the Episcopal Church.  And we went to the Methodist Church because Methodist Church was within walking distance.  And the Episcopal Church you would have had to have a ride every single Sunday.  So we ended up going to the Methodist Church.
Speaker 1: You went to church by yourself?
Speaker 2: It was within walking distance.
Speaker 1: But that--but the four boys went to church.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) We would go to church by ourselves.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: We went to church by ourselves.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And well, you know, my--I was baptized a--an Episcopalian.  All four of us were.  My father [Reginald Ross] was Episcopalian.  My mother [Ruby Ross] was Methodist.  So when my father died, I guess my mother then reverted back to Methodist.  But the aunt [Annette Swanston] that raised us--even though it was her sister--she was not Methodist, she was Episcopalian.
Story_ID: 12604
Speaker 1: A lot of the people that moved to this area in Yonkers [New York] moved out of places like Harlem [Harlem, New York] and, you know, the Bronx [Bronx, New York], etcetera for that better life that was being offered to you.  That sort of thing.  You know, so I would say growing up, I mean I, you know, we still joke about it.  Actually I was with my brother over Easter.  And we were joking about, you know, how Easter is the day we all got to change our clothes.  In other words, we got new Easter outfits. So our old Sunday clothes now became our school clothes.  And old school clothes now became, you know, the knock around clothes.  I mean it's not that uncommon to what a lot of people went through during that period.  And looking back, we had a car.  We had a house, you know. We had, you know, we never felt we wanted anything.  You know, we had friends. We were able to do things we wanted to.  We, you know, we kept up with our classmates in whatever classmates were doing.  Except we didn't have cars.  And some of them may have had cars.  We didn't.  But you learned how to walk, take a bus.  And do, you know,  go use the public transportation.  And it's not that easy now a days with kids to do.
Story_ID: 12605
Speaker 1: Were your uncle [Henry Phipps] and aunt [Annette Swanston]--you think that they were--were they--I know they were strict.  Was there a nurturing side?  Or did they do a lot of messaging like, you know, "These are the things you need to--." You know, the things that count.
Speaker 2: It's funny that, you know, you ask a question like that.  And messaging--you know, to understand it, you have to really--you would have to understand I guess my--understand them a little bit more than I could really even explain.  You know, we would--we were encouraged to do well in school.  Okay. But we weren't required or told that I expect you to go to college. Okay. If we--that wasn't the messaging that we got.  We got the messaging I expect you to do well in school. When my oldest brother [William Ross] got out of high school as I said, the first thing in his mind was to go to coll--go to military.  And he joined up at the Marines. Enlisted in the Marines.  When my other two brothers, you know, graduated, the one that was technical  and went to the engineering--the technical school [Saunders Trades and Technical High School, Yonkers, New York] and took engineering--pre-engineering in high school.  He [Clarence Ross] is the first one that started to think about going to college.  And he, you know, scraped and figured out a way to get to college. With help of some of his teachers getting him some scholarships here or there.  And he took ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and went to college on a ROTC scholarship.  That sort of--that thing went to Pratt Institute [New York, New York], took engineering.  And then the second brother, Winston [Ross] all of a sudden realized that his brother graduating was going to go to college. He had to go to college too.  Of course, he did not have a preparatory program.  He wasn't in a pre-college program.  So he ended up going to New York City community college.  Subsequently he went on to NYU [New York University, New York, New York], and got his degree from NYU.  Got a masters from Columbia [University, New York, New York] and etcetera.  And even did all the work for Ph.D. and never did the dissertation.  So he's a Ph.D. in waiting, I guess.  But he chose not to finish it, so. But the point is my oldest brother--I ended up, you know, just automatically because I was going to an academic high school [Roosevelt High School, Yonkers, New York].  I surrounded myself with, you know, students.  We just automatically--my classmates all talked about going to college since I was following the academic program.  So I knew I was going to college.  I didn't know how I was going to get there.  But it wasn't an option.  It was something I just was going to do.  And my oldest brother, when he saw that I was going to college, he decided after six years in the Marine Corps that he was coming out.  And he was going to go on to college.  And in the end, we all ended up with masters--at least masters degrees from, you know, Columbia, NYU, you know. LIU [Long Island University, Brooklyn, New York] in my case, etcetera. And--.
Story_ID: 12606
Speaker 1: Who were the people influencing you?  Was it mainly your, you know, your aunt [Annette Swanston] and uncle [Henry Phipps] at that time?  Was it friends?  You know, were there--I mean you told me that your, you know,  other uncle [Reverend K.G. Swanston] would come and spend, you know, time.  But, you know, were you in touch with your mother [Ruby Ross]?  I mean what things were forming, you know, forming you as people?
Speaker 2: I think a lot of things came--you know, was coming into plan.  I don't know if there was any one thing you could point to.  I think my aunt and uncle  that raised us had a lot of influence on us.  I think my uncle was to the point where I claimed he was a religious fanatic.  Okay. I think.  I learned how to put it into perspective--religion in perspective.  And I would say I'm pretty religious.  But I've also realized that you--like he ended up--I think he ended up most likely dying of prostrate cancer.  To this day I'm not sure.  But now I know more.  Probably prostrate cancer.  But instead of him going to see a doctor, he just kept saying, "God is going to heal me." You know, I said back now when I learned that God didn't put doctors on this earth, okay for me not to go to them if I'm sick.  All right, so it's up to me now to go.  He's made them available.  It's up to me to go.  Whereas his philosophy was more a philosophy of, you know, I don't need a doctor.  A doctor is man made.  So I learned how to put a lot of that in perspective.  So that has an influence on me.  I think with my aunt  I saw some--and my--I think my mother--going back I think my mother--her--just the fact that, you know, she stood up and said, you know, that, "You're not gonna separate her four boys." That was important to her.  And she stood her ground.  I think my father whom I didn't know, but I realized I probably developed my business skills and just my knack for business, and just the common business sense that I have, I probably developed from him. Without even knowing him, you know, I probably just developed that.  The love that I had for business.  'Cause in high school [Roosevelt High School, Yonkers, New York] I started taking business courses.  And my yearbook ended up saying that I'm going to be a benevolent business boss. That's how my high school classmates ended up seeing me, going into business even though I was telling people I wanted to become a lawyer, corporate lawyer.  So that had some influence, you know.  I think the brothers [William Ross, Winston Ross, Clarence Ross], all of us became very competitive against each other.  The fact that one went on to college.  And then all of a sudden the other one had to do it.  And then when I went on, the third, fourth--the oldest one-- I wasn't gonna let his--he wasn't gonna let his baby brother go on to college without him. Without him not doing it.  So I think--so we all sort of had a lot of competitiveness that we had.  And, you know, I think the teachers that I had, I was fortunate.  I gave you the story with the high school counselor--with the junior high school [School 5, Yonkers, New York] counselor who I think at that point without realizing it, I realized that people aren't gonna tell me that I can't do something.  I think I got that attitude from my mother, from my aunt [Annette Swanston], from my uncle [Henry Phipps].  But in high school I had good counselors.  I had a good science teacher in the eighth grade.  An eighth grade science teacher that I sought out when I was thinking about which college to go to.  Even though he was eighth grade, and I was, you know, a junior in high school.  I did. You know, I called him, and talked to him about which high school--which college should I go to.  And he was a white teacher.  You know, a white science teacher.  So I would say my high school teachers--had a good counselor. Who would seek out the minority students to make sure we all got access to all the scholarships that was available. And sought us out.  If he knew of a scholarship, and we did not--he didn't see our name signed up, or didn't see us putting an application in, he would call you into his office.  And he would sit you down.  And he would say, "Why didn't you fill out the application for such and such a scholarship?" And make you do it.  So.
Speaker 1: So he--so you had--you--after that guidance counselor--what that guidance counselor story told me was that you had your own mind and you sort of at that point had learned how to stand up for yourself.
Speaker 2: Hindsight would say yes. When I was doing it, I wouldn't--I didn't know what I was doing.  All I know is I wanted to do something [laughs].  And I was going to do it.  And unless somebody would, you know, could give me a real reason why I shouldn't--a better reason why I shouldn't.
Story_ID: 12607
Speaker 1: So what were some of your favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: My favorite subjects I guess--at which level, high school?
Speaker 1: Mh-hm.
Speaker 2: I liked science.  And to this date I would tell people that I would be--I would probably be a chemist or a scientist if I enjoyed math.  People don't understand that since I'm an accountant and they say that as an accountant you have to love math.  But I'm not good at math.  I'm good with--I love numbers.  I love the problem solving.  I love everything else that goes with it.  But not math per se.  So my favorite subjects I would say would have been history.  I loved history, political science.  I loved chemistry, you know, science.  I hated languages.  I hated math, hated English.  I did end up taking a lot of business courses.  Instead of taking advanced languages, I started moving toward the business law course.  Instead of taking advanced math course like I guess trigonometry or calculus or something like that.  I would have taken business math, you know.  That type of thing.
Story_ID: 12608
Speaker 1: What is the young Frank Ross, what is he like at this point?  You know, is he a dreamer?  Is he well behaved?  You know, is he rambunctious?  Is he, you know? It seems like you were probably well behaved.  But I mean is he--?
Speaker 2: (Laughing) We were well behaved.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: We were well behaved.
Speaker 1: Okay. So but are you--you know, do you--well I'm just trying to understand what was, you know, who were the people you admired?  Or what, you know, did you dream to be?  Or, you know. What--I know you said a corporate lawyer, and I'll get back to that.  But I--,
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, I'm just wondering what were you like?
Speaker 2: If my brothers--if one of my brothers was here, they will tell you that my theme song as I was growing up in high school and probably in college got to be 'Dream the Impossible Dream' [sic, 'The Impossible Dream']. So when you ask me was I a dreamer? They--I guess they saw a dreamer in me. I never envisioned--I never saw myself being a dreamer.  Okay, I chose to go into accounting at a time when, you know, accounting--the major firms in accounting wasn't hiring any blacks.  So people were telling me why are you wasting your time?  And I would end up saying, well, you know, I'm not going to be in a position to take all these different positions that they're thinking about for five years. And I have to get more experience, etcetera, etcetera.  I won't be a partner.  I  won't get to these high level positions for several years.  But I gotta get training.  And by then, those positions would be open.  So I'll be ready to take those positions. So that's how I--that was how I was--that was the way I dreamt. It wasn't one of these dreams I'm going to be XYZ some day. It was a very logical, rational way of getting the training, getting the experience.  So I think I would be--people would tell you I was probably a little bit of a dreamer.  I think I was determined.  I mean I--plus I think I've always been a very positive type of a person.  I've always felt that, you know, I want something.  I can get it.  I--you know, I can do anything I set my mind to.  You know, if I want it bad enough, I can do it.  And that's the type of person I was I guess in high school [Roosevelt High School, Yonkers, New York].  I wasn't--we worked--I had to work in high school.  So I didn't even get a chance to play football.  I never even tried out for the football team.  But I did play with the football players in pick-up games, etcetera.  And I was satisfied I could compete with them.  But I never got a chance to play 'cause I had to work after school. You know, and things like that.  But, you know.
Speaker 1: Were you help--were you working because it was viewed as helping the family?  Or was it to help the family, or raise some extra--you know, just to have extra spending money?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] It was more to have extra spending money.  It was not even extra.  It was to have spending money.  And I guess, you know, my aunt [Annette Swanston] and uncle [Henry Phipps] sort of took the attitude that, you know, they can't afford to give us any money.  So if you want to have any money whatsoever, you've gotta earn it.  So start earning it.
Story_ID: 12609
Speaker 1: What were your friends like?  Who were the ones, you know, was-- you said it was a mixed school [Roosevelt High School, Yonkers, New York].  So--right?
Speaker 2: It was a mixed school. And I guess you would have two different groups of friends.  You would have a neighborhood group which would be, you know, the individuals that lived close to you.  And also the individuals that would go to church with you, etcetera.  And they would go to different schools.  Some would go to, you know, the trade schools.  They would--very few would go to the Roosevelt High School at the academic side. Okay, but some might.  Some did go.  And then you had the friends that you had in school.  You know, who tend to be mostly white.  So you had a good cross section.  You interacted with all types of people from different socioeconomic backgrounds.  As well as, you know, different racial backgrounds, different religious backgrounds.  Some were Jewish, some Catholic, etcetera.  So I mean it was very diverse.  I guess growing up, I had an opportunity to--even though it was a--even though I grew up in what I would say was a very segregated community.  Okay, but you got outside of that segregated community enough so that you learned how to operate within, what I would say was a well diversed group of people.
Story_ID: 12610
Speaker 1: I graduated from high school [Roosevelt High School, Yonkers, New York] in [1962].
Speaker 2: Okay. So were you aware of yourself as a black person?  Were you--was it an environment that you had a lot--you know, since you were mainly around-- like I'm from--I grew up in a town that had a thousand blacks, the other fifty thousand white. Though I, you know, we went to a black church and everything like that but what kind of--I'm just trying to understand what's forming you right now.  You know, forming you as a person.
Speaker 1: I think you knew in about what was going on.  You know. I mean in high school I remember writing a paper to--in my American history class about [Dr.] Martin Luther King [ Jr.] Dr. King and what he was doing.  And I remember including in it, you know, the statement that he made that--what was it about, a law. That if a law is an unjust law, it's not a law. Is that all--or something to that effect.  And I remember building a paper.  And the significant part of the paper--building a paper around Dr. Martin Luther King and the Civil Rights Movement at the time.  And I remember making a significant part of the paper around that statement.  And I remember when I made an oral presentation to the class on it.  And I remember the history teacher, who was a very good history teacher, said, "Great paper Frank.  Excellent paper.  But only one thing wrong.  Is that, that statement that you made is not a valid statement."  And I remember that to this day because I felt that it, you know, I believed what Dr. King was saying about it.  And I understood what he was trying to say about it.  And she picked up on it very literally.  And was ready to tell me that it's not.  So we had a nice friendly discussion back and forth.  And history was one of my better subjects.  So--I was able to have a good discussion with her.  But still I--that--you know, that helped me become aware of the differences and how people think about things, you know.  And I may look at something, and I would be influenced one way.  And a white person will look at it, and they'll be influenced another way.  You know, and the differences that existed.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Do you remember any--your first racial incident?
Speaker 1: My first racial incident other than my junior high school [School 5, Yonkers, New York] guidance counselor.  Growing up, you know, I'm not sure if I do.  Other than, you know, you have friends.  You have white friends.  And as you're playing with your white friends, you know, again, you would-- you know, you'll end up making the--using the wrong terms with them.  And that sort of thing.  And they'll try to--and that sort of broke the ice all the time, you know.  And no longer do you have arguments.  But I wouldn't say that was a racial incident.  I really--it's hard to tell--to go back and remember any one incident that I would say is my first racial incident.
Story_ID: 12611
Speaker 1: This wanting to be a corporate lawyer, what was for--you know, was that in your mind set in high school [Roosevelt High School, Yonkers, New York]?
Speaker 2: In high school, yes.  I want--I liked history. American history especially.  I liked the political science aspect of it.  And it was natural--it was a natural thing to think of myself as a lawyer.  There happened to have been in our neighborhood, probably the only other professional that was in our neighborhood, happened to have been a lawyer.  Actually it was the son of one of the families that ended up--he ended up going on and becoming a lawyer.  So I guess in that sense, I was exposed to another black professional who was a lawyer.  And that's part of why I was saying I wanted to be a lawyer. Besides I liked, you know, this history. The type of subjects that I liked, you know, would be normal, would tell you that, you know, you'd make a good lawyer.
Speaker 1: Now you--.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Usually enjoyed studying to be a lawyer.
Story_ID: 12612
Speaker 1: You're in your senior year [Roosevelt High School, Yonkers, New York] and it's time to, you know, I mean you're getting ready to graduate.  And so your thought is to go on to school. Is that right?  So explain what, you know, what you did.
Speaker 2: Well, the idea was to go on to college.  I was going to go to college.  The question I had was do I go away?  Do I stay home?  And commute the way my brothers did.  And I think I applied to schools like NYU [New York University, New York, New York], Long Island University [LIU, Brooklyn, New York], University of Toledo [Toledo, Ohio] and I think one other school that was away.  But it quickly narrowed that I can't afford--couldn't afford to go away.  So it had to be LIU, Long Island University or NYU. Also the question was what would I major in.  And I wanted to be a lawyer but I also realized that I couldn't--I probably would not be able to afford to go to law school.  So I had to look for a subject matter that I could work.  So when I got my degree, I would get a job.  And I did not want to teach.  So that sort of limited me to business.  And then when I started to look at business, you know, I started to think about--well my brother--At this time, one of my brothers was at NYU taking the business.  And,  you know, then he showed me an accounting book.  It was an accounting book for non-accountants 'cause he was still in mercher--he was now in merchandising--getting his bachelor's degree in merchandising.  And I looked at it.  And I found it interesting.  So he told me a little bit about it.  And then I decided I would go to--I would think about going--I definitely then said I would go to business-- take a business program.  And the choice was NYU or Long Island University [Brooklyn, New York].  And I chose LIU for two basic reasons.  I chose them because my brother wasn't going there. And my brother was going to NYU.  And I did not want to compete with my brother.  Since I figured if I went to NYU I would--taking business, I would have some of the same subjects, some of the same teachers he had.  And I didn't want that.  So I went--was going on my own. And LIU was a good choice.  Second, it was a strange reason.  But LIU's catalog, they actually listed all the courses you could take. Or you would take.  Unlike some other catalogs, which just gives you general course.  And as a freshman you would take an English course.  You would take this.  You would take that.  And you were to be expected to [unclear]. LIU  said as a--in a business program you would take, you know. The first semester you would have English literature--U.S. English literature, something like that.  Then you would have introductory to business.  You know, it actually listed the courses.  And I kind of liked the idea.  Then, you know, I saw every single course except for the four or  five electives that I would have.  But I saw the names of the courses that I was actually going to take.  And I kind of liked the idea that I knew what I was getting into for the four years that I was going to go there. You know, so I chose to go to LIU.
Speaker 1: So how was-- you were commuting back and forth.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Commuting from Yonkers to Brooklyn--two and a half--almost two and a half hours each way.  A bus ride--two bus rides.  Start at the beginning of the subway.  Change in mid-Manhattan some place to Flatbush Avenue.
Speaker 1: So this was a real strong desire of yours?
Speaker 2: In effect it was.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously]  It was.
Speaker 2: But I didn't look at it that way.
Speaker 1: You didn't look at it that way?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously]  No.  It was--.
Speaker 1: It was what was required to go.
Speaker 2: I wanted to go to college.  I wanted to go to Long Island University.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Right.  Okay.  So tell me, during those four years, what--was it what you expected?  Were you, you know, were you forming yourself as a person in other ways?  Were you--I mean what was going on during those college years?
Speaker 2: I think you've got to again think back to what was going on and the time that we are talking about.  Here it is now 19--you know, '62 [1962] to '66 [1966].  And, you know, so the Civil Rights Movement had pretty much--was in the transition stage from, you know, real civil rights to picking up other things.  And then it was just at the start of the Vietnam era.  So you really--it was really in a transition period.  But LIU at that time was pretty much a school that was dominated by, you know, by the Jewish community.  If you--you know, it was mainly made up of students that couldn't--didn't get into NYU. You know, for whatever reason.  So they ended up going to LIU or NYU, etcetera.  Those were the schools that would go to St. Johns [University, New York, New York], etcetera, if they couldn't get into City College [of New York, New York, New York] or Baruch [College, The City University of New York, New York, New York] for the business students.  So it was pretty much a white Jewish college at that time.  But they--in my accounting class we had three black students.  One was in the night program.  And two--one--a young lady from Jamaica and myself.  We were the only full-time students in the accounting program of about sixty or seventy students who graduated that year.  We were the only two.  But I felt--I mean I ended up being well received.  I mean I ended up being the president of the accounting society by the time I was a senior.  'Cause I was probably number two or three from an accounting program just only--not taking your total grade average.  But just if you take your accounting course average, I was probably the second student--highest grade student in the accounting program.  So I was well accepted, well received by the students, the faculty. You know.  You know, it was a great faculty, great supportive faculty.  Actually the chairman of the department, a fellow by the name of Professor Waletzer (ph.), when we were--at--in our senior year, you're going to all these campus interviews.  He ended up passing the word along that if I couldn't get a job at one of the big five firms, to come talk to him. And that he would-or the big eight firms then---that he would then, you know, try to get me a job with one his friends so that I could get my experience.
Story_ID: 12613
Speaker 1: So you were saying that your exposure--you weren't unexposed to the activities of the '60s [1960s].  You know, so you were some--I just want to--.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I was out there.  I think one thing too, you know, LIU [Long Island University, Brooklyn, New York] , being a white college, you had the white fraternities.  And the white fraternities at that--during that time, several of them were trying to recruit blacks for their fraternities.  And I remember one of them approached me to join the fraternity. And I gave it serious thought about joining the fraternity because it would have made life easier. Because I could have moved to--I could have moved from, you know, from Yonkers [New York] to the frat [fraternity] house and wouldn't have to commute.  But I don't know.  For whatever reason, I said no.  And they ended up, of course, looking for another--picking another black student to be their--the student that joined them.  And that student ultimately became the president of the class and, you know.  That was very help--that's a big man on campus [laughing].
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: So you weren't removed.  Even though--,
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, even though it wasn't a school that would do--that would have a lot of demonstrations.  I think you knew exactly what was going on.  And, you know, you had a chance to really id--really identify who you were.  And really could become comfortable with who you were.
Story_ID: 12614
Speaker 1: Now I mean it's good in a lot of ways.  You weren't limited [at Long Island University, Brooklyn, New York].  You weren't limit--this was not the guidance counselor's situation [Ross faced racial discrimination from a junior high guidance counselor]--,
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] That's right.
Speaker 1: --that you had before.  Now and you had sort of--and it's obvious that you had done well for your, you know, the--you said the chairman of the department.  He said,  if you don't--.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The chairman of the department did say if I couldn't get a job at one of the big eight [accounting] firms, that I should seek him out and he'll make sure I get the experience with one of the smaller firms, that I would need in order to sit for the CPA [certified public accountant] exam.
Speaker 1: Now so here you are.  You're coming out.  Well did you ever--was it the case where people come and recruit?  Is that how it was done in those days or was it a little different?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The interesting thing is that the accounting profession in 1962, the major account--major firms, the big eight firms--there were eight big firms at that time:  Did not recruit blacks. They didn't have any.  If they had any, it was a mistake 'cause the person happened to be very light skinned, went to a, you know, a predominantly white school and in effect passed.  And then when they realized it, it might have been too late.  I think 1965 is probably the first year that any of the firms started to hire a black.  And I graduated in '66 [1966].  At the time, my professor passed the word along.  He never told me that.  He just passed the word along to my classmates. 'Cause here I was one of the top students, and he wanted to make sure I got the right experience.  But at that time, I had had offers from six of the big eight firms.  And I didn't let him know.  So he didn't know that I already had the offers to go into different interviews to six of the big eight. You know, big eight firms.  Actually, you'd asked earlier about my first experience with racism.  And I don't know whether this is an experience with racism. But I remember going through one of the interview sessions. And I remember the interviewer, he was probably the recruiting partner actually asking me whether I could deal in an all-white environment.  And, you know, I just looked at him. And I--at first I was going to give him a quick answer, which was going to be, that I could probably deal easier in a white environment than I can in a black environment. But I decided that wasn't the right answer. So I said, well all you have to do is look at my college, high school, you know, and you would see that that's the environment I really lived in, except for my community where I grew up. You know, 'cause I guess that's closest that I came. You know, that I could think of having to deal with what I would say eventually I've learned is a lot of corporate racism.  Subtle type of racism, you know.  But there--all the firms that I've interviewed with did ultimately give me an offer.  I eventually took the offer from KPMG, which at that time was known as Peat Marwick Mitchell [Peat and Marwick Mitchell & Co.].
Speaker 1: You know, now so what were--this was pretty--still this was pretty outstanding, you know, in the time that you came out. That you got offers from six of them.  That's--.
Speaker 2: At that time the firms offered--they made an offer or they hired one nationwide.  If a firm was hiring, they would hire one.  And when I say that, people look at me and even the firms look at me, and said no, that never existed. But it--once you go out and got into the profession, you started running into other individuals your age.  And I ran into several people.  One was--what's his name, Rasean (ph.).  I think it was in New Orleans [Louisiana].  He used to--actually just recently he died a couple years ago.  I can't think of his first name. But he was into politics from--running political campaigns and ran a political campaign for Morial [Mayor Ernest N. Morial] from New Orleans.  But he--we got to know each other about five years after I joined Peat Marwick.  And I remember talking to him. And we started talking about the different offers that we had.  The timeframe of those offers.  And then he finally said, "So you're the one that took my job offer at Peat Marwick." And we talked about it. And, you know, he indicated--you know, he said that he was told that they were interviewing someone in New York.  And that if that person didn't accept their offer that, you know, he would be hired. And then we--there's another person, a fellow by the name of Larry Belcher, who's now on--has his own practice in New Jersey.  But he was hired by Price Waterhouse [Price Waterhouse Coopers]. His offer came when I--the same time I sent Price Waterhouse my rejection letter to let them know that I was accepting Peat Marwick's letter, and not Price Waterhouse's offer. So, you know, you get to see these things. Even--no one ever will tell you that it happened.  But just from getting to know different people, you start to see what was going on then.
Speaker 1: Now who was the first person that was admitted to a big eight in 1965?  Do you know who that person was?
Speaker 2: What's his name?  Dan Dennis.  And he's now practicing in Boston [Massachusetts].  He was accepted at Price Waterhouse [Price Waterhouse Coopers].  Now I'm not gonna say that he was the first.  But he is one of the first, and he was the first at Price Waterhouse.
Story_ID: 12615
Speaker 1: Okay.  So here you are.  This is a big deal. I mean in anyone's, you know, thing.  Even to be white with a big eight accounting firm is a big deal right?  At that time?
Speaker 2: At that time it--yeah.  It is a--it would be.  I just don't like to think of it as--.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Okay.
Speaker 2: a big deal.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Well [laughing] you may not want to think of it like a big deal, but it was.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously laughing]
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's a big deal.  And you--so is it all that it's cracked up to be?  Are there limit--you know, what are you doing?  Are you--I mean what's the experience like that you have?
Speaker 2: They--well--I think when you're hired by the--by these firms,  I think the experience back then--I'm going to go back then.  I think what helped me then is that I had the opportunity to work for several partners. That in effect, saw my having the opportunity as an opportunity for them to do something positive.  One was a partner by the name of Sye Borough (ph.) who was the first Jewish partner in Peat Marwick, KPMG.  He--during my staff years. That's four years, I worked. I would say 90 percent of my jobs were on engagements for him.  Whether he was the partner on it or a partner that was one of his partners.  Okay,  I was a--worked under.  So in effect, he pretty much took me under his wings indirectly. Even though I don't know that.  I can't say that 'cause he never told me that. But when I'd look at, you know, the engagements, the opportunities, who I worked for, it turns out that most of my engagements--and all the major engagements and all the major opportunities were directly or indirectly related to Sye Borough .
Speaker 1: You know, and that's fascinating in and of it's own because there's this whole, you know,  people saying that, black men have been mentored by Jewish men if they're success--you know.
Speaker 2: I've given you two good examples right--.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Right.
Speaker 2: There where without even thinking about it.  I mean, that this happened.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now did you find that--did he mentor you in other ways that maybe you didn't know about? You know, because it's--.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Well I would say in a--He was always there, if I had questions. Yes.  I could always go to him. Even after I started working for who I would say my second mentor was, which I'll mention in a minute.  But I always felt comfortable walking into his office and asking him a question and not worrying about whether the question was going to be a dumb question, or whether he was going to say, "I mean you're supposed to be a manager now.  You're supposed to know these things." I never fel--you know, I felt comfortable just going in and asking him, saying, "I need some help with--am I on the right track?" Or him looking at me and saying, "Well you don't work for me.  You work for somebody else."  I--You know, "You should ask them." You know, things like that.  But the second partner I said that mentored me was a partner by the name of Jim Powers.  Now Jim Powers is from Georgia. Okay.  You know, he's--you know, you joke about a redneck, but he was red.  He had red hair, red freckles on his face but he was from Georgia.  And he took me when I was a manager--ready to become a manager, he took me on his team as a manager and gave me major engagements to work on.  JC Penney was one of the major engagements that I have a chance to work on, which was one of his accounts.  And again, he was someone that I would say mentored me in giving me the chance but also mentored me in giving me advice.  I mean we'd be down at a bar after work, socializing.  Next day I would come into the office, not thinking anything of it, you know, and he'll make a slight comment, "Frank, you handled that situation very well." And then I'd say, "You were lo--you know, you actually watched what I did?" [laughing]  And, you know, he was just helping me. You know, it wasn't that he was watching me.  He just saw, you know, a certain thing happening and he saw how I did it. And he encour--and he--the next day he would mention that I did the right thing.  And, you know, so he mentored me in a lot of ways.
Speaker 1: So were these under social sit--you know, sort of business social circumstances he was doing it? Or were--was it under client circumstances?  I'm just--.
Speaker 2: It was both.  It was more li--I would say I worked for him from a business point of view.  And at times the team that worked for him would go together.  Would socialize after work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where he would, you know, that's where that--that second-- that situation I mentioned--.
Speaker 1: So he said you did--I mean just in conversations or issues that would come up, how you handled the discussions?
Speaker 2: That's right.  He gave me a chance--well he also gave me a chance to be the lead technical partner for the merchandising.  His area of specialization was merchandising.  And he handled most of the major merchandising clients of the firm. And I ended up developing training programs that the firm used to train, you know, nationally.  I taught at some of those training programs. So he gave me the opportunity to be exposed.  I was viewed as being the leading expert that would, you know, manager expert in the firm in technical issues thanks to him.
Speaker 1: Did--what year are we talking about now?  Is it--.
Speaker 2: This would be '70--I joined KPMG in '66 [1966]. So we're talking about the first--Sye Borough  would be between '66 and '68 [1968].  And Jim Powers would be between '68 and '72 [1972],  '73[1973]. '66 to '69 [1969],  '69 to '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your first mentor leave the firm in '68?
Speaker 2: He left the firm--ge did not leave the firm.  He was transferred to be the managing partner of the Los Angeles [California] office.
Story_ID: 12616
Speaker 1: You became manager [Peat and Marwick Mitchell & Co.] in what year?
Speaker 2: In 1969.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You're building--were you on the right--were you making manager at the same time as your white counterparts?
Speaker 2: I was probably one year ahead.  There were four of us who was on a fast track, and I was one of the four that got on that fast track.  There was a fifth person that was on an extra fast track and made it in three.  But four of us made it in four, when the normal time was five.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were any of the clients ever surprised when you would show up?  Or did they express surprise?  And this is a different--because you're in--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] They were.  They were surprised.  I mean, you know--everything you've read about, everything you hear, happened.  I had situation--one situation where I had a client.  I was running--I was--this was when I was a staff.  I was running an engagement.  I was the in charge.  What we called an in charge which means I was in charge of our field team.  And I remember, you know, the president of this company was an elder--was an elderly gentlemen.  And I remember, you know, meeting him for the first time. And I remember seeing a little bit of shock in his face.  But he was very polite.  And I remember him taking us to his club. The way he had always done his predecessors.  But it was nice. I remember going into his office to give him the results of the audit.  And I remember him instead of being--paying attention to the results of the audit, he started talking about what color should he paint his office.  What color should he paint his room. You know, anything--small talk of anyway whatsoever.  But we did the work and we got the job done.  And I--But the next year I didn't go back on the job because I'd been promoted now to manager.  And I remember the in charge that took my place told me, when I asked him, how was so and so doing? You know. He said, "Oh, he was a very interesting person." And he told me, "You know, the first question he asked me was not where Frank Ross was. But where,  using the n-word was." (Laughs)  You know. I said, "Well that doesn't surprise me.  I mean here's a guy who couldn't talk to me about anything serious.  Could only talk to me about paint and stuff." But he did take us to his club.
Speaker 1: Did you and he--you--and Peat Marwick didn't lose the account either.
Speaker 2: We didn't lose the account.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I didn't do anything foolish to lose--to cause that. But no.  But that's just one example.  I mean those things happen.  And you've got to take it in stride.  I mean I learned how to deal with people.  All  different types of people, all different types of situations.  And not let it get the better of me.  Now maybe it got into my system way down but I haven't let it get out if it did get there.
Story_ID: 12617
Speaker 1: You've had a sort of long and lustrous career really with the same company [Peat and Marwick Mitchell & Co., later known as KPMG]. Then you left, you know.
Speaker 2: I left.
Speaker 1: So let's talk about your leaving. And I wanna go back--,
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Okay.
Speaker 1: to some of the, you know, things. But I, you know--you--when did you leave?  Was it--'cause it's--you said in the [1970s] I think.
Speaker 2: I left in 1973.
Speaker 1: So that's shortly after you've been promoted to manager?
Speaker 2: After three years as a manager.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Three or four years as--Four years as a manager--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I left.
Speaker 1: And what is motivating you at this point?  I mean you really are--.
Speaker 2: Well, I can--there--two--a couple of ways that you have to look at it.  One thing I--we didn't talk about is that when I was in college [Long Island University, Brooklyn, New York], I had this job at Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York neighborhood] Youth In Action.  At Bedford-Stuyvesant Youth In Action, the accountant for Bedford-Stuyvesant Youth In Action was someone who had his own practice called Emsar Bradford.  Emsar Bradford was one of the first black CPAs [certified public accountant]  And, you know, had his own practice.  And he would drive up--and here I was just a--I think I was a junior when I first met him.  And here he would drive up into Bedford-Stuyvesant right where Bedford-Stuyvesant Youth In Action on Bedford and Fulton, right on the corner.  But it was on Fulton Street, but right in that block. You know, okay.  And he would park a big Cadillac right in that block.  He would walk in with the fanciest clothes.  And I'm  not the type that--I couldn't afford anything fancy. But he comes in, you know.  A CPA, fancy clothes, parking his car.  No one touches it, etcetera.  I mean he became my idol.  And he became the person that I wanted to be was to be Brad--Emsar Bradford.  I wanted to have my own firm.  And I remember when I got out of sch--When I was graduating, and I had all these offers, I talked to him about did he have a job offer--did he have a position for me.  And his advice was, "If you have an offer from one of the big eight firms, take it.  And then after you finish with that come and see me and I'll give you a job after you finish with the big eight firms." And we stayed in touch.  But that was my--that was my idol. So I went to KP--Peat Marwick Mitchell with the idea that I wanted to have my own practice.  I wanted to be running my own firm.  I wanted to be another Emsar Bradford.  Around 1972, '73 [1973], I realized I could be a partner at KPMG. I was told that, you know, I'm on the right track.  I competed on the largest jobs.  I knew that--but I knew that the firm would make me a partner.  I knew that the firm was ready to make a partner.  I knew I had gained the respect of my counterparts.  I had gained the respect of the New York office partners.  So I knew I could be a partner.  But only one thing was missing.  And that was the fact that I wanted to be Emsar Bradford.  I did not want to be a partner in a big eight firm.  That wasn't my dream.  And at that same time, it was during the Nixon [Richard M. Nixon] Administration, in the early '70s [1970s] where you have black enterprise.  The concept of black enterprise started.  And you started to have, you know, you read--every time you pick up a newspaper you would read of a new major black business being formed.  And actually that was around the time when 'Essence' magazine started.  When 'Black Enterprise' started.  And that's probably two--one of the few.  Those are probably two.  If there're any more men--there're probably just a few more that got started at that time and is still in existence today.  But anyway, a lot of companies owned by blacks were started.  And I said, well, that's great.  I have the right experience.  I can pick them up as clients. So, I left KPMG and started my own firm.
Speaker 1: And you start--did you form immediately with Ross--.
Speaker 2: Wait.
Speaker 1: Well, this is what I wondered.
Speaker 2: Ross, Steward and Benjamin.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Ron Benjamin was a tax--was our tax partner.  He had Price Waterhouse [Price Waterhouse Coopers] experience.  Ron Benjamin had the middle-sized firm experience.  But he was another auditor. So the three of us started. Two of us started.  Ron Benjamin and myself left our firms and we started it at 666 Fifth Avenue [New York, New York]. Right in the--then it was called the Tishman Building.  I'm not sure what it's called now. But it was right on Fifth Avenue, 666 Fifth Avenue.  And we started our business.  And we, you know.  I was told by K--by Peat Marwick that they didn't want me to leave. But, you know, they understood. And they actually referred a client or two to me during that period.  But I had to--you know, I had to do that because what I had to do was to get--I had to become the Emsar Bradford.  To get it out of my system.
Speaker 1: So how do you spell his name?  Emsar--.
Speaker 2: E-M-S-A-R, Bradford, B-R-A-D-F-O-R-D.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's now deceased.  But I mean I still remember--I remember it well. Because that's really was the thing holding me back.  In order to become a partner.  I knew I could do it.  But I had to be ready to give it my all.  And I wasn't ready.  I was still young.  I was probably in my twenties.  I would've been a partner at Peat Marwick probably at thirty-one.  But I really wasn't thirty-one of age yet in that sense from a business point of view.  So I went out on my own. And I did it for three years.
Speaker 1: So three years.  So from 1973 to '76 [1976]?
Speaker 2: '76.
Speaker 1: And during that time, you had tremendous growth though during that time.  Can you just explain a little bit.  I mean you were successful on your own.
Speaker 2: We were successful.  I--relatively successful I would say.  We ended up I think hiring probably up to twenty people working for us.  We did over--back then it was almost a million five to two million dollars.  It was what I would consider success.  We had one office in East Orange, Newark. Around the Newark, East Orange area in New Jersey and one in the, you know, in New York City.  And I could have done that and made a good living.  But I think what I started to think about at that time--actually, it's interesting.  A headhunter called me.  Right around--probably in the year--in 1980--1975.  Six months or so before I left.
Story_ID: 12618
Speaker 1: I wasn't even thinking about leaving.  But we were at the point where we started to strategize.  Okay, how do we take this firm to the next level?  And what do we have to do?  We have to get it 8A [business development] certified and decide what we were going to do and that sort of thing.  And then I get a call from a search firm.  What's his name?  I can't think of his name now.  It's a black search firm in New York.  But he had a referral.  He wanted to refer my name to Equitable, to be the director of their internal audit department.  Now I did not know this was going on. I get a call from Peat Marwick's [Peat and Marwick Mitchell & Co.] recruit--personnel partner.  I remember this well.  One Friday he calls me up and he says, "Frank, I hear that you're getting ready to leave your practice [Ross, Stewart & Benjamin]." And I said, "What?" He said, "Yeah, I heard that you're getting ready to leave your practice. And I just want to let you know  that if you're really thinking about  leaving your practice, before you do anything, give us a call.  'Cause we really didn't want you to leave. And we really would love to have you come back." Okay, then on Monday, I get a call from the headhunter.  And the headhunter tells me about this great position that they have at Equitable.  And it was a good position.  It would have put me at the director position, and  make me a vice president. And within three years, I was supposed to be running the internal audit department of Equitable.  So it was a good position.  But apparently, they had called a partner that they knew at Peat Marwick and they talked to that partner.  And the partner then called the personnel person, etcetera.  If they had not done that, I probably would not have returned to Peat Marwick.  Because that started me thinking that--you know, what do I really want to do?  If I have a chance to go back would I really enjoy myself? And that's when I went back to Jim Powers, the partner that I was working for before.  And we met over dinner several times.  Where I--we just--I just explored with him, is this what I really want to do? And, you know, should I do it?  And what's my opportunities back? And he just point blank said, "You know, Frank, if you want to come back to Peat Marwick, I will tell you if you want to come back two years from now you probably would be able to do it.  But I will tell you if you want to come back--if you wanted to come back, now is the time to make your move." Because the partners that--the managing partner of that office, the partner in charge of the audit practice, the key partners in the firm that know me personally--that knew me, he said, "Is going to be retiring in a year or two." So he's saying that if you want to return, now is the best time because these partners are in power.  And they can speak about Frank Ross on a first hand basis.  Whereas, two or three years from now you won't have a partner that can speak about you on a first hand basis. And that was the best advice.  'Cause then I said, well, maybe then I really should think about returning. And I returned as a manager with the intent that if I did well, I would become a partner.  And then I became a partner.
Speaker 2: And how long did it take you to become a partner after that?
Speaker 1: After that--I came--I returned in--September of--,
Speaker 2: '76  [1976]?
Speaker 1: --'76 and I became a partner the following year, June of '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: Now--.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] 'Cause I wanted to make sure that I got some credit for the years that I had my own practice.
Story_ID: 12619
Speaker 1: Now with your practice [Ross, Stewart & Benjamin], who were your clients and what things did you learn about yourself?  You know, in that process?  'Cause remember you were saying I was young still business wise.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: I think I--starting with the second question.  I learned a lot about myself.  I learned that well--I learned how to run a business.  Okay.  I learned how hard it is to meet payroll.  To this day, I pride myself on the fact that we never missed a payroll because my wife [Cecelia], if she was sitting here she would say, yes, but we also--but we also didn't have money on some weeks. But I didn't miss the payroll.  So I knew how hard it was to go out and to collect cash, to meet the payroll, etcetera  So I learned a lot about how to run, manage, operate a business.  I learned a lot about myself and how to deal with different people. You know, and how to treat people. Different--you know, people working for you when you have the ultimate responsibility for them.  So I learned a lot about that.  And I learned a lot about myself.  I think that if I did not do it--do that, I probably would not had been as successful at--today as I am.  'Cause I think I had to go through that experience.  And because of that experience, I got the confidence in myself. I got to know that I can do something.  I can do it.  I--you don't have to tell me, you know, convince me.  I mean I know I can do it.  All I have to do is go and do it.  So I learned a lot about confidence.  I also learned some strengths and weaknesses.  I learned that I'm great in a large organization.  I learned that I am not the type of person that's going to be able to just walk into a crowd and knock on the door.  Walk into a crowd and say, "Hi, I'm Frank Ross. Here's my card.  Give me a call.  I'll call you tomorrow and why don't we do some business?" Some people have that type of personality.  They could just do that and they're gonna walk out of an--of a reception with lots of cards, lots of meetings.  I found out, that's not me.  I'm the type that, if you give me an opening, I'm going to find a way. After I got that opening, I'm gonna find a way to work with you and to get your business.  And we just work and talk it out until we figure out how, with the both of us can do something together.  But I can't get that opening.  Somebody else had to help me.  And that's where KPMG and the larger organization really came in handy.
Story_ID: 12620
Speaker 1: The question you asked was who some of my [Ross, Stewart & Benjamin] clients were.  And I guess the type of clients we dealt with during that period [1973-1976] were a lot of small--medium size not-for-profits. In addition to that, we did--we got a chance to work with a lot of the community, or not community, but the black enter--the enterprise development type companies working with start-up businesses. Jackie Robinson Development Company and it ultimately is now Jackie Robinson Foundation which probably one of our larger clients.  Because it gave me a chance to meet--well Jackie Robinson had died but it gave me a chance to meet Rachael Robinson, and I had worked with her for a while.  And that was a good experience.  I worked with Studio Museum in Harlem and--you know, organizations like that.
Speaker 2: So those organizations could afford to pay the bills you needed to stay at Fifth Avenue [New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: They were able to afford the bills.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Well we weren't getting rich on it but we also had government work.  We also did work for New York City and the state and a little bit of federal work too.
Speaker 2: And what did you--do you think you learned anything about operating with other people? 'Cause that's a different--it's different when you're working in a large organization, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And even--well you hadn't been a partner in a large organization. But it's different than, you know, three people coming together and sort of forming a partnership.  Did you--would you say that, you know, there were--that that worked well for you?  Or you were, you know. And then how did your partners feel when you sort of up and--were they shocked and surprised and disappointed?
Speaker 1: They were disappointed. But I think they understood.  'Cause we did talk a lot about it during the period that I was thinking about it.  So I think they ultimately understood. Plus they also knew the opportunity that I was leaving for. You know.  I think they were--but I do think they were disappointed.  I think I learned how to deal with, you know, a small group of people.  I remember when I left Peat Marwick [Peat and Marwick Mitchell & Co.], the manager and partner, a fellow by the name of Tom Wheeler, did mention to me that--you know, that I would be dealing with a lot of the same issues and problems that he, as managing partner was dealing with, except it will be on a smaller scale.  But there would be the same problems.  And he was right. I dealt with an employee suing us, you know.  And I remember going home and being sued on--I think Christmas was on a Saturday or Sunday. And Friday was our last workday.  And at 4:00, the messenger came with the lawsuit.  Couldn't contact an attorney until the following Tuesday 'cause everyone was off Monday.  So I remember dealing with all the things you deal with, with a business.  And, you know, how to deal with them. And but I, you know.  It was a great experience. I would not one to exchange that experience for anything.
Speaker 2: What happened to your partners?  Did they go on and continue or did they--.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] They continued for several years. And ultimately they merged the firm with Mitchell Titus [Mitchell &Titus LLP]  which is now the largest black CPA [certified public accountant] firm. But Mitchell ultimately merged with them.
Story_ID: 12621
Speaker 1: Now, so you've been back [at KPMG] since 1976?
Speaker 2: Since 1976.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So we're talking about--how many years, that's  twenty-five?
Speaker 2: You can do the math better than I can.
Speaker 1: Is that it?  Twenty-five.
Speaker 2: Almost twenty-five years.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Almost twenty-five years.  So this is like you--oh, gosh.  This is like you--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) (Laughing)
Speaker 1: So what--what would--how would you say your--and you became partner in 1977.  So you've been--,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That's right.
Speaker 1: --a partner for twenty-four years.
Speaker 2: Twenty-four years now.
Speaker 1: You know twenty-four years.  That's pretty impressive.  So what would you say--can you describe your career in this, you know, 'cause this is a long time.  You know.
Speaker 2: Years, has it changed? You know, has it, you know.  What have been the sort of the paths along the way? Or, you know, or the road marks along the way? Or--.
Speaker 1: Well I've had a good career.  I mean in looking back on it, I would say that I spent two years in New York as a partner.  I  worked in '77 [1977] to '79 [1979], the summer of '79 as a partner in New York.  Summer '79 was offered the opportunity to transfer to Washington [D.C.] to build a practice.  To build what would be the not-for-profit practice.  Higher education, government, the public sector practice in Washington.  And--which are, you know, I took the opportunity and transferred to Washington.  And I've been very--relatively successful in Washington.  I became--I built a successful practice.  Became the head of the ordered practice.  Eventually became the office partner in charge of the office.  You know, so I've been fairly successful.  During this period, I had an opportunity to run for KPMG's Board of Directors.  And in our firm, you can--the firm-- you know, to be on the board, you actually have to be elected by the partners.  And it's not--you have to go through a very extensive nomination process.  Where there's a nominating committee of the existing board, that selects who they want to run.  And then they put you on a slate. And then there's--all the partners that want to run can also put their names on the--well if they meet a certain requirement, get to the slate.  And then you have to be elected by the partners.  And I've been elected.  I was elected to the board probably around eight years ago.  And since then I've been elected at least two other times.  So I've been elected to the board by all partners for three times.  I've had chance to be on the firm's administration --top administrative committee which is the management committee also.  So I think I've been fairy successful in that sense.
Speaker 2: I would consider that very successful.  Can we put it a little in perspective?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There are now five--you say there--.
Speaker 1: There're five big--.
Speaker 2: Accounting firms.  How many African Americans are in--play the role that you play in other  big firms?
Speaker 1: I would say that there's probably one other African American that's in a role like I'm in.  And that's Woody [Willard] Brittain from Price Waterhouse Coopers who is one of the--probably the third or fourth top administrative partner at Price Waterhouse Coopers. Other than that, I would say there's one other member now on KPMG's board besides myself.  And Eddie Munson but that's it.
Speaker 2: So in the--in the country, do you have numbers of how many black partners like yourself?
Speaker 1: I don't have the exact number but I would say it's probably no more than probably seventy-five. Fifty to seventy-five in that range now.
Speaker 2: I didn't even know it was that high--.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm just making a calculation.  I'm saying if we have five firms and each firm will have at least ten with a few having a few more.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In between fifty to seventy-five .
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  Because the law firm community is, you know, has never--It's been a difficult thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And we have more firms, you know, all around the country.
Speaker 1: That's right.  But then they--this is the, you know, the big firm like KPMG.  And  we have almost sixteen hundred, seventeen hundred partners.  And out of that you may have maybe twelve or thirteen.  So percentage wise, it's probably the same thing as with any of the law firms, you know, you're referring to.
Speaker 2: Now you--Let's look at this.  So you are--you--when you look back over your career, do you have any regrets at all?
Speaker 1: No. I really--I don't have any regrets whatsoever.  I can honestly say that I have no regrets in my personal life, no regrets in my professional life.  I mean I would--I kid my son [Michael Ross].  I keep--referred to my son before but he's not a young man.  He's twenty-eight years old right now.  But I joke with him a lot sometimes and I say--tell him how lucky he is.  And I tell him I would sure love to be in his shoes right now.  And then I pause.  And then I say, "But, of course, I want to know what I know right now, too--I want to know what I know now.  I'll exchange shoes with you but knowing what I know now."  You know.
Story_ID: 12622
Speaker 1: Family when I was looking at your background seems to be very important to you.  And you got married when?  I know you were married by the time that you had--because your wife is--.
Speaker 2: Yes. I got married at twenty-four. My wife was twenty.  So we got married--she got married young,  I got married at the right age [laughing].
Speaker 1: And her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Cecelia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: C-E-C-E-L-I-A.  And your children?
Speaker 1: We have two children.  A daughter who is Michelle and a son who is Michael. Michelle teaches the third grade in Alexandria , Virginia.  And my son works with  JP Morgan.  I think it's now called JP Morgan Chase and he's on rotational assignment in London [England] seeing the world.
Speaker 2: So that's why you were saying about that.
Speaker 1: That's why I was--.
Speaker 2: "I wanna be in your shoes but know what I know."  (Laughing)  Which is something we all want.  You know. That's the ideal scenario.
Story_ID: 12623
Speaker 1: You have been successful in corporate America, which has been something that has eluded a lot of African Americans.  In fact, I remember about two years ago, I talked to--there was a professor at Harvard Law--Harvard Business School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] who had--who was doing sort of a study about--.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: And there's another woman at University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign, Illinois] who had looked and seen all these sort of rising stars that, you know, were promise the corporate suite and then it never materialized.  And she has sort of a negative view on the world.  But you fit within what  he said.  That people were targeted early.  That sometimes it took them longer but you don't even fit that.  You know, he said, "It would take them sort of longer. It was a more circuitous route."  You know.  "But they were picked early.  Like their white counterparts."  But my question for you is twofold.  And I think that you may have answered the first one and that is, what would you credit your success to?  You--I--you may have answered that but I want to ask that question again.  And then I'll ask my second.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Okay.  I think I credit it to having the right mentors at the right time.  I think I look back in my career and I would say I had at least three, maybe four mentors.  We've talked about two. One was Sye Borough (ph.).  The other one was the Jim Powers.  But when I moved to Washington [D.C.], Steve Harland was then the managing partner and really is the one that was instrumental in convincing me to come to Washington.  So--and he's the one that pretty much gave me--supported me in everything that I wanted to do in Washington.  And pretty much made me feel as if, you know, I could do whatever I felt was necessary to grow the practice.  And he let me try and do it my way without putting any restrictions on me.  So I'd say that's a significant part of it.  I think the other thing is just this:, you know,  I can do.  I'm not going to let the negative things get in the way.  I mean I'm not naive.  I'm not going to pretend that there isn't racism.  I'm not going to pretend that--I mean, I could tell you story after story about, you know, where one manager didn't believe--didn't want to listen to what I was telling this manager.  And I'm a partner and I'm telling the manager this is what the technical literature is saying.  The manager goes back and tell the client something totally different than what I told the manager to tell the client. And I had to go back to the client and correct the--manager.  Some--when I tell that story to some partners they say, "You didn't fire the manager on the spot?"  I could've.  But why, you know.  So I understand you know.  There's stories like that all over the place.  But, you know.  So I think I didn't let myself get caught up in all the negatives.  And I stayed focused and pretty much on what I wanted to do.  And as long as I felt I had a chance to do it, and a chance to accomplish it, and the opportunity was there for me to do it, you know, then I stayed the course.
Speaker 1: Now do you think that--talking of staying the course. Do you think that it's important for African Americans to stay the course in corporate America?  You know, there're always these things.  Sometimes people say that, forget it.  You can do better as an entrepreneur and build your own thing.  And then now we've seen a rash of, you know, people selling out.  I mean they're--you know.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: You know.  Everyone's selling out these days  (laughing).  So my question is, you know. But at the same time, not many people are making it to the corporate suite. You know.  And so I'm told that Ann Fudge [Ann Marie Fudge] just recently is no longer at, you know, at Maxwell House [Coffee] or wherever she was.  So I--you know, my question for you is, you know, what are your views on that subject?
Speaker 2: I--you know, well I see a lot of good young blacks joining KPMG.  I see them moving up.  And I see a lot of good in the blacks that have--that I think could become a partner. And if they become a partner, could very well, who knows?  Become a managing partner. But even become the chairman of the firm.  But they decide to leave to do something else.  Okay.  So, you know, that is discouraging.  And I think a lot of blacks get discouraged early in their careers. And they look at what other people are doing. Or they look at what they read about blacks that may have been successful as an entrepreneur. And they think they can do it, the same thing.  And I think what you've got to do is get to know yourself.  I think not all of us are ever going to be the chairman of a major corporation.  Not all of us will ever be a partner. Not all of us will ever be, you know, the number two, number three person in any organization. But we owe it to ourselves to at least stay the course, if you think you have the opportunity.  Not all of us are built--are set out to be an entrepreneur.  But on the other hand, I mean if you really want to be an entrepreneur, and you really want to try it, I think you have to.  I had to do it.  And I'm happy I did. 'Cause if I didn't, I would have probably left KPMG at one point soon. I would have left.  After being a partner for a few years to do it.
Speaker 1: So do you, with--do you think that--let's just step back a little bit, and talk about just African American's in the business world.  And I'd like you to share, you know, any thoughts that you might have. You know, about whether it's important, whether it's not.  You know, what things we should do?  And, you know there're trends.  You've existed even in the time period that you, you know, been a CPA [certified public accountant].  There have been tremendous changes, you know, in that.  And so I'm just, you know.  And I think back to even who your, you know, mentors were.  The first Emsar, whatever his name was.
Speaker 2: Emsar Bradford.  This is going back to Emsar.
Speaker 1: Emsar Bradford.
Speaker 2: That's going back.
Speaker 1: Right.  But--I'm--you know, my thing is, you know.  What do you--what are your thoughts about this? And even sort of going forward, you know.  Where are the real opportunities? You know, what people should do? You know--.
Speaker 2: Well I--you know, I mean the world is changing.  And the world will change.  And you've got to be flexible enough to change.  I don't think if I--joined, you know, KPMG today, that, you know, a lot of what I faced I--that the people are facing today.  They have different challenges. And you have to be ready for those challenges.  So I think you have to be flexible.  I think one of the key things I think for any success is being flexible.  But you need a mentor.  You need to have--I look at, you know, [Kenneth] Chenault [American Express Company chairman and CEO].  He had a mentor.  And you just go around and you look at the individuals that made it to that point.  And I don't know--Ann Fudge.  But I'm sure if you talk to her, she would tell you she had mentors.  And then you'd ask her why did she leave.  And if you really get an honest answer, it's probably because she did not see a mentor to take her to the top level.  And that's what you need. I mean, you know,  I think a black could very well be a chairman of a big five firm some day.  I think if I was younger, and I've had the success that I'm--that I have and--but if I was younger in my career and--I could very well position myself to be the chairman of this firm.  All it takes is identifying who the next leader is going to be.  At your right age.  And getting that person to be your mentor.  If that person is your mentor--now you can't make it happen.  But if that mentor--if you could get a mentor at that level and that mentor is going to help you get to where you could very well succeed and become that.  And I think what's happening with a lot of blacks is we move up to a certain level and then our mentors move on. And we haven't been--a new mentor hasn't taken us under their wings.  That to me is critical.  Is that there really a men--a mentor has got to be a person in power once you get to that level.
Speaker 1: So really, I mean, it's all still happenstance. Because, you know, you can't control within the--.
Speaker 2: That's right. That's right.
Speaker 1: What--when you can cultivate a mentor and to, you know.
Speaker 2: It's not a black and white thing either.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Because at that level, somebody's going to pick you up because they feel comfortable with you.  A good leader wants to have good people.  People they can trust in their corner.
Story_ID: 12624
Speaker 1: You have been very philanthropically, you know, involved with organizations.  Both maybe through your, you know, the practice and the nature of your practice.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: But I also detect in the material I've read, though some of it, you know, was taking things and--selling it short but--so I'm not sure whether it was the chicken or egg [laughing].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Who's going to say, "Well,  you saved me."  But you can answer that.  I mean, you seem to have--or what I would read is that, you know, you've been very involved in UNCF [United Negro College Fund].  You've been very involved with--at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. Which I would consider--It's a non-paid position.
Speaker 2: It's a non-paid position.
Speaker 1: Philanthropic.  And you also have been involved in the arts.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: And so I just wanted you to talk--I mean if that is really true, and it's not really business. And--.
Speaker 2: No. there's some truth to it.  I mean,  you know, you--take Howard [University, Washington, D.C. ] for instance.  I would say I probably got involved with Howard because of business.  I think KPMG was doing the audit of Howard.  The dean of the school knew me from the profession. From being involved on different committees with the American Institute of CPAs [certified public account].  And when I moved to Washington [D.C.], he called.  He asked me to teach the course.  So since we did the work, you know, it made sense for me to do it.  But that would be a year, two years.  But I've been doing it now for almost twenty-one years. And it gets beyond where it's, you know, business.  It's because I like it.  And I enjoy helping the students and you know. The students, you know, they haven't complained yet that they don't like me as a professor. So I keep doing it. You know.  And so in that sense. It's a passion in that sense. I think when I look at some of the things that I--I like working with smaller organizations.  You look in my--the list of organizations I'm involved in, you'll see they're smaller--tend to be smaller organizations.  I--my wife and I collect art of all different types. And nothing fancy.  Nothing that I would say we'll get rich off of.  But it's, you know. We like art.  So in that sense, that was a natural fit.  'Cause I think when you get involved with non-profit organizations or different charities, you really have to like what they--what you're doing, to really fit, make it fit with your job. Or else it's going to be a job, an extension of your job.  And, you know, also I think I have--And I know when I took over this office, and now even when I--One of the positions I have with KPMG is the chairman of their foundation board .  And one of the first things we did as the chairman of the Foundation Board is move the Foundation away from strictly making contributions to colleges, and start setting aside part of our budget to start the program we called 'Involved'. Which is gettin' all the offices involved in their local communities.  And providing volunteer time for employees, volunteer service. And supporting the whole concept of volunteerism within KPMG.  And that I say is probably a passion. Because I started that locally here when I took over as managing partner. And it was just a natural extension to do it when I took over as the chairman of the foundation board. You know, where it comes from? I don't know.  I would tell people that, you know, people helped me.  So it's a way I'm giving back without making a big thing of it.  You just go ahead and you do.  You help other people the best way you can.
Story_ID: 12625
Speaker 1: What still, things haven't you done in your life that you would like to do?
Speaker 2: I think, well, you know.  I'm getting close to where I'm going to retire from Peat Marwick--from KPMG.  So it's a question that my wife [Cecelia Ross] and I keep talking about a lot.  And I think I would like to travel a lot more than I've had a chance to. I don't have any grandkids. Even though I'd love to have some grandkids.  And then that would give me time to spend time with grandkids. Where maybe I didn't spend as much time with my kids as I probably should've. But also on that, I would probably teach.  Find a college.  It could be Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  I'd like it to be a predominant--one of the historically black colleges, or a college that have a large minority population.  And I would love to teach.  Just teach accounting.  Not get into the chairmanship of a department.  Not worry about whether I'm a dean, not worry about the politics.  Just let me go teach three, four, Whatever classes is considered fulltime teaching.  Let me teach.  I'll teach the courses and I think I could do a lot there.  And I would like to work on some non-for-profit boards like I'm doing now and also a few corporate boards. And that's really what--If I had the ideal job descrip--that's an ideal job--write an ideal job description for what I'd like to do when I retire. That's my ideal job description.
Speaker 1: So is retirement in the picture right now? Are you--.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Retirement--we have a mandatory retirement age.  It's not--Well, I shouldn't say it's mandatory.  But it's a recommended retirement age at sixty.
Speaker 1: I had heard it was earlier--,
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously]  So--.
Speaker 1: --for--okay.
Speaker 2: So it's early.  So, so, you know, the idea is to give the partners a chance to do some things other than just follow and you know, this rough schedules that we follow.  That's number one.  Number two, to make room for younger partners.  Give them a chance.  It's just part of the culture that's here.
Speaker 1: I think that's the case also with investment banking too.
Speaker 2: It's--yeah.
Story_ID: 12626
Speaker 1: Because you interact with young people, you know, between your experience with Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  Do you have any concerns or hopes for the black community, and young people coming ahead?
Speaker 2: I see a lot of sharp young people coming ahead.  I mean I have no problems worrying about it.  I don't worry about it.  I think we have a lot of good sharp people that I think is going to go further than our generation--, my generation went.
Story_ID: 12627
Speaker 1: Do you think you're West Indian heritage had  anything to do with your success?
Speaker 2: It's part of me.  So I'm sure it had something to do with it.
Speaker 1: And the last--.
Speaker 2: I would say, you know, as a--I'm a West Indian American.  An African with West Indian American.  That's why I could never use the word African American 'cause you got to put West Indian in there someplace. 'Cause that's part of me.
Speaker 1: And what do you think you gained out of being West Indian?  What was--what part of you is West Indian?  All of you?  I mean what part is different from someone who was raised just as an African American?
Speaker 2: I--you know, that's hard to say.  You know, I grew up in the United States, you know.  When I was--I came over here when I was very young.  But you're still exposed to the culture through my aunt [Annette Swanston], my uncle [Henry Phipps], a lot of our relatives, a lot of their friends, etcetera  And I think it's a work ethic. You know.  It's just--as I said, my aunt and uncle did not force us to go to college.  They didn't say we had to.  But somehow or other we all did.  The only requirement was that we do well in school. It's a work ethic that  they developed and a desire to achieve.
Story_ID: 12628
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what you would want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I may even not make it. (Laughs) No.  I would like my legacy just to be that I helped a lot of people.  You know, I was able to help people as I went along the way.
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you would like to say?
Speaker 2: There's one part of me that you did not mention.  I was the founder of the National Association of the Black Accountants.
Story_ID: 12629
Speaker 1: Your being the co-founder of National Association of Black Accountants--.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] National Association of Black Accountants.
Speaker 1: And how that came about?
Speaker 2: National Association of Black Accountants was formed in--officially it was incorporated in 1969. And it was formed probably in 19--the first meeting was probably formed--was probably occurred in the--in 1968.  Actually a couple of us got together in my living room. I think I'd just gotten married [to Cecelia Ross]. My daughter--I was married over a year but my daughter [Michelle Ross] was just born. We had no furniture in our living room. And I'm inviting--think I told my wife, we'll have about sixteen people to--for Sunday afternoon to talk about doing this. And could she fix some, you know, hors d'oeuvres and stuff like that. And she said, "Where are they going to sit? We have no chairs or anything. We have a couch and nothing else." And--but we met. We filled up the floor. You know. And started talking about why we needed such an organization. And it was really formed for the reason that--you have the professionals--I was saying earlier where, you know, just opened up. Had just started to open up to blacks. In 1967, '68 [1968]--1966, '67 [1967], firms were still hiring only one black.  In 1968, the New York City Human Rights Commission [New York City Commission of Human Rights] brought a lawsuit against the major firms in New York--that had headquarters in New York City, and sued them. And as a result, the firms' reaction to that was to go out and hire anyone, as long as you were black. You were--they gave you a job as an accountant. And they brought you on. And then when you go to a firm and you say, "Well.  But this person doesn't have the background." A lot of us would go and say, you know, you're hiring from a school that's not really teaching--don't really have an accountant program.  How do you expect that student to compete with a student coming out of an NYU [New York University, New York, New York] or a Pace [University, New York, New York], which have very strong accountant programs? Don't you think you need to do something to bring them up to speed? If you're going to recruit from those schools, don't you need to do something? But of course, that don't get you into remedial, you know, training. And that gets into the whole concept that you're not hiring.  You know, that you're making exceptions in your hiring policies.  And no one wants to go there. So what we said is, well maybe we could address some of these concerns by forming an organization that would be able to, you know, provide a group for networking. A group for--where people could get to know others, and ask questions. And we could sort of overcome, you know, the problems that they were facing or help them overcome it. So we started the organization. We came by--you know. We started in New York. Of course, we had to get it accepted by the profession, the AICPA [American Institute of Certified Public Accountants], the New York state society. We had to get those firms be--those organizations behind us. We had to get the major firms behind us. And I guess that's where the fact that I that I had, had a reputation within KPMG of being, you know, someone that is not going to be a rebel rouser. And someone that's going to be doing things positively, but I'm not going to be the type of person that's not going to do something, came in handy. And as a result, I was able to get the major firms to all support it. And we started.  Now--but it was really started with the intent of filling a void that existed. And I guess that void still exists because the organization has grown. And, you know, every--and it's been relatively successful.
Story_ID: 12630
Speaker 1: Now how long did it take you to get the support of all the big eight [accounting firms]?  Was that over?  Like a short period of time?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I would say it took about a year. It took a year. I don't know if within a year we got, we got the full support of all of the big eight firms. But we did get the majority of the firms. And we did have several events where the firms sent their representatives.  Like KPMG would send one of their top partners to a function we had. And they were very impressed that it was an upbeat, positive session. And, you know, the other firms did.  But as a result of that, we got their--you know, they trusted us then. And they gave us their support. And then gradually, the organization got to the point where it no longer needed their support.  It grew beyond their support.
Speaker 1: Now was it--these sixteen people--were they all based in New York [New York] at that time?
Speaker 2: Sixteen people met in the--about sixteen. But ultimately it boiled down to about eight.  Eight or about nine, I think. Ultimately it boiled down to nine that stayed with the idea, and kept the idea, built the idea. And started reaching out to more members.  So we started with the nine. And all New York based. It started in New York. But at the same time we were starting the New York chapter, within a year or so of that, all the major cities started to have groups. Starting to come together to do the same thing. So it was only a natural then that we all formed--come together. And when we formed the New York chapter, we really formed it with the intent of it being a national organization. So its incorporation was built around a national organization. Its concept was national.
Speaker 1: So how many years? How long do you think it took for it to really be national? Was it two years?
Speaker 2: I would say, it took probably two to three years before it truly became a national organization.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you pattern it off of any other organizations? I mean--.
Speaker 2: We patterned it--not necessarily. I would say, we did--there was an organization called the National Association of Accountants. And if I had to pick an organization whose bylaws I used as an example that would have been the organization.
Speaker 1: But that was a white organization.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] That's a white organization.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: It's not patterned off of any--,
Speaker 1: No. I understand.
Speaker 2: --other black organization. It was really patterned off of--it's like closely with the National Association of Accountants. Because we had the situation after we just opened it up just to CPAs [certified public accountant]. We opened it up just to people that's in practicing accounting or we opened it up to educators, people in corporate America. The whole accounting profession.
Story_ID: 12631
Speaker 1: And the mission at that time? The stated mission was?
Speaker 2: The stated mission was to provide an opportunity to provide training. To provide networking, to provide an opportunity for blacks to be in leadership positions, to achieve leadership skills. And to have a good time.
Speaker 1: And what are you most proud of has happened? I know its, you know. It's larger. How large? It went from what membership to what membership?
Speaker 2: I don't know the exact membership now. But I would say, it's probably in the twenty something thousand membership. I would say--I'm proudest of  just the fact that actually this past July--last July, I should say, they had their twenty-fifth anniversary. And--no--would have been--no, thirtieth anniversary. It's '69 [1969]. Right? thirtieth anniversary. And I think I was proudest of the fact that, you know, the organization is still growing. And the purpose of the organization, although it's been refined and words have been changed, but the organization is still set. You know, its goals are still the same as the original founders set out when they first started, started the organization. So I think that's what I'd be most proud of. That we had the vision that survived from the objective, the purpose of the organization.
Speaker 1: Now when you say co-founder, were there nine co-founders? Or would you say there mainly two of you?
Speaker 2: I would say there were nine individuals that really--that really formed the nucleus. Okay. And we were at--three or four of us were at Peat, Marwick, Mitchell [ Peat and Marwick Mitchell & Co., later known as KPMG]. Others--one was with Arthur Anderson, Arthur Young.
Speaker 1: Do you remember there--would you be able to say their names?
Speaker 2: I'll be able to get you the names.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Okay. Okay--.
Speaker 2: I don't know them all offhand.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Good.
Speaker 2: But I would say, then there's one other, you know, really Bill Aiken. I don't know if you've heard that name. But Bill Aiken actually became the second president. And whereas I would take the credit for the formation, the acceptance, the establishment; laying the groundwork that allowed the organization to overcome all the criticism. Bill Aiken, I would say, I would give him the credit for taking the organization and truly taking it national. You know. So--But he came in a second group that took it, and really took it national. Whereas I was only able to get it to the established, accepted. He then came on board and as next president and was able to then fly around the country and get chapters started.
