Story_ID: 654931
Speaker 1: Good morning.  My name is [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing today are Vicky Wilson [Ricketts' daughter, Victoria Ricketts Wilson], Maia Lott [ph.], and Renee Ricketts.  Today is July 23rd, 2017.  We are in View Park, California.  And would you please say and spell your name for me?
Speaker 2:  	My name is Vera L. Ricketts [HistoryMaker Vera Ricketts].
Speaker 1: Spell--
Speaker 2:  	V-E-R-A, L., R-I-C-K-E-T-T-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your birthdate?
Speaker 2:  	October 20th, 1922.
Speaker 1: And where were you born, what town?
Speaker 2:  	Indianapolis, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your profession?
Speaker 2:  	I'm a registered pharmacist.
Story_ID: 654932
Speaker 1: So now, we'll start with what we call People magazine type questions, easy questions.  What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2:  	Yellow.
Speaker 1: Me, too (laughter).  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2:  	Oats and raisins and dates.
Speaker 1: Time of year, your favorite time, your favorite season?
Speaker 2:  	It's September, the fall.
Speaker 1: Fall?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination, do you have a favorite?
Speaker 2:  	Jamaica.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2:  	(Pause) A--a phrase?  My thrust is to give something back to the community.
Story_ID: 654933
Speaker 1: We'll talk about your family, both sides.  Let's start with your father.  What's your father's name, when and where was he born?  Tell me a bit about him.
Speaker 2:  	Robert Henry Phelps, P as in people, P-H-E-L-P-S [Robert Phelps, Sr.], in Clarksville, Tennessee.  And my mother is Sarah Blanche Chilton [Sarah Chilton Phelps], and she's in Clarksville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: And do you know the, their dates of birth?  When was your father born?
Speaker 2:  	He, he was born in Tennessee, Clarksville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2:  	I have to go pull that up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you, do you know when your mother was born?
Speaker 2:  	No, I don't remember that either.
Speaker 1: Around--
Speaker 2:  	Yes, I can, I can share after we pull it up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: And, and what was your father's work?
Speaker 2:  	He, he started as a builder, and he went from that to be a laborer, okay.
Speaker 1: In Tennessee?
Speaker 2:  	No, in, in Indianapolis, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and who were his parents, your grandparents on your father's side?
Speaker 2:  	I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know what his, his family's work was in Tennessee?
Speaker 2:  	In Tennessee, I think he did labor work.
Speaker 1: And what about his, his family?  How far back can you trace his family?
Speaker 2:  	And--and his first cousin, he built a house for her and next door to our house in, in Indianapolis, Indiana.  And so, we were very close to her and, and their children.  And in one of the pictures I have here of, his sister was in one of the pictures over here also, in terms I, I had that connection.  So, his two sisters, they were very close to our family, okay.
Speaker 1: And how many siblings did your father have?  How many children in his family?
Speaker 2:  	Total of nine, I think it was.
Speaker 1: Nine?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 654934
Speaker 1: And your mother, Sarah Blanche Chilton [Sarah Chilton Phelps], she was also born in Clarksville, Tennessee, you said (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: And did she work?  Did Sarah work, your mother?
Speaker 2:  	She, she worked sometimes doing housework and laundry work for people.  She--
Speaker 1: And did she have siblings?
Speaker 2:  	Plenty (laughter).
Speaker 1: How many?
Speaker 2:  	Well, in, in her, in her immediate family, I have to give that to you later then, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how far back can you trace your mother or your father's family?  Can you go back to slavery?  Did they ever tell stories of anybody being a slave?
Speaker 2:  	No, not a, but, but she, my mother talked to me about her brother.  And he lived in Springfield, Ohio and he would come from Springfield, Ohio to visit us.  And we'd do it periodically, have family reunions and so, someone had documented, I think, an in depth study of her, her side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 654935
Speaker 1: Do you, did your parents [Sarah Chilton Phelps and Robert Phelps, Sr.] meet in Clarksville [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: Do you know when, how, how old were they when they got married?  Anybody know?  Sixteen?  Sixteen.  She's, yeah, yes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Victoria [Ricketts' daughter, Victoria Ricketts Wilson] had, she had that record.
Speaker 1: Vic- Victoria said that they were sixteen.
Speaker 2:  	It, all right, one was sixteen, and one was seventeen or something.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when did they move to Indianapolis [Indiana]?  Were they already married when they moved?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, ma'am, and they moved to Indianapolis, okay.
Speaker 1: Did the whole family move or just, just them?
Speaker 2:  	Well, all the rest of them was born there in Indianapolis.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2:  	Our, our children was born in Indianapolis--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2:  	--for the most part.  Others were from Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Got it.  So, you were born in Indianapolis, right?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: And, and how many children did your parents have?  How many brothers and sisters do you, do you have?
Speaker 2:  	I think it was nine.
Speaker 1: In your family.
Speaker 2:  	Nine, ten, eleven, I think it was, okay.
Speaker 1: And where, where do you fall in the birth order?
Speaker 2:  	Let's see, Elzie [Elza Phelps], Mer- the fourth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 654936
Speaker 1: So when you think back on your childhood, and now you're ninety-four, so that's thinking (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --think far back, right?  When you were a little girl, what, what do you remember?  What's your earliest childhood memory as a little girl?
Speaker 2:  	Well, one, I, I, one, I remember specifically. My mother's bedroom was adjacent to our room, our, our bedroom, and mommy [Sarah Chilton Phelps] had a lot of children.  So, we had a Murphy bed, one of the beds that comes out of the wall.  And so, somebody might have given to her but, anyway, it collapsed, and when it collapsed, the scar that I have on my head right now, it cut me right up there.  And so, eventually, something happened, so I went blind on this, on the right eye, but the doctor took care of that, so I'm okay now.  And also, I remember when, when I was, much earlier, I had a disease called St. Vitus Dance [Sydenham's chorea].  It's, it's a nervous condition.  And so, I could not continue to go to school so I stayed home, and mama took care of me until I became better.  And then, I went back to school, and tried to catch up again just so I could be with the rest of the class, and I did, and it worked out fine.  And I thank God for that.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you had St. Vitus Dance?
Speaker 2:  	About nine or ten, somewhere around there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were young.
Story_ID: 654937
Speaker 1: And so, where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2:  	I went to, it's a public school called School 37 [Hazel Hart Hendricks School 37].
Speaker 1: Um-hm, in Indianapolis [Indiana]?
Speaker 2:  	In Indianapolis.
Speaker 1: So, I want you to think about where you grew up, your, your home where you grew up, and your neighborhood when you're a little girl, and think back.  And what are the sights, sounds, and smells that you remember as a little girl?
Speaker 2:  	Well, one thing I remember, early in the morning, a rooster would crow and so, it's time to get up.  And if my mother [Sarah Chilton Phelps] had given birth to a baby, then I had the responsibility at some point to make sure I fixed my daddy's [Robert Phelps, Sr.] breakfast.  And we had a coal stove, coal stove that we cooked on it, and the coal stove had water sitting on there to take our baths and et cetera, so I remember a lot about that.
Speaker 1: Were you the first girl?
Speaker 2:  	No, ma'am.  My, my oldest brother was Elzie [Elza Phelps] and my oldest sister was Mary Lee [Mary Phelps]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--and so, both of them have passed on.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And so, go back, so you remember that and what else?  What about the smells?  What smells do you remember as a little girl?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, my mother, my mother made cha-cha.  It's a, it's a relish made out of green tomatoes, onions, spices, and cook it on the stove.  It was the best smell, and I was telling someone at some point, I walked through the airport in Indianapolis, and they had something like that on sale that you could take back home to your state.  But I saw it, but, but she told me how to do it, but I must have done something wrong with those.  You had to use your hands, and burned my hands and everything, so I, I left that alone (laughter).
Speaker 1: But you remember the smell of cha-cha?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.  And, and my grandmother, when she come by to visit us, we had, I have the bowl downstairs.  And she, she would cream the butter from the cows that we had from, from the milk.  And so, she creamed the butter and added sugar to it, then she add the other ingredients, and it was best.  She should have put that cake on the market but (laughter), but it was very, very good, very good.  I remember, I remember her good cakes that she used to make. And I also remember my, my mother cooked a lot of beans.  And so, sometimes that's all we had for dinner, for a large pan of cornbread and the beans.  That, that was dinner.  And so, the kids would say, "Where's the rest of the food?"  So, my mother said, "This is all you're going to get, and if you're hungry, you'd better eat what you have before you 'cause we can't-- there won't be any more for you to eat, so you better eat it now."  So they got the message (laughter).
Speaker 1: And they ate (laughter)?
Speaker 2:  	And they ate, that's right.
Story_ID: 654938
Speaker 1: What kind of a student was young Vera [HistoryMaker Vera Ricketts]?
Speaker 2:  	Well, when I wasn't sick, it was good.  I was still focused.  I was still frugal.  So basically, I had a good childhood and I, basically, I, I minded my parents [Sarah Chilton Phelps and Robert Phelps, Sr.] very well, and they would ask me to do.  In fact, they were so lenient, was, she would always send two of us to the grocery store 'cause if one did something bad, the other could tell on her (laughter).  Yes, so, I, I remember a lot, that going on, too.
Speaker 1: Now, in Indianapolis [Indiana] when you were growing up, was your neighborhood a black neighborhood?  It was a segregated neighborhood?
Speaker 2:  	It was about three white families in the neighborhood.  In fact, the man in the back of us, he wanted me to be, (pause) investigator, what you call it?  Anyway, that was not my cup of tea 'cause I, I was focused into the scientific world.  From my high school [Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana], I had a teacher in my high school that really stimulated a little spark in me that kept me into the scientific world versus going into investigation.  Okay.
Speaker 1: So, it was in high school that you became interested in the sciences?
Speaker 2:  	No.  It, it was, it was in the young years.
Speaker 1: Yep.  What, what do you remember?
Speaker 2:  	Well, I remember some special little things, like picking up, not wild, but bugs that you see crawling around.  They were no--and you see a snail, what, what would make that snail a snail?  Or if you see a, a wild animal, I want to inquire from my parents, what's, what is this all about?  So, it, it stimulated, grew and continued to grow.  And then, from grade school [Hazel Hart Hendricks School 37, Indianapolis, Indiana] going into high school, they, they capture all of this; and it really focused me into the world that I went, that I completed.
Story_ID: 654939
Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2:  	Crispus Attucks High School [Indianapolis, Indiana].
Speaker 1: So that was named for the great Crispus Attucks, yeah.
Speaker 2:  	That's right, that's right.  That was a trip also.
Speaker 1: How so, tell me?
Speaker 2:  	Well, from the beginning, students at Crispus Attucks High School graduated from high school, and they went off to college.  But then, they went to college, they came back.  They didn't have a school to go and teach.  So, so, somebody went to downtown and asked the government to provide a high school for us.  So, they did.  So, for our professors and our high school were Ph.D.'s and they really took a lot of interest in us.  And I remember Mrs., Ms. Cockendahl [ph.].  She was my, my biology teacher.  Mr., Mr. Park [ph.] was my math teacher.  Mr. Henry [ph.] was our other teachers.  And we focused, the school focused on a lot of foreign, a foreign language.  And so, at that time, doctors were writing prescriptions in Latin.  And so now, they write in English and, thank god (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) But so did you learn Latin in high school?
Speaker 2:  	I took Latin and learned it in high school.  It was, it was very good.
Speaker 1: And so, you said the teachers were Ph.D.'s, so these were people who had gone and gotten a lot of education (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: --but they weren't able to teach at the college level?
Speaker 2:  	That's right.
Speaker 1: So, they came back to your high school?
Speaker 2:  	It was, it was a lot of--separating us from them.
Story_ID: 654940
Speaker 1: When you were growing up, do you remember any encounters of racism in Indianapolis [Indiana] when you were a child?
Speaker 2:  	Well, I was Mrs. Civil Rights (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2:  	I wanted to see a lot of changes in the youth.  I wanted to see a lot of changes in a lot of things that was going on in the world that I was living and working around.  So, I did a lot of sit-ins.  And I was very much a part of CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], what James Farmer was, the CORE person I was very much involved, beginning of his program.  And in, in terms of, in the Indianapolis at that time, there'd be stores like Hook's [Hook's Drug Stores] that they have in Indianapolis, was Hook's.  Here, they are, it's like Walgreens [Walgreens Company] and those big stores.  But in Indianapolis, they had a bar, a counter, where you could sit.  In Indianapolis, you could do that.  So, in, in a white community, you couldn't go to sit at the pharmacy.  Sometimes, doctor would, doctors would order some castor oil.  You know what castor oil is?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2:  	A doctor would order castor oil.  And so, the pharmacist would make a fizz out of orange juice and the castor oil, and you could get it down in you.  And sometimes, elderly patients, if you had a newborn baby, and they had a cold, you'd put it into the soft spot in, in the top of the head for the baby's cold.  But I picked up on that for, for being around old people. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, I want to go back to your childhood when you were a little girl, maybe in high school [Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana].  Do you remember, were there any encounters between blacks and whites that you recall when you were growing up, like did you, did, did you experience racism yourself as a, as a girl growing up in Indianapolis?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, in Indianapolis, going from one school to the next, they had bus lines, and you had to sit in the back of the bus.  And that upset me so much 'cause the bus started in our community going downtown.  And so, I questioned the bus driver why, why would I have to sit back here in the back, in the back of the bus?  And white people don't get in- into the bus until we're almost downtown?  So, he said, "Well, I'm not in charge of that, but you sit where you have to sit," and that's where I sat (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, you didn't, you didn't fight it back then?
Speaker 2:  	Well, I, I didn't have the skills to go fight them.  I just kind of plant a seed, with somebody, somebody like from the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] could come on and go downtown to fight it.  But it, it bothered me con- considerably, and we'd go downtown at the, at the train station.  And we'd sit in there so, and you could not eat at the counters at, in the stores in downtown.
Speaker 1: And how old were you when you were going downtown?
Speaker 2:  	About eighteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this was when you were, finished high school?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, ma'am.
Story_ID: 654941
Speaker 1: I want to stay when you were young still.  So, you mentioned in your house that when, when you were little, you had to make sure on the, the--it was coal burning stove?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, ma'am (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The coal burning stove, you had to get the water ready.  Did you have, did you have a bathroom in your house, or did you use an outhouse?
Speaker 2:  	Okay.  We had a number five tub, and we had a number ten tub, and right in, right in the back of you is a little tub that mama [Sarah Chilton Phelps] made me when I was a baby, and right in the back of you (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) A little tub (laughter).
Speaker 2:  	(Laughter) Yeah, a little tub, okay.  And so, my brothers and my older sisters, they took their bath first in the number five, a number ten tub.  And so, all the other kids after that took their bath in that same water.  Isn't that a shame?  But, anyway, that's what happened.
Speaker 1: And what about the toilet?  Where was the toilet?
Speaker 2:  	The toilet was outdoors.  They call them outhouses--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2:  	--in the, I mean, almost like in the woods.  But the rule was you could not drink water, or you could not eat watermelon after the sun goes down 'cause you had to go to the bathroom.  And so, in lieu of doing that, you see that little pee pot, pee pot and, or you get a slop jar, and you go to the outhouse.  My daddy [Robert Phelps, Sr.] dug a deep hole into the ground, and put a toilet seat on top of it, and that's where, that's where we would go.  If we were working in the garden, we would go to the bathroom, et cetera.  And so, that was very frustrating to me, but I had to do what I had to do.  In fact, we were living in that neighborhood where they had not put electric lines in, so that's the reason we had the, the oil lamps.  That's what we studied by, and it was one lamp in each room.  And we had the responsibility each day to clean the glass part of the, of the lamp so that we could see; and that, that was very frustrating.
Story_ID: 654942
Speaker 1: When you, you were talking about you were young when you were discovering that the nature, and the bugs, and animals, and everything, as a little girl, what were you dreaming about becoming?  What, what were you thinking you would do?
Speaker 2:  	My first goal as a little girl was to become a nurse.  I don't know why, but anyway, that was my focus.  And, but then somewhere, it changed and went into pharmacy.  And, and so, since I, since I made a change, I was dedicated in making that a career, making a good choice of making a living.
Speaker 1: So, tell me about the lady at your church.  There was something about a lady at your church when you were dreaming as a child who in- inspired you.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.  We, we were from a Baptist church, and I was very laid back, if you will, in terms of reading announcements at church.  And so, the minister asked me, he said, "Next Sunday, I would like for you to read the announcements."  And I was so nervous, but anyway, I did it, and that was good for me because it's a kickoff in terms of letting me feel comfortable.  And I'd go out there and talk to the community, when I talked to the youth, and talked to seniors, and et cetera, that it was important that, that foundation had been put there for me to express that.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 654943
Speaker 1: Did your interest in pharmacy and just science have anything to do with your illness when you were little?
Speaker 2:  	I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: You, be- you said you were ill when you were little.  Did that spark any interest in your being interested in medicine and--
Speaker 2:  	No.  I, I think the spark came from the bugs, and a lot of bugs flying around.  I wanted to know where they came from and how they came about.
Speaker 1: And so, after you finish high school [Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana], did you go to college right away?
Speaker 2:  	No, I did, I think I w- was about two years extension work in, in a university extension, and I had to make money to pay for my college education.  And I paid for it all the way through by doing work.  And my first job was placed for where they made silk stockings for women.  And you had to put all the size four--one, two, three, four--do that.  And so, after I accumulate enough moneys, and could transfer those credits from the university extension, I transferred those credits to Indianapolis College of Pharmacy [Butler University College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Indianapolis, Indiana] and, and that's how I kept on going.
Speaker 1: And how long is the pharmacy program?
Speaker 2:  	Four years.  No, it, it was, I think there was a, what was that?  We, we had a wait because the World War II [WWII] war was going on.  And so, they accelerate a lot of the students who were already in college.  They, they pushed them up another grade, so you had to take some extra work at Indianapolis College of Pharmacy.  So, because they had, they took all the fellows to the service, so that you didn't have anybody to fill, make prescriptions, and stuff.  So, therefore, they agreed that the students who were already in pharmacy, if they take some additional courses, they could do that, and they could go to another level.  So, at some given point, Indianapolis College of Pharmacy sold their building to Butler University [Indianapolis, Indiana], and that's where I end up graduating from, with a B.S. degree.
Speaker 1: And were there any other women in this program?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: There were?
Speaker 2:  	A lot, a lot--
Speaker 1: And, well, is this because the men were in the war, that there was, there was availability (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yeah, I think so, um-hm I think so.
Speaker 1: Were there other black women?
Speaker 2:  	No, I was the only black person in the class.  And I would sit, there I go again, I sat in the back of the classroom.  So, it was about twenty students who sat up in front, and there was some empty seats in between, and then, I was sitting in the back.  And so one day, the professor came into the classroom.  He said, "Students, today, I would like for you to write a composition.  You don't have to put your name on it."  And so, my civil rights thing came into--to be.  I said, I'm going to write, I'm going to write my composition as if I were a white student, wanted to know why the black student was sitting back there in that corner.  So, evidently, he read it, and he listened, and it must have dawned on him, so he made a change.  But I said, my civil rights stuff paid off (laughter).
Story_ID: 654944
Speaker 1: So your civil rights interest, when did that begin?
Speaker 2:  	Well, I think it began a long time ago.  With all the things we were subjected to, that things we could not do.  In place--instead, there was a place in downtown Indianapolis [Indiana] called, it was a black insurance company.  And if you had to go to the bathroom, you had to go to one in the city to kind of shop in the area, to this big black bank to use the bathroom.  And if, if you were home, you had to go into the basement of one of the big buildings to get a snack (unclear).  I said, now this doesn't sound right, but anyway, we kept on, what they call, kept on, keeping on, keeping on, trying to make a difference in the quality of life of people.  And that was my, my goal, to try to make a difference.
Speaker 1: And so, when, you, you said in your pharmacy school [Indianapolis College of Pharmacy; Butler University College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Indianapolis, Indiana], they, after writing that essay, you were moved forward.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Did he ever figure out it was you who wrote it?
Speaker 2:  	I don't, I don't think so, but I had, I had another teacher, another professor in my class, in my biology, chemistry class.  And his name was Michener [Nathan Michener].  And so, all the kids in the class call him Michener.  And so, I called him Michener one day and so, he looked at me square in the face.  He said, "Professor Michener, to you."  I said, "Oh, excuse me."  It, it took me back a step or two, but anyway, I, I guess maybe I really hadn't grown to the point that it was something really going on in, in my world, and how they world is.  We didn't quite click, so to speak.
Speaker 1: What kind of a student were you at the pharmacy school?
Speaker 2:  	I, I think I was an average student.
Speaker 1: Do you think you were treated fairly?
Speaker 2:  	For, for the most part, yes, okay.  There was one professor that really started, took me under his wings--not, not the one who write, wanted me to write.  He, he was the science component of the, of the college.  But anyway, he sort of took me underneath his wings, to make sure I had what I needed to do to graduate.
Story_ID: 654945
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from pharmacy school?
Speaker 2:  	Nineteen forty--uh, Maia [Maia Lott (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Forty-eight [1948], 1948.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and what did you do upon graduation?
Speaker 2:  	What did I do, what?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What, did you start working right away?
Speaker 2:  	Well, I started working as a clerk.  And when I got deep into the pharmacy, then I wanted them, from the clerk part of the pharmacy, to be a pharmacy technician, as they call them today.  And then, at that point, when I, when Butler University [Indianapolis, Indiana], when Indianapolis College of Pharmacy [Butler University College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Indianapolis, Indiana] (unclear) Butler University, then I took over what a pharmacist really does.
Speaker 1: And so, where were you working?  At the university?
Speaker 2:  	No, at a public, at a public, not a public, at a high, a business, like CVS [CVS Health] and Walgreens [Walgreens Company]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--in, in the pharmacy department.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And I learned the ins and outside.  And I, and had to pay on customers, and give, give them some good advice as, as we would call it; and we thought we were helpful to the people.
Story_ID: 654946
Speaker 1: So, I'd like you to talk about what a pharmacist does because, you know, there's, there's one thing of filling prescriptions, but also as you're talking about really advising patients who are coming to pick up medicine or who have questions.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about the job?
Speaker 2:  	Okay.  I wanted to talk about, in, in the pharmacy itself, we had a little book called Humphreys ['The Pharmacy Student's Pocket Notebook,' ed. John Humphrey].  And some manufacturer had put together a list of over the counter drugs that you can ask for.  And, and that's what my mother [Sarah Chilton Phelps] used to do when I was younger.  She made a very good relationship with the neighborhood pharmacist.  He was one of us.  And instead of us having to go to the doctor every time we go to see the pharmacist, and he would give us advice.  That, that was part of it.  And then, the other part of it, before I miss a part, is when I worked in the manufacturing department.  We made, made a lot of solutions and a lot of saline solutions.  And the doctor add something to the water to be injected into the arm, so we'd, we'd get a whole lot of that.  We made a whole lot of ointments that, to rub on you for whatever doctor says you need it, and put the ingredients into that.  So, it, it's really two parts of pharmacy.  One, one is taking care of the prescription, and one was the manufacturing.  And so, and one of the jobs that I had, that's what they wanted me to do was to do the manufacturing.  In fact, when my husband left Howard University [Washington, D.C.] to go to Durham, North Carolina, at that point, at, at the hospital that I was going to, the pharmacy wasn't there.  They open, I had to open up a new pharmacy from scratch.  And so, that's how Duke University [Durham, North Carolina] got me because Newton [William Newton Ricketts] had to leave.  And so, they knew I had some skills, and so they asked me if I would work for them.
Speaker 1: At the beginning of your career as a pharmacist, I wanted to understand what a pharmacist does because as you just described, a lot of people go to the pharmacist before going to the doctor, or instead of going to the doctor, so you have to have a lot of medical knowledge.
Speaker 2:  	Well, sometimes the, in some, I guess, some, some of the schools in pharmacy, they, certain things that they share with you in terms of helping to take care of the patient.  And so, if, if it's something that you know that you can buy over the counter without a prescription, you have that knowledge, and you want to share it.  And that's what my mother [Sarah Chilton Phelps] did with, with me or with us.  Okay.
Speaker 1: And so, there's a level of trust that builds between the pharmacist and the patient (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, and, and you become a part of the, of the family.
Story_ID: 654947
Speaker 1: And so, you, you start out working in Indianapolis [Indiana]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --as a pharmacist?  When do you go to Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2:  	After I had taken the national pharmacy board, I took it in Washington, D.C., and I took it in North Carolina.  And so, the skills that I had is what they were looking for.  So, it was a hospital in, somewhere in Boston, Massachusetts.  And so, they asked me to send my application, and I did.  And so, and I had the papers and everything and sent it there.  And they accepted me as an employee on paper, but then it dawned upon them that they didn't have a picture of me.  They didn't know what I looked like.   So, they asked me to send them a picture, and so, it showed that I had some color in my skin, so that's not what they wanted.  So, they rejected my application to come.
Speaker 1: This is in Boston?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yes, okay.  They rejected me, so it was a good thing I met my husband [William Newton Ricketts] (laughter) when I went to Lincoln Hospital [Durham, North Carolina]--I mean, to the Washington, D.C. hospital.
Speaker 1: So, and, and so, you were rejected by Boston, but you were accepted in D.C.?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's, so you went to D.C. for a job?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Story_ID: 654948
Speaker 1: And then, how did, how did you meet your husband?
Speaker 2:  	'Cause he was making goo-goo eyes at me.  He was coming down the hall (laughter).  So, he got to the point where he asked my mother [Sarah Chilton Phelps], he said, he'd like to marry me.  I said, I said, "Well, let me ask my mother."  And my mother said, "Well, just think about it 'cause you just don't--." I was so naive, it was pitiful (laughter).  I didn't know A from B.  But anyway, (laughter)--
Speaker 1: So, he, what was he, what's your husband's name?
Speaker 2:  	William.
Speaker 1: William Ricketts [William Newton Ricketts]?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: And he was at Howard University's--
Speaker 2:  	Yes, he was a student--
Speaker 1: What was he studying?
Speaker 2:  	--in medical school.
Speaker 1: Medical school, and so, you met him at Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].  Where were you when you met?
Speaker 2:  	Well, they, they left the classrooms on the campus, and it came through a hallway to pass the pharmacy.  And so, he looked over there and he saw me.  We were making conversation (laughter).
Speaker 1: How old were you?  Around?
Speaker 2:  	I guess, I must have been in my thirties maybe because I had made, I had made a commitment that if I was not married when I was thirty-five years old, I would go and forget about marry, and go abroad and do pharmacy, like going to Jamaica or go to Africa, and, and do pharmacy, volunteer for pharmacy work.  That was my goal.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And age?  Your daughter thinks you were about twenty-five.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But your goal was if you didn't get married by what age?
Speaker 2:  	I, well, I thought, I thought it was thirty.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, you met your husband around twenty-five, and how soon after you met him, did you get married?
Speaker 2:  	No, because it was another fellow who was taking me out for dinner (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah?
Speaker 2:  	And so, and, and he, he went to school with my roommate.  And she's from New Orleans [Louisiana] from Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana].  So, anyway, he said, "Well, if it doesn't work out--." I said, "I'll be right here for you if you want to come back and talk.  We can still have lunch together."  And so, that's what happens.
Speaker 1: And, and, but it worked out (laughter)?
Speaker 2:  	Yet, it worked out fine.
Speaker 1: And you got married in the same year?
Speaker 2:  	No, not in the same year.  After, I think it was about a year later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.  When, when he asked, from the time he asked me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, was he still in medical school when you got married (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And you're working as a pharmacist at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Story_ID: 654949
Speaker 1: And so now you're in D.C., you're at Howard University.  This is, you know, the African American campus, a lot of scholars are there.  A lot of, you know, majority black people who are building their lives.  What is your experience like, in D.C., compared to Indianapolis [Indiana]?  Is it different at all?
Speaker 2:  	Somewhat in terms of when I was in Indianapolis, my, it was more clinical, in terms of receiving prescriptions, making sure--and they were okay, make sure that those was okay.  And we'd get a lot of compounding.  The doctor would write for so many grains of medicine that you, that'll come to the back, and they continue, so you had to weigh it out.  And so, you'd put all it down on a piece of paper, and you fill the prescription.  That's the way it was when I left Indianapolis.  And when I went to Washington, D.C., I did some of that also, but I did more manufacturing.  I did more manufacturing the solutions, and the drugs, and the ointments for the patients who are in the hospital, for the most part.
Speaker 1: And in D.C., where were you, where were you living?  Were you on campus?
Speaker 2:  	No.  I guess when I was married, when I was in--before all that, was a place called Slowe Hall [Lucy Diggs Slowe Hall], okay, and that's where I stayed, okay.
Speaker 1: Right.  And then, and that was a part of Howard University, Slowe Hall, was it?  I think so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Well, I think so because they asked for that, yes.
Speaker 1: Yep.  And then, after you got married, where did you and your husband [William Newton Ricketts] live?
Speaker 2:  	Almost in the same neighborhood of the university.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And were there any other black pharmacists at the Howard University pharmacy?  Were, because that's a black college [HBCU] so--
Speaker 2:  	Well, well, they, it was a pharmacy school at Howard University [Howard University College of Pharmacy, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: But where, where you were working, were there any other blacks in the pharmacy office?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: And, and any other women.
Speaker 2:  	The, the team pharmacist was, was black.
Speaker 1: Any other women?
Speaker 2:  	A few.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were, be- because before, you were the only one, right?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: How long did you work at the Howard University pharmacy?
Speaker 2:  	Let me see, maybe a total of at least ten years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And also, when I left Durham, North Carolina, I went back to Washington, D.C. area.  There's a hospital called--
Speaker 1: Green?
Speaker 2:  	I'm trying to think of the hos--
Speaker 1: Freed- ?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Freedmen--
Speaker 1: Oh, Freedmen's Hospital [Freedmen's Hospital; Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2:  	No.  When--when I left, when I left Durham, North Carolina going back to Washington, D.C., it was a hospital.
Story_ID: 654950
Speaker 1: Well, before you go there because let's go to Dur- to--Durham [North Carolina] was when you went to Duke University, right?
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: And your--was it, you went there because your husband got a job at, at Duke?
Speaker 2:  	No, because his, he, he wanted to be a surgeon, and it required you to take four years of extracurricular to become a surgeon.  And so, the Lincoln Hospital [Durham, North Carolina] program that he went to, and that I was also with, to sit at the pharmacy in Durham, his timeframe was over.  So, he had to go to another hospital in Norfolk, Virginia, to, to work on his fourth year.  And then, he went back to Washington, D.C., and I stayed in Durham, North Carolina to work at Duke.
Speaker 1: So, tell me about the invitation to work at Duke in the pharmacy because you were the first black woman to be--
Speaker 2:  	At Duke.
Speaker 1: --a pharmacist at Duke, correct?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: And what year was that--
Speaker 2:  	Uh--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Fifty-eight [1958].
Speaker 2: --nineteen fifty-eight [1958].  And so, how did, how did that come to be?  How did the invitation come for you to be pharmacist there?
Speaker 1:  	At, at Duke?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1:  	Well, I guess, someone in the personnel department at Duke Hospital [Duke University Hospital, Durham, North Carolina] realized that Newton [William Newton Ricketts] was leaving, and that I would possibly leaving.  And so, he approached me in terms of would I consider become a staff pharmacist at Duke Hospital.  So, I talked with Newton about it, so he said okay.  And my second daughter, Verlie [Verlie Ricketts Lockings], I think, was born while I was in Durham.  So, I had somebody to take care of her, her well.  And so, anyway, I said yes, and that's how that happened and--
Speaker 2: So, where were you working before you were at Duke University?  You're in Durham 'cause you moved there with your husband, right?
Speaker 1:  	Yes.
Speaker 2: Were you work- were you working in pharmacy when you first came?
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, I, I was working in a retail pharmacy, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And you, when was your first daughter born?  What, it--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Fifty [1950].
Speaker 2: Fifty [1950].  So, your first daughter was born in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], in Washington, in 1952?
Speaker 1:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 2: What's her name?
Speaker 1:  	Paula Renee [Renee Ricketts].
Speaker 2: Okay.  And then your second daughter was born when?
Speaker 1:  	In, in Durham, North Carolina.
Speaker 2: And that's, what's her name?
Speaker 1:  	That's Wendy Nicole [Wendy Ricketts Greene]--.  No, it was Ivy Verlie.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And, and you have two other daughters, correct?
Speaker 1:  	And the baby daughter was born in Los Angeles, California.  And Victoria [Victoria Ricketts Wilson], my second daughter, who's sitting right here, she was born in Washington--in California.
Speaker 2: And so, what are the years of daughter three and daughter four?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Sixty-two [1962] and '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962] and '67 [1967], okay.  So, the first daughter is born in '52 [1952], and the last daughter is born in '67 [1967].
Speaker 1:  	Now, all my children are five years apart.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And, and so, you have two young children when you are, when you become the pharmacist at Duke University, yes?
Speaker 1:  	Well, one was born there, and one, I brought there with me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, how are you managing having two children, now being the pharmacist, and your husband moved, right, to continue his education?
Speaker 1:  	Yes.
Speaker 2: Were you there by yourself with your daughters for a while?
Speaker 1:  	Right.
Speaker 2: Who's helping you?
Speaker 1:  	I inquired, someb- somebody to come in to help--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1:  	--(simultaneous) to, to watch them, okay.  But I, I continued working in the, in the capacity of my pharmacy.
Story_ID: 654951
Speaker 1: You become the first black female pharmacist at Duke [Duke University Hospital, Durham, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How, you obviously know how to do the job, but how are you treated 'cause you're in the South now?  You're, you're in North Carolina--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: --in the '50s [1950s], right?
Speaker 2:  	The South went straightly right from Indianapolis [Indiana] right to Durham, North Carolina.  Shortly after I got there, one of the white persons brought a prescription in to have it filled.  And she point- and she pointed out, and she said, "I do not want her to fill my prescription."  And so, the pharmacist on the staff, the white pharmacist on the staff, said, "Why?"  "Because I want him," and him was white.  And so, the staff pharmacist at Duke said, "Well, him cannot find, cannot fill the prescription.  He's not a pharmacist.  He's an orderly.  He cleans the floors."  And so, she (laughter), so she told him, "Okay, here's your prescription back, and we prefer, if possible, you don't come back here anymore."  And I, just reading the scrip on her, she was a paraplegic.  She, she used crutches to get around in the pharmacy to do what she had to do 'cause they hired her because she, she had that skill, but she also had that, yeah, (unclear) that went along with it.  But what, that was an experience.
Speaker 1: So, that was, do you have, did you have others like that?
Speaker 2:  	No, but I cried.  And so, so the staff pharmacist said, "Well, you can go to the bathroom, and sit down and cry, or oh, do you want to?  That's okay."  By the way, the person who hired me, sit down and talk, like we're talking in terms of this is sort of what you expect on this job or in, in North Carolina.  So I thought I was well prepared and I thought, with my civil rights movements that I had enough strength to, to deal with it.  But after I got that cry out of my system, then I continued to work.
Speaker 1: And the people stood up for you--
Speaker 2:  	Yes--
Speaker 1: --in the pharmacy (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	--(simultaneous) yeah, yes, yes--
Speaker 1: That must have felt good?
Speaker 2:  	--yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And so, at Duke, were most of the, most of the patients who came in white?
Speaker 2:  	For the most part, yes.
Speaker 1: But you didn't have any more issues after that?
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: How long were you there?
Speaker 2:  	I guess it was about, maybe two or three, maybe two--
Speaker 1: About two years?
Speaker 2:  	--because Newton [Ricketts' husband, William Newton Ricketts], soon, soon he was going to be leaving Norfolk, Virginia to go back to Washington, D.C.  So, it was about two to, two to three years.
Story_ID: 654952
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When he went back to Washington, D.C., you met him there?  You, you moved?
Speaker 2:  	One--one of the nurses at the hospital, at Lincoln Hospital in Durham [North Carolina], she helped me to drive from North Carolina to Washington, D.C. or, or an outskirt place near there 'cause that's what she did.  She helped me out con- considerably with, with the baby in the back seat, and trying, trying to drive.  We're going where I had to go, and there was--anyway, that's what happened.
Speaker 1: And when you moved back to Washington, D.C., where did you work?
Speaker 2:  	I went to Washington, D.C., when the Washington, D.C. main hospital [District of Columbia General Hospital, Washington, D.C.], when I went back to Washington, D.C., and I did a lot of manufacturing there also.  We did some prescription, but most of it was manufacturing pharmaceuticals.
Speaker 1: So, and, and what is your husband [William Newton Ricketts] doing at that point?  Has he finished school?
Speaker 2:  	No.  He, he had to do another year.  And so, at that, at that particular time, he was focusing primarily on cancer.  And so, I guess, that's the reason that I took off at some point in my life to help promote American Cancer Society, and help the community to be knowledgeable about what the cancer program was all about.
Speaker 1: And so, your husband is, is, he's studying to be a surgeon, right?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: So, that's a very long process (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: How are you all working together?  How, how does the family work 'cause both of you have big careers?  He's in school for a long time, and you have young kids.  How, how are you managing everything?
Speaker 2:  	Well, I, I guess, because I was working, we had a source of income, and the hospital might have subsidized in some capacity.  But, anyway, most of the income, I think, perhaps came from, from there.  And I didn't have no problem with that, okay.  And it, it worked out well.  And I had hired, hired people to help supplement me, okay.
Speaker 1: To help with the taking care of the children and--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --the household?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Where did you live in D.C.?
Speaker 2:  	8th Street, Park Lane [ph.], that's where I was living.
Speaker 1: And was that a black neighborhood?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, for the most part, yes.  It was a, a lot of apartments.
Story_ID: 654953
Speaker 1: Tell me about other aspects of your life.  Were you involved in a church in Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2:  	Well, I was married in Washington at a Presbyterian church, yes.  I, I wasn't that much involved with--however, across the street from me, was an Episcopalian church, and I could walk out my front door, and walk across the street, and walk into their front door.  But that, that was, what was going on there.
Speaker 1: And, and I didn't ask you this before, but did you become an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] when you were in college [Indianapolis College of Pharmacy; Butler University College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Indianapolis, Indiana] or later?
Speaker 2:  	I became an AKA when I was in Indianapolis, Indiana.
Speaker 1: And, and how did, at what age?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I guess, about twenty-five, twenty or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  So, was it a graduate chapter?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: So, you moved back to Indianapolis?
Speaker 2:  	No, no, I, I had that when I left Indianapolis.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, you were involved from a young age?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: And tell me about being involved in Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority.
Speaker 2:  	It was wonderful (unclear) these experiences in my life.  And gave me an opportunity to provide what I had to offer someone, in terms of making a difference in their quality of life for seniors and, and for the youth 'cause I did a lot of the work, health of the youth for the children that I was involved with.  And a lot of my work was involved with senior citizens, the work that I was doing, but that, that was a part of that.
Speaker 1: So, you, you joined the sorority in your twenties?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then had been involved over the years?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: What kinds of things have you initiated, 'cause as a pharmacist, you just described your, you know, your helping with seniors and youth.  Were you able to apply your skills as a pharmacist in your public service with the sorority?
Speaker 2:  	Well, one, one thing that I, I received a letter of compliments about, there are plants that are poisonous.  And some, some of them are around us all the time.  And I wanted the people to know that, and I want them to share that with their children that these particular drugs that's not good for your body, so stay away from them, or they'll cause, cause a rash on your body.  So, beware, and don't let the kids be- become involved with that.
Speaker 1: And I see that you are a Golden member--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --which means, tell me what that means?
Speaker 2:  	Well, it means that I had a recent level, that I have provided services, and done work for the organization through my kindness, through my spare time, if you will, in terms of making a difference in the field of cancer.
Story_ID: 654954
Speaker 1: As you're building your career because, again, you're, you're a trailblazer.  You know, at Duke [Duke University Hospital, Durham, North Carolina], you were the first African American female.  Are you, when you're in D.C., are there other--when you come back--are there other black females who are in, who are becoming pharmacists at this point?  Do you have colleagues who are black women?
Speaker 2:  	Well, when, when I left and came back from Durham, North Carolina, going back to Washington, D.C., there were, there were quite a few students who was attending Howard University school of pharmacy [Howard University College of Pharmacy, Washington, D.C.].  And, and the school of pharmacy was very much connected to the school of medicine [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].  And so, it was a nice unit there in terms of being able to utilize the skills of both departments.
Speaker 1: And, speaking of Durham, when you were in Durham, because you were there in the late '50s [1950s], and the beginning of the '60s [1960s], right, in Durham?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What was going on in civil rights when you were there, and were you involved because there, there were sit-ins that occurred there.  There were other, it was a lot of movement in the South for the Civil Rights Movement.  I know you said when you were young, you were active [in Indianapolis, Indiana].  After you become a pharmacist, are you, do you continue to be active in Durham in civil rights activities?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me--
Speaker 2:  	Sit-ins for the most part.
Speaker 1: And was this as, was it part of an organized effort?  Were, was this when you were with Forman [sic.]?
Speaker 2:  	Well, I, I think it was part of an org- part of an organized, because CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] had, had its guidelines, and the sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] had its guidelines in certain things you can't, can't do to represent the organization.  So, you had to be very careful about that.  And so, I did a lot of work going to the school system explaining certain things that the students were interested in, in terms, in terms of learning.
Speaker 1: And so, this is while you're still in Durham, right?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: What do you remember that was going on in Durham, just the political scene, civil rights scene, while you were there?  What, what's happening?
Speaker 2:  	Well, it's a place right now that I don't want to be (laughter).  Well, I, I'm glad I experienced it, but you have something to compare with what was, or what is, and what, maybe down the road, it's going to be.  And so, that part of my life, I have experienced.  And so, I was able to share that with a lot of organizations in terms of what is.
Speaker 1: Well, when you say, you didn't want to be there, give me an example of what was happening that you didn't like?
Speaker 2:  	(Pause) The government has certain rules and regulations that I didn't like, in terms of going downstairs in the basement and eat.  The water fountains had a sign over there said for, "For white people only."  You could only drink out of the water, the water fountains.  I went to the place once in one of the meat, meat department stores.  And so, when you're pregnant, you have to go to the bathroom frequently.  And so, I had struck up a conversation with the lady, and I was telling her, "I need to go to the bathroom."  And so, I said, "I don't know whether I can make it downstairs or not 'cause I had to go to the bathroom downstairs.  I'll go to North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company to go to the bathroom."  So, she said, "Over there in the corner by that door, you pretend you don't know any difference.  Just walk on in there and use it anyway."  So, I did that and I came on back in, and bought the (unclear) and went on home.  So, I, I guess, I picked up something along the way until it was a certain way to you can find making a way out of no way, that was one of my focuses.  It was making a way out of no way.  And so, it was, that was an experience myself, in terms of how to deal with that situation.
Story_ID: 654955
Speaker 1: So, Mrs. Ricketts [HistoryMaker Vera Ricketts], would you tell me when you, when you got to Lincoln, what were you doing?
Speaker 2:  	Originally--let me back up, I was supposed to be coming there as, as a pharmacist, and set the pharmacy up, but it wasn't ready.  So, somebody in administration said, "I'll teach you how to draw blood from the person."  There's a name for it, when you draw blood from a person's arm.
Speaker 1: I can't remember.
Speaker 2:  	Anyway, so they taught me how to do that.  And so, I did that until they, then the hospital got their act together, and I was able to open up the pharmacy.
Speaker 1: So, you had built the pharmacy from scratch?
Speaker 2:  	I had, I had, well, the room--
Speaker 1: In terms of the--
Speaker 2:  	--the room was there, and medication was there.  But they didn't have a supervisor to see what was coming in, and what was going out of the pharmacy at Lincoln Hospital [Durham, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: So, did you, were you responsible for ordering all of the supplies--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and everything?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, in the pharmacy, yes.
Speaker 1: And, and you had mentioned about the saline solutions in figuring, and, and what did you do as it, as it related to the solutions?
Speaker 2:  	It, it--not, not at Lincoln Hospital.
Speaker 1: Oh, that was somewhere else?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, let's stay at Lincoln now.  And did, did you teach the nurses about pharmacy?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, I, I taught them about pharmacology as, as a course, okay.
Speaker 1: So, tell me about that, that course.
Speaker 2:  	Well, in their training, they received a little bit of knowledge about that particular phase of, of their nursing training.  And so, I embellished it so they would have something to--when they have a national exam on nursing, then they have a, a few more points that they can draw from, one that I shared, what I shared with them.
Speaker 1: When, when you set up the pharmacy, did you also have to hire staff?
Speaker 2:  	(Pause) I think we had, we had to offer, and we offered an assistant to come in to help because they had to have orders sent to the floors for the nurses to inject, or to put the medication on them or, or see however they were, whatever their need was that they had somebody who could go upstairs to the patient's bed.  And then, and the nurse would get the medication and they would follow through on that.
Speaker 1: And so, was it mainly you and an assistant in, at the pharmacy?
Speaker 2:  	Just a little.
Speaker 1: So, a small staff?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Story_ID: 654956
Speaker 1: And how did Duke University [Duke University Hospital, Durham, North Carolina] come to know about you as a pharmacist?
Speaker 2:  	I--I think University Hospital personnel department, who hired people to work at Duke, must have heard about me.  And they said to someone, "I, I think she'd be a good person to add to our staff because she comes with a lot of knowledge.  So, I think we should consider that," and so, they came downstairs and, and talked with me about it, and see if I would accept it.
Speaker 1: And did, was your husband [William Newton Ricketts] at all involved because he was at Duke at the time, right?
Speaker 2:  	Well, he, no, no--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2:  	--my husband, at that time, was finishing up his training at Lincoln Hospital [Durham, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: At Lincoln.
Speaker 2:  	And so, he was leaving from there to go to Norfolk, Virginia for another part of his residence in becoming a surgeon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were about to leave to go with him?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, I, I was to go--I was going to leave with him going but, but Duke Hospital asked me if I'd come and stay with them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And so, I did for a couple of years, okay.
Speaker 1: So, when, when your husband finishes up in Norfolk, he's then coming back to D.C. Is that right?
Speaker 2:  	When, when he finished in Norfolk, no, he went back to Washington, D.C.--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2:  	--to complete his fourth year.
Speaker 1: And that, and, and when you came to D.C., and you had help, as you said, driving down, which hospital did you go to work at?
Speaker 2:  	D.C. General Hospital [District of Columbia General Hospital, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: D.C. General?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you became, were, were you the head pharmacist there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) H- ho- hos- .  No, I had formed the hospital staff, okay.
Speaker 1: Hospital staff, okay.  And did your job change at all?
Speaker 2:  	We, we had a few prescriptions to fill.  And but I, I think, mostly, the person who was in charge of D.C. General Hospital, he, he knew what he wanted me to do, to do, to make large quantities of medications to be put into smaller containers and sent to the floor for the patients to be taken.
Speaker 1: So, the, did the volume increase then?  There were more patients at that hospital?
Speaker 2:  	Well, yeah, yeah, there were more patients at this, at D.C. General Hospital than it was at Freedmen's [Freedmen's Hospital; Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 654957
Speaker 1: How did that work because you're, you're making up the medications--as you say you make it, and then you put it into smaller containers?  Does it change just in terms of because it, this is, these are formulas?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Correct?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And you're putting them together.  Does, does the calculation change when you're, like in cooking, if you have a big batch to a little bit, sometimes things change.  Does it change at all when you're--
Speaker 2:  	Well, they, they have formulas, say, for instance, if you're supposed to be making sterile, sterile solution.  It has to go through a, a department where they can sterilize the water.  And so, but anyway, the ingredients, the main thing was the saline water.  That's what we would make.  And then, when it gets to the floor, then they will inject into the tubes that go into the patient, whatever needs to go in there.  Or I think, if you're low on certain body chemicals, then you can get some saline solutions.  They have it all worked out.
Speaker 1: How long did you work there?
Speaker 2:  	Let me see, (pause) about two years, because I left there and came to California.
Story_ID: 654958
Speaker 1: So, what prompted the trip across country, from Washington, D.C. to California?
Speaker 2:  	One to my husband's, a res- a new student, one of my medical student that was doing an internship at Freedmen's Hospital [Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.] said to my husband, he said, "Dr. Ricketts [William Newton Ricketts], why don't you just go to California?  It's beautiful out here, and the weather is warm."  So, he said, "I'll, I'll take a try and go out there, and check it out for myself, and see how I like it."  And so, he came back.  He, he liked what he saw here in California.  And so, he went back home and got us, got the cars, all things fixed up in this, and the kids fixed up, and we drove across the country.
Speaker 1: And did he, had he found a job already?
Speaker 2:  	No, he, he's going to set his own practice up.
Speaker 1: He, okay.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: (Background noise) And we'll wait 'til the--(pause) was he a surgeon at this point?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: So, what, what, tell me about the practice that he set up.
Speaker 2:  	Well, he, he was a surgeon at this point, but you also have, have to go through something for the city or, or one of the states to become certified, as a board certified surgeon.  But he, there's another level that he has to go and take a test to, to become that.  And so, when he, (unclear) FAC, federal association of community (pause) surgeons.
Speaker 1: What year did you move to Los Angeles [California]?
Speaker 2:  	I don't, I don't remember.  Let me see if I (unclear).
Speaker 1: Sixty, possibly '61 [1961]?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Sixty-one [1961], '62 [1962].
Speaker 1:  	Where are you, and what year we went to Washington (unclear), we went to--
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960]?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --'cause she [Ricketts' daughter, Victoria Ricketts Wilson] was born in '62 [1962], right?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, yeah, (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, so around 1960?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, you come to Los Angeles.  Had you been before?
Speaker 2:  	No, only once to see what it was like.
Speaker 1: And did you move into this neighborhood, Inglewood [California]?
Speaker 2:  	No, ma'am.
Speaker 1: Oops, this is not Inglewood--View Park [Los Angeles].  Where did you move at first?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  East 123rd Street.
Speaker 1: And what neighborhood is that?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Uh--
Speaker 1: Compton [California]?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Near Compton.
Speaker 1: So, you moved near Compton when you first came here?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes.
Speaker 1: So, you're in California in the '60s [1960s].  What is like here?
Speaker 2:  	Beautiful, very nice, people were very good, a lot of work to be done (laughter), a lot of workshops to be done to embellish people in terms of cancer, HIV [human immunodeficiency virus], and AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome].
Speaker 1: Well, though, that came later.  The HIV/AIDS came in the '80s [1980s].
Story_ID: 654959
Speaker 1: So in 1960, when you first come, do you get a job right away as a pharmacist?
Speaker 2:  	No, because I, I think he was, he was trying to, yeah, he was trying to set up an office practice.  And so, I, I worked in the office with him as, as his administrator.  And, and sometimes, sometimes, I would help if he asked me.  After he'd seen a patient, and he has the lab work, and he made his diagnosis, and he asked me, as a pharmacist, the medications that were good for this patient.  And, and that, that was a good tie in for me.
Speaker 1: So, you worked with him for--
Speaker 2:  	Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: --for, for how long?
Speaker 2:  	About five--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ten years, ten years.
Speaker 2: Ten years?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, about ten years.
Speaker 2:  	Well, when I started working with him, when I was on East 123rd Street [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You worked for about ten years with him.
Speaker 2:  	About ten years, okay.
Speaker 1: And so, you helped him to build his practice?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: So, what was it like working with your husband [William Newton Ricketts]?
Speaker 2:  	It was nice.  I didn't have no problems (laughter).  I mean, we communicated very well.  It would (unclear).  There, again, I had to find a reliable person to come in to watch--
Speaker 1: Your children?
Speaker 2:  	--two children because I brought one with me.  No--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Two.
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1:  	I brought two with me.  And so, so I had to have somebody to oversee them--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --while I was working in the office.
Story_ID: 654960
Speaker 1: And you're in Los Angeles [California] in the '60s [1960s].  So, back on the East Coast, there's a lot of civil unrest, but also on the West Coast.  There, there's the, the Civil Rights Movement is, is growing, right?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is on the scene.  What do you remember in terms of civil rights activity in Los Angeles when you were here?
Speaker 2:  	Well, Rodney King was a--
Speaker 1: So, that was later.  I'm talking about in, during the civil rights era.  So, Martin Luther King is still alive, although he is killed in 1968.  So, do you remember that period when John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was in office, and then he was assassinated?  When you first moved to Los Angeles, do you remember anything that was going on in, in terms of civil rights?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The hospital.
Speaker 1: Hospital?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  King Hospital [Martin Luther King Jr. General Hospital; Martin Luther King Jr. Outpatient Center, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: King Hospital (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) It is, well, King Hospital was, was thriving then.
Speaker 1: Okay, wait, so tell me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So, she was one of the persons helping to get King Hospital brought there.  She and several other people were trying to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes, were working together to- because there was no hospital in South Central [South Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, can you tell me about the, your daughter saying that you helped to bring what became King Hospital into South Central because there was no hospital in the area?  Can you talk about that?  Do you remember that?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, I, I know it was a big struggle.  And they had to go through many hoops to get where they got with, at terms being the King Hospital.  It was a lot political stuff there, I think, came upon the scene.  But they, they got all those things all straightened out, and I thought it was very viable, um-hm.  And I think they made a big change, a major change in the community providing healthcare.
Speaker 1: Because there was no--where did people go if they had to go to the hospital before that?
Speaker 2:  	I think that, I think they went downtown.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  A small, a small community hospital by County General [Los Angeles County General Hospital; Los Angeles County + USC Medical Center, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2:  	Huh?
Speaker 1: Small community hospitals and County General.
Speaker 2:  	Broadway Hospital [Broadway Community Hospital, Los Angeles California], okay, 'cause, 'cause my husband [William Newton Ricketts] was on the surgical staff at Broadway Hospital.
Speaker 1: When, that was, was that far away?
Speaker 2:  	No, it wasn't far.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, so then, you worked with your husband for ten years in his office.  Did you go back to being a pharmacist after that?
Speaker 2:  	On and off.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, no.
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: No.  You and, then she was at home with the kids?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes.
Story_ID: 654961
Speaker 1: So then, after that, were you at home with the kids, and then being more involved in your sorority, and then The Links [The Links, Incorporated]?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: So, let's, let's talk about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --your social action work because you've been, I see you're wearing your AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] pin, and your Links pin.  Tell me about your involvement in society.  We can start with the AKAs.  You, you had talked about them a little bit.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: In Los Angeles [California], what did you do with the AKAs (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Okay.  Well, frequently, some of the existing organizations were seeking, seeking volunteers to come and serve on their board, and to do, and you follow through what they would like for you do for them like, example, for Jenesse [Jenesse Center, Inc., Los Angeles, California], a shelter for battered women and children.  And so, sometimes we would take the children to the grocery store to point out, these are the kind of vegetables you should have in your diet.  And you should leave some of these things alone that's high carbohydrates to make you heavier.  And they enjoyed that, and sometimes we'd bring doctors in to come and to speak to them in terms of, or a psychologist, in terms of should I stay with my boyfriend, or my husband, if they beat me, or what, what should I do?  So, we brought resources material for them to draw from, and so, they were, they very grateful about that.  And the school, and Jenesse has grown tremendous.  In fact, the church down the street, they still, we still support them.
Story_ID: 654962
Speaker 1: And then, in terms of the--well, the, the chapter, the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] chapter here, didn't you help to open a chapter in Los Angeles [California]?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, we had one chapter called AGO, Alpha Gamma Omega [Alpha Gamma Omega Chapter].  And the, the idea came into being in terms of why don't I start another chapter?  And, and we did, and so, I was one of the charter members of the new chapter, a Theta Mu Omega Chapter.
Speaker 1: And when, when did you found that chapter?  Is it up there?
Speaker 2:  	It's, it's, I guess, in one of these pro- programs over here.  I don't remember right now.
Speaker 1: So, when we go to the photos, we can check that.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you were one of the founding members of that chapter?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: And so, who do you remember was in the chapter in, in the early days?
Speaker 2:  	I have a lot of pictures of that, too.  I know Etta Orville [ph.] was in there.  Thelma Rice, I think, was in there.  I, I know those came, came to the top of my mind that was there that I worked a lot with, okay.
Story_ID: 654963
Speaker 1: And when did you join The Links [The Links, Incorporated]?
Speaker 2:  	19--I think it was 1960.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, it was in the '70s [1970s], '70 [1970].
Speaker 2:  	I, I can pull that up, too.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Seventy [1970], '80 [1980].
Speaker 2: They're thinking maybe around '78 [1978].  So, tell me about The Links.
Speaker 1:  	Because I'm a platinum member--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1:  	--I've gone as high as I can go in the chapter [Inglewood Pacific Chapter of The Links, Incorporated, Inglewood, California].
Speaker 2: Tell me about The Links.  What, what does The Links organization do?
Speaker 1:  	Well, Links is a friendship organization, and it's also a service organization, and they do both of them very well.  And they have different components, you know, like deal with things that's happened internationally.  And that's how Jamaica became, I think, a couple of years ago, Links decided they, the national office decided they were going to adopt Jamaica as its international trends and services facet.  We were also doing some work with Africa that was very good for, for The Links.  And the chapter took it on very well, and did very well in implementing that program, and taking things to the community about it.
Speaker 2: Now, your husband [William Newton Ricketts] was from Jamaica--
Speaker 1:  	Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: --or he grew up there?
Speaker 1:  	Yes.
Speaker 2: And so, you have a natural affinity for Jamaica.  You were (laughter)--
Speaker 1:  	Yes, yes (laughter).  It, it, before The Links adopted Jamaica, my husband and I had already adopted Jamaica (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tell me some of the things.  Had you, you were telling me off camera about going and seeing some of the conditions, and then what you did about it.  Can you tell me that story?
Speaker 1:  	Yes, okay.  Well, because I went to one, one of the big hospitals in Montego Bay [Jamaica], where you get off the plane and so, I made a trip there.  And the patient was sleeping on the mattress, on the bed with no sheets on the bed or no, no gowns on.  And so, I went back to the groups that I belong to, and I said, well, we could do something about this.  Let's join together and make, make it happen and, and it did happen.  And at that time, it was an airline called Air Jamaica [Air Jamaica, Ltd.], and they were very, very supportive of our project, and sending things over there.  A lot of times, sometimes you send something to Haiti.  It just sits there because you have to pay duty for it coming in.  So, anyway, it, it worked out very well in terms of helping the people.  At the other--
Speaker 2: And did you involve The Links with that, or that was later?
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, yeah, and we also involved The Links also with just putting it, donating sheets to the national, to the local chapters.  And I had a person--a connection, make sure that when the sheets got to Jamaica through the barrels of--
Speaker 2: They, they were big barrels of sheets that were sent, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) Yes, yes, they had to be distributed.  And so, that worked out well, so the sheets got where they had to go, okay.
Speaker 2: Which is really important because you can gather the items, but if you don't have someone on the ground, you don't know where it's going.
Speaker 1:  	Some- sometimes it doesn't get where it's supposed to be going.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But what, you had local contacts on the ground--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --who made sure that it got there?
Speaker 1:  	Yes.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 654964
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What are some of the other international efforts that you've been a part of?
Speaker 2:  	I, I think for the most, inter- oh, there's, there's another component.  It was in one of the foreign countries.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The stoves?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  We took computers down and books and desks.
Speaker 1: So, computers, books, and desks, tell me about that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yeah, well, there's an adult school in Westchester, California [Westchester, Los Angeles, California].  That's where, and they had a senior citizen program.  They also have stained glass programs there.  (Pause) So, so, I said to the principal what my thrust was, and we were trying to get computer--at, at the schools in Jamaica, they did not have computers.  And so, I said to her, "Do we have any computers in sch- in stock that need to be replenished?  Can you help me?"  So, she said, "Ah, good," oh, one of the airport- one of the other companies in the city had donated some computers to this particular place.  And so, they gave them to the school, and they didn't need them 'cause the United States provided computers for the school.  So, they said, you can have all of these.  You had to have them upgraded to the present time, so weeks, I took them back to the groups and tell them, this is what was going on.  And so, they agreed that we were going to help.  So, we got the computers, and companies upgrade them, made them current, and it was about thirty-two of them that we sent to Jamaica.  And, there again, we used Air Jamaica [Air Jamaica, Ltd.] to get them over to Jamaica, which is a good thing.  And they, they were so grateful.  And the schools didn't have anything, you know.  We, we take so much granted for here that other people don't have anything--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --okay.  So, it, it all happens, and now they had computers.  And, and my husband [William Newton Ricketts] donated a current computer out of his pocket to go along with those, so they have something current.
Speaker 1: And around what year was that?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2:  	No, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Looks like '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: In the '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Eighties [1980s], about '87 [1987].
Speaker 2: Oh, around '87 [1987], okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) I think so.
Story_ID: 654965
Speaker 1: Let's talk about The Links organization [The Links, Incorporated].  The, you joined the Inglewood Pacific Chapter [Inglewood Pacific Chapter of The Links, Incorporated, Inglewood, California]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is that right?
Speaker 2:  	I was, I was coord--it was three women, came together, okay.  When I came to California, they already, they, established was also the, the L.A. Chapter of Links [Los Angeles Chapter of The Links, Incorporated, Los Angeles, California].  And then, it's another chapter of Links broke off from the, from the L.A. chapter for--there was two chapters of Links.  And then, the third person was, it was a question about having it, you had to have a city government to establish a chapter.  So, it wasn't one at Inglewood [California], and Inglewood is just a few blocks from here [View Park, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	So, I, I went through the necessary--I inquired to find what the necessary was, and who I need to contact.  And, and then, I was very involved on the national level and the western level, and so they give me the guys that I needed to, to--the three of us all came together, and went to, to the national office, and submitted our necessary papers to become a Links chapter.  And, and that was a great time in my life, in terms of getting a chapter started in Inglewood.  And, and you had to list your boundaries, what it's going to cover, say you're going to cover the--all it said was like, Westchester [Los Angeles, California], like, some parts of Inglewood, identify specifically where you was going to have your services going.  And so, that's what we did.
Speaker 1: Well, because a, a big part of what The Links organization does is public service, right?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, ma'am, and friendship.
Speaker 1: Right, public service and friendship.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, ma'am.
Story_ID: 654966
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the public service first, but then, we'll go to the friendship.  In terms of what your chapter did, what were some of the major initiatives that have occurred over the years with your Links chapter [Inglewood Pacific Chapter of The Links, Incorporated, Inglewood, California] in public service?
Speaker 2:  	In public service?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The youth forum.
Speaker 2: Youth forum?
Speaker 1:  	Oh, we, we established a very nice youth forum at University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California].  And we took high school kids to this workshop, and invited other chapters to come and join also.  But, anyway, that's what we did to make a difference there.  And--
Speaker 2: And who, are, are you working with, local public schools?  Who, who, where, where are the youth coming from?
Speaker 1:  	Well, USC is the University of Southern California.
Speaker 2: Oh, so it's through the--
Speaker 1:  	And so, so, they provide the site for us to bring our workshops to them.  And so, all, all the other chapters, like the doctors' wives, they, they came and helped a lot.  And some, some of us AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] and Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.] chapters came, different chapters came and, and brought their youth.  And we were focusing primarily on the youth, giving them guidance.  Some little things we just take for granted.  The kids didn't even know about it, so we had little workshops, individual, like workshops.  They could come and express themselves and, and put, it made a difference in their lives, a lot of difference, and--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  College prep.
Speaker 1: What about college prep?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah we had college prep, too.  We have, a lot of times we would have sources, re- if we, if we have some major concerns, we'll, we'll get some students who are knowledgeable about how to do X, Y, Z.  And I mean, how to get in college, start from scratch, how, how do you volunteer work, and that those credits go towards your community involvement because you've been there, made a, making a difference.
Story_ID: 654967
Speaker 1: I want to talk about the friendship part because many of our organizations have formed, and it, and around women connecting with each other and--
Speaker 2:  	Sometimes (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay, sometimes, fair.  Tell me about the friendship component of The Links [The Links, Incorporated].
Speaker 2:  	Well, I, I think the bonding takes place when we have committee meetings, and we have them in individuals' homes.  Or sometimes we will have them after, or before our regular meetings to, to establish that kind of friendship.  Or you invite them to your house, like invite a lot of them here in the backyard just, just to have coffee and tea, and whatever.  And so, it brings, and, and presently, the church I go to down the street, they rent for a fee, they rent out the church, and you can have workshops in the church to, to deal with the concerns of the community, not necessarily in our community, but other communities, specifically Watts [Los Angeles, California] where this high population of blacks, and where there is a high population of crime.  And so, so, we can do whatever we, we try to do.  My, my--when my, when my husband [William Newton Ricketts] died December of this year, or last year, one, one of the persons, she, she had developed something to provide students to go looking for jobs, and they go well dressed.  And so, maybe some of the things that my husband had in his closet, they could use those for a well dressed person.  They gonna go looking for a job, and--and that, that was a nice something that they really liked, enjoyed or--
Speaker 1: And you gave a lot of his clothes to them?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 654968
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Tell us about your high school yearbook here.  Where are you there?  That's, that's what I thought.
Speaker 2:  	That's still when I was sitting in the back of the classroom (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh.  So, is, that's your entire class?
Speaker 2:  Yes, sir, my senior, senior class, okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And what year was that?
Speaker 1:  	Nineteen forty-eight [1948].
Speaker 2: And which school is this?
Speaker 1:  	Turn it over.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I see (unclear).
Speaker 1:  	Butler, Butler University [Indianapolis, Indiana].  And, and they had given category, so I was in the class of pharmacy.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  There's a photo of, of the practice that they opened in Louisiana.  And this is where they opened the office (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) That's, that's the last practice that he had, Manchester.  These are a staff of, of Manchester medical building [Manchester Avenue, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2: And where is your husband?
Speaker 1:  	Right here on the very end.
Speaker 2: Right here?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: And what's his name?
Speaker 2:  	William, William Newton Ricketts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	That's our twenty-fifth wedding anniversary.
Speaker 1: And where are you?  No, where, where is this, where did you have the anniversary event (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Oh, Los Angeles [California], here, here at the house.
Speaker 1: Right here at home, oh, beautiful, okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear), Obama--
Speaker 2:  	Can you read that saying that it has on there?
Speaker 1: We can, we'll take a picture of it, so we'll have it.
Speaker 2:  	Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: But this is, this was the letter that President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] sent to you?
Speaker 2:  Yes, okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  This was a sheet, hospital sheets for The Links [The Links, Incorporated] project for Jamaica.  So--
Speaker 2:  	Instead of the patients sleeping on the mattress, they sleep, we'll send some sheets to the hospital, Cornwall Hospital [Cornwall Regional Hospital, Montego Bay, Jamaica], so patients have something to sleep on.
Speaker 1: And, and where are you in this picture?
Speaker 2:  	Right there.
Speaker 1: Excellent, okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And these were the desks for the students in Jamaica.
Speaker 1:  	It's when the kids didn't have a desk to sit in, in the classroom.  So, we bought some desks to get them off the floor, to get them into a chair in the classroom.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  This was the article from the pharmacy where the one that, was it this woman, or that was--
Speaker 1:  	No, no, I'm not in there, but it was, that, that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) She was the one that was disabled.
Speaker 1:  	--was the pharmacy staff and the people who was in charge.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, I see.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It's a Butler class.
Speaker 1:  	Is my, my pharmacy class at Butler University [Indianapolis College of Pharmacy; Butler University College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Indianapolis, Indiana].  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Can you get it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1:  	--and there I am, there I am right down there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Oh, there'll be great.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Her mom [Sarah Chilton Phelps] is right behind you in that (unclear).
Speaker 1: This?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm.  And that's the picture of her in the bathtub.
Speaker 1:  	Is it, yeah, there's mama, mama (unclear), when I was a little baby and mama had me in it.  That's what she gave me a bath in.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter) Is this the actual tub behind you?
Speaker 1:  	No, it's downstairs.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, okay.
Speaker 1:  	And, and that was my mother who was sitting next to--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1:  	And that's my grandmother.
Speaker 2: What's her name?
Speaker 1:  	Nellie Chilton.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1:  And she's a, she's, she has asthma, so she put asthma into that thing that's smoking.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It's called asthmador, asthmador.  I think it had--
Speaker 1:  Yeah, now the, now the (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, it doesn't--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  These are all (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So, what would she smoke for her asthma?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It's a product they used to sell over the counter called asthmador.  And if I think I looked it up correctly, it had some antispasmodics.  I think a little bit like--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  So, it was actual medicine (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And who's this?
Speaker 1:  	That's my husband and me and Renee [Renee Ricketts], Victoria [Victoria Ricketts Wilson], Verlie [Verlie Ricketts Lockings], and Wendy [Wendy Ricketts Greene]--
Speaker 2: Your daughters?
Speaker 1:  	--all, all the children.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  This is from Links chapter, chapter [Inglewood Pacific Chapter of The Links, Incorporated, Inglewood, California].  Is that right?
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, that, that's the USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] workshop that we gave.  We provided for the kids to, to embellish their knowledge about life.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And I got this one that already has a caption on it.
Speaker 1:  	I think he was the ex-mayor of--
Speaker 2: That's [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young.
Speaker 1:  	Yes, Andrew Young, okay, okay.  I invited him to come to one of our workshops.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So, he came here to Los Angeles?
Speaker 1:  	Um-hm.  Or he's here in the city and I just captured him--
Speaker 2: Who's that?
Speaker 1:  	She's in the United States Senate.  What's gir--
Speaker 2: Is that [HistoryMaker] Carol Moseley Braun?
Speaker 1:  	No.
Speaker 2: I can't see.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, let me see.
Speaker 2: Oh, what was her name?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Norton, it says Norton. Oh, what is her name?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Eleanor Holmes Norton.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that Eleanor Holmes Norton?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It's Eleanor Holmes Norton.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, that's fine.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You did already?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yep.
Speaker 2:  	And that's my whole family.  I'll, I'll show you the lady, next generation.  There's, there's my brother and sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.  She came to one of our workshops.
Speaker 1: That's Rosalynn Carter, right?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.  She came to one of our workshops on cancer.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Mommy failed to mention that she really was a strong impetus for, and for championing against (unclear) for cancer research out here, and worked really heavily with the American Cancer Society.  And one of my dad's classmates--what's his name?  He always talked about when it was--
Speaker 2:  	Leffall [HistoryMaker Dr. LaSalle D. Leffall, Jr.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, Dr. Leffall was the president of that organization, and they came out here to L.A. kind of, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, wonderful.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And they've got black people to understand what was cancer, changing lifestyles of eating, or, you know, skip cancer, colon cancer, prostate cancer (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2:  	Okay, that's Newton and Newton's family.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is your husband's family in Jamaica?
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, that's, that's Newton when he's a little boy.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You got that?
Speaker 1:  	Oh, I want to put, put, when I was elected president for the National Medical Association, the doctor--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You want a badge?
Speaker 1:  	--and the auxiliary national president was together.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Well, thank you.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Is that from this?
Speaker 1:  	Well, that's, that's when I was elected to be the national president, but the actual, the, actually, the actual thing that happened, that fellow that I was standing next to, I think he put it over on this other table.  Dr. Royal [Frank Royal] and me, it's to your left--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It's the smaller--
Speaker 1:  	--it's to your left.  Yep, that, that's it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, there we go.
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, Dr. Royal and Verlie.  He was the national president of, of physician, and I was national president of the women's auxiliary.
Speaker 2: And what's his name again?
Speaker 1:  	Royal, R-O-Y-A-L.
Speaker 2: Royal, okay, thank you.  You got it?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So, one of the main ingredients of the asthmador that I guess my grandmother was smoking was belladonna.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's that skeletal muscle relaxant, so it's going to relax the bronchioles from spasms.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: What's this?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Which one is this--
Speaker 1:  	(Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --(simultaneous) in this spread, the medical bus?
Speaker 1:  	Medical, medical sync- screening.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Screening plus screening (unclear).
Speaker 1:  	It probably was cancer again, okay.
Speaker 2: Do we have all the pictures now?  Excellent.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's all the pictures.
Speaker 2: Excellent.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, thank you.
Speaker 2: We did it!  Thank you.
Speaker 1:  	There, I want--
Speaker 2: Oh, wait, what?
Speaker 1:  	--that, that, that's a baby stove.
Story_ID: 654969
Speaker 1: You became auxiliary, auxiliary president of the National Medical Association?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: When was that, in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Okay, the, the National Medical Association came into being because at one time, the American Medical Association would not accept black doctors.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2:  	And so, the National Medical Association came into being as a national black physicians organization.  And so, at one time, the National Medical auxiliary [Auxiliary to the National Medical Association] was not always just an auxiliary.  It was the dental wives and, and other organizations in the medical field.  They all came together.  But then, at some point, we pulled out from all these other organizations, and we just had the National Medical Association.  And so, this year, it's going to be in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and I was president of, of the National Medical auxiliary, nationally.
Speaker 1: When, when, in the '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what, what was your role?  What did you do as president?
Speaker 2:  	As, as president, I, I communicated with people, sometimes one on one, in terms of becoming a member of the auxiliary.  Then, one (unclear), the bylaws is that your, your husband has to be a physician to belong to this organization, okay.  And, well, anyway, that, that's the reason for it, and we give scholarships to students in medical school.  And now, we're also giving scholarships to students, some nursing students.  And we raise monies to give those scholarship monies, and you, we have a state organization.  And I think, for most important, it's in San Francisco [California], and they, they made a contribution to the National Medical Association.
Speaker 1: Did, did part of that scholarship go to Meharry?
Speaker 2:  	Well, Meharry, Drew Medical School [Charles R. Drew Postgraduate Medical School; Charles R. Drew University of Science and Medicine, Los Angeles, California]--
Speaker 1: Howard?  Was Howard, Howard University [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, Howard, Howard University, yes, and Meharry, and Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee].  They, they all, the students that apply.  And we have a committee that reviews the applications that are sent in.  And they're, at a certain time, we present all those students to, to our national, or a local link organization, present them scholarship.  And I think, I think the national makes a contribution to the scholarship fund.  And they, they are presented at the national convention.
Story_ID: 654970
Speaker 1: From the time that your husband [William Newton Ricketts] became established in his own practice, after you finished helping him, for the rest of this time, you've really been working in public service--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, out reaching into the community in, in different capacities, okay.  That's what I've been doing for--
Speaker 1: For many years?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: And was it like a full time job to do all that work?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: Sounds like it.
Speaker 2:  	Ask, ask my daughter in Houston, Texas, who's an attorney.  She said, she said, "Mama, all, all your work is about a full time job," (laughter) when she said, I call her.  She said, "Mama, what is it?  What you got on your plate now," (laughter)?
Speaker 1: So, tell me about your children and what they're doing.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, they're, the daughter who was just there, she's in health sciences.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2:  	What's, what's your age?  (Unclear) see a name, Renee [Renee Ricketts]?
Speaker 1: (RENEE RICKETTS):  I'm a healthcare consultant.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--
Speaker 1:  	She's a health, healthcare consultant.
Speaker 2: And where does she live?
Speaker 1:  	She lives here in Los Angeles [California] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Los Angeles.  And tell me about the other daughters.
Speaker 1:  	Okay.  The other one, she's an attorney.  She, graduated from Houston, Texas, and she has a family law practice.  The other one, who's sitting over there, she's a pharmacist.
Speaker 2: That's Vicky?
Speaker 1:  	Yes, Victoria [Victoria Ricketts Wilson].  She graduated from--
Speaker 2: (VICTORIA RICKETTS WILSON):  SU.
Speaker 1:  	Texas school of pharmacy [Texas Southern University College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Houston, Texas].  And Wendy [Wendy Ricketts Greene], she's a surgeon.  She's at, what's the school in, in--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Emory (unclear).
Speaker 1: Emory, in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2:  	Emory, Emory University [Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia], okay.  And so, she's in charge this year of the surgical section for the convention in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: For National Medical Association?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, ma'am, um-hm.  And she, and she's doing well.
Story_ID: 654971
Speaker 1: And she has a little girl.  She, it was her, her little girl that met President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].
Speaker 2: Tell me about that, the meeting of, of your grandbaby and President Obama.
Speaker 1:  	They, they had some steps, and you know how you tell kids, do not do this, and do that.  And sometimes, they go and take a challenge, and go and do it.  They want to do it anyway.  Anyway, she jumped, she jumped four steps, from one landing to the next, and she, she broke her leg or something.  And so, school had, had planned a field trip to, to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To the White House [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 1:  	--to the White House.  And so, I guess they were wondering, what are we going to do?  Anyway, anyway, she went and so, Obama took her under his arm, under his rein, to make sure that she was taken care of, and asked her how it all happened, and et cetera.  And a special elevator they had the president to go on, so she got on that elevator to keep him away from the public, et cetera.  She said, quite an experience.
Speaker 2: I bet.
Speaker 1:  	Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: How many grandchildren do you have?
Speaker 1:  	Four, I guess it's four.  Victoria [Victoria Ricketts Wilson], Wendy [Wendy Ricketts Greene], Wendy has one daughter [Chloe Greene], Victoria has a daughter and a son [Thomas Wilson IV].  And, and Renee [Renee Ricketts] has a daughter [Candice Ricketts], okay.
Story_ID: 654972
Speaker 1: I want to ask you, you just mentioned President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].  When you were growing up, did you imagine that there would ever be a black president (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I couldn't, and I worked so hard with that.  I worked so hard with, with that, with that convention.  In fact, he, he (unclear)--
Speaker 1: We'll look at the pictures after.
Speaker 2:  	No, no, he sent me a, a card.  It, it was over here on the table.  He sent me a card with his picture and his dog on it, and he said, "I am so grateful for the amount of time that you sent during my campaign.  I appreciate it very much."  One day, I'm going to put, I guess, I'll put it in a frame, but anyway, he, he, and I was so dedicated to him, and he was the first black president.  He, very, very good, and, and I think he did a good job (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, when you were, when you were working in the Civil Rights Movement, and not interested in the colored only bathroom or water fountain or all that, did you imagine that one day, there would be a black president?
Speaker 2:  	No, I couldn't imagine it, okay.  And as when I, I guess I worked so hard for it, to make it all happen.
Speaker 1: And what kind of work did you do?  What did you do here for, on behalf of Obama when he was running?
Speaker 2:  	Gener- making phone calls and, and getting people out to vote.  That's one of the big things that's on my list is to get people out to vote in the Democratic Party 'cause I think that's where a lot of the politics takes place, and against the Republican Party, who don't want to start to begin with.  So, any- so, anyway, I, I think Obama did an excellent job, and he was very cooperative and communicative in terms of trying to get things done, and trying to get them done the right way.
Story_ID: 654973
Speaker 1: As you think about what's happening with black people today (laughter), what, when, when you look at, you know, you've, you've lived many years, and you see the gains that we've made, and now, we're at this juncture, in our history, what are your concerns for black people?
Speaker 2:  	Well, one, one of my concerns is I, I think the person that we have selected as president [President Donald John Trump] today for the United States.  I, I think that somehow he would like to see things the way they used to be, sitting in the back of the bus, and you cannot eat here, and you cannot go there, et cetera, et cetera.  That's, that's what I really think.  And, and I, one of my main focus today is trying to get people out to vote to the polls, and vote because sometime I think there's a system to tries to keep us not to vote.
Story_ID: 654974
Speaker 1: As you look at your life, and all the things that you have accomplished over the years, what legacy do you hope you're leaving?
Speaker 2:  	(Pause) Well, number one, I want our people to really get out there and vote.  And also, touch base with your neighbors, touch base with your insurance people, (unclear) and see if you see anything that they can do to help you to, to register to vote.  And, and I think it makes a big difference in terms, the voting process.  That's the part that's very close to me, okay, to make a difference in the quality of life of people today is.  And, and also, another problem is I don't think that mothers send their boys to, to preschool early enough.  And so, they lose out on, on the educational level 'cause the law requires them to go to the first gr- I think it's called first grade.  And that's when they learn all the basics, but, by the time the boy gets through that stage, other kids have already passed that, and leave him behind.  And he's frustrated, he feels frustrated, in terms of, "I'm not smart enough to be in this class I, I'm going to stay out on the street and play ball with my friends," instead of getting that education in his system.  And, and I think, I think parents need to bring their children to the dinner table--all cell phones, it's time out, for dinnertime.  Let us find out what you did today, and how did you handle it?  And, and I think, it's, it's a very important component, and what contribution you're going to make if your neighbor doesn't have a way to get to the store.  You go knock on a door and ask yourself, "Is there anything I can get you at the store today, Ms. Smith?"  Build some character in them.  I, I guess, the bottom line is some character built into it.  I don't really want to get into the re- religious component of it, but I, I think parents should send the kids to Sunday school, and learn some kind of a discipline.  At least, you could sit in your seat and you don't, and you don't have to talk back to the teacher.  And those, those kinds are the kind of things that's (unclear) in the child, like I guess I'm focused primarily on getting the children, the youth straightened out.  That's, that's a (unclear) of my main focus, getting, getting a place for them to be ready for the real world and, and maybe set some kind of a goal.  Yeah, I can do it, too, you know, I can be somebody.
Story_ID: 654975
Speaker 1: And what, what would you say right now to young people, young African Americans, who might be interested in going into pharmacy, like you, building a life like you have.  What advice would you give to them?
Speaker 2:  	Okay.  Number one, I, I know picking up dimes and nickels off the street when people throw them away, just pick them up.  They don't belong to anybody, so pick them up, put it in a container, and you build up on it, so, for your college entrance, you know.  I think the crafts, they need to explore a little bit more, what can I do or what can I offer somebody in terms of further my education, what I want to do.  There are enough basketball players or football players and golf players out there in the world so, so what part am I going to play to make a difference?  What part going to happen if I decide to get married?  How am I going to help function the family if, if I don't put something in place that I can go to school and make a little money?  And I, I also want them at some level to look in the paper, and see what they're, where, where are the jobs, and maybe gear myself towards becoming eligible to serve in that job capacity if that's what they're looking for, 'cause I, right now, I think, medical, something in the medical field that there's, that people are really out there trying to hire people.  But if, if you don't have it up here, you can't put it down here and work on it.  And so, maybe, maybe we need to go to the school system, and ask the school system if they could develop programs to inspire children to go into different fields to help them to be ready, so to speak.
Story_ID: 654976
Speaker 1: How do, would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2:  	(Pause) Frequently, people ask me, they've said me, dear, "One day, I want to be just like you."  I said, "Now isn't that a compliment," (laughter)?  But, but I guess they see what I'm doing, and how much energy I place on doing what I have to do.  I, I guess they feel guilty if they don't have that kind of get up and go to make things happen.  I think that's part of, and you're happy, happily, for my children, for their accomplishments.  And I think they're doing well and I, I hope they continue to inspire their children and their grandchildren to become somebody and make, and make a difference in somebody else's quality of life, as well as your quality of life, their own quality of life.
Speaker 1: So, today, you're ninety-four years old, is that right?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: What does it feel like to be ninety-four, and, and to be a healthy woman, and with a sharp mind?
Speaker 2:  	Some- someday, I'll look in the mirror, I'll say, "Girl, you're getting old," (laughter).  And, and all the muscles, and all these things in the body that make that body move, dissipates.  It's, it's not as active as it used to be, but, but that's the way God made us.  Well, then, you'll have to come to a realization that's what is, but, but you go to some exercise classes and, and get the muscles moving, and keep your brain moving.  And I think it all comes together.
Story_ID: 654977
Speaker 1: What do you look forward to doing that maybe you haven't done yet?  Is there anything on that list that you haven't done yet?
Speaker 2:  	I, I, think everything on my list, I, I think, just about, I'm, I've done, and I've accomplished it, okay.  And I feel good about it.  I, I really think I made a difference, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets?
Speaker 2:  	Right now, I don't have any regrets, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would like to share that I have not asked?
Speaker 2:  	What, I can't think of anything right now, of anything that you haven't asked.  Oh, what, there's one thing on my list that I haven't completed, all these artifacts, and I have some more of it downstairs.  There, there museum, I, I was, I grew up with, and my parents [Sarah Chilton Phelps and Robert Phelps, Sr.] grew up with it.  And I want, and I take it to the school system, and I take it to church to let them know from whence we came.  And so, where- whereas we had the school to iron.  They put them on the stove and iron, and iron our clothes.  Sometimes the children are so lazy now, they can't plug the regular electric iron into the plug to get the wrinkles out of their clothes.  And, and that bothers me.  I, I don't know whether, how I can make a difference, but it bothers me.  It's, my mother would call it, it's they don't have the get up and go (laughter), you know, just take advantage of what used to be.
Story_ID: 654978
Speaker 1: And there's one thing, you said your husband [William Newton Ricketts] passed away just this past December?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: How many years were you married before he passed?
Speaker 2:  	Six- sixty-four.
Speaker 1: Tell us what it's like to be married for sixty-four years.
Speaker 2:  	You give some and you take some.  I think that's the bottom line.  You, you got, you, you have to have something interrelated to some things that come up, you say, well, we'll see what we can do about, let's sit down and talk about it, see if we can bring something, make some changes if you don't like it, and I don't like it, we'll see what we can do about it.  It's, it's, I guess, you'll call it a meeting of the minds.  If, if I wasn't working in the office with him, and the amount of time that I have to spend with him, it's mostly at the office.  And when he comes home, he's tired, and he wants to eat dinner, and then he wants to relax.  We really had to work on that to see if we could revamp it, you know.  And, and I guess you got to put God in that whole plan, you know, some things you say, I'm going to leave to the hands of God, and let, get on my knees and oh, right, get, I forgot about it, have your kids get on their knees and pray.  But anyway, I had to get on my knees, and get something, get on something, and sometimes things happen that he can't understand, and I can't understand, but it needs to be addressed.  And so, you had to find some way to put it on a teabl- table, and if you don't have the skills to do it, then you find somebody who is in, in psychiatry, or somebody who's in some field that's plugging you or plugging the marriage.  You find somebody who can come and sit down and talk with you.  Sometimes I guess your minister can do that, too, sit down and, and work through whatever is going on.
Speaker 1: Thanks a lot, thank you so much.
Speaker 2:  	(Laughter).
Speaker 1: It's been wonderful to talk to you.
Speaker 2:  	Okay, you're quite welcome.  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Really wonderful.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
