Story_ID: 633287
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is Linda Olatunde.  Sir, could you please give your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's Richard Warren Roberts [HistoryMaker Richard W. Roberts], Richard, normal spelling, Warren is W-A-R-R-E-N, Roberts, R-O-B-E-R-T-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 21st, 1953, New York, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you were born in Harlem, New York, I think, right?
Speaker 2: I was born in New York Hospital [NewYork-Presbyterian / Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, New York] and lived in Harlem--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as a youngster.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: United States district judge for the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: September 28th, 2007.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at the United States courthouse [E. Barrett Prettyman Federal Courthouse] at 333 Constitution Avenue, NW, Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's good enough.
Story_ID: 633288
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that they ask me to ask everyone, and so we have to ask them.  They're kind of a warm-up.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) The first one that popped into my head was meat lasagna.  One thing I'm known for, however, is having some- something of a voracious appetite.  So, I eat quite a bit and I eat a wide variety of things, but I think lasagna was the first one that popped into my head.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Springtime in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Caribbean.
Speaker 1: All right.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Keep the faith.
Story_ID: 633289
Speaker 1: I'm gonna to ask about your family history.  I'm gonna to ask about your mother's side of the family, and your father's [Beverly Roberts] side, but we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother's name was Angeline, A-N-G-E-L-I-N-E, her middle name was Valentina.  She was named after Valentine's Day because that's when she was born.  It's V-A-L-E-N-T-I-N-A.  Her family name was Tynes, T as in Thomas -Y-N-E-S [Angeline Tynes Roberts].
Speaker 1: All right.  And what was her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth was February 14th, 1926.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Lynchburg, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on her side?  How far back can you trace her side of the family?
Speaker 2: We actually were able to go back to about 1803.  My mother's father was Joseph Walter Tynes.  Her mother was Lucy Rich Tynes.  Her father was a minister when she was growing up in Greensboro, North Carolina.  He pastored the--I think it's the Monument- Monumental Baptist Church [sic. Providence Baptist Church, Greensboro, North Carolina].  I might get in trouble, I might be naming that wrong, but he was a pastor of that popular black church in Greensboro, South, uh, North Carolina for many years.  Before that, he was an educational administrator--I believe at the Junior Union Theological Seminary in Virginia [sic. Virginia Theological Seminary, Alexandria, Virginia], so he was an educator and a pastor.  Her mother, Lucy Rich Tynes, ran a school [Northern Neck Academy, Richmond County, Virginia]--I believe in Lynchburg, and then opened one in Greensboro when the family moved from Virginia to Greensboro, North Carolina.  So, she, herself, was an educator.  Because they had ten children--I believe at some point, she, her mother stopped running the school, and had to devote her full time to being a homemaker with ten children.  But my grandfather, Joseph Walter Tynes, continued as an educator and a pastor of the local Baptist church there.  Now, he stemmed from a line of Tyneses who made their home in Smithfield, Virginia, Isle of Wight, I-S-L-E, of Wight, W-I-G-H-T County, Virginia.  What I learned from a family reunion that we attended of the Tynes side of the family, back about seven or eight years ago, was that the landowners in that part of the county were the name, had the name, Tynes.  They had slaves going back into the 18th century, the late 17th century.  There was one particular Tynes who was viewed, ironically, as the black sheep of that white family.  He was a bit rebellious.  When he owned several parcels of land in that area, he decided to deed parcels of land to some of his slaves who took on the name, Tynes.  And he manumitted them as early as 1803.  So, in 1803, there was a community of landowning black people named Tynes in Isle of Wight County, who had achieved their freedom because this black sheep of the Tynes family, decided to go against convention at that time, and deed significant parcels of land to some of his slaves.  From that time forward, there has been a community of black Tyneses in that part of Virginia.  And we had our family reunion down there seven to eight years ago.  And it's quite an extended family that has stretched out into many corners of the country.
Story_ID: 633290
Speaker 1: My [maternal] grandfather [Joseph Walter Tynes] had a first cousin whose name was George Tynes.  George Tynes graduated from Wilberforce University [Wilberforce, Ohio] in Ohio in the '30s [1930s].  He was recruited by the Soviet government at the time to come to the Soviet Union [Russia] on a one-year contract to help the Soviet Union develop its poultry farming practices.  He signed on to that contract, went over there for a year, performed admirably.  The Russian government asked him to stay for another year.  The story is told that he was so taken by his treatment by the Russian citizens there, and so taken by how some of the baggage accompanying his blackness in the United States, tended to get put a bit to the side in the Soviet Union.  And he found that the embrace that the Soviets gave him was quite different from how sometimes he, as a black man, would be shunned in his home country.  He enjoyed staying there so much that he ended up staying in the Soviet Union.  I'm not certain if he took on dual citizenship, or renounced his U.S. citizenship, and took on Russian citizenship, but he became a Soviet citizen.  He stayed there and he married a Russian woman [Maria Alexandrovna Tynes].  They had--I believe three children.  I got the, the chance to meet one of them for the first time in about 1987 or 1988.  Her name was Emilia.  Emilia by that time was already grown.  She had married--I believe a Guinean fellow whose last name was Mensah, so her name was Emilia Tynes-Mensah.  She had come to the United States, and I believe she was able to get United States citizenship in part because her dad had been, had been a United States citizen.  So, I was told in advance that I'd be getting a chance to meet my black Russian cousins.  Despite the fact that I knew that these were indeed black Russians, legitimately black Russians, she and her daughter at the time came to my home when I was living in New Jersey.  I met them for the first time.  I welcomed them in and housed them there while they were visiting.  But I must say it was the most amazing thing to see two black women who looked like ordinary black women you see in the United States, and to hear one of them, the mother, speak with a thick Russian accent.  That was quite amazing.  She looked like a regular sister, but here she is speaking with this thick Russian accent, something I'd not encountered before.  Her daughter spoke no English, spoke fluent Russian, and she looked like a regular black woman from a neighborhood I grew up in [in Queens, New York].  It was just a mind-expanding experience.  Happily, they were able to have the daughter go to school here.  She graduated from the University of Maryland.  She married an Azerbaijani, whom she met at the--I believe at the university.  They now live in Virginia and have their own child, so I've been able to stay in touch because she lives in the area.  So, that's a little bit of additional history of that side of the family.
Story_ID: 633291
Speaker 1: Now your, your [maternal] grandfather's [Joseph Walter Tynes] first cousin, this would be your great uncle [George Tynes], I guess, right, or--
Speaker 2: You know, I never tried to figure out the right term for what he would be, but that's probably right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, your great uncle, he was at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He went to Wilberforce and--
Speaker 1: It's interesting, went to Wilberforce.  I just wonder if he was there when--I'm trying to do the calculation I had, when Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] was there.  That's when the, who could have--
Speaker 2: I think Du Bois might have gotten there--was he a student there or a teacher there?  I'm trying to remember.
Speaker 1: DuBois was a teacher, had to be--well, he was a teacher there in 1890, so maybe that's a little bit early.  I don't know, probably a little early.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, I think my relative was there in the '30s [1930s] or graduated in the '30s [1930s], so I believe Du Bois had some connection (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's, he's long gone there from Wilberforce--
Speaker 2: That might have been, yeah.
Speaker 1: --but I just wondered who by at Wilberforce could have possibly influenced him at all about going, you know.  I mean to go to Russia in those days in those days--it was some stigma attached to it, but not like it was in the '50s [1950s], of course, but I don't know.
Speaker 2: Well, there was certainly the stigma in the United States about going to a Communist country.  The fact is, though, that at that time, there was also a great campaign among some nations about international solidarity, and how working class people ought to bond together.  So, there was that aspect, I think, of some of what Russia was, and the Soviet Union was, that might have provided some of the pull.  It might have provided an ability for him to feel embraced.  When he went there and saw a great deal, for example, of African students, who were also recruited to come and study in the universities there, I think that has been a trend that even continued into the '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s], and '70s [1970s], and perhaps today.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And it may be that one of his children that I just mentioned to, Emilia [Emilia Tynes-Mensah], met her husband at the time, who was a student coming from Africa, and they met, got married, and had two children.  So, perhaps there was at the time, a stigma to a United States citizen saying, "Well, I'm going to go try Russia out for a while."  But I think that more of that stigma attached post-World War II [WWII] than pre-World War II, but I'm not the best student of history on that, so I couldn't go too far.
Speaker 1: Did you have, and you might not know this right now, but for somebody looking at this in the future that wants to do some research about this, do you have an idea of where your ances- your relatives lived in Russia?
Speaker 2: He lived in Moscow [Russia].
Speaker 1: Moscow, okay.
Speaker 2: Part of the poultry farming that he helped with might have been on the outskirts of Moscow, but he based himself in Moscow.  When he married a Russian woman [Maria Alexandrovna Tynes], they lived in Moscow and raised their three children in Moscow.  One of the other children is a, a journalist named Slava Tynes, and the third child is Ruben Tynes.  Both of these sons married Russian women and had children.  Emilia is the one who married an, an African and had children.  Emilia is now involved quite a bit in an effort to bring unity among multiracial Russians, particularly mixed-race Russians.  At a time in Russia, there was a stigma attached to mixed-race children there, and a number of them were deposited, as it were, in orphanages.  So, she found that there was a significant number of mixed-race children, Russian children, in orphanages.  And she has worked hard over the years to--I believe, establish a foundation to help care for and educate some of these children.  Slava, the journalist, has worked in journalism over there for quite some time.  And Ruben, I have not yet met, but one of their sons came over to this family reunion some time ago.  And I actually saw him when he came to the United States again several months ago, so I've attempted to keep this family connection over in Russia going.  I've not yet been to Russia.  My wife [Vonya McCann Roberts] has actually been to Moscow when she was an ambassador with the state department [U.S. Department of State].  She had a conference that she had to lead the U.S. delegation for.  And I'd given her the name of my grandfather's cousin's wife who was still alive then.  She actually went to visit, and got to meet this surviving spouse.  She told me later that the--apparently (laughter), either--I don't remember if she said KGB agents or U.S. Secret Service agents, either followed her, or later interviewed her asking, "What are you doing going to this Muscovite's apartment?"  But it was all on the up-and-up.
Speaker 1: That is an amazing story.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, it's, you know, I just, well, you know, I hope somebody follows up on this at some point really just--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's very interesting research.  I have not had time to fully devote time to dig into, but it's an interesting story.
Story_ID: 633292
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Angeline Tynes Roberts] talk about growing up, what it was like for her growing up in--did she grow up in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: She did.  She grew in Greensboro [North Carolina].  She was born in Lynchburg [Virginia], but moved at a fairly early age to Greensboro, North Carolina.  She grew up, as I said, in a family of ten children.  She was the youngest of the ten--she was the tenth.  Her father [Joseph Walter Tynes] had fully established his pastorship of the church [Providence Baptist Church, Greensboro, North Carolina] at the time.  And her mother [Lucy Rich Tynes] was full-time rearing ten, ten children.  Her father was, as I said, also an educator, and fairly strict disciplinarian.  So, in his church, unlike some other black Baptist churches, he emphasized erudition and education.  So, in his sermons, he emphasized lessons from Greek and Latin, and the Old Testament and the New Testament.  And he did it, he said, for purposes of education and enlightenment, and not for entertainment.  And that meant that when anyone in the audience felt like he or she was getting the spirit and voiced that, he would say, "Silence."  This was a fairly strict fellow who wanted you to listen, and not hoot and holler, if I can use that term.  So, it was a different kind of a church environment from what might be a more popular type of (background noise)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: So, your grandfather allowed no getting happy, as they call it in church.
Speaker 1: That wasn't part of the way he liked to run his, his services, and, quite frankly, at home as well.  At the dinner table, conversation was encouraged, but noise was not.  Also, when he was in his study preparing lectures or preparing his sermons, he insisted on quiet in his house.  So, my mother has--tell--used to tell stories of vivid memories of her mother always speaking very quietly and softly.  And even when she would want to laugh, she'd cover her mouth, and just laugh, (makes noise).  And when they were at the dinner table, she would encourage them to speak softly because the father was one, who was a strict disciplinarian, and with a booming baritone voice of his own, but his was the only voice that was supposed to be heard at times like that.  So, she tells funny stories about how they used to escape to another room if they ever wanted to have the decibel level arise above vocal pitch.  So, it was a fairly strict upbringing with a, a learned father, and a learned mother, but a father who was more rigid, and a mother who was much warmer and looser.  But she still felt that she had the blessings of growing up in an intact household, two parents, brothers and sisters, with lots of guidance looking out for their baby sister.  And she went to the public schools in Greensboro, went to Dunbar High School [ph.] in Greensboro, which was a sort of a flagship high school for black people in Greensboro, North Carolina at the time.  And it was, of course, during a time of segregated education, but segregated education also had, as one of its hallmarks, flagship black schools that produced some wonderfully educated and wonderfully motivated students.
Story_ID: 633293
Speaker 1: Was her father [Roberts' maternal grandfather, Joseph Walter Tynes], saying he was a Baptist minister?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, that's unusual in a Baptist church to have that kind of--
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: --control over--
Speaker 2: --it was.
Speaker 1: --emotions and such, yeah.
Speaker 2: Interestingly, two of his children became ministers as well.  The oldest of his surviving children, Theodore Tynes, pastored a church in New York City [New York, New York] for a short while, but was also a science teacher.  My understanding is that he dabbled a bit in the metaphysics.  But at some point, he decided to branch out on his own, and separated himself essentially from his family and his background.  And he moved to St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands] where he lived out probably forty or fifty years of the rest of his life, and was quite a recluse away from the family.  I'm not sure if that was a reaction against some of the strictness that he experienced under his father as a minister or something else.  I never got a chance to meet him when I was growing up.  But on one opportunity to go down to St. Croix in the '80s [1980s], I sought him out, and found that he was living in a nursing home at the time, and was able to finally meet the one uncle I'd never met.  And I was full grown before I was able to meet him.  And though he was on in age, up in his probably late eighties or early nineties and in somewhat declining health, he was still able--I went there with my aunt and uncle, my Aunt Margaret Tynes, about whom I'll tell you a little bit as well, and my Uncle Victor Tynes, whom I'll tell you a little bit about as well.  So, they were some of, two of his younger siblings, who went down there as well.  And they were able to stoke his memory of some things about growing up, and about Greensboro [North Carolina], and about some other religious study he had done.  And though he may have been in advanced stages of dementia, he, nevertheless, greeted them with the words of Hebrew prayers, fully, and he was almost loquacious.  It went on for two or three minutes in Hebrew.  The man spoke multiple languages in his prime, and he was able to quote Hebrew prayers in that fashion.  I was astounded.  But he was one of the several children who seemed to exhibit--I guess, you ever hear tell of people who are, are so brilliant they're almost crazy?  There was a streak of that in that family.  He was, as were some of his siblings, extremely bright--bright to the point of being almost eccentric, and that probably explained some of how he sort of struck out on his own, and disconnected himself from the family and, and did his own thing.  But it was no surprise to my aunt and my uncle who heard him reciting these prayers to them in Hebrew, despite the fact that he had pastored--I think a Baptist church as well, but he had studied multiple languages.
Story_ID: 633294
Speaker 1: Another of the siblings was Morris Tynes [Morris Harrison Tynes] who became a minister of a Baptist church in Chicago [Illinois], the Greater Mount Moriah Baptist Church.  Now, he passed away--I believe in '93 [1993], and the city named a street after him right outside where his church was.  And his home-going service lasted probably five hours when you had many city officials and lots of people coming to give tribute to him.  But he, too, was someone who had studied and gone to divinity School, got his divinity degree from Yale [Yale Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut], got a doctorate.  He actually studied undergrad at A and T in North Carolina, North Carolina A and T University [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].  And I'll tell you another connection that was interesting there.  My father [Beverly Roberts] was the chairman of the English department at A and T at the time that my Uncle Morris was a student there.  I'll fill in that gap a little, a little later.  My father had vivid memories of my Uncle Morris talking out in English class with great elocution, and someone who could be as glib as the next person.  And it was no surprise to my father than Morris Tynes ended up in the pulpit.  But Morris Tynes ran a pulpit that was something of a mix of what he had seen growing up, and what is more traditional in the Baptist church.  He would infuse in his sermons, lessons from the Greek and Latin, the Old Testament to the New Testament, information that would be educational and enlightening, but he also understood his congregation.  When he was pastoring, he knew that a great number of the people who were coming to his church had migrated during the war [World War II, WWII] from Mississippi, as people from North Carolina had migrated to New York [New York], and people from Texas had migrated to California.  Well, much of his congregation had migrated from Mississippi.  My Uncle Morris was fully aware of the traditions of the Baptist church in Mississippi, and he knew that church just wouldn't be complete for many of his congregants unless there's a little bit of spirit that could be released.  So, he would build an education, but then he'd get that spirit, and he'd hoot and holler from the pulpit as well.  So, he'd combine that, and I was able to see some of that in his services.  And he really was a character, as bright as they come, but he, he also had a tremendous sense of humor.  And he knew how to blend education with entertainment in the course of a Baptist sermon or service up in his church.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I've heard of that church, yeah.
Speaker 1: Greater Mount Moriah.
Speaker 2: Greater Mount Moriah, yeah.
Story_ID: 633295
Speaker 1: Now, they had a very interesting series of, a very interesting set of siblings.  I'm not sure whether my Grandmother Lucy [Lucy Rich Tynes] or my Grandfather Joseph [Joseph Walter Tynes] had music in them, but for forever reason, the genes from those two people combined to create a family full of mus- musical talent.  My Uncle Frank [Francis Tynes], who he might have said was the black sheep of his family, he might have been number three or four in age, did not complete college.  He actually had a run-in with his father who was strict, and Uncle Frank was a big six-footer.  He didn't take anything off anybody.  And when his father tried to discipline him, so the story goes, he wouldn't take it.  And his father--I guess, was trying to im- impose some corporal punishment.  He wouldn't take it.  He picked his father up, bodily, put him down on a bed somewhere, and said, "Goodbye," left the house, and never came back.  Eventually, he went to become a Pullman porter on the train system, settled in New York [New York], reared his own daughter.  But I was mentioning a musical ability.  The man was never formally trained.  I remember visiting him because he lived in Long Island [New York] when I was growing up, growing up in New York.  He would sit down and tickle the ivories, as if he had been classically trained, as if he had been, you know, someone who had studied at Juilliard [Juilliard School of Music; The Juilliard School, New York, New York].  It was amazing to watch.  He also was able to dismantle an entire organ, and then put it back together, not trained, never been trained to do it.  But he had music in him.  My mother [Angeline Tynes Roberts], I told you, was the baby of the family, but she had the loveliest voice I have ever heard.  She was a coloratura soprano.  She majored in music at A and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].  When she moved up to New York, she was hired by the Metropolitan Opera chorus, one of the earliest African American women to be hired as a regular chorister in the Met.  She, herself, was the organizer and leader of the choral at the church we attended.  She performed in operas from 'Aida' [Giuseppe Verdi] to 'Cavalleria' ['Cavalleria rusticana,' Pietro Mascagni] and 'Pagliacci' [Ruggero Leoncavallo]. I remember when the Metropolitan Opera performed in its own opera house before Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] was constructed.  I think it was in the '30s [1930s] or the '40s [1940s] in Midtown Manhattan [New York].  And we got a chance to go and see her performances while she was singing there in the Met, so there was music in her.  There was music in my Uncle Frank.  I had an uncle named Jacob [Jacob Tynes] who did go to college.  He was a correctional officer in the Bronx [New York] in New York City.  He had an organ in his home, and I'd go there, and he'd play the organ.  I don't think he was trained in it, but there was something natural about, about that, that he had.  My Uncle Frank, Frank, sorry, my Uncle Victor [Victor Tynes], who's still alive, and just celebrated his ninety-second birthday, I believe, in Greensboro [North Carolina], also can tickle the ivories.  I do think he took music lessons, but he plays the piano.  He can play the guitar.  I think he might have played some other instruments.  He was a, a dentist in Greensboro during his professional life.  But my Aunt Margaret [Margaret Tynes], the only relative who accompanied, whom I accompanied to the [U.S.] Virgin Islands to see my Uncle Ted [Theodore Tynes], is a world renowned opera star.  She has just celebrated her eighty-eighth birthday.  She's here in this area, but she spent about forty years living in Italy, and was--I guess I'd call her sort of the Leontyne Price of Europe when she was still performing in her prime.
Speaker 2: Now, did she perform under the name of Margaret Tynes?
Speaker 1: Under the name of Margaret Tynes, and she was classically trained.  She attended Juilliard.  She's got an amazing voice.  She performed on 'The Ed Sullivan Show' a number of times.  She went with Ed Sullivan on the state department [U.S. Department of State] sponsored tour of Russia back in 1957 or '58 [1958].  I was just able to attend the Paley Center [Paley Center for Media].  It's a museum formerly called the Museum of Television and Radio in New York.  And they had clips of her performance on 'Ed Sullivan' and on 'The United States Steel Hour.'  There was a, a performance that was narrated by Duke Ellington of a piece he had written called 'A Drum Is a Woman.' Margaret performed that theme song on that show.  She tells a funny story.  She was at home in New York asleep.  The phone rings at two [o'clock] in the morning.  She picks up the phone groggily.  The voice on the phone says, "Hi, this is Duke Ellington."  She said, "Yeah, and I'm the president of the United States," and slammed down the phone (laughter).
Story_ID: 633296
Speaker 1: The story that my Aunt Margaret [Margaret Tynes] tells us is that she was asleep in her apartment one morning and the telephone rings.  She picks up the phone groggily, and the voice on the other end of the lines says, "Margaret Tynes?"  She says, "Yes?"  He said, "Well, this is Duke Ellington."  And she looks at the phone and says, "Yeah, and I'm the president of the United States," and she slams down the phone.  Ellington was undaunted.  So, half a minute later, the phone rings again.  She picks up the phone and says, "Hello," somewhat annoyed.  And he said, "Please, I really am Duke Ellington, and I got your name and number from my sister [Ruth Ellington Boatwright]," or it's maybe brother, Mercer [sic.], his brother, Mercer, or his sister--I forgot which.  And then, that grabbed her attention because she was acquainted with Duke Ellington's sibling.  In any event, it was two [o'clock] in the morning, as was Duke Ellington's want.  He was very prolific and productive early in the morning.  He told her that he had just completed writing a song that he wanted her to record.  He wrote it with her in mind.  She, at that time, had already, in the '50s [1950s], established quite a career in New York [New York], and other places on the stage, and singing in the New York City Opera, and singing at other places, so he had become familiar with her work.  And he told her, "I want you to come down tomorrow and record this song I had just wrote with you in mind.  I've written this piece called 'A Drum Is a Woman'."  So, she did, she said, "All right."  She went down there.  She sight-read the song the first time.  And he said, "Okay, well, are you ready to perform it, and have it recorded (laughter)?"  And the rest was history.  She went ahead and recorded it.  It was recorded on a, an album that later was produced--I can't recall the record label [Columbia Records].  I actually was able to find it.  Someone was able to find it for her, so I have it back home.  But I was recently going up to the Museum of Television and Radio that's now called the Paley Center [Paley Center for Media, New York, New York].  They have clips from television broadcasts stretching way, way back to the early days of television.  I was able to find then a clip, not only of the appearances that she made on 'The Ed Sullivan Show,' including the Ed Sullivan tour of Russia that occurred, but also, on a 'United States Steel Hour' broadcast, is a one-hour broadcast that Duke Ellington appeared on with his band, narrating the story that he wrote called 'A Drum Is a Woman.'  It was a musical, and the voice-over when the broadcast opened was that of my aunt.  Midway, the program, one of the dancers was lip-syncing, but it was my aunt's voice who was singing the song, 'A Drum Is a Woman.'  And at the end of the program, she was actually standing there in person.  You would see her singing the song once again.  So, we were able to see those broadcast and it was quite, quite a thrill.  I was able to get copies to show to Aunt Margaret as a surprise gift to her, to her, for her eighty-eighth birthday, which just occurred a couple of weeks ago.  But that was part of what I wanted to mention concerning the music that runs throughout that family.
Speaker 2: Can you tell us what year she was on 'Ed Sullivan' or what year, sir?
Speaker 1: It was approximately 1958 or 1957.  I can get you the exact year if you need it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, that's good, that's something, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I have a copy of it back home, but I can get you that year.  And I think it was either the year before or the year after that she appeared on the 'United States Steel Hour' show with Duke Ellington.  There's around that time in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Okay, that's--
Speaker 1: She later got opportunities to perform in opera in Europe, and ended up moving to Milan, Italy, where she lived for over thirty-five years.  She met an architect [Hans von Klier] over there, who was born in Czechoslovakia [Czech Republic and Slovakia], but reared in Germany, but he, too, was living in Milan.  He was an industrial designer, and they got married and lived in Italy until he passed in 2000.
Speaker 2: Was he a U.S. citizen, too?
Speaker 1: No, he wasn't a U.S. citizen (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 633297
Speaker 1: I had the good fortune, actually, when I was about fourteen years old to go over there [Milan, Italy] and spend the entire summer with them.  And it was an eye-opening experience.  The average day would include sitting at the table with them over breakfast, for example, listening to Aunt Margaret [Margaret Tynes] speak to my Uncle Hans.  His name was Hans von Klier, H-A-N-S, a small V-O-N, and then K-L-I-E-R.  He was an industrial designer and architect of some renown.  As it turns out, he had started early with Olivetti [Olivetti S.p.A.], where he designed everything from typewriters to furniture to computer equipment, later opened up his own studio, and employed many people on his own, was called upon worldwide to design a variety of industrial settings, and had some furniture of his own being sold throughout the world.  But in any event, this is a man who was born in Czechoslovakia [Czech Republic and Slovakia].  Actually, he was a baron.  His father was a baron, his mother was a baroness.  But at the age of nine, when World War II [WWII] was underway, and an invading army was coming in, they had to drop everything they had, and flee the house they lived in.  His father ran a factory at that time, and the invading army was known to take over large factories, or the homes of people who ran factories, and he had to flee with just the shoes on his feet.  And he and his family were living hand-to-mouth for, I don't know, months and months and months.  He tells stories about how he would pick up cigarette butts that were dropped behind by soldiers, collect them to create new cigarettes that he'd then sell to try to make money while they were itinerant.  But they ended up, after the war, settling in Germany, and they were able to sort of put their lives back together and live a life.  But I remember, when he came to this country shortly after he got married to my aunt, he was visiting us in the early '60s [1960s].  The movie, 'A Sound of Music' [sic. 'The Sound of Music'] was a popular movie then.  Of course, you see the dislocation that the Austrian family in that picture went through when they had to flee, and climb every mountain to go over into the other country to avoid the Nazis.  My uncle told me that he was unable to sit through that entire movie because it reminded him too much about his own dislocation when he was nine years old, and how his family had to flee with the clothes left on their back.  And they had to live hand-to-mouth for a long time.
Story_ID: 633298
Speaker 1: That's a little context for how, when I got to Italy to their home in Milan when I was fourteen years old, the day would start at the breakfast table with my [maternal] aunt beginning her comment to my uncle [Hans von Klier] in English, stopping because having spent now five, six, seven, eight years in Europe, speaking other languages as much as she spoke English, she'd trip on a word that she couldn't quite remember in English, so she'd switch over to Italian.  Her sentence would begin in English and then, she'd finish it in Italian.  My uncle would answer her, beginning in Italian, and then some word would escape him in Italian, he'd flip over into German.  And so, I'm picking up languages as a fourteen year-old in ways I never would have back here.  They were, I guess, trilingual, or quadra- he, she spoke English obviously.  She spoke Italian from living there, and from studying Italian opera.  She spoke German because she sang German lieder, and her husband has spoken German when he was growing up in Germany.  They both spoke French, of sorts.  My only foreign language training, at that time, had begun in French, so I'd speak with them in French a little bit.  But it was really a, a time when I, as a fourteen year-old, was a bit of a sponge, soaking up all of this new set of foreign languages that they would speak interchangeably, two or three languages in the course of one conversation.  And it was wonderful picking up.  I'd learned how to count, and speak certain common phrases in German and in Italian, and add it to the little bit of French that I knew.  It was an amazing experience, but I stayed with them for two months.  My Aunt Margaret [Margaret Tynes] was on a concert tour, so she was giving performances in Italy, Austria, Germany, Czechoslovakia [Czech Republic and Slovakia], and Hungary.  And as a fourteen year-old, I was able to visit all these places.  I was able to pick up a little bit of Hungarian, where she was performing in Budapest, Hungary.  For a week, I was able to pick up a little bit of Czech, where she was performing in Prague [Czech Republic] for about a week.  I was even able, even able to hear my uncle remember a little bit of Czech that he were, was speaking when he was a nine year-old before he fled that country.  So, as a fourteen year-old, I was able, I was taking piano lessons at the time as well.  And right after that, I enrolled at the High School of Music and Art [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts] in Manhattan [New York] where I graduated from in high school.  And some of the musical performances we did in the high school actually mirrored some of the musical performances I had hear her perform.  She did a concert performing in a cathedral in Northwest Italy of Giuseppe Verdi, 'Da Requiem,' his 'Messa da Requiem.'  Lo and behold, my sophomore year at Music and Art high school, as a member of the junior chorus, we were assigned to learn and perform Giuseppe Verdi's 'Requiem' Mass.  And I felt very, sort of grounded in that already, but it was a wonderful experience.  So, music tends to run through that side of, my mother's [Angeline Tynes Roberts] side of the family in, in multiple ways.
Story_ID: 633299
Speaker 1: Where did your mother [Angeline Tynes Roberts] go to college?
Speaker 2: My mother went to North Carolina A and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].  That was sort of the college of choice for that family.  That family had a deep and enduring connection with that school.  She went there.  My Aunt Margaret [Margaret Tynes] went there.  My Uncle Victor [Victor Tynes] went there--trying to go up the line in age.  I think my Uncle Jake [Jacob Tynes] may have attended there.  I believe my Uncle Ted [Theodore Tynes] might have gone there, but that was really around the time, the transition time.  I'm not sure if he went there, or if he did something in Virginia, but at least four or five of the Tynes children went to A and T.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They were there in the '40s [1940s], I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think my mother graduated in roughly around '45 [1945] or '46 [1946] from A and T.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: She actually was, she was a music major.  And we've seen brochures or catalogues from A and T showing that she was Miss A and T the year, the year that she graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A lot of people think of A and T as the school that was famous for the sit-in demonstrations in 1960-'61 [1961], but that was later on down the line.  But--
Speaker 2: It was, and I had a chance to go down--I think in 2002, to Greensboro [North Carolina], luckily at the invitation of, of former North Carolina Supreme Court Justice Frye [Henry E. Frye].  I was attending a legal conference and had the luck to be sitting beside him.  During a break, we struck up a conversation.  We found out where each of us was from.  When he mentioned Greensboro, of course, I had to mention my grandfather [Joseph Walter Tynes] and the Tynes family.  And he was really astounded that I was the grandson of the pastor, who had founded the church [Providence Baptist Church, Greensboro, North Carolina] that he is now a member of.  He mentioned that to the current pastor, the then-current pastor.  And I get a call a week later saying, "We want to invite you to come down to this church to speak on Men's Day [International Men's Day] in November, as the grandson of one of the, the founding pastor of this church."  And it really did sort of bring things full circle.  It was an amazing tribute and honor for me to be invited to come to speak on the very pulpit where my grandfather had been speaking to his parishioners when he was the pastor of that church.  And one of, on that visit, Justice Frye was able to take me on a little bit of a tour of Greensboro, although I had visited down there as a youngster quite frequently to go back and visit my grandparents, at the same time I was going down to Columbia, South Carolina to visit my father's mother [Wilhelmina Williams Roberts].  So, we made trips to the South frequently in the summertime when I was a youngster.  But when Justice Frye took me on this tour of Greensboro, he took me to the F.W. Woolworths building [F.W. Woolworth Company] that was the site of the sit-in, staged by the A and T students that you just mentioned.  I think that site, that corner has been preserved as something of a civil rights relic now.  And there was a plaque commemorating that, as well as some other important facts in black history in North Carolina, one of which was Justice Frye becoming one of the first African Americans in the state senate of North Carolina, as well as on the Supreme Court of North Carolina.  But the other place he took me was to A and T.  A and T had, has now constructed a bronze statue right in front of the administration building of those four or five students who were the A and T students who made history, not just for A and T, and not just for North Carolina, but for the entire country.  And it was a thrilling moment to see that set of statutes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother meet your father [Beverly Roberts] in college or afterwards or what?
Speaker 2: They met in college, they met there at the college.
Story_ID: 633300
Speaker 1: My dad had grown up in Columbia, South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Now, let's go on, and move formally--I guess to his side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 1: My father's first name was Beverly, B-E-V-E-R-L-Y, his middle name was Nash, N-A-S-H, last name, Roberts [Beverly Roberts]
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and--
Speaker 1: He was born June 12th, 1911.
Speaker 2: Okay.  In--
Speaker 1: In Fernandina, Florida.
Speaker 2: How do you spell that?
Speaker 1: F-E-R-N-A-N-D-I-N-A.  That's now called Fernandina Beach [Florida], but when he was there, it was called Fernandina.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's a, a coastal town half hour or an hour east of Jacksonville, Florida.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?  How far back can you trace that group?
Speaker 1: That's a rich and deep story, too.  I cannot give you years, the way I gave you on the Tynes side.  But his father [Richard Samuel Roberts], I should say, my father was very keen on trying on keep a genealogy on both his side, and my mother's [Angeline Tynes Roberts] side.  I have, to this day, a family chart that he drew, based upon his research stretching back--I think, three generations from his family.  So, I have a family chart that identifies, not just who his father's parents were, and his mother's [Wilhelmina Williams Roberts] parents where, but they go back yet two more generations.  I'd have to bring the chart in to reel off some of the names to you, but we were able to trace, or he was able to trace back the Roberts' side of the family to a plantation in Georgia.  There was an island off of the coast of Georgia where some of our relatives had been slaves.  He also was able to trace back to Florida as well.  And we had a one-family, I believe, that was a slave-owning family that had some children who ultimately became seafaring sailors, so we know that on that side of the family, there were some seafarers or shipbuilding people who had come out of slavery from the coast of Georgia.
Speaker 2: Now, what island or islands did they inhabit?
Speaker 1: I would have to go back and look--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --at his family tree to tell you what that is.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I can't--
Speaker 2: There are so many.  St. Simons [St. Simons Island, Georgia], Sea Island [Georgia], Jekyll Island [Georgia], you know.
Speaker 1: Jekyll rings a bell and I'd have--I was about to say that, but I have to go back and look at the genealogy to make sure that I'm getting that from the genealogy, as opposed to some of my other studies about the islands off of Georgia.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I think it might have been Jekyll Island.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I think we can--he was able trace back three generations before his father to come up with some names, as well as some of the lore from family history.  And my father was intent on making sure that, you know, the stories that came down told both, you know, the colorful and the not-so-colorful, the good, as not, as well as the not-so-good. He recalls a story about one uncle of--I think, my grandmother--who took up in a small building behind the main house that a relative lived in.  And he had a taste for the spirits and, you know, that uncle would often be seen quite lit up by some of the spirits.  So, he'd tell some of the good, as well as the bad.  He'd tell a story about how there was one fellow who moved into that back house, where the husband of the woman living in the front house, was often gone.  So, the fellow in the back house would often come up and, you know, entertain himself with the wife of the husband who was often gone.  And, and that produced some offspring as well, but that was some of the, you know, colorful, as well as the off-color that he wanted to pre- preserve as part of the truth of, of the history of how social relations were down there.
Story_ID: 633301
Speaker 1: Well he was born in Fernandina [Fernandina Beach, Florida], and he moved with his family to Columbia, South Carolina, and that's where his formative years were spent.  He went through the segregated public school system, but he went to Booker T. High School, Booker T. Washington High School in Columbia at the time which was segregated, but one of the flagship black high schools, and he excelled academically there.  He actually--I believe was given a violin lead at the graduation, so that when they were performing a musical piece, he was the one who was given the lead solo on the violin.  Now, my father also told stories about how he enjoyed playing pranks.  During class, for example, he had an uncanny ability to imitate the signs of bird calls by piercing his, uh, squeezing his lips carefully in the corner of his lips, sucking in air to make a sound, a high-pitched sound like a bird, but doing it, masking any movement, so that the teacher in the front of the room couldn't tell where the sound was coming from.  My father was sitting there still, not moving, and with a straight face.  (Laughter) And he would disrupt the class with the teacher's consternation: "What is that, where is there coming from?"  And it, you know, the teacher wouldn't know that it was he.
Speaker 2: So, he could actually control his lips without even putting his hand up there?  I mean, he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He could control it simply by the sheer force of, of deciding how and when to squeeze his lips.  I tried to do it.  I can't do it very well (makes noise).  I'm making a noise that was not quite what his was.  His was far more--had a higher decibel level and sounded much more like birds, but that was the method he used to get the sound out.  And the teachers were flummoxed.  They just couldn't tell what is this, and where is that coming from?  I mention that only to say that at the graduation when he was playing the violin solo, his E string had popped, and so, it became untuned.  This was not intentional.  And so, when he was playing the song during the course of the performance, you know, you would hear him, melodious six or seven notes until he had to get to the E string (singing).  And the teachers thought he was playing a prank.  He really wasn't.  His E string had accidentally become unstrung, but that's the sound that came out.  And they, they punished him afterward because they just didn't believe that, that's what happened.  They thought this is yet another Beverly Nash Roberts [Beverly Roberts] prank, but it wasn't.
Story_ID: 633302
Speaker 1: But in any event, he did go to Benedict College [Columbia, South Carolina] after graduating from Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Columbia, South Carolina].
Speaker 2: It's right there in Columbia [South Carolina], right?
Speaker 1: Right there in Columbia.  This was notable because his parents [Wilhelmina Williams Roberts and Richard Samuel Roberts] never completed any formal education.  Neither his mother nor his father went to college.  They emphasized throughout, however, the lives of their five children who lived, that education was extremely important.  And they drummed into their minds that to get ahead and to be able to contribute in society, we're going to make sure you get educated.  And so, from meager beginnings, they reared these five surviving children.  Every single one of those five children, growing up in segregated Columbia, South Carolina, went to college and graduated and got college educations.  They were so dedicated to making sure that education advanced the black community that when they learned about youngsters in high school, who lived out in what they called the country, the suburbs of Columbia, or rural areas in South Carolina, but did not have the means to come to Columbia to get formal education, they would just bring them into their home, say, "Well, you come stay with us.  We're going to let you go to school and stay here."  And there were legions of young people who were able to come to col- come to Columbia, stay in the family homestead, and get the education that they sought because my grandparents were so dedicated to making sure that young people had the educational opportunities that were otherwise denied to them.  But my father [Beverly Roberts] went to Benedict.  He graduated from Benedict.  He told the story about how he had to make a choice at that point.  Here he was, an educated African American college graduate in Columbia, South Carolina.  He remembers walking down the fairly, fairly narrow sidewalk downtown in segregated Columbia, South Carolina.  And they would be coming in the opposite direction toward him, white people walking on that same sidewalk.  And, often, they'd look as if they had come in from the country wearing clothing that made them appear to be farmers who may not have gone to any formal education themselves--not to denigrate them, but here's someone who had gone through formal education, has a bachelor's degree.  And the practice in South Carolina at that time was if a black man was on a sidewalk, when whites were walking toward him, the custom was for the black man to step off the sidewalk, no matter who the white person was--could have been a little kid, could have been an uneducated homeless person.  If that person was white, a black man, had to step off the sidewalk, and let the white people pass.  My father decided at that point--well, something's going to happen.  Somebody is going to get in trouble.  Somebody is going to get hurt.  I'm not going to suffer that indignity.  That is not going to happen to me.  So, either I can stay on the sidewalk, and get arrested, as I probably would, or I can decide to go someplace where I don't have to suffer that indignity.  He decided he was going to move to New York [New York] and further his education.  So he did.
Story_ID: 633303
Speaker 1: He [Roberts' father, Beverly Roberts] went up to New York [New York], and he enrolled at New York University [New York, New York] at the time, and he pursued his master's degree.  He got a master's in, a master of arts in English, and began his Ph.D. studies, and completed the coursework for his Ph.D. studies.  The thesis advisor he had ended up leaving the school.  And he had a replacement thesis advisor who had decided to tell him to revamp the entire course of the doctorate that he was going to have to prepare and write.
Speaker 2: Was this at NYU [New York University], too?
Speaker 1: This was at NYU.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That really was just not feasible, given the, what he had wanted to do, so he didn't complete the actual degree.  He completed the course work for it.  But it was interesting to hear that while he was there as a graduate student in New York, he was working as an elevator operator at the Broadway Central Hotel [New York, New York] that was not too far from NYU to make some money to be able to pursue his education.  And as an elevator operator, I think the hotel allowed him to actually stay in a small room that was at the hotel, so he was able to work, gain a little money, find a place, himself, a place to live, and, while furthering his education.  These are the kinds of things that enterprising African Americans from the South, who came north, had to do to be able to make ends meet.  But he also tells the interesting story about going to that school.  They, of course, had a swimming pool at the facility.  And the swimming pool was open to all who were enrolled, except if you were an African American, you could use the pool on Fridays.  So, white students could use the swimming pool throughout the week.  African Americans were barred from the pool until Fridays.  And it was on Fridays when they were allowed to use the pool because when they did the draining of the pool to put fresh water in, it was Saturdays.  So, you could use the pool on the Fridays before the water got drained, but not when they put the fresh water in after Saturdays.
Story_ID: 633304
Speaker 1: But in any event, after he [Roberts' father, Beverly Roberts] had finished his graduate work [at New York University, New York, New York], he made his way down to Greensboro [North Carolina], where he was given an appointment as a professor in the English department at A and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].  I believe he stayed there about nine years, and ended up becoming the chairman of the English department.  My mother [Angeline Tynes Roberts] was a student at the time, and she had graduated there and majored in music, and was Miss A and T.  And my dad would tell you that at the time he had a keen eye for good-looking, a good-looking black woman.  And not to boast, but I remember my mother, she was a good-looking black woman.  They ended up dating and courting and getting married.  And they, too, decided that the North was the place for them to go.  So, he moved back up to New York [New York] with her and that's where I was born later on.  But they, they, again, enterprising, they had initially gotten a chance to run a candy store that was on Edgecombe Avenue, not Edgecombe Avenue, it was on, off of St. Nicholas Avenue between 136th [Street] and 137th Streets in Harlem [New York, New York].  But they also picked up part-time summer jobs--I believe at a Bulova watch factory in Queens [New York], not too far from LaGuardia Airport [New York, New York].  These were some of the things that, you know, enterprising African Americans had to do to make ends meet when, particularly, they're moving up from the South, and trying to get settled.  Eventually, though, my father, with his degrees in English, decided he wanted to teach again.  Countee Cullen, the renowned poet who was in New York at the time, part of the Harlem Renaissance, taught poetry at Frederick Douglass Junior High School, 139 [New York, New York] in the public school system in New York.  Unfortunately, Cullen died.  My dad was up there at the time, and the board of education asked him to replace Cullen at the Junior High School 139 in Harlem, and to take over his poetry classes.  My father did that.  He taught at the Douglass Junior High School, 139 for many years after that--I think about twenty, twenty to twenty-five years.  And he held down other posts as well.  He taught English as a foreign language to people who wanted to learn English who were from other countries.  He also was promoted to become an assistant principal and a principal in the New York City public school system.  But my mother, at the time, held a number of jobs, including working at the Metropolitan Opera [Metropolitan Opera House, New York, New York] and the chorus there, and doing a number of other things as well.
Story_ID: 633305
Speaker 1: Did you want to tell the story about your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My grand- my father's father was named Richard Samuel Roberts.  His family originally was from, from Fernandina, Florida [Fernandina Beach, Florida], where my Dad [Beverly Roberts] was born.  But in Fernandina, he was the custodian of the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] at that time.  When he and my grandmother [Wilhelmina Williams Roberts] decided, however, to move to Columbia, South Carolina, roughly around 1920, he also landed a job as the custodian for the federal courthouse in the federal building in Columbia, South Carolina.  He held that job during the day shift.  I believe he started around four [o'clock] in the morning and stayed until about twelve noon.  But his real passion was photography.  He had a photographic studio that he ran in the half-block long, black business district of Columbia, South Carolina at that time.  So, in the afternoons, he'd go down to that photographic studio where he would engage in photography, and principally shoot portrait photographs of many people who wanted to have some record of what they looked like or what they did, or have photographs of themselves or the children, or their possessions that they wanted to have recorded in photography.  His tagline for his studio was "We will make a true likeness of you.  If you like the way you look, it'll be a true likeness that you will see in your pictures.  If there's something about the way you look that you don't like, we will make sure that we can fix it, so that it's, nevertheless, a true likeness that you enjoy."  That was his passion.  He did principally portrait photography, but he is also hired to take photographs of events--graduations, funerals, and other things of that nature.  Oftentimes, when young babies died, and the infant mortality rate was much higher then than it is now, parents would want to have something to remember their babies by.  So, they would hire a photographer to come take pictures of the baby in the baby's funeral garb or funeral dress.  So, there, it's interesting that in the collection of his photographs, you will see that with some frequency.  But he ran his studio from 1920 through 1936.  His wife, my grandmother, was a constant helper, although she was, again, a homemaker rearing five children.  She would often come down to the studio in the afternoon with fresh baked bread, or some lunch, or a hot meal for him to eat there, assist when she could when customers were coming into the studio.  So, it was very much a partnership in that regard, but the craft and the artistry was principally his.
Story_ID: 633306
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how he picked up photography?  How did he learn photography in those days, or who--did he have a mentor or--
Speaker 2: I think the short story is that he was self-taught.  I believe he had the motivation to develop an interest in photography and taught himself.  It was part of the lesson he passed on to his children.  If you're interested in something, learn about it.  If you want to do something, figure out how it works.  I don't believe he had a teacher.  I don't believe he had a mentor.  He had a passion, though, and he decided he was going to find out as much about it as he could.  And he did and he was quite successful with it.  His studio operated in Columbia [South Carolina] for sixteen years.  He, unfortunately, contracted pneumonia, and died in 1936.  But the family, at that point, knew the value of the collection that he had developed of all of these glass plate negatives.  The photographic medium at that time was a glass plate on which images were projected, and from which prints, photographic prints were made.  But he had roughly three thousand or so glass plate negatives that he had collected during the course of his photographic business.  The family was aware of the value of them, and how they someday be of great historical value as well.  But since there was no one there to continue the business, the children were not, themselves, the same level of photographers as the father [Roberts' paternal grandfather, Richard Samuel Roberts] was, although they all had developed a photographic bug and enjoyed taking pictures.  They all had other careers that they were embarked upon and chose to follow.  So, they closed the studio, but they knew enough to know that to preserve these glass plate negatives, they had to find a place to store them that was as close to archival conditions as possible.  What they did then when they closed the studio was to transport these three thousand glass plate negatives to the crawl space under the family house in Columbia, South Carolina, where it was cool, where it was dark, where it was relatively dry, very important archival conditions that you would find even today in preserving this medium.  So, they were prescient enough to know that these were valuable, and that we had to put them some place where they could be preserved and not deteriorate.  Interestingly, the children went off, pursued their careers and for fifty years, there sat the glass plate negatives.  One of the children, my Uncle Cornelius [Cornelius Roberts], remained in that home, even after my grandparents passed away.  And at some point, a historian [Thomas L. Johnson] with the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina], was writing a history for the bicentennial of South Carolina.  He happened upon someone who said, well, "You know, there is a family that lives in this house where there was a photographer who was operating in Columbia between 1920 and 1936, and shot lots of scenes of Columbia, lots of pictures in Columbia.  Who knows--maybe they still have some photographs.  You might want to go find out."  This historian then learned about the address, went to the home.  My Uncle Cornelius was there, and asked him if he knew anything about the man who used to take pictures that lived in this house.  My uncle said, "Yes, that was my father, and he was a photographer for many years here.  And we have his glass plate negatives right here under the house."
Story_ID: 633307
Speaker 1: The historian was astounded.  This is a, a man named Johnson [Thomas L. Johnson], who was an historian at the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina].  He got together with a photographic expert named Dunn [Phillip C. Dunn], Tom Johnson and Phil Dunn, and they said, "Please let me see them, I've got to see them."  So they carefully removed some of these negatives from under the house.  And, amazingly, they were still in very good condition for, for the most part because of the careful decision the kids had made fifty years ago to try to keep these preserved.  When the, when Tom Johnson and Phil had (unclear), they said we have got to do something with these.  So, they ended up doing an oral history throughout Columbia [South Carolina], trying to identify who it was pictured in these images.  And so, they went around to many of the churches, and the community centers, and to homes of people, asking them, "Well, can you recognize any of the people that we have made prints of from some glass plate negatives?"  And it was a project that spans two or three years.  And it really did energize a lot of the senior citizen community in Columbia that had been alive back then that were able to say, "Oh, yes, that's my Uncle So and So, oh, I know who that is.  He lived right down the street.  His grandson lives right down the corner.  Oh, that person moved up to New York [New York] and is working in New Jersey."  It was really quite a stimulating project for a lot of the African American community in Columbia, South Carolina.  It led to the, actually, the production of a book of my [paternal] grandfather's [Richard Samuel Roberts] photographs with a preface that contained a lot of the historical information that Tom Johnson had unearthed from a lot of the people whose oral histories he had taken.  Some of the photographs, they were able to identify.  Some of them, they were not able to because any documentary records from the studio did not survive, but the glass plate negatives did.  And so, it turned into a project that ended up having a book of my grandfather's photographs published in about 1986 by B. Clark publishers called 'A True Likeness:  The Black South of Richard Samuel Roberts, 1920-1936' [eds. Thomas L. Johnson and Phillip C. Dunn]. It also ended up in a tour of many of his photographs based at the museum there in South Carolina, in Columbia, South Carolina, and those photographs were taken on tour to many different places in the United States.
Speaker 2: Wow!  What are some of the, where have they been exhibited at--
Speaker 1: Oh, they were exhibited in New York City--I remember at the Studio Museum of Harlem [sic. Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] in 1986, I believe.  I was living in New York at the time and I was able to see it there.  And outside of Columbia, they've gone to, oh, I think, places in the Midwest and Ohio.  I think I've heard them go to perhaps Kansas City [Missouri] or Missouri.  I think they've been down in Texas.  They've been down to Florida.  The Columbia Museum [Columbia Museum of Art, Columbia, South Carolina], I'm certain, has a list of all of the locations where they were on exhibit.  I remember that in connection with those exhibits, they would often invite the surviving children to come and speak at those exhibits.  There was one exhibit I was able to attend in Atlanta, Georgia, where my, four of the children who were alive at the time, were invited to come and speak about their father, and their father's experience, and about the photographs in the book.  And this is also something of a revival for my father [Beverly Roberts] and his siblings to be able to be invited to come and speak about their lives and their father and mother's [Wilhelmina Williams Roberts] life, and what it was like growing up in, in South Carolina, and the artistry that his father displayed.  So, it was quite an invigorating time for those, for those children.
Story_ID: 633308
Speaker 1: Now is there any one particular photograph or a couple that are, are--I guess the, considered the most valuable or the most famous or, or--
Speaker 2: I remember one that my father [Beverly Roberts] considered to be the most classy of them.  It was a black and white shot of a woman who was standing beside a table.  She had a formal dress on, and I believe a rose or a flower of some kind nicely placed in her hairdo, and it showed a very classic and quiet elegance about her.  And a second one, I believe, he enjoyed the most, was a photograph of a couple.  It was a man sitting in a chair with a woman standing beside him, slightly leaned toward him on his shoulder.  They had a, I believe, a bit of a gaze toward each other, but it was a couple that was dressed in a fairly formal and classy way.  It was a photograph that for him mixed love, success, artistry.  These were people dressed in clothing that suggested, we are people of means.  It was a pose that suggested we are comfortable with that, and we have achieved, and that's fine.  It was a pose that showed a great deal of warmth between a black man and a black woman, but it was also a picture that was posed with a unique artistry that my [paternal] grandfather [Richard Samuel Roberts] used in posing his subjects to make them look natural, but to also create some symmetry and to create contrast.  You would often find that my grandfather would have people sit in ways that they found relaxing.  And he would say, "I'll take the picture the way you want it, and after I do that, let me do one thing.  This will be free.  Let me take a picture the way I would like to pose you.  And you can take whichever one you think is best."  He would then shift the poses a little bit to create some parallels or to create some contrast.  For example, you will see sometimes photographs where a man would have his leg, right leg, crossed over his left leg.  You would also find my grandfather then to have taken the subject's right hand, and have it resting on top of the left hand, so sort of parallel crossing there.  And you'd have the right leg and the right arm draped across the left limb.  The woman in that pose that I just identified before, similarly, would have some of these kinds of parallel set-ups to show ways that angles and shapes could be used in artistic ways.  He also used lighting in a very creative way, so that there would be some lighting on one side or three-fourths of a side of a face with a contrast of lesser lighting on another one that would cause highlight to be made of certain features on a face, and mask other ones, or to create the kind of images that provide contrast in a photographer's eye.  I'm not a professional photographer, so I'm not doing it the justice that it deserves in my description.  But my father, who was much more of a photographer, would have said something like that.  But those are the ones I remember--the two pictures he found the classiest of his father's work.  And my grandfather actually shot around the same time that Van Der Zee [James Van Der Zee] was quite popular in Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so, I've heard his work described as being that of sort of the Van Der Zee of the South, or at least the Van Der Zee of South Carolina--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but they shot around similar times.  And I believe his work actually came up to the Schomburg library and museum [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] up in Harlem at one point.  And you'd often hear comparisons between Van Der Zee's work who shot often, in Harlem, and my grandfather's work.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, you got, this is, so I, you know, so I've discovered a new one now on this interview.  But I saw, I was surprised to see the work of the Smith brothers [Morgan Smith and Marvin Smith], too, and who are Harlem photographers from Kentucky, two twin brothers.  They were artists and photographers.  Schomburg showed their work about five years ago.  So, then, we got P.H. Polk in the South, and then your, and your grandfather.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 633309
Speaker 1: I guess students of photography will find this interview of interest like, I guess in that regard, too.  It's some beautiful photographs (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we talk about closing circles.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: We have, you know, the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] is a place where my Aunt Wilhelmina [Wilhelmina Roberts Wynn], my father's [Beverly Roberts] sister, has been a docent for many years.  She left Columbia [South Carolina] after she graduated from St. Aug's [St. Augustine's College; St. Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina].  She went on to get a master's in social work, moved to New York [New York] eventually, and has actually lived up there in Manhattan [New York] for over fifty-five years, I believe.  She's still alive and I try to visit her any time I go up in Manhattan.  She celebrated her ninety-first birthday, but she lived in the Riverton apartment complex [Riverton Houses] in Harlem [New York, New York] for all of that, most of that time, and volunteered at the Schomburg, which is only three blocks away on 135th [Street], and it's either Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard] or, or Powell [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard].  But she was also a public elementary school teacher there on 135th and 5th [Avenue] at the Russwurm School [P.S. 197, John B. Russwurm School, New York, New York], for many, many years was awarded New York State Teacher of the Year while she was still teaching.  But she was a docent at the Schomburg until her retirement.  And, and she, too, was another one who decided that she would heed the words of her parents [Wilhelmina Williams Roberts and Richard Samuel Roberts], and pursue education, get a master's degree, and went on into, into teaching.  Her oldest brother, my Uncle Gerald [Gerald Roberts], who lived here in Washington [D.C.], finished at Benedict College [Columbia, South Carolina] as well.  He became a law librarian here in Washington, but when he moved to Washington, he took the civil service examination to try to get into the federal government.  He ended up scoring among the highest scoring testers during that administration of that test the year that he took the civil service exam here in Washington, D.C.  But black men faced, at that time, the unfortunate circumstance that, even if you scored the highest score on the civil service exam, the jobs open to you were still limited sometimes to elevator operator or a clerk.  Notwithstanding that, he was able to work his way into becoming a, a librarian at the [U.S.] Department of the Interior where he served for many, many years here in Washington, D.C.  His last post was as a law librarian at the [U.S.] Department of Labor, actually one block away from the building, where I am before he retired.  But he enjoyed a career in the federal government that spanned many, many years.  The other sibling was Cornelius Roberts who stayed in Columbia, South Carolina.  But he, too, graduated from Hampton University [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], got a bachelor's degree there, and he taught science and engi- and shop, science shop in the public school system in Columbia, South Carolina.  And it was he who remained in Columbia, and was able to show the historians the glass plate negatives that the family had, had preserved that later became the subject of the book ['A True Likeness:  The Black South of Richard Samuel Roberts, 1920-1936,' eds. Thomas L. Johnson and Phillip C. Dunn].  So that was a family that came from of modest means of no formal education, but they listened to the drum beat about the importance of education.  And all five of the children, the fifth [Miriam Roberts] who, who died fairly early on, also went to college, became a teacher, and lived there in South Carolina.  But all five of them, these two people reared five children, got them all through college, and got them into professions.
Story_ID: 633310
Speaker 1: Is there a story that your parents [Angeline Tynes Roberts and Beverly Roberts] tell about how they met, first started courting?
Speaker 2: They tell stories about how they did meet at A and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] when he was a professor and she was a student.  The story they told more about was the transition into New York [New York], and how they had to do what they had to do to sort of make ends meet before they could settle down and rear a family.  The stories about the actual meeting and courtship, I don't have as, as vivid a memory of.  There are little snippets I can remember--my father, despite the fact that he was trained in English, and was, oh, I guess he was an ABD, Ph.D. is, all but his dissertation, and finished all of that work.  He, nevertheless, had some skills that just amazed me.  This was a man who could design and construct a house.  When he got to Greensboro [North Carolina], he found a plot of land, couldn't afford to buy a house, but he got this undeveloped plot of land.  He designed a short, one-story shotgun building that became a home.  He designed it.  He was not an architect, but he knew how to design.  He was a self-taught person about how to design.  He designed a sort of a shotgun house and built it, and that's where he lived.  He also remembers his first car.  I think it was a '36 [1936] Dodge.  He was able to take the engine of the Dodge completely apart, disassemble it, and put it back together again.  This is not a man who was a mechanic or trained in it.  He learned about it, wanted to do it, studied it, and got it done.  I remember that little story about him building the house in Greensboro more than I remember stories about my mother and he courting in Greensboro.  I remember more stories about them moving to New York [New York], and having to take on, running a little candy store, and taking on jobs at the Bulova watch factory near LaGuardia Airport [New York, New York] as ways of making ends meet before they were able to land more secure and permanent jobs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, but your father, eventually, uh, your mother became part of the chorus at the Met [Metropolitan Opera], you said--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --and your father taught--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He taught at Junior High School 139 [Frederick Douglass Junior High School, New York, New York] for--I suspect it would have been at least twenty years.  And then, he taught at some other schools, became an assistant principal and passed the principal exam and so on.  But Douglass was what I remember.
Story_ID: 633311
Speaker 1: He also ran the after-school program.  So, Dad [Beverly Roberts] was one of these fellows who--you may remember this show called 'In Living Color' that was popular?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And they had a skit about Jamaicans who would routinely have fifteen, sixteen, seventeen jobs.  My dad reminded me of that skit because while I was growing up, he always had three jobs.  He had his teaching job during the day, but that Junior High School 139 [Frederick Douglass Junior High School, New York, New York] also had an after-school program.  He ran the after-school program--that was his second job.  There was also a program in New York [New York] that offered teaching English as a Second Language [ESL] to people who are in the city and wanted to learn English.  That was his third job.  He'd do that at night and sometimes on weekends.  So, Dad was always working three jobs.  And so, his teaching was the principal activity.  And he actually taught at a time--this is a slight diversion--but I remember that he taught at a time when he invested in these children.  When I was growing up and going to school, if there were any difficulties, they'd send us to the principal.  And the principal would give us a lecture, or they'd send someone off to the assistant principal if the principal would send a student to detention.  When my father encountered--and this was principally a black school, this was in Harlem [New York, New York], and it was an all-male school at the time, so he called them young men.  He would address these junior high school students as men.  He'd greet them in the morning as men, trying to inspire them and instill confidence in themselves.  But whenever he'd run into any issues with them, any problems with them, he would actually go to their homes.  He would visit the parents.  He'd sit down with the parents and talk with them.  He would review with them what the child's strength is, but review also what the challenges were, and how some of the behavior needed to be modified, and let these parents know, here's what's going on.  He would sometimes not come home when we expected him because that's what he was doing.  He didn't have to do it.  It wasn't a job requirement, but he was invested in these kids.  He didn't just send them off to somebody else, and let somebody else take care of discipline problems.  He would talk with the children himself, and then go visit their parents.  And there are so many parents, I remembered, when I'd go to his school at the graduation or some other time, coming up to him and thanking him for taking the time to invest in their children the way he did.  It, it was a very inspiring thing to see, particularly by contrast with how I would see in later times, when I was in school, that's just not how a lot of the teachers I saw would handle issues with kids.
Story_ID: 633312
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' [Angeline Tynes Roberts and Beverly Roberts] personalities, and they seem like two remarkable people, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'd have to draw a little bit from both of them.  Though I told you that my father played the violin in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Columbia, South Carolina], he didn't continue to perform on any instrument.  I take my music from my mother.  I took piano lessons when I was a youngster.  I took it probably for only five years.  I wish I had taken it more, but as garrulous youngsters sometimes are, you get a little bit restless when you're sitting at the piano for an hour a day having to practice.  So, I stopped after five years, but the music never left me.  I probably got that music from my mother and her family.  I would then play for enjoyment.  I would then play for creativity.  I'd then play creating my own tunes.  I would then play, recreating tunes that I would hear by ear.  So, that I got from my mother.  She also encouraged me to try to sing.  I never considered myself to have had the greatest singing voice, but that's okay.  It helped me get into the High School of Music and Art [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York].  You had to take an exam to get in there--a performance exam included.  So, I take my music from my mother.  My father, as an English major and an English professor, and a grammarian par excellence, I take my being something of a grammar stickler from my father.  If you ever interview my law clerks, they would tell you that I sent back with red ink anything that's got any grammar, punctuation syntax issues.  It's got to be perfect.  And it's a, an enjoyment, I think, of language.  So, I think I take from my father that aspect of what I do and what I like.  The foreign language, enjoying foreign language learning, enjoying the rules of constructing proper sentences and paragraphs, that's probably something I get from my dad.  I suspect that the part of me that's a little bit of a prankster, I get a little from my dad, but it's infused with some of the humor that I had seen in my mom, so that probably comes from both of those.  But, so, those are some of the characteristics that pop into my head--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) most immediately.
Story_ID: 633313
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: The earliest childhood memory I have is when I was either four or earlier.  We were sitting in our apartment in Harlem [New York, New York] in the Riverton apartment complex [Riverton Houses].  We were sitting at the dining room table.  I have two sisters, twin sisters, not identical, who were six years older than I.  So, they must have been close to ten years old.  I recall them in a moment of discovery for them.  It sounds silly, but this is what I remember.  I recall them realizing that they could bat their eyes individually, and that when you blink your eyes at the same time, naturally, it's not, it doesn't always have to be that way.  I remember them discovering that you could blink eyes individually, and they went on for minutes and minutes about how amazing that was as a discovery.  Why do I remember that?  I haven't the vaguest idea, but that's what I remember.  I was either three of four sitting at this table with a moment of discovery on the part of, self-discovery on the part of my sisters.  And it may be that from that point, I ventured into other aspects of bodily self-discovery.  My father [Beverly Roberts] was one who was able to wiggle his ears.  I watched him do that, tried to figure out if I could do it, and I ended up knowing how to do it.  That was some self-discovery for me.  My sisters, I think, later discovered how they were able to manipulate eyebrows individually instead of at the same, so I learned that.  This doesn't sound quite as kosher, but when one flared one's nostrils in one's nose, that was a bit of discovery my sisters found as well.  So, my early memories have to do with moments of self-discovery and bodily discovery when I was three or four.
Story_ID: 633314
Speaker 1: This is a question we always ask.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sounds--subway trains.  I grew up in New York City [New York, New York].  I went to high school [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts] in Manhattan [New York] when I was living in Queens [New York].  I commuted an hour and a half each way for a total of three hours' commute.  I remember the jingle and jangle of subway cars coming and going.  The sights of a mosaic of faces in New York City of a type you probably wouldn't see if you were, let's say, in some European country.  The--particularly in my high school, which tended to draw people from all corners of New York.  That was a high school that probably had one of the most unusual blends of ethnicities that I'd seen anywhere.  We had black, brown, yellow, red, white, and I'm not sure that there was any single dominant group at that time.  Tastes--my parents [Angeline Tynes Roberts and Beverly Roberts] are from the South.  They grew up in the Carolinas.  We had a distinct palate for southern cuisine.  I took to 95 percent of it.  We would have collard greens, black-eyed peas, sweet potatoes, all the meats, the pork chops, fried chicken, and so forth.  I enjoy eating, so that's a taste that I remember.  I said I took to 95 percent of it because one of the smells that I remember is every New Year's Eve, Mom would get some chitterlings, clean them out, and cook them.  I smelled those chitterlings cooking and being cleaned.  I was too young to appreciate that after they were cooked, they would taste good.  All I remembered was the smell.  Every New Year's Eve, I got out of the house.  When I found out what the chitterlings were, I refused to taste them, to touch them, to eat them.  I wouldn't touch them.  To this day, I've never eaten chitterlings (laughter).  But every New Year's Eve, Mom would clean them and cook them, and take them over to an uncle's house and aunt's house where we were close, and we'd enjoy New Year celebrations.
Speaker 1: Now, that's a familiar story.  I hear that story a lot from people who, you know, experience southern cooking and really, don't really have to eat them (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Go ahead--sights, sounds, smells.
Speaker 2: Well, some of the other tastes, I, I can remember the cornbread.  Cornbread was just magnificent.  Biscuits--my father's, my father's sister's husband, my uncle, who's alive today in New York, my Uncle Robert Wynn, one of the best bakers--this is a guy who's an accountant.  He's a, you know, he's a business major at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], but he could cook up a breeze in that baking oven.  So, at times, for example, like Thanksgiving, we'd always wait to get his biscuits.  He could bake the best biscuits in the world.  My mother would do pretty well with cornbread.  My Aunt Mina [Wilhelmina Roberts Wynn], his wife, my father's sister, we would never fail to get some of the best macaroni and cheese from her.  She was a macaroni-and-cheese specialist.  My mom and dad, though, they did Hoppin' John, like nobody's business, so we'd always get quite far with that.
Story_ID: 633315
Speaker 1: Hoppin' John's a black dish from the Carolinas that, and can you describe it?  I heard Vertamae Grosvenor [Vertamae Smart-Grosvenor] describe on public radio once, but I think people often hear the name and don't know what it is, but so you could us a description of it?
Speaker 2: Well, I can tell you this, that they took liberties with some ways that they presented it.  There may be some ways that Hoppin' John has traditionally presented in certain parts of the South or the North.  I can tell you how it's presented in my house and it got that name.  Hoppin' John was essentially black-eyed peas and rice for us.  I understand it has different, may have different presentations, in different places, but when that got on the table, the word attached to it was Hoppin' John.  It was a fairly beige-colored pea that had semicircular shape with a black, darkened internal portion of it, and that was baked--not baked, but I think it was boiled in a big pot.  And then, a pot of rice would be boiled with it.  You'd put some special spicing, I never learned about, mix it up together, and serve as Hoppin' John.  And pot liquor was another taste I remembered.  collard greens, cooked in a large pot, often drew out some of the juice.  And my father [Beverly Roberts] enjoyed greens, but he liked the pot liquor even better.  If you served him a bowl of greens, he'd finish it, but he would savor the liquid that was drawn out from those greens, and he'd just drink it straight up.  And that, you would always hear him end up with a, "Ahhh."  I'll never forget that.  And, frankly, when we have collard greens at home now, I remember Dad.  I put some of that pot liquor in that bowl, and I'd drink it straight up and I go, "Ahhh," in tribute to him and in memory of him.
Speaker 1: That's something.
Speaker 2: But I guess we have, you know, the, the palate was really tickled with all kinds of rich tastes.  I told you that lasagna was one of the favorite foods that I have because we were exposed to that.  We were exposed in New York [New York] to Sicilian pizza.  It was a different pizza from what you find in many, many other parts of the country.  It had a very thick top of cheese, topping of cheese the way you will not find, for example, in Chicago [Illinois] pizza or other kinds of pizza.  We enjoyed sometimes going to Brooklyn [New York] where we would find a greater selection of Jamaican food.  The Jamaican patties were just fantastic any time we went there, and we were able to get some Jamaican patties.  I'd remember that.  Some of the more pedestrian tastes--right down from where my sisters went to high school, John Adams High School [New York, New York], and I went to high school there for one year before coming to Music and Art [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York].  There was a, an eating place called White Castle.  White Castle was known for what were sort of miniature hamburgers.  They were smaller-size hamburgers with flatter patties, and they were placed on very soft buns the size of regular dinner biscuits, but they were very soft.  And they had a slight sprinkling of cooked onions in them, always had a slice of pickle in them, and a dab of ketchup, and maybe some mustard on the other side.  They cooked them and presented them in a way such that they were usually, present them in a batch of four that were always connected, and you could eat a single hamburger like that in probably three or four bites very quickly.  So, they sold them back them for twelve cents a hamburger, so you could go in and order six or eight hamburgers, and down it and that would be your meal.  The taste was wonderful.  And we'd often just get in the car and drive the two miles down to White Castle just to enjoy the tastes of White Castle hamburgers.  I think there may still be one or two White Castles or White Towers in New York City, but that was a flavor I'll, I'll never forget.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think, people, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Far before the two, all these patty, special sauce, lettuce, pickle, onions, and a sesame bun.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a whole cult about those now, and people send away for frozen boxes of them and everything (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's right.
Story_ID: 633316
Speaker 1: You lived in Harlem [New York, New York] initially.  Then the family moved to Jamaica [Queens, New York] or Long Island [New York], right?
Speaker 2: I lived in Harlem until I was four.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mom [Angeline Tynes Roberts] and dad [Beverly Roberts] were occupying a--I think it was a two-bedroom apartment.  My sisters were born and they had one of the bedrooms.  My parents had the other one.  I was born--though I believe I was in a bassinet or a crib, or somewhere that started in the parents' bedroom, but then sometimes ended up in the living room, maybe my sisters' room.  But the two-bedroom apartment became too small for a family of five when the youngest was a growing boy.  At that time, developers were reclaiming parts of land that used to be swamp land in the southern part of Queens [New York].  And some of it was filled in and they were deve- they would build tracts of new homes there.  So, my parents heard about a new development called Van Wyck Gardens, or (pronunciation) Van Wyck Gardens [sic.].  And it was right near Kennedy Airport [John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York, New York], and it was a series of brand new homes that included single family homes or duplexes side-by-side, single family duplexes.  We ended up moving into one of those side-by-side duplexes.  You might call them townhouses today in Washington [D.C.], but they were a little larger than that.  It was a four-bedroom, two-bathroom duplex.  My par- I remember my parents telling the story about how they were fretting endlessly about how they were going to actually do this, but their goal, ultimately, had been to own instead of rent.  At Riverton [Riverton Houses, New York, New York], we were paying rent, they were paying rent.  Out here, this is a chance to own a home.  It was the ultimate dream, but the rent they paid at that time was about seventy-five dollars a month for this apartment.  When they bought this house, the housing costs doubled, so their mortgage ended up being $150 dollars a month back in 1957, when Dad was a teacher living on a New York City public school teacher's salary.  And they were scratching their head all the time, "Oh, my goodness, are we making a mistake?  Oh, my goodness, how are we ever going to make up?"  But they were determined to do it and to make it.  And doubling the housing costs was quite a stretch for them, but they made it happen, and they made it work.  And Dad, I remember, celebrated his mortgage burning party in 1987, and the house was then free and clear owned by him.  And it, it all worked out.  He was able later, able later on in life, actually to chuckle about how he worried, how is he going to pay $150 dollars a month mortgage when all the housing costs began spiraling out of control all throughout New York and the rest of the country.  And he would hear about the mortgage amounts that others would have to pay.  So, it was quite a chuckle for him by year thirty, when his thirty year mortgage ended up having its final payment of $150 a month (laughter).
Story_ID: 633317
Speaker 1: What was your neighborhood like?  Was it a mixed neighborhood, a all-black neighborhood or what was it like?
Speaker 2: This was a neighborhood just south of what was then bordered as Jamaica.  Jamaica was a predominantly African American neighborhood beside neighborhoods, like St. Albans, Hollis, Springfield Gardens, Laurelton.  These are neigh- contig- contiguous neighborhoods in southern Queens [New York] that were primarily African American.  They were also neighborhoods that tended to draw some of the successful musicians.  Louis Armstrong, although he moved to northern Queens, opened up the notion of having black folks who wanted to own, move to Queens.  But we had James Brown living in St. Albans for quite a while, the godfather of soul.  We had Count Basie  living in southern Queens for quite a while.  There are a number of other African Americans who chose that part of Queens to make home.  This part of Queens, just south of the formal border of Jamaica at that time, had been essentially swamp land, so they had to reclaim it.  So, it was building a new community, this roughly--oh, I don't know, about six by, six block by four block square area, was a lot of reclaimed land that they constructed new houses on.  So, it was building a new community.  I remember that on my block, we had principally black families, but there were five or six white families.  By the time ten years passed, we were down to only one white family, and the block became principally black.  That white family moved about a year later, and we came- became almost all black.  The next block had the one remaining white family on it.  And I think they still owned, but they were preparing to sell because the parents themselves have now died.  So, the neighborhood, essentially, was predominantly black.  We did have perhaps, at the time, you could have called them token whites.  The first two or three white families in there moved away fairly quickly, but we had two that stayed for a fair amount of time, but it was a principally black neighborhood.  It was a time when most of the families were intact, two-parent households with anywhere from two to three to four children.  It was a time when children came home, finished their homework, and they went outside, and played on the block.  They didn't stay inside watching television.  They didn't stay inside on the computer--we didn't have computers.  It was very much a community that was vibrant and alive with young children outside having fun and playing and exercising, and playing games and socializing.  It was a community where, if we misbehaved, if I went out and misbehaved, I'm not trying to suggest I did that a lot, but as an example, if I went out and I misbehaved, a neighbor down the street witnessing it, would have every license to come and discipline me for my misbehavior.  And it was absolutely acceptable and it was expected.  If a neighbor of mine, a colleague of mine, a peer of mine misbehaved from down the street, and my parents [Angeline Tynes Roberts and Beverly Roberts] saw it, my parents could discipline them.  I'm not talking about corporal punishment.  I'm talking about calling them on the carpet, and letting them know that this is not acceptable and you shan't--you shall not do this.
Story_ID: 633318
Speaker 1: So, there was enough familiarity and enough respect for the other adults in the neighborhood [in Queens, New York] to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.  And, you know, we, if an adult came up to us, we had grown up in a, in an environment where there is an absolute respect that was respected, expected, and given.  The, the idea of disrespecting someone who is older, who is an adult, it never crossed our minds.  And when one set of adults would learn that another set of adults had to reprimand a child, it was encouraged, it was reinforced, it was expected.  And in that sense, we were, indeed, a community rearing each other.  It wasn't a set of individual households doing its own thing.  This really was, somewhat of the typical African village, if you will, that you hear about where it is a village raising young people, and not just individual parents.  That did happen.  And I didn't appreciate at the time how important that was, and how healthy that was until later on you saw communities tend to splinter or break down, or where you saw families that would be living in isolation from others, and you wouldn't have that same experience.  We would get out, though.  The kids were, after homework was over, we'd be out until dark.  We'd be playing dodge ball or kick ball or stick ball.  We'd be playing--the girls were playing Double Dutch.  The boys didn't do it that much, but we'd be playing tag or hide-and-seek.  There was always something going on.  We'd ride our bicycles, but it was also some block activity with kids on the street doing things, engaged, active, and it was a lot of fun.  It may be similar in parts of New York City [New York, New York] now.  I suspect that things have changed a bit.  I don't see quite as much in many places where I go to in Washington, D.C.  I have a nostalgia about it.  I wish I could have that same experience for my own children [Jordan Roberts and Jillian Roberts], but this is thirty, forty years later.  I can't impose upon them the experience we had back then and, you know, as long as they're getting the values they need, the help, the support they need, the friendships that they value, if, if that means they'll be text messaging each other or IMing [instant messaging] each other, instead of being out on the street, I have to take a certain measure of that with some acceptance.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the community was eventually a predominantly black neighborhood.
Story_ID: 633319
Speaker 1: Most of us went to the public schools there.  This was at a time, however, when our closest elementary school was a six-block walk from my house, but I didn't go there.  I went to an elementary school that was about a mile and a half away, and we had to ride a school bus to get there.  The school, a mile and a half away, was in a predominantly Italian and Jewish white neighborhood.  So, though it wasn't, as I understand it, any plan for busing to achieve any forced or court-order integration, it clearly was an effort to make sure that at least a white school had some sprinkling of people of color there--if not, for the purpose of having black students be able to enjoy educational benefits where resources were greater in a white school.  I never looked back to find out which of those two, if not from some other motivation, caused me to be going to this white elementary school.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: When it came time for junior high school [J.H.S. 202, Robert H. Goddard School, Queens, New York]--
Speaker 2: --so, what was the name of the school?
Speaker 1: P.S. 124, Queens [P.S. 124, Osmond A. Church School, Queens, New York].  We had elementary schools then that were numbered, they weren't named.  So, if you run into a New Yorker of my yolk and ask them, "Where'd you go to elementary school," you're going to hear numbers, not names (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But we went to that elementary school, and I remember following that drum beat that my parents [Angeline Tynes Roberts and Beverly Roberts] heard from their parents: make sure education is number one on your priority list.
Speaker 2: Did you have any specific aspect of school that you liked better than any other aspect?
Speaker 1: I think in elementary school, it was a sort of an undifferentiated mass of multiple subjects that I didn't really pick up a single subject as my favorite at that point.  I did pick up favorites a little later.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I can tell you that my elementary school originally went up to the eighth grade, but they lopped off the seventh and eighth grade, and fed those students into a brand new junior high school building, so that by the time I graduated from elementary school, it was a sixth grade graduation.  And by the time I graduated, one of my best friends, who lived across the street, and I were in all the same classes throughout elementary school.  We went, and I don't know why I can remember the names of all of my elementary school teachers--I can't tell you what I had for breakfast this morning--but I remember the names of all of those teachers.  They were principally white, mostly Jewish, but she and I went to all the same classes--first grade, kindergarten, first grade, second grade.  We actually skipped second grade.  I was in second grade for two weeks, and then they put me into the third grade, and she went as well.  We went all the way up to the sixth grade.  And it turns out that, even though we were students of color being bused into that neighborhood and into a school that was predominantly white, she and I ended up graduating in that class, number one and number two.  So, those two black kids, who were top in the class in this white elementary school.
Story_ID: 633320
Speaker 1: She and I, all--then went to a junior high school.  There was a junior high school that was just one mile from our house, a predominantly black junior high school in Jamaica [Queens, New York].  Jamaica's mailing borders, boundaries ended up extending down into our neighborhood.  Our neighborhood originally was called South Ozone Park [Queens, New York], but the--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --postal service [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] redrew some of the lines, so it became Jamaica.  It's just easier to call it Jamaica now, so that's where I grew up.  But we went to a junior high school, a public junior high school, not the one that was only a mile from our house, but one that was three miles away, again, in a predominantly Italian and Jewish neighborhood in a whiter area of Queens [New York] called Howard Beach.  Howard Beach gained some notoriety, unfortunately for Howard Beach, about fifteen years ago, when there were some black patrons of a pizza parlor, who were chased out of that pizza parlor, by a gang of angry whites who were telling them, "We don't want you in this neighborhood, get out of here."  And they were literally haranguing them, chased them out of that pizza parlor, chased them down on to the Belt Parkway, which is, at the time, was about a four-line, maybe six-lane highway at that stretch, with busy traffic all the time, chased them out on to that roadway where they were hit and killed by cars.  Howard Beach also, unfortunately, and maybe some of its residents don't think it was unfortunate, was the home of John Gotti, one of the reputed mob bosses in New York [New York].  In any event, we got bused into that neighborhood to go to junior high school, a predominantly white public junior high school.  When you get to the junior high school level, at least when I was there, you combined numbers with names, so that junior high school was Junior High School, 202 Queens [J.H.S. 202, Robert H. Goddard School, Queens, New York].  But it also had the name, Robert H. Goddard Junior High School.  Goddard [Robert H. Goddard], of course, was the famous rocket scientist, after whom that school was named.  But we were bussed from my neighborhood to that junior high school, and I will never forget.  The school opened a year before I got there.  The students who were bused from the seventh and eighth grade out of my elementary school [P.S. 124, Osmond A. Church School, Queens, New York] to form the seventh and eighth grade at that, to help form the seventh and eighth grade junior high school there, were greeted by picket lines formed by white parents and students, some carrying picket signs, some carrying and waving violently Garrison belts.  That was the name of these pants belts that they used to, to sell that were very, very thick.  It was stylish to have thick belt buckles then and thick leather belts with thick buckles on them (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, this, we're talking about 1960--what here?
Speaker 1: This was, this was in '63 [1963], '64 [1964]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --when I remember them coming out.  These students, who were just youngsters--I mean, they were teenagers.  They were just going to school.  They were just going to learn.  They were just going to advance education, getting off their buses with white students and parents, adults, standing on picket lines, jeering them, yelling at them, saying, go home, using the N word on them, waving Garrison belts, threatening to act violently toward them.  This is what greeted the class before I got there of the black students who were bused in from the African American community.  The good news is they, like the Little Rock Nine, stuck it out. They stayed there.  They continued to go to that school.  The violence, or threat of violence, over the course of the year simmered and died down, so that when I arrived at that school in the fall of '64 [1964], we were not greeted by protests.  I think there was a level of acceptance or inevitability that people in that community arrived at, so that by the time I got there, I could just go, and not have to face the j- the taunts and the jaunt--the jeers.
Story_ID: 633321
Speaker 1: But I still was very much only one of a very few number of people of color going into a predominantly white neighborhood junior high school [J.H.S. 202, Robert H. Goddard School, Queens, New York] that had predominantly Italian and Jewish, politically conservative population.  But it was an eye-opening experience.  It was an early opportunity to hear a lot of Yiddish often.  Again, one who is enjoying language, enjoyed hearing a whole different set of vocabulary with a lot of nicknames.  And code, code words is not what I mean, uh, a vocabulary that people would use fairly loosely to mean a lot of different colorful things.  That was fun to hear a lot of Italian American students talk about some of the traditions that their family, families would practice in their neighborhoods.  It was all eye-opening and different and fun.  The students, themselves, though they may not have thought that we were the first choice to embrace among friends, nevertheless, were mostly about learning like we were.  Their parents might have been another story, but the students, once you're in the school, we, we got forward, and did what we had to do.  But the process of going through an education from kindergarten through the eighth grade, and then later on in Music and Art [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], where there were art, where there were multiple ethnicities there, was one in which, when I think back on the vocabulary about Brown v. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], and some of the stories and myths about Brown v. Board of Education, I come out with some of my own take about the importance of non-discriminatory education.  Some argue that black students' ability to sit beside white students in an educational setting provides some sort of educational benefit to the black students.  I certainly wouldn't deny any student, being able to be educated in a multiethnic environment enjoys a benefit.  I enjoyed it at Music and Art.  That was truly multiethnic.  It was not just bi-ethnic.  It was multiethnic.  I wonder, though, about the argument that black students can benefit and learn better if they're sitting beside white students.  I think what I took out of my experience in going to predominantly white primary education was that I could appreciate that there was the full range of abilities, of attitudes, of intellect, in white communities just as there were, we had in black communities.  I was able to encounter in that primary educational setting some absolutely astoundingly brilliant white students.  I was able to engage with them.  I was able to enjoy their company.  I was able to learn with them.  We were able to exchange educational stimulation.  I also encountered some stunningly brilliant black students, and I was able to engage with them.  I was also exposed to some really dumb whites.  I don't mean to be denigrating them, but there was some impression in black communities that if it's white, it's right.  If it's white, it's the best.  If it's white, it's good.  And there were some students there whom I could out-perform with my eyes closed, and two hands tied behind my back.  Again, not to denigrate anybody, but it showed me that there is a breadth of abilities and a breadth of opportunities in all people, not that to strive to be among whites is what gives you education, but to strive to see the breadth of experiences and abilities that people have is more useful than not being exposed to a wide breadth of folks.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you got kind of a cultural and logistic education in a way that you would never receive if you'd stayed in an all-black school.
Speaker 1: I wouldn't have gotten it in the same experiential way.  It's always possible to learn just from books, but I think combining book learning with experiential learning provides you with a foundation that is second to none.
Story_ID: 633322
Speaker 1: Now were there any particular teachers or mentors during your school days that stand out?
Speaker 2: The true fact is that my best teachers and mentors were my parents [Angeline Tynes Roberts and Beverly Roberts].  I come home to them every day.  I'd be with them every weekend.  And the drum beat that they played from the earliest days I can remember, up through, past my graduate education about the essential importance of education, about doing your best, and about being prepared are themes that I think carried me well into my adulthood.  And I do think watching how they negotiated working, learning, struggles in the neighborhood, how they made choices about standing up when you needed to, about how to confront challenges of racism or sexism.  Watching that, I think was the best teaching and learning that I experienced.  I remember, you know, not just in times, in flush times, within tough times.  In 1963, I believe, was the March on Washington, Resurrection City, my dad (laughter), my mother used to call him a Negrophile.  This is back when the term, Negro, was the respectable term to use, not that it's not now, but she called him a Negrophile.  I didn't quite know what that (unclear), what that meant, and I finally looked up the suffix -phile, and learned what she meant.  It--I guess it was her sort of '60s [1960s] speak for him being a bit of a Mau Mau. When the March on Washington happened, you know, he said, "I'm going down there 'cause we need to have some things happen."  Of course, I think this happened right before the '64 [1964] Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] was passed.  I have a memory of my father's commitment to that.  I have a memory of him talking about how he joined the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and how this was important because of the long set, had happened before, and how we have to make things better for the kids that follow him.  And I remember on April 4th, I believe, of 1968, when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed.  We were sitting at the table there, and we learned the news.  That Sunday, my father, who was a, an officer of the church we attended--at the time it was (pause), there was a time in the service when the members of the church (pause)--
Speaker 1: Take your time.
Speaker 2: --were invited to stand up and give announcements or speak.  What just happened to me happened to him.  But after he composed himself, he stood up in a very clear voice, and simply said, "I am going to Memphis [Tennessee]," and he sat down.  And after Dr. King was assassinated, and they decided we have to continue his work.  We have to support these sanitation workers.  We cannot let the oppression of our people continue the way it's been happening.  We have to stand up and we have to do it, when it's important and when it's right.  He went to Memphis.  I remember that.  I remember him taking a stand.  That was important and what a lesson, what a lesson.  If you give me just a moment, I'll, I'll be able to tell you a little bit more.
Story_ID: 633323
Speaker 1: So, I think, I'd have to say first, my best teachers were my parents [Angeline Tynes Roberts and Beverly Roberts].  And, you know, watching my mother also do what she had to do to make sure she could contribute to the household, and watch her do what she could do to inspire young kids to enjoy music, and take it and run with it.  I've tried sometimes with my own music to share it with others.  That was very inspiring.  They really were my best teachers and mentors.  I try now in my own interactions with my wife [Vonya McCann Roberts] to think back on how my dad and my mom interacted with each other, and how I can always try to improve our own relationship.  And they, they were excellent role models.  There were some actual school teachers in primary and secondary school who I also think back on as having a particular impact.  Now, the schools that I attended had almost no black teachers.  And the teachers I can recall--well, at least in the elementary school [P.S. 124, Osmond A. Church School, Queens, New York] and the junior high school, although, interestingly, by the time I was an eighth grader, the top grade in my junior high school, my dad had actually transferred to start teaching at Junior High School, 202 [J.H.S. 202, Robert H. Goddard School, Queens, New York].  So, we were there at the same time--I, as a student, and Dad as a teacher.  I never took any of his classes, but we'd pass each other in the hall.  I felt a little self-conscious that Dad was there, and the students might think, oh, well, he thinks he's a big shot 'cause his dad's a teacher there.  And so, I tried to sort of keep a low profile.  Dad thought that I was sort of trying to stay away, perhaps for other reasons.  But it really had to do with just, you know, if I'd see him in the hall, instead of going up and hugging him, he said that what I'd do is give him a nod like that and keep walking.  And he said, well, he kind of got the vibe, so he wasn't going to go out of his way to, you know, give, give me big hug or a handshake either.  But it really was because I was afraid the students, oh, the students might think, oh, he's a big shot, showing off that he's got a dad who's a teacher here.
Story_ID: 633324
Speaker 1: When I got to high school, I think what I remember is there were two teachers in particular.  One teacher, who was the--I think she was the head of the music department, but she certainly was in charge of the senior chorus by the time I got to be a senior.  There was something that she saw in me beyond just whatever little musical talent I had in singing then, and she decided that when we put on our senior chorus production for the entire school, and we would invite the community to come as well, we'd sell, sell tickets.  And we'd have a semiannual concert and art exhibition at Music and Art [High School of Music and Art].  It still goes on today at that school, which is now called LaGuardia High School of Music and the Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York].  So, big audiences would come to our semiannual production.  She saw something in me beyond, as I say, what little musical or singing talent she saw, that she wanted to develop.  I think she saw in me someone who had done the right thing, or tried to be good most of my life, and she wanted to spark a little bit of rebelliousness.  She wanted to spark a little bit of step out on the stage.  She wanted to spark a little bit of cut loose and let yourself glow, let yourself grow, let yourself, let your flame of your internal fire breathe free.  And so, although I think there were a number of other men who could have gotten solo parts and perform far better than I could have, in some major productions, we performed 'Carmina Burana' by Carl Orff with some very difficult pieces.  She gave me a couple of the solos that we performed openly there.  When we graduated, the senior chorus sang Beethoven's [Ludwig van Beethoven] Ninth Symphony ['Symphony No. 9'], and there's a quartet with solos early on.  She assigned me one of the baritone, the bass solo, to perform.  And we graduated in Carnegie Hall [New York, New York] by the way.  That's where our graduation was staged in New York [New York].  So, there I was, given an opportunity to solo in Carnegie Hall at the, at the age of sixteen (cough).  But Mrs. Mandel, Sybil Mandel, was a firebrand of her own, a quiet firebrand, but somebody who was gutsy.  And I think what she did was see something in me that she wanted to bring out so that I would step out there more.  I would provide more leadership.  I would go out there and sort of carry the flame, carry the touch, not just musically, but socially.  I had not soloed before. Giving me those solo roles, I think, was often, was also her effort to--I guess, bring me out of what might have otherwise been perceived as a shell, and encouraged greater--I don't know, aggressiveness or assertiveness.  She never told me that, but thinking back on what she did, I think that's what she was doing.  She was a little quiet rebel of her own, and I think she was trying to bring that out and, and I appreciated that eventually.
Story_ID: 633325
Speaker 1: There was another teacher in the tenth grade [at High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], Mrs. Mapp [ph.], who taught us tenth grade biology.  There are some things I can do and do pretty well.  Hardcore science, I will not say, is one of them.  So, tenth grade biology, we went into with a--I went into with a bit of a fear, this is daunting.  The last time I'd had hard science was in junior high school [J.H.S. 202, Robert H. Goddard School, Queens, New York] survey class.  We had chemistry, physics, biology, and a fourth science, and they didn't come naturally to me.  Math came naturally, music came naturally.  Later on, computer science came naturally.  Hard science did not come naturally.  But I took this tenth grade biology course from Mrs. Mapp who made it an absolute joy.  And it was something I learned about infusing in students the joy of learning, and through showing joy in teaching that I appreciated.  I haven't done much teaching.  I've taught trial advocacy as an adjunct professor at Georgetown law school [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.] a couple of years early on in my career.  I've gone up every year for over twenty years to Harvard Law School's [Cambridge, Massachusetts] trial advocacy workshop, run by Professor Charles Ogletree [HistoryMaker Charles Ogletree], and taught over there.  And in times when I sit down with my kids [Jordan Roberts and Jillian Roberts] and try to impart something to them, I try to remember the joy that Mrs. Mapp displayed in teaching what was for me a difficult subject at first until I got over the fear of it, and was able to get into the joy of learning it, and ended up doing pretty well in tenth grade biology--I think, in part, because she infused in it, not only the, the joy of teaching, but helped us to develop the joy in learning it.  Those are a couple of examples of teachers that kind of stick out in my mind from the high school level.
Story_ID: 633326
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], did you envision yourself, or did you even think about like, what you were going to do in the future?  Did you envision yourself as a musician, a professional musician maybe, at that time?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I'll tell you why.  I enjoyed music.  I had some limited talent for it, but I knew that it was limited, and I knew that trying to make a living doing it professionally was probably not going to be met with a lot of success, and I accepted that.  And it wasn't, it was a self-deprecation.  It was simply acknowledging music has a, plays a big role in my life.  And I think the role that it can play acceptably is music appreciation and music performance for fun, for relaxation.  I bought into that, accepted it, and that was fine.  I did not ever think I would go into it as a profession, and something that I would try to earn a living at.  And, and that was fine.  And that ended up working out quite nicely.  At the time, I thought I was going to be a mathematician.  I don't know, I didn't know then what mathematicians did, but that turned out to be my favorite subject.  I took all of the ninth grade, tenth grade, and eleventh grade required mathematics.  I guess it was algebra, geometry, trigonometry, did very well in it, enjoyed competing, you know, with some of the, the other students, including white students to see who could get the 100 instead of just 99 or 98.  If I got a 97 or a 96, I was a little disappointed, because how did I miss those two questions?  And I'd go back and study those two questions, so the next time I'd go back and get a 100 [percent] on all my tests.  But that was a level of academic interest and, and inspiration I had in that subject at the time.  So, I then went and took--I guess it was advanced placement calculus, or at least it was senior-level calculus, and enjoyed that and did very well in it, and knew that when I was graduating, I was going to go to college and major in math and be a mathematician.  Again, not having any idea what mathematicians did, but I knew what my passion was, what I enjoyed, so that's what I was going to do.
Story_ID: 633327
Speaker 1: Before we broke, you said there was more about the march on, on--more about the King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination aftermath that you wanted to tell us.  But is it, so before we, 'cause you graduated in '68 [1968], right?  You graduate from high school [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: I graduated from high school in '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: Seventy [1970], okay.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Seventy [1970], okay.  So, you're still in high school when Dr. King--right?
Speaker 2: So, right, I was still in high school.  I was in high school when Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] was assassinated that June.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was in high school.  Actually, I think I was in junior high school [J.H.S. 202, Robert H. Goddard School, Queens, New York] when Malcolm X was, oh, was it elementary school [P.S. 124, Osmond A. Church School, Queens, New York] when Malcolm X--
Speaker 1: Malcolm X is '65 [1965], yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, that was junior high school then--
Speaker 1: February '65 [1965], yeah.
Speaker 2: --that was junior high school.
Speaker 1: Was that, did that have a big impact on you at the time?
Speaker 2: I was young at that point and didn't have a full appreciation for all that Malcolm had gone through.  I did not have an appreciation for--aside from his troubled youth he had gone through, how he had come out and begun with the Nation of Islam, and the tenets of the Nation of Islam that he had embraced early on, the transformation that he experienced, having gone through the turmoil within the Nation, having later experienced his Hajj, having then come back with a more internationalist view about his faith, and having a more advanced view about what that means in the United States with respect to progress for African American people, and living in a nation that had multicultural and multiethnic people.  His death was frightening in that I would hear my parents [Angeline Tynes Roberts and Beverly Roberts] talk about, "They're taking away another one of ours.  They're taking away another one of ours."  So, we would hear stories about some of the members of the African liberation movements around this time when they were fighting the colonialists, being assassinated or murdered.  We'd hear people about, in the South, where the lynchings continued.  We'd hear stories from the South about that.  And then we'd (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, like those days, you had Medgar Evers in Mississippi, killed in '64 [sic. 1963].
Speaker 2: I think Medgar Evers might have--
Speaker 1: Like Tom Mboya in Kenya, and some other, you know.
Speaker 2: And I'll footnote Kenya later on.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: It was even, ten years later, I went to Kenya in connection with a graduate program [at the School for International Training Graduate Institute, Brattleboro, Vermont].  And there was a politician named J.M. Kariuki [Josiah Mwangi Kariuki], whose body was found out in the outskirts of Nairobi, Kenya, mutilated.  And the belief was that he had been murdered and assassinated because he was a challenger to the then-incumbent presidency of Jomo Kenyatta.  The investigation at that time went all the way up--I think, to the chief of the armed forces or chief of police.  It--they did not continue it beyond that to see if it went up into the presidency.  But, yes, these are stories that, as a youngster, I would hear in some abstract sense that there was a vulnerability about black men or African men.
Speaker 1: Lumumba [Patrice Lumumba], too, is another one now, yeah.
Speaker 2: Patrice Lumumba in Congo, so there, there were stories.  And Malcolm's name, at the time, when he was assassinated was--I guess, another name on that list of black men being killed and assassinated with political overtones to it.  But that, that was at a time when I had not had the chance to study all of what he believed, what he had gone through, and appreciate how arresting his voice was particularly meaningful in the development of political thought of African Americans in this country at the time that, that happened.  But I think I was mentioning the statement that my dad made because it was a great teacher for me that standing up when you need to stand up, when it's important.  It's not a choice.  It's a requirement.  You just have to do it.  And so, the, the commitment that he demonstrated in that fashion was an important lesson that I tried to keep in the back of my mind.  And I try to live up to, probably not as successful as he demonstrated it to me, but I'll always be grateful for having learned his example.
Story_ID: 633328
Speaker 1: Now were you involved in clubs and things in high school [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] or did you, or sports or any, that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: I had my greatest failed effort at being a jock in high school.  When I joined the track team, I was practicing and training to run low hurdles.  It lasted about three months.  It came to a precipitous end when, essentially, two things converged.  The first one was somebody broke into my locker at school and stole all of my uniform clothing.  That clothing cost money.  I didn't have money to replace it.  And so, unless I replaced it, I wouldn't have been able to run in meets.  The second thing was my commuting to and from school was about three hours every day.  So, when we ended school, if I went straight back home--excuse me--I wouldn't get home until after 6:00.  Track practice occurred after school and it was-it went generally an hour, an hour and a half, so that meant I'd get home not until 7:30 or quarter to 8:00.  Priority number one for me was making sure I got my homework done, and studied, and was prepared for tests, and so on.  That extra time really cut into my ability to get my academics done.  So, my career as a track star was like a comet.  It flashed up, and then it crashed (laughter), so I didn't--I ended up getting my photograph taken early enough in the season, so that I was pictured in my yearbook as a member of the track team.  But I really never got to compete significantly in meets.
Story_ID: 633329
Speaker 1: I did join our black students' society, our club.  At Music and Art [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], as the name might imply, we were students who studied art and music on top of our academic curriculum.  As I mentioned before, we had a semiannual concert every year.  Now, these concerts over time typically highlighted performance of classical European music.  That actually was quite good for us to study because as with many arts, if you study some of the classics, and you get the discipline in studying classics, you can launch off into almost any other area of music with success.  So, I mention that just to say I benefitted from having studied classical music when I studied piano and studied voice, and performed classical music at high school.  In this era, however, of the '60s [1960s], when the call for greater relevance in the lives of African Americans was rising, we somewhat chafed at the idea that the only music that was worthy of presenting to the open public was European classical music.  And so, we decided on our own to develop an aspect of the semiannual concert that we should be able to perform that would highlight our Africanness.  And so, in my senior year, our organization, I guess, negotiated with the administration.  I wasn't one of the negotiators, but somehow they were able to get the music department to agree to a lot of full twenty to twenty-five minutes of the semiannual concert to a performance to be put together completely by the black students who had decided to choreograph, and put together a performance.  And so, I was a stalwart member of the crew that rehearsed and performed what we called the black section or the African Amer- the African section of the semiannual concert where we came, dressed in what was to us, African garb.  It was dashikis and, you know, sandals, and so forth, but it was interesting African American-designed dashikis.  When I ultimately got my chance to go to a continent, I, I could see that it was a very African American vision of what African garb was, but that's okay.  The importance was, we were trying to connect with, with roots, much in the same way that Americans of other nationalities were connecting with their national roots in many ways.  In any event, we, the members of that group, choreographed presentations that were a combination of South African boot dances, very sophisticated choreography.  I don't know who did it, and I was very impressed, but it might have combined the, the genre of the South African boot dance with what you will sometimes see in black Greek letter fraternity stepping.  But someone also got some lyrics from traditional South African songs, and they were blended to create essentially a boot dance that we performed and sang.  We also had some other songs and poetry that we performed during the course of the, what we called the black part of the semiannual.  We performed it actually in the aisles of the auditorium, and on the stage.  And when we finished, we filtered out through the aisles, so it was almost participatory.  We were right there with the audience, whereas the traditional European classical music that we were also performing.  So I had to change clothes, and then switch into different gear and perform, you know, Verdi's 'Requiem' ['Messa da Requiem,' Giuseppe Verdi] or 'Carmina Burana' [Carl Orff].  We were down in the aisles, and encouraging the people who sat in the audience to clap along with us, so just stomp along with us, so it was quite, quite energetic.  That was one of most vivid memories of some of what the black students in that organization did during the senior year at Music and Art.
Speaker 2: Okay, because we, you mentioned earlier your trip to Milan [Italy].  That was like earlier in junior high school [J.H.S. 202, Robert H. Goddard School, Queens, New York], I guess, right?
Speaker 1: I think it was right between junior high and high school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Or maybe it was in my ninth grade when I was attending the other local high school before I transferred to Music and Art.
Story_ID: 633330
Speaker 1: Did you have firm plans for college when you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was never a question.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At home, the, the question was not, are you going to college--as which college do you think you're going to?  And, and I thought premising the question that way was very helpful.  And I always knew I was going to go to college.  When I was in high school [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], one or the other clubs, I guess, I belonged to was the Arista honor society.  I couldn't remember if you required a certain grade point average to get into that society, or whether they automatically just took the top 10 percent of the class, but that was a society that was an honor society [National Honor Society].  We got involved in efforts to enhance our educational experience.  And we also offered enhancement and enrichment sessions for our fellow students when they might need it--tutoring, if they might need it.  So, that was sort of the, that was the intellectual side of the enrichment that I enjoyed on joining clubs.  The cultural side was the black students' organization.  The physical side was joining that track team, although it didn't, that didn't last quite as long.  But I always knew I was going to go to college, and it didn't depend upon my membership in that Arista society.  It was just sort of part and parcel of what I was doing and who I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you came out of top 10 percent of the class, huh?
Speaker 2: If I recall, we had a graduating class of 587 students and I was twenty-second, so I think that's, you know, 4 percent or 3 percent, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how did you choose your college?
Speaker 2: It was mere fortuity.  For our 587 graduating seniors, they had allotted only one senior college counselor to all 587 students.  I had, as best I recall, one interaction with that college counselor during my entire senior year.  And it went like this--she encountered me in the hallway and said, "Oh, by the way, Richard [HistoryMaker Richard W. Roberts]?"  I said, "Yes."  She said, "You think you'd be interested in going to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]?"  I said, "Gee, I don't think so."  She said, "Okay."  That was it.  That was the entire, entirety of my interaction with my college counselor then.  It turns out that the reason she asked me was she had found out that Yale had put together a scholarship or several scholarships that they were looking to find students of color, black students, in particular, to lure black students to Yale.  And I think she asked me because I was a member of the honor society, Arista honors society, and she might have thought I would have been competitive for one of these scholarships.  And, obviously, Yale has a reputation for getting a fine education.  But the question came and went that quickly, uh, there wasn't any follow-up about, well, "Why--," or well, "Let's sit down, and think this through and maybe you should think about it."  It was, "Okay--bye," (laughter).  So, I was very much on my own in deciding how to pick a college and what colleges to look into.
Story_ID: 633331
Speaker 1: So, I have, may have bypassed an opportunity to see how competitive I might have been going to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], but I was pretty much on my own.  And I knew very little about what criteria to use to select colleges to write away for, for college bulletins and college brochures.  Something in the back of my head said, "If it has a name of a state, it's probably good."  I'd heard about the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], the University of North Carolina [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina], and so on.  So, I ended up writing away to colleges that had the name of a state in them, really knowing not much more than that.  And somehow, I whittled down a list of colleges to which I applied to roughly about four.  And that was against conventional wisdom, which nobody had shared with me at the time, that you should apply to at least seven, and have it range from a school or two that you know you get into, on the one end, to a school that's going to very hard to get into, but try anyway, to a bunch of schools in the middle.  I ended up applying to Queens College [Queens, New York], part of the City University of New York [New York, New York]--got in there.  I applied to the State University of New York at Binghamton [Binghamton, New York], which was called Harpur College [Harpur College of Arts and Sciences, Binghamton, New York], which at the time, was one of the better of the State University of New York colleges in that system, and I got in there.  I applied to Rutgers University [The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, Jersey] in New Jersey--I think it was Livingstone College [Salisbury, North Carolina]--I got in there.  But I really wanted to go to Cornell University [Ithaca, New York], and I applied, and I got in there.  I actually made a trip up there with a white friend of mine whose father [Jesse Olson] agreed to drive us both up there since we were both interested.  He, interestingly, was named Paul Olson.  His father was a leader of a big union in New York [New York], one of the leaders of a union--I think it was 1160, 1066, 1166 [sic. SEIU Healthcare 1199].  He'll kill me if I got the num- if I got the number wrong.  But his father named him, my classmate, Paul, my white classmate, Paul, after Paul Robeson.  So, this was a progressive family that I had the luck to--whose son I had the luck to meet, and become good friends with, and he's in New York now.  So, we went up to Cornell.  I was able to find people in the black students union.  And there was a housing complex in what was called North Campus at Cornell where I was put up for the weekend, and enjoyed the company of a lot of African American students, some of whom had turned out later were some of the ones who had taken over the university administration building with rifles in their hands.  And I was set.  I knew what I was going to major in--mathematics.  I found the math building.  I knew where I wanted to live.  That's where I wanted to go--until I got a letter from the director of admissions of financial aid who was black at the time--Carson Carr [Carson Carr, Jr.], saying, "We've admitted you, but we can't give you any money, no scholarship money."  Well, that dashed any hopes of going to Cornell 'cause I couldn't afford it.  We didn't have that kind of money.  Someone had told me, fortunately, that Vassar College [Poughkeepsie, New York] was admitting men, was a, a school with an excellent reputation with a good name, and had a late application deadline of roughly March 15th.  So that deadline had not passed yet.  I've got an application, I applied, I got in.  They gave me scholarship money, and that was the answer.  They just--it was really fortuity, so I went there and enrolled, and went through it.
Story_ID: 633332
Speaker 1: Now, you were one of, is the first freshmen class of men at Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York], I believe, right? Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.  We were the first freshmen class of men at Vassar in the fall of 1970.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We have enjoyed calling ourselves at reunions the legendary class of 1970, and I'll continue to call us that.
Speaker 1: Right.  Many young men dream of going to a school full of women.  What were your feelings at that (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, I can tell you--I did not go there to be a coeducational pioneer.  And, interestingly, if you ask me how I enjoyed my first year on the social side, I did not.  We had, I think, a ratio of one to seven on that campus of men to women.  We had two hundred men and fourteen hundred women.  We had, with respect to black students, we had a ratio of--I think it was one to nine.  We had seven black men and sixty-three black women on campus.  In the dormitory in which I lived, which was the African American cultural center, we had two men and thirty-six women, so that made it a ratio of one to what, eighteen?  Now, I enjoyed the company of women as much as any other man did.  There were times, however, when you just needed to be with the guys, you just needed to be with the guys.  And, frankly (laughter), there, there just weren't enough guys around.  I had, for example, a roommate at the time, a guy, and we had very, very different rooming habits.  And when you live in close quarters that way with someone with whom you have very, very different rooming habits, it doesn't really foster the kind of tight friendship that you'd otherwise, otherwise might want.  There were a couple of other guys in the class who, and, again, this was the '70s [1970s], who enjoyed, you know, doing drugs.  That was never a part of my life.  I didn't condemn them for it, but it just wasn't a part of what I sought to do, and how I chose, chose to spend my time.  So, that cut out another part of, you know, the potential candidates for trying to befriend closely some people.  There were another guy in the class who enjoyed living among the white students on the campus in a white dorm, and found few ties, tried to forge few ties in the black dorm with other black students, so that of sort severed a connection with that possible link.  And so, it was very difficult to find and sustain the kind of relationship with, particularly black men that I wanted to, to forge, of the type that I'd had in my neighborhood [in Queens, New York] growing up all the time.  And there were also pressures, really inordinate pressures, and not only on the men, but also the women, given that kind of imbalance in the genders.  So that, you know, it brought on the men some unwelcome pressures, but it also created among the women to the extent that there was any kind of vying for the attention of the few men there, a kind of competition and cattiness that wasn't healthy for the women either.  So, in my first year, I was really looking at transferring away from there because of the unhealthy imbalance between the male and female population.  I never got to complete that process.  And the next year, when the next class of men came, a lot more men came, a lot more black men came.  It really did even out some of those pressures in ways I hadn't expected would happen, but it did, and it made it much more comfortable to be there.  It made it much more healthy for the men and the women, and it made it a place where I wasn't seeking to run away from, that I wasn't seeking to run away from, and I ended up staying the full four years.
Story_ID: 633333
Speaker 1: Now, I did cheat a little bit because in my junior year, second semester, I really did want to see what it was like to be in a mostly male environment.  And so, I applied for, and was accepted to, the exchange program at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], which had only recently begun to accept women.  And I got down there, and I ended up living in an eight-man suite (laughter).  And, again, most of the student body was male.  And it was also because they had, had a course there than they didn't have at Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York], so I developed a major at that time, a double major in black studies and political science.  Vassar didn't yet have in its black studies program, which was emerging and very strong, didn't yet have a black politics course.  But a professor named Marguerite Barnett [Marguerite Ross Barnett] at the time taught a black politics course at Princeton which I really wanted to take.  So, those dual aspects drew me to attend Princeton for that semester.  I did take that course, and I did exist on a college campus that was predominantly male, and that was enjoyable.
Story_ID: 633334
Speaker 1: Now how did you manage to switch from math, mathematics to black studies and political science?
Speaker 2: The teaching at Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York] of math, perhaps as it is at other places, was highly theoretical.  There was very little emphasis on telling math students the practical use that you can use, make of this math learning.  I took calculus, multivariable calculus, linear algebra, set theory, and it got very, very theoretical.  At a certain point in the '70s [1970s], you know, many of us were urging, were, were really striving for determining the relevance of everything in our lives.  There really had to be something relevant to what we were learning and doing.  How do we use this theoretical math to help improve people's lives?  What can we do with this theoretical math to change injustice?  What is there about this theoretical thing that we're learning that is going to be able to be relevant to us?  I never did get that set of answers.  And so, I, unfortunately, moved away from math.  I saw in the struggles for justice lots of political themes.  I saw the need to know our history, and so that sort of drew me to double major in black studies and political science instead of being a double major in black studies and math.  I'd always wanted to have black studies as a major.  But when I was an early student at Vassar, Governor Rockefeller [Nelson Rockefeller] chose to end the uprising at Attica Prison [Attica Correctional Facility, Attica, New York], where the prisoners, who had been complaining for long time about inadequate housing conditions, inadequate sanitation, inadequate recreation, inadequate educational opportunities, brutality among some of the prison guards, and living conditions that border on what, to them, was cruel and unusual punishment, time and time again, made requested demands of the administration there that were unanswered, or that were looked down upon.  And they took it upon themselves to take a stand, and they took over the prison.  And Nelson Rockefeller at the time said, "I will have none of this."  He sent in the state troopers to storm that prison.  It was a violent storming.  It was a bloody takeover.  It was stunning.  That was something that had quite an impact on many of us.  When I had heard the plight of many of the people who had been incarcerated, when I'd heard how they were looking to improve their lives, when I, looking, heard how they were simply looking for simple decencies as human beings, while incarcerated in that institution, and that their pleas for simple justice and simple fairness were met with this kind of violent reaction to repress all of that, it really had an impact on a lot of people.  That was another thing that led me, I guess, into thinking, well, I think maybe I want to become a lawyer to help represent some of these people who may not have the wherewithal to take a stand, and stand up for themselves, may not have the money to hire lawyers, may not be able to have access to lawyers, who are looking for simple justice, and need technicians to help achieve that simple justice that's been denied them.  Maybe this is a way that I can turn my learning into something relevant that can help people in ways that I think important.  So, when I abandoned math and was looking for relevance, it was sort of a fallback major lots of people took, which was political science, but it did offer the possibility of providing for me some relevance in an area that would give me background for pursuing something useful in the future.
Story_ID: 633335
Speaker 1: Who were or what authors or activists inspired you in those days?  I mean, there are a lot of people, a lot of emerging voices, The Black Scholar magazine's being published, a lot of things, Black World [Negro Digest] under Hoyt Fuller [Hoyt W. Fuller].  A lot of stuff is coming out the Center for Black World [sic. Institute of the Black World] in Atlanta [Georgia], a lot of political thinking was, you know, people speaking on campuses and such, [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis case, so which, what things influenced you the most?
Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, you mentioned Angela Davis.  I can't let that pass without telling you a short story.  My mother [Angeline Tynes Roberts] had a beautiful round face, and she had a fairly full head of hair.  She never wore it in an Afro though.  There was a time in 19--oh, I can't remember the exact year.  It was in the late '60s [1960s] when Angela Davis was still at large where black women were getting pulled aside left and right on the, on the suspicion of being Angela Davis.  It was called, walking while Angela Davis.  My mother was one of them, and she was the kindest, gentlest person you can imagine.  I heard the story about my mother being pulled aside by law enforcement on the suspicion of being Angela Davis, not that being Angela Davis was a bad thing, law enforcement called her a bad thing, obviously, so there was this stigma.  But I remember this kind, gentle, musical woman being stopped, and questioned, to see if she was this outlaw, Angela Davis.  And I said to myself, if this woman can't just walk down the street with a calmness and patience that she displays to everybody, without being hassled in that fashion, what's going on here?  What is the deal?  So, little things like that tended to add up to a consciousness that grew for me in high school [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] and in college [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York] about what's fair, what's right, what's just, what's unjust?  What are people being subjected to that they shouldn't be?  How do you right these wrongs?  What is it that we have been taught in the past that's not quite accurate?
Story_ID: 633336
Speaker 1: I look back at some textbooks that purported to teach students in elementary school and junior high school about the history of Africa.  The history of Africa never started in those books before 1887 [sic.] with the Berlin Conference when the European powers divided up the continent among themselves and balkanized the people of Africa.  It all started after that.  And the reasons that I actually saw printed in those textbooks that I looked at, all Africa had no history before then.  It was a dark continent shrouded in nothing that was worthwhile, studying or learning.  It was stunning to look back at some of these actual textbooks that were being used in the New York City public school system and elsewhere when I was in college [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York] questioning this thing, these things that I had learned before, don't really ring true when I'm digging more deeply into the history of African people.  How could this have happened?  How could we have been taught to think of Africans as nothing, but wild bush people running around with no intelligence, no skill, no history, no culture, no language, no intelligence, and that we had nothing worthy of even looking at it until the 20th century when the colonialization occurred.  And the history of the continent even then was studied in terms of the colonizing powers and what they were and weren't doing.  And so, we studied often the liberalization movements in Africa in Mozambique, and Angola, and Zaire, then Congo, in Zimbabwe.  We followed carefully what the people from Lumumba [Patrice Lumumba], to Kenyatta [Jomo Kenyatta], to, you know, Mandela [Nelson Mandela], to the Mobutu [Mobutu Sese Seko], to all kinds of people throughout the southern, particularly the southern continent that we're doing, and certainly in the West as well.  In Ghana in '57 [1957], when you had Kwame Nkrumah and other, so it was a very important part of reaching back to understand, well, who really are we?  Where did we really come from?  What is the nature of our people?  What kind of history is there?  What kind of struggle are we capable of?  What kind of independence can we grow?  And so, reading scholars of the type that you have mentioned who will give us a perspective on us as being something different from just wild, you know, wild bush people, who have no link to anything that's called civilized.  Being able to read about the civilizations of Songhai, (unclear), and Ghana, about achievements that people in Egypt must have accomplished at times when other historians say Europeans were crawling around in caves, were things that opened eyes about self-image, things that opened eyes about image of those around you, family, and about potential, and about possibility.  And if it could happen three thousand years ago, if people were coming from Greece to study the scientists and mathematicians in Alexandria [Egypt], it says that the people from whom you, from whom you stem and flow, have something under here that's worthy of you, you know, growing, and emulating, and finding, and using.  So, these academics whom you were talking about really did have an impact as well, particularly when I was studying in the black studies program [at Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] about our history, about our possibility, about challenges that we faced, and about how we overcame them, and continue to confront them, and achieve and succeed.  And when we didn't succeed, we stepped right back up and tried it again, and would succeed eventually.  So, they were inspiring.  Many people call the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] times of turmoil and are glad we're past it.  I look at the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] at a time when my mind, my understanding, my sense of fairness expanded beyond what it had ever been.  My appreciation for the multiple peoples that occupy this globe grew in ways that it wouldn't have done, perhaps in the '50s [1950s], or in the '80s [1980s].  I look upon the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] as a time I am grateful for having grown up in, and I wouldn't have traded it for anything.  Did we experience some extremes?  Did we experience experimentation with some conduct that we probably wouldn't be involved in today?  Of course.  But the learning for me that happened during that period, I wouldn't have traded it for anything.  The sense of standing up for what's right, the sense of committing yourself to fairness and justice, the sense of trying to improve people's lives, and think of others and not just yourself.  I wouldn't have traded that period for anything.
Story_ID: 633337
Speaker 1: As we approach graduation, I guess, in 1974, now had you decided that you wanted to become a lawyer by that time?
Speaker 2: I had chosen to go to law school.  I wanted to become a criminal defense lawyer, often inspired by the example of those who were trying to represent those inmates at Attica [Attica Correctional Facility, Attica, New York] who didn't have access to lawyers, or whose lawyers may not have been perceived as giving them the most zealous representation, and the inmates who came from communities like mine where, you know, they made bad choices, took wrong turns.  Some of them deserved to be locked up.  Some of them, though, were human beings that did deserve second chances.  One thing I also knew, though, was that I had never been back to the continent.  I'd never been to Africa, the homeland of my ancestors, and I wanted very much to establish, establish that connection before going to law school.  So, I took a year between college and law school [Columbia Law School, New York, New York] with a goal of being able to get to Africa.  I really wanted to get to Tanzania where Mwalimu Julius Nyerere was the president, and he was engaging in a very progressive experiment in what he called African socialism, which was based upon some prosper theory of having people work together and cooperate in trying to build up a society, rather than trying to stoke the competitive forces in the society to allow the, the strongest to achieve and build, and the weakest would fall off, and you build societies in that fashion.  So, I wanted to know what that meant, what that, what that felt like, how people interact in that environment.  I wasn't able to get there, but I did get to East Africa, and I was grateful for that.  I ended up finding a program, a graduate academic program at the School for International Training [School for International Training Graduate Institute] in Brattleboro, Vermont, which was then run by the Experiment in International Living, now called World Learning, which will combine for me an academic component.  The first half of it was academic study on the campus involving international development, and economics, and other language training.  The second half of it involved getting an internship in the foreign country that you wanted to do some of this experiential learning in.  I was able to get a, a graduate fellowship that would fund this study for me, so it combined nicely.  And I went up there in Vermont for six months and studied.  Then, I was able to get an internship in Nairobi, excuse me, Nairobi, Kenya.  I was fortunate to have had a schoolmate at Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York], who was herself, part-Somalian and part-Trinidadian.  She ended up marrying, I think, a fourth cousin or fifth cousin, who was a Somali, ethnic Somali, but a Kenyan citizen, who was going to college at Trinity [Trinity College] in Connecticut [Hartford, Connecticut].  They dated, got married, set up household at Kenya, and when she learned that I was looking to get to East Africa for an internship, she said, "Well, go on to Nairobi, call up my husband."  She, at the time, was back in New York [New York] doing some other graduate work.  She said, "I won't be there for this semester, so just call up my husband.  He runs an educational tour of business where people who are coming to Nairobi, and want to learn about the culture and language of East Africa and Nairobi can get college level exposure and lectures from the University of Nairobi [Nairobi, Kenya], professors, and so on.  Just call him up."  So, I was able to call him up, and he said, "Come on over, you know, you can work for us, and do this."  What a great and lucky opportunity.  This was an immersion into East Africa through the lens of an indigenous African, Somali ethnically, but a Kenyan citizen.  He had a cousin of his who was also Somali ethnic, ethnic Somali, and a Kenyan citizen.  And the three of us were welcomed into his home--well, the two of us were welcomed into his home.  We lived there with him, and we went to work every day with him in running this business that he ran.  It was a wonderful, wonderful opportunity to see Kenya through the eyes of an indigenous person, to get out into the countryside.  We set up homestays for some visitors who wanted to be able to live for a weekend out in (unclear) where the Kamba people live, about forty miles outside of Nairobi.  But I, too, was able to stay and live and eat and work with those folks.  So, I got a unique exposure, and that's what I wanted before going to law school, so I got that.  I got a master's degree in connection with that, but did go to law school to try to pursue my goal of becoming a criminal defense lawyer.
Story_ID: 633338
Speaker 1: You mentioned earlier that the murder of a Kenyan official in Nairobi [Kenya] when you were there.  And did your ideas about, did you, I mean, well, how were your ideas about Kenya or East Africa changed by being there?  Did you, did the things, did you have a realistic idea when you went there, or did things like, you'd say, wait a minute, this is different from what I thought it was going to be, or more complicated that I thought it was going to be?
Speaker 2: Sort of a two-fold answer--first, I had done a little bit more study about ujamaa and Tanzania than I had done study about the recent history of, of Kenya and the Mau Mau uprising and the revolts of Jomo Kenyatta had led when he was in opposition (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're coming in ten years after Mau Mau, I guess, and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: This is in '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you're about--
Speaker 2: I went there in '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: --ten, twelve years, maybe after the Mau Mau uprisings and such.
Speaker 2: So, my images of Kenya weren't as in sharp focus as my expectations or images of Tanzania, but one image I did take to the continent was formed by the African American experience of Kwanzaa.  Our own cultural nationalist movement in the United States had developed this institution of Kwanzaa.  It was marketed at the time, however, as being a traditional African celebration that our brothers and sisters in Africa had engaged in for years.  At the time of the harvest, and they were celebrating the seven principles in Nguzo Saba of Kwanzaa.  And they did it by having a certain number of, you know, the (unclear), the candleholders and the--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --the cup with wine.  And there was all these traditions and things that were done in connection with the Kwanzaa celebrations that I had learned about, and really embraced to the point that I'd write my letters, write letters home to my parents [Angeline Tynes Roberts and Beverly Roberts] when I was in college, say, "Why are you going to celebrate this commercial activity of Christmas when all they do is want us to spend money and buy things, and we're not really looking into our own culture?"  And I'd urge them to celebrate Kwanzaa, the traditional African, East African, celebration of the harvest and learn all the Kiswahili language that went along with it.  When I got to Kenya and lived with my Somali hosts in Kenya, early on, I was asking, well, "Tell me, how do you celebrate Kwanzaa?  And what meaning do you take out of Nguzo Saba, and which of the Nguzo Saba are the most important to you?  Is it kujichagulia?  Is it ujamaa?  Is it ujima?"  He looked at me with the most quizzical look on his face that I had ever seen.  And he said, "Sit down with me, my brother, and tell me what you are talking about (laughter).  I'm not sure I know what you're saying."  Well, it's obviously now, Kwanzaa is an African American creation and that's fine.  It's a tradition that we celebrate among ourselves, that we've created among ourselves, and that's fine.  I was extremely disheartened that it was marketed initially as a traditional African celebration in East Africa at the time of the harvest.  It has no connection to reality--none.  So, to the extent that [HistoryMaker] Maulana Karenga and others Imamu Amiri Baraka and Clyde Halisi marketed it that way.  I'd, I'd tell them, yeah, you shouldn't have done that.
Story_ID: 633339
Speaker 1: I think what happened to Congress of Afrikan People at that time, before--was run by Baraka [Amiri Baraka] at that time because Maulana [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga] was in prison in '74 [1974]--
Speaker 2: He also ran the Committee for Unified Newark.  I guess that might have been the political arm of the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) yeah, of the movement.  But he was also responsible, I think, for helping to sponsor the first National Black Political Convention in what was it--Gary, Indiana, and the second one in Little Rock, Arkansas?
Speaker 1: Right.  He helped with that and he also, but they also had something Congress of Afrikan People in Atlanta [Georgia] in '69 [1969] or '70 [1970], '70 [1970], yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, that's--
Speaker 1: And he, but all while, like Maulana's in jail during this period and Baraka becomes the imamu of, you know, of, you know (Unclear), and had the responsibility for--I guess he and Jitu Weusi, and then later on Haki [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti] and [HistoryMaker] Kalamu ya Salaam others get involved in it, but there was confusion about Kwanzaa in terms of, which Maulana has since, you know, come around and said, well, I didn't really mean that and others took it, you know, further than what, you know, he would have said, but at any rate, that's an interesting story.  So, you're in Kenya and you find that (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, that it may be well be that they're right.  It never came from their mouths.  I ended up being something of a fifth level or sixth level consumer of those who translated for them (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think it came from some of them but not from--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It may not have come from Maulana (unclear).  That's what--
Speaker 2: Well, so, I stepped off the tarmac and into the home of my hosts and asked them about Kwanzaa, and it was, it was like cold water being thrown on me.  So, there, there was that impression I carried with me that had to get shifted a bit.  But I also went with open eyes, went understanding that at least at that point, that some of the textbooks that had been given to us about Africa and Africans so far missed the mark, that I had to do what I could to sort of clean the memory tracks of those kinds of misimpressions, and go over to the continent with the open eyes that it warranted for someone who's going to learn on the ground.  There was a lot of book learning that I was fortunate to have done through the black studies program [at Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] that corrected some of the misimpressions that were placed by some of the earlier scholars who had miswritten about the continent.  But experiential learning really is an essential twin to the academic and book learning to give you a full appreciation for what's going in, so I tried to be there with open eyes and open ears.  What I did get there, I was obviously fascinated with the political environment as well since I had also been a political science major.
Story_ID: 633340
Speaker 1: The time that I got to Nairobi [Kenya] was highly charged politically.  Jomo Kenyatta had been in power for some time, unchallenged, when it came to his tenure in office, challenged by opposition politicians and academics.  One academic in particular was J- uh, politician was J.M. Kariuki [Josiah Mwangi Kariuki], member of parliament.  I came right after the time that his body was found out in the bush.  Rumors were rife throughout Nairobi and Kenya that he was assassinated by the political hierarchy.
Speaker 2: How do you spell his name just for the record here?
Speaker 1: K-A-R-I-U-K-I, Kariuki.
Speaker 2: K-A- okay, Kariuki, J.A. Kariuki (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) J.M. Kariuki.
Speaker 2: J.M., okay.
Speaker 1: I remember a lecture by, I think, being--speaking with a University of Nairobi [Nairobi, Kenya] professor, Mutiso, Gideon Cyrus Mateo Mutiso.  I remember his name--G.C.M. Mutiso, M-U-T-I-S-O, I think, who was trying to introduce me to some of the history of the recent political circumstances that I was walking into in Nairobi.  When I was walking downtown, there was a time when the president was going from, I guess, an official building to some other appointment.  His motorcade, not unlike President Bush's [President George Walker Bush] motorcade, was preceded by motorcycled police officers that would clear the street.  People were required to stand on the side of the road for significant periods of time, five, ten minutes.  Now, remember, 1975, Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] wasn't even in office yet, but when Jimmy Carter took office in what, '77 [1977], his motorcade from the [U.S.] Capitol [Washington, D.C.], after his inauguration down to the White House [Washington, D.C.], wasn't a motorcade.  He and Rosalynn Carter were walking on the street on Pennsylvania Avenue, not in some bubbletop, not in a limousine, they walked it.  He was a jogger, as I remember, but the security situation was a fear, was such or it wasn't, that the two of them walked from the Capitol to the White House.  The federal buildings were not barricaded, closed.  People, of course, were behind the stand, so they wouldn't rush the road.  But people were out in the open waving, and he was waving right back, yeah.  Two years before that, I'm in Nairobi, and you have what, you had then what you have now with a post-9/11 [September 11, 2001] president over here.  Motorcycles, clearing out, and then you had the police cars as the second level of security, and then you had quite a few military people.  It appeared to be military people with automatic arms.  These are rifles or semiautomatic rifles that would stand guard, and look very carefully into the faces of all the crowd that was standing there.  And what I learned is you absolutely had to stand still with your hands at your side.  You could not wave when the president's motorcade passed you because you became then a security threat.
Speaker 2: No false moves (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You became then a potential target for one of the security people thinking that you're a threat and taking you out.  I'm not saying that, that happened, that anybody got taken out during my time there for simply waving, but it was absolutely common knowledge among the throngs who would be on the sidewalk.  You don't wave.  You don't raise your hand.  You stand perfectly still because if you don't, you're in danger.  And when the president's car finally came by, it really did speed.  There was no waving.  He wasn't in there waving back.  The people with their guns had them aimed at the crowd just to make sure nobody did anything or, or a mis- took a misstep.  I understand that was because the tension was very high.
Story_ID: 633341
Speaker 1: And the opposition to the president's [Jomo Kenyatta] autocratic rule was running very high, that there were grassroots oppo- there was grassroots opposition to his continued rule that he was, and his administration was viewed with a great deal of skepticism and with the understanding that the corruption was running rife.  People looked at increase in wealth that he seems to display between the time that he'd come out of the liberation movement and to the time that he became president.  They looked at the wealth amassed by his daughter.  They looked at the, you know, the opulence with which he would travel overseas when he did.  I don't know if he did that often.  People were asking questions about that.  People would hear about aid that came to the country and they never saw it.  It was fomenting a great deal of opposition, and so the security was heightened very much around (unclear) at that time.  I even went to the movies and remember now, I don't know if this was much as a security issue, or it was just a patriotism and cultural issue.  Movies would not begin without a playing of the national anthem and a showing of the Kenyan flag in the flapping and on the movie screen.  The minute that came on, everybody had to stand right up.  And if you didn't stand right up, or if you didn't stand up at all, there was ostracization that was serious.  There weren't any police in there to arrest you, so I don't know if that was cultural or security.  But there was a tension about it all that I really had to very careful about any time I was down there.  Particularly, as a foreigner, you know, you had to make sure that you didn't overstep your bounds.  But having said all that, that was the political environment into which I stepped.  The social and cultural environment was so warm.  It was so wonderful.  I learned so much.  Learning what I learned for two months in Europe at the age of fourteen was great.  Learning and living the way I did for three months at the age of what, twenty-two, in the homeland matched it, might have surpassed it.  But it was a, an eye-opening experience.  It was wonderful to see that there were regular human beings who had the same fears, the same loves, the same concerns, the same hopes, the same aspirations, the same mores in some regard that I did, and human beings back home did.  Fabulous to learn how there were cultural practices that were different from ours and what they meant and how they sprang up.  But it was really an experience I wouldn't have exchanged for anything.  If I had to change it, I would have tried to arrange it, so I could have spent yet another three months or another six months, but law school classes came a knocking at the door and I had to listen.
Story_ID: 633342
Speaker 1: You went to Columbia University law school [Columbia Law School, New York, New York], right?  How did you choose Columbia?
Speaker 2: By that time, I did get some wisdom from somebody that you apply to a range of schools, about seven schools, from schools that you think you'd be easily competitive getting into, to those that might be harder.  So, I did that.  Columbia had the lure of being a very well-rated school and being in New York [New York].  So, it was close to home, close to family, and had a good reputation for a good education.  I did enter the Council on Legal Education Opportunity [CLEO] summer program before that.  It was a six-week program sponsored by the CLEO foundation to have students of color and working class students who are about to enroll in law school come and participate in a six-week program that gave you some advance instruction about the method of learning law, exposure to the way law is tort--taught, exposure to how legal writing is done, and how legal research is done.  I think the biggest benefit of that program, aside from exposing you to substantive legal areas, and letting you get to see real law professors, was that it took the edge off of, or tried to take the edge off of the shock of the first year of law school.  For students like me who had no lawyers in the family, we, you know, we didn't have lawyers in my family.  I wasn't, you know, following Daddy who was a partner in some Wall Street law firm to work on the weekends, and watching him do what he did, or go to court.  And, you know, we didn't have lawyers in my family, so the idea of going to law school, and the shock of the first year of the Socratic Method in learning all of these vague and foreign principles that you learn in law school, it wasn't dissipated completely.  But you sort of took a little bit of the edge off it because you got a little practice, and you got to know, well, this is what's coming, and I actually do have some capacity for understanding some of this and for writing about some of this.  So, I did that just before Columbia.  And I, I chose Columbia really because of its reputation and location.  I found it nice to be able to go back to New York City.  Home was there.  My parents [Angeline Tynes Roberts and Beverly Roberts] were there.  I still had a sister who lived there.  My mother had developed multiple sclerosis and was ill, so I felt good to be able to be closer to home with her being there.  And, you know, wanted to be whatever support I might be able to be for Dad who, you know, was trying to help her through her illness.  So, that's where I went.
Story_ID: 633343
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the highlights of Columbia University law school [Columbia Law School, New York, New York]?  Was there any particular course of study that was-you were more excited about than others?
Speaker 2: This may not answer your question, but when you started off by saying what were the highlights, I have to tell you that the first highlight occurred in my first year, my first week, probably even before classes started.  There was a freshman orientation reception that was hosted by the law school.  This was in 1975.  Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] was the president.  There had been a writing campaign among academics and universities and law schools to the president, to encourage the president to abandon affirmative action in higher education.  There was a writing campaign to tell President Ford we should not use or adopt a- affirmative action programs in colleges and universities, in admissions programs for students, in hiring and promotions for faculty.  These were academics writing these letters to President Ford.  When I arrived at Columbia, and I looked at the BALSA bulletin board--BALSA was the Black American Law Students Association [National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)].  That was the black students, law students association.  I saw one of those letters.  It was a letter signed by twenty renowned law professors.  It was a letter that was signed including, by including one of the most well-respected professors in the administrative law area.  A professor had written the seminal treatise in that book and a professor who had always been called upon in that area to give lectures to provide who knows, expert testimony, who knows what.  Well-regarded, well-renown, I mean he was a god in this area.  And I saw his name.  A few days later, I was in this reception, and faculty were mingling among the new students.
Speaker 1: But it was back, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 1: No, what was his name, the name--
Speaker 2: Walter Gellhorn.
Speaker 1: Walter Gellhorn, okay.
Speaker 2: And he was a brilliant man.  I actually wasn't trying to mention his name because of the story I was about to tell.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I'll just say that this was a professor who was well-renowned and, and the authoritative author of a seminal book in that area.  At this reception, a friend of mine, who was in the second-year class, an African American gentleman I had met at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], and I were mingling about.  And Professor Gell- this professor came up and, and introduced himself, and I heard him say his name.  I shook his hand and said, introduced myself, and I said, "Thank you for coming up to me."  I said, "Are you the professor who is the authority in the area of administrative law?"  And with his chest expanding, he said, "Yes, I am."  And I said, "You, you are the one who's written, written the treatise that's being used in our administrative law classes at Columbia, aren't you?"  Chest ever expanding, he said, "Yes, that's correct, young man." And my next question was: "And are you also the same professor that signed the letter to President Ford decrying the use of, and deployment of affirmative action in higher education in the admission of students, and the hiring and promotion of faculty of color in our higher educational institutions?"  Well, that smile on his face turned into something very different.  The inflated chest began to not inflate, but to deflate.  And then, it inflated again with a frown on his face.  And the response was: "Well, if you mean was I a member, or am I a member of the board of directors of the NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.].  And if you mean, have I contributed to causes advancing black people's interest, and if you mean, have I been on the side of young students who come through here and I try to tutor them, then yes, I have."  I said, "Thank you, but that's not what I asked.  I was asking if you had signed the letter decrying affirmative action."  My friend at the time, who had already known about this fellow, and whose face was growing more drawn by the minute while I was asking the initial set of questions about, "Oh, are you the professor who did this, and are you the professor who did that?"  My friend was beginning to sink away, so, oh, goodness, what is this guy doing?  He doesn't know who he's talking to.  When I came back with question number three, and then he heard the answer that the professor gave to my question, he put his hand to his head and started grinning.  The professor turned to him after I said, "No, that's not what I asked you."  And the professor said to him, "What the hell are you laughing at?"  And I had to say, "Well, professor, I--if, if you have to resort to profanity to be able to continue the conversation, perhaps we shouldn't really speak right now--nice meeting you."  And we walked away.  That was my introduction to Columbia law school (laughter).
Story_ID: 633344
Speaker 1: It was useful in that it let me know, yes, I'm home, yes, I'm in New York [New York], but remember, New York has challenges.  New Yorkers have challenges.  It doesn't mean that everybody that you run into in New York is going to fit the stereotype that perhaps midwesterners or southerners have about New York and New York types, and that the struggle continues.  The struggle has never been won, and the struggle will not die, and you've got to stay on your toes.  You've got to understand who's going to stand in judgment of you over the next three years in regard to what you say in class, in regard to what you write on your exams.  You're going to have to make decisions about what you do, and how you're going to be, but your job here is to learn.  Your job here is to master the material.  And your job is to demonstrate that you can.  But never forget what else is going on.  You asked about highlights of courses.  I know in my first year for whatever reason, I gravitated toward property, fascinating to learn about principles of ownership and rights that are bundled together when we talk about land ownership.  I remember one session of a course that was taught by Professor Curtis Berger [Curtis J. Berger] who was a wonderful teacher of property, who opened up his class with imaginative ways to try to capture people's attention much the way I told you about my tenth grade biology teacher.  And maybe that's why I was gravitating toward property, I don't know, but he really did a wonderful job.  He talked about this concept of adverse possession.  If someone occupies openly and notoriously some land or real estate for a prolonged period of time, in a way that exerts, in a way that would show that you are claiming ownership of it, even when you don't.  Over a certain period of time, if you have openly and notoriously sufficiently exercised dominion and control over that property, the principles of adverse possession can be used to entitle you to ownership of that property.  In other words, you just get aggressive, you take it over, you take it over openly long enough, and it becomes yours.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a, just a practical example.  There is a woman I know in Chicago [Illinois] that purchased a house in the--there was an area that was coming back from, and all the way down.  There's a lot adjacent to it, and she didn't own the lot, but she put a big fence around it.  And she said, "Believe it or not, if I keep that fence there long enough, it's mine."
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That's what you're talking about?
Speaker 1: Well, that's, that's a common law principle in property.  It stoked my interest in wondering, well, let me see what kind of application this has in real life.  And it made me wonder about the struggles of red people in this, in this land, so-called Native Americans who were here on this land.  They didn't really--many of them did not, many of those nations didn't have a concept of land ownership, and individual ownership of land.  There was a much more collective shared principle that this is part of a larger existence--land, water, air, spirit.  That's part of a larger existence, but it made me wonder about how, when people cross the Atlantic [Atlantic Ocean] and came to this country, and then stretched out west when Native Americans, red people, were occupying that property, whether those notions that came in from across the Atlantic about adverse possession, ended up dispossessing so many of these indigenous people of the land that they had occupied for so long, and then ended up squeezing them off into reservations, if the justification for that dislocation included principles like adverse possession.  Maybe property was interesting to me because it had some ability to stoke thought in conversation about, well, real life applications of, of events that we in phenomena that we observe.
Speaker 2: Did you think about in terms of black American accumulation of wealth or an inheritance and that sort of thing and how the laws work and don't work for us?
Speaker 1: That was something that was added on, I guess, over time with thoughts about how land ownership in this country had become so important, particularly in the early years, and communities being able to develop wealth and to pass it on to succeeding generations.  And you heard stories about how black farmers, after the Civil War, got plots, but over time, because of various machinations, had those plots taken from them through taxation, through adverse possession, through zoning, through other kinds of devices that would dispossess them of some of their land.  So, it, it, it was perhaps a seed that allowed me to think about growing other ideas about how does this really affect real people's lives.  And I suppose there was, there was a first year.  First year is probably the hardest year of law school.  It, it is a, it's a shock and it's a lot of work.
Story_ID: 633345
Speaker 1: The second year of law school probably is harder work, but it's less of a shock because you've gotten over the first year, and the newness of the approach and the technique.  The third year, some often wonder whether we need to go through it.  You're really on automatic pilot or cruise control through the third year.  You get to take more electives, so you get to veer away from some of the less interesting courses that are requirements, and to simply stoke some of your intellectual curiosity with more seminars.  So, it is emotionally easier.  And it is a time when you can afford to spend a little more time worrying about now, how do I position for the work world, and what kind of jobs am I going to look for?  It was also an environment, though, that was very much law firm oriented.  That school had a reputation for feeding many students into very lucrative law firm positions.  I knew, however, I wanted to in public service.  At that time, going to Columbia [Columbia Law School, New York, New York] as a student, and a second and third year student, and saying, you wanted to work for the government or do some kind of public service, you know, the career guidance people would hear you and say, "Oh, gee, uh, you know, maybe there's something in that, too.  Let me see what I can find to help in that," whereas if you went in and said, "Well, I want to work for a firm," fifty, fifty alternatives, readily available.  I'm hoping that, that has developed over time so that the public interest-oriented students feel as comfortable as anybody else does feel there, but you were certainly in the minority at Columbia when your interests, career interests, were more toward public interest.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's surprising.  Now, you, well, I don't know, this is something like I would think Columbia would be a little bit different, but it was not so.
Speaker 1: That's how it was back then.  Today, the school has expanded.  They have attracted some other clinical programs.  They have expanded the faculty.  I'm not as up as I should be as an alumnus, but it may well be that today they have fabulous opportunities.  I certainly hope so.  Some of the voices heard by some of my generation of alumnus certainly was, were sending that message and maybe it, the message has been heard.  And if they've done that, then I applaud them.
Story_ID: 633346
Speaker 1: Now, you said your third year consisted of more electives and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's when you--I was able, for example, to take a seminar on law in Africa.  Having come back from Africa was an offering that I couldn't resist.  We, we took a course in, it was on neighborhood development and housing.  I was taught by the only black professor on faculty at that time, Professor Parker [Kellis E. Parker], whose brother was Maceo Parker--by the way, James Brown's trombonist.  And Professor Kellis Parker himself was a musician, so we (laughter) actually had some fun with him on the music front as well.  But so, some of those kinds of courses that fed on our need to find relevance in what we were learning, were courses that were easier then to take, than in the first or second year.  I can't tell you that I left law school [Columbia Law School, New York, New York] and went into neighborhood community development.  I didn't.  I can't tell you that I went out of law school and engaged in any kind of international, international relations with African nations during my training.  I didn't, but that's okay 'cause I think part of going to law school is to become a generalist and get a breadth of exposure, and not necessarily focusing narrowly on one area of the law.  So, I tried to keep true to that and, and take a smattering of, of offerings.
Story_ID: 633347
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, just to recap, could you give us your full name, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Richard W. Roberts.
Speaker 1: And we're completing an interview we started last fall, correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is May 1st, 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in the United States courthouse [E. Barrett Prettyman Federal Courthouse] at 333 Constitution Avenue, NW, Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 633348
Speaker 1: Now, we were talking about Columbia University law school [Columbia Law School, New York, New York] last time, and I think we had pretty much covered it.  We got you about ready to graduate, I believe.  So, is there anything about Columbia University law school you want to say before we move you on?
Speaker 2: Well, I was fortunate to be able to finish my third year.  The third year is often viewed by law students as the easiest of the three years.  The first year is the year of anxiety and fear, a whole new teaching method, a whole new learning style, a different set of information that, for those of us who had not come from lawyer families, could be a bit intimidating.  Once you get past the fear of it, the second year tends to be harder work without the fear.  The third year tends to be something of a breeze in a certain sense that you've conquered the fear.  You've put in the harder work of the second semester.  And the third year, you're sort of having fun.  Although I was lucky to finish because, unfortunately, in April of my third year, my mother [Angeline Tynes Roberts] passed.  As untimely as it could have been at this, as, at the young age of fifty-two, so I had to interrupt my studies for about a week to attend to her funeral and burial in South Carolina in my dad's [Beverly Roberts] family plot, but I was able to come back.  I picked back up with my course work, complete law school, and finish it and put it behind me, and move to the working world.
Story_ID: 633349
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit--now you earned a master's degree at the same time?  Is that correct?
Speaker 2: (Nods head). When I finished college at Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York], I knew that I wanted to pursue law.  And so, I applied to go to law school, but I also knew that what I really wanted to do was to take a year between college and law school, and in some way, be able to get to East Africa.  I was quite interested in being able to experience the--experiment in ujamaa that was being pursued by the Tanzanian government, led by, at that time by Julius Nyerere, a former professor who had become president of the nation after it had emerged with--after Tanganyika had merged with Zanzibar and become Tanzania (background noise).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Yeah, we were talking about the master's degree--just recapping that.
Speaker 1: When I had applied to law school, I, nevertheless, wanted to defer entrance until after I could spend some time in East Africa.  I most wanted to be able to live and work in Tanzania to experience the, experi- experiment with ujamaa, collective work, and responsibility and economics that was being pursued by President Nyerere of Tanzania.  I wasn't able to secure an internship there, but I did secure one in Nairobi, Kenya right next door, and I did travel to Tanzania.  So, the program that got me there was the School for International Training [School for International Training Graduate Institute, Brattleboro, Vermont], international career training program, which required you to study for a semester on campus in Vermont, and then pursue your internship in a foreign country, which I did and completed that program by writing a, I think, a thesis, which I didn't complete until 1978, which was the same year as the year that I finished law school [Columbia Law School, New York, New York].  So, the program itself, and the work was mostly done in the year between college and law school.  The final thesis was completed, so I got my degree in 1978, the same time I got my law degree.
Story_ID: 633350
Speaker 1: Now, who did you clerk with?
Speaker 2: I didn't clerk for any judge.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The--at that time, many of us were interested in launching straight into public service.  And in addition, many of us did not have the impression that we saw faces of people that look like us sitting beside judges in courthouses as their law clerks.  And I guess there was a fear that, that just wasn't a career option viable and open to students of color.  So, some of us, and I will count myself among them, chose not to pursue that because it did not seem terribly realistic.  I do regret not having looked at that now, and I think the doors have been opened up a bit more now and, hopefully, that will remain that way.  But I, nevertheless, had a burning desire to do public service, and bypass the opportunity to apply for a judicial clerkship.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you--well, I have it that you were hired by the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice].  Now, this is right after law school [Columbia Law School, New York, New York] in 1978?
Speaker 2: That was my first job straight out of law school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was accepted into the attorney's general honors program, and was offered a job by Drew Days [Drew S. Days III], who was the first African American assistant attorney general in charge of the Civil Rights Division.  Griffin Bell was the attorney general at the time, and I was very excited to be able to work under the leadership of Drew Days in the Civil Rights Division in the criminal section.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How do you spell--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.  How do you spell his name?  I'm sorry (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) D-R- D-R-E-W, D-A-Y-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, Drew Days.
Speaker 2: Drew Days, as you may know, went on after being the assistant attorney general for civil rights in a storied career, to be the solicitor general of the United States, so the number three position in the Department of Justice, and often referred to as the tenth justice.  That's the position in the justice department in charge of handling all litigation in the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  And the solicitor general, when the solicitor general argues, the Supreme Court justices often find whatever the solicitor general says to be quite important.  And so, he was referred to, as are most solicitor generals, the tenth justice.  He filled the role that Justice Thurgood Marshall had filled some decade or so earlier when Justice Marshall had left the seat on the Second Circuit, U.S. Court of Appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit] in New York [New York], to become the solicitor general as well.  So, I started in 1978 as a trial lawyer in the honors program in the criminal section, Civil Rights Division of the Department of Justice.
Story_ID: 633351
Speaker 1: Talk about a couple of cases.  I know there's, the one that I know about here is the case of Joseph Paul Franklin, shooting two black joggers in Salt Lake City [Utah], that this guy has a long history--well, just tell us about this case.
Speaker 2: In the, 1980 or so, we had gotten the report that two black teen- teenage joggers, who had been jogging with two white female joggers, in a city park in Utah, had been shot and killed by a sniper.  This was on the heels of a trail of other shootings that had occurred across the country.  When the investigation was all completed, and we had identified Joseph Paul Franklin as the person who was responsible for the Utah shooting, it turned out he had also been involved in shootings of many other black people and biracial couples throughout the United States.  He also had been identified as having shot Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.], who was, at the time, the president of the Urban League [National Urban League].  Vernon Jordan had been attending a meeting of his board in Fort Wayne, I believe, Indiana, and he had given a ride to one of his board members who happened to be a white female back to her lodging.  And when Franklin, who was in the area, saw the two of them emerge from his car, Franklin apparently reacted the same way he did when seeing people of multiple races together.  He allegedly pulled out a .30-06 rifle or a .30-30 rifle, held it up, and fired into Vernon Jordan's back.  It felled him and required him to be hospitalized.  Happily, Jordan recovered, and the rest of his story is history.  He's done quite well since then.  But I've seen Vernon Jordan, and he has told me that, that shooting blew a hole in his back the size of my fist, and that, but for the grace of God, the hole was just to the side of his spinal column.  And although it did a quite a bit of damage to him internally, it did not sever his spinal cord, so he's able, thankfully, to be with us today, and in full shape.  But in any event, when the black joggers in Utah were felled by Franklin's bullets, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] undertook a massive investigation to try to track down all the leads that they could.  And I remember having been assigned this case when it was simply a newspaper article that we saw, and said, "This sounds like it may be a criminal civil rights violation.  Let's have somebody monitor this," and I was the one to monitor it.  I will never forget that on the day of the debate between Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] and Ronald Reagan [Ronald Wilson Reagan], the presidential debate where Jimmy Carter was the incumbent running for reelection, Ronald Reagan was the Republican opponent.  I was sitting in front of my television ready to take in the debate.  A flash came across the bottom of the screen, one of those news alerts.  It said that Joseph Paul Franklin had been arrested at a blood bank in Florida--tune in at eleven [o'clock] for more details.  Well, that was the first that I learned that the suspect that we had been trailing all over the country, because he was running from the authorities, and changing his appearance, and trying to adopt disguises, and ditching cars, and shifting locations, had been captured.  I knew at that point that I would not have the luxury of sitting back and seeing the debate, that I'd have to go straight into the office and get on top of developments, and be prepared to go out to Utah to pursue the grand jury investigation.  And that is what happened.  When we got all the leads together, and got all the evidence together, we were able to have an indictment against him for committing two criminal civil rights violations with death resulting.  We had urged the local district attorney to go first since the greater interest was lodged there in Utah, and we certainly wanted to be able to yield to them to go first.  They decided to have the federal case go first and we stepped up.
Story_ID: 633352
Speaker 1: So, the federal authorities did step forward with the indictment, and we took the case to trial.  What the evidence showed was that Franklin [Joseph Paul Franklin] had been in Salt Lake City, Utah for a few days.  He had left a trail of comments to people he had encountered--racially motivated, hateful comments about race mixing and black people.  Black is not the term that he used.  He used the N word most frequently.  But the story was he had been essentially cruising about the country, robbing banks, and shooting biracial couples and black people.  When he got to Utah and saw this foursome, two young black teenage men and two young white teenage women, jogging together, it enraged him.  He parked his car in the bushes on the corner of an intersection, and went to his trunk of his car, and pulled out a rifle, and lay in wait there for this foursome to come back out of the city park [Liberty Park, Salt Lake City, Utah].  And as they were crossing the intersection, he pulled the rifle up, and fired seven shots into the bodies of those, those two black men [Ted Fields and David Martin], felling them, and killing them.  The white women were not stricken.  I think one might have had a grazed wound, either from a bullet, or from something ricocheting from the black men's bodies.  Those women were just beside themselves with fear, but Salt Lake City, too, was quite shocked by what had happened.  It stoked all kinds of fears of racial, potential racial problems, racial motivations.  And the Salt Lake City community and authorities were quite vigilant in trying to get to the bottom of that case.  But after he fired the shots, he put the rifle back in the car, jumped in it, started laughing, and driving off down the street.  Then he fled, and was on the lam until he was captured the day of the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], Reagan [Ronald Wilson Reagan] debate in October of 1980.  In any event, we did go forward.  We tried that case in front of Judge Bruce Jenkins [Bruce Sterling Jenkins] in the U- Utah federal district court [U.S. District Court for the District of Utah], in front of a jury of Salt Lake City and Utah citizens.  We had called dozens and dozens and dozens of witnesses to put on a purely circumstantial case because there was no single witness who says, "I know that man to be Joseph Paul Franklin, and I saw him shoot those boys."  We had to patch together a huge mountain of circumstantial evidence but--
Speaker 2: No ballistic evidence at all?
Speaker 1: We had ballistic evidence that was used to identify what kind of rifle it was, what kind of bullet was used.  We never retrieved the rifle itself, but we were able to get witnesses who had identified Franklin as being in possession of a .30-30 rifle and a .30-06 rifle, and a mountain of other evidence from people who had encountered him while he was in Salt Lake City, often talking about his hatred for what he called race mixing, to people later on after he fled.  He made his way back to Cincinnati [Ohio] to a beauty shop where he cut his hair and had it dyed, so that he could try to change his appearance to different points in between.  He was actually stopped in Covington, Kentucky, I believe, in the very car that matched the description of the car he drove in Utah.  And, apparently, while he was being questioned in Covington, he was able to escape from that police station, and get back out on the lam.  Well, at least, we were able to keep his car.  And that car came- became a key piece of evidence back in Salt Lake City where eye witnesses to his various travelling's around the city were able to identify it as the car that he drove.
Story_ID: 633353
Speaker 1: So, it was a great deal of circumstantial evidence that pointed to his guilt, and the jury did find him guilty on both counts.  And the judge [Bruce Sterling Jenkins] sentenced Franklin [Joseph Paul Franklin] to two consecutive life terms.  And what Franklin ended up doing after that was agreeing to plead guilty to having committed shootings and murders in other states, initially in states where there was no death penalty.  And so, we would learn that he contacted authorities in state number one where there's no death penalty to confess to a killing or a shooting there.  We wondered why he was doing that.  One story might explain that.  While he was in the custody in the Salt Lake City [Utah] jail awaiting trial by the federal government, the authorities seized from him some elaborately drawn plans and diagrams outlining a route and method of escape from the custody of the U.S. Marshals [U.S. Marshals Service] that we believed he was going to pass on to someone outside to try to help him escape.  It turns out that after the federal trial was over, the district attorney in Utah tried him as well to seek the death penalty.  And at some point, during the midst of that trial, Franklin managed to escape the custody of the law enforcement.  Happily, he was found a short while later hiding in the elevator bank of that courthouse.  But it gave us the notion that it may be what motivated his interest in confessing to these series of other killings or shootings.  It gives him more opportunity to be moved from place to place and increases his opportunity to escape.  That was conjecture on our part, but I think the authorities by that point knew to keep a careful eye.  But many localities wanted to bring closure to a lot of the shootings that had happened there.  There were shootings in Missouri, someone coming out of a house of worship in Missouri.  In Indianapolis [Indiana], I think there were some, a couple of shootings there of a young African American worker in a fast food shop had been shot through glass plate, a plate window while he was cleaning up the shop.  There were shootings in Georgia, shootings in a variety of places.  And the investigators believe that he was linked to at least thirteen.  There was a shooting in Pennsylvania as a couple, a young couple, a black and white couple, walking across a bridge, got shot.  So, he was linked to a number of these shootings, and began to confess to a number of them in series.  I'm not sure what has come of that, but I don't believe he's been executed anywhere.  So, I think he's in supermax, housed in supermax federal facility.
Speaker 2: I know that he's accused of having shot Larry Flynt as well.  Is that--what do you know about that?
Speaker 1: That is an accusation, and I don't know whether he's come forward to confess to that.  He might have.  I just don't recall, but there are quite--and I believe that might have happened in Georgia, one of the shootings I mentioned in Georgia.  So, I, I believe he is serving, at the moment, the two consecutive life terms that were imposed upon him federally in 1981.  He was also sentenced by the state court in Utah to two consecutive life terms to follow the two consecutive life federal terms.  He was not given the death penalty, but so he will presumably spend the rest of his time behind bars.
Speaker 2: So, you had enough evidence to convince the jury that he was guilty apparently?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the other, here's a question I have, and I always wonder this.  Did he actually know he was shooting Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.], or did he just shoot him because he was with a white woman?
Speaker 1: I don't believe there was any evidence that he knew the identity of the black man he was shooting.  It was enough certainly in Utah for him to see a black man with a white woman.  It was enough for him in Pennsylvania for him to see a black man and a white woman crossing a bridge.  It was merely enough for him in Indianapolis to see a young black man who happened to be developmentally retarded, and was lucky enough to have a job cleaning up to be able to support himself.  But it was enough for Franklin to see a young man like that working in a fast food joint to shoot him through the plate glass window.  And so, I suspect it was enough for Franklin to just see a black man beside a black woman [sic. white woman] to cause him to be enraged and to fire his weapon.
Story_ID: 633354
Speaker 1: Now this is all in--you're stationed in New York [New York] during this period, right, or--
Speaker 2: Well, I was stationed in Washington [D.C.] at that time.
Speaker 1: Washington, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had moved from--when I left law school [Columbia Law School, New York, New York], I moved to Washington, and worked in the justice department headquarters [U.S. Department of Justice] in Washington and we had to travel.  So, I traveled out to Utah, but my headquarters, I was stationed in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, were you ever assigned to the U.S. Attorney's Office in New York?
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: Southern District of New York [U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York].
Speaker 2: I was.  I'd served at the main justice department, Civil Rights Division, for four years.  And then I went to private practice here in Washington at a law firm, Covington and Burling [Covington and Burling LLP], for three years.  And then, I moved back to New York and worked in the U.S. Attorney's Office in the Southern District.  But before I'd done all of that, I was able to also prosecute some cases in the Civil Rights Division involving allegations of slavery, church arsons, racially-motivated violence cases, and so on.
Speaker 1: Allegations of modern slavery in the United States?
Speaker 2: Modern day slavery in the United States of America (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, tell us about one of those cases.  We--you know.
Speaker 2: We would investigate allegations, for example, by migrant farm workers, often in the South, who had been recruited to certain farm areas to dig watermelons, farm, or harvest citrus fruit in Florida, different places down south where those (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, are these, I'm sorry, are these primarily Hispanics we're talking about or--
Speaker 2: No, no, they ranged from--we had some migrant crew leaders, some labor crew leaders, who would go around recruiting in various areas.  One case I had was a crew leader from Florida who came up the East Coast in the southern area.  He'd stop in Jacksonville [Florida].  He'd stop in Atlanta [Georgia], and often go to missions or skid rows, where he would find people who were apparently unemployed, go to them and say, "How'd you like to make some fast money?  All you have to do is come with me, and help me pick some crops in a certain location.  I'll pay you in cash, and then you can be on your way."  So, for someone who's unemployed, and often sometimes who is, someone who is homeless, this was a very inviting proposition.  Well, what would end up happening, however, is that the conditions would be nowhere near as pleasant as the crew leader promised.  There, there would often be, often very rural, and isolated areas cut off from communications and telephones and, frankly, other people.  They would be housed in very, very substandard shacks, and they would be told, "You'd better not leave here, and you'd better get there and work when I tell you to 'cause if you don't, you'll be in trouble," and they'd be threatened with pistols.  They'd be beaten if they tried to leave.  If they ever spoke back to the crew leader, they would face some kind of corporal, corporal punishment.  And they would make examples of anybody who would actually walk off by bringing them back, and really beating them in front of everybody else to say, "This is what's going to happen to you if you try to walk off.  Now, get out in that field and keep digging those potatoes, digging those watermelons, pick those oranges."
Story_ID: 633355
Speaker 1: Now, I read that in the 1930s or '40s [1940s], that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had actually investigated that type of activity in the South.  James Weldon Johnson actually went to the South to a site to investigate personally, you know.  Were you aware of those incidents when--
Speaker 2: All the cases that we were handling were actually more current comparatively.  These were cases in the 1970s and 1980s and it, in looking back, you can see that those kinds of conditions and treatment of people happened decades ago.  You would have thought that by 1970, 1980, 1990, it wasn't happening anymore.  Unfortunately, it was continuing to happen.  It was happening to the most vulnerable among us, those who are the least capable of voicing their condition and problems, those who had the least contact and access, contact with or access to, authorities or people who could make, shine a light on these conditions.  And often, if we were finding out about these, it was only because someone, for example, from a rural migrant legal workers' organization, who made it their business to try to go to the rural work sites, and try to make sure everybody's all right, would report to the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], or report to the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] that it appeared that some of these workers were being mistreated, were being forced to work against their will, were being physically abused and beaten.  And we'd learn about it in ways like that.  But these things did happen, and I'd go down and I'd see some of these locations, and I'd interview some of these people.  And sometimes the locations would have to be raided by a combination of federal and state and local law enforcement who would let the folks know, "Okay, we're law enforcement, we will protect you.  If you are not here voluntarily, you can feel free to leave.  We will protect you and provide you transportation back."  Oftentimes, they were so frightened, and not aware that they could trust law enforcement that people who are actually still enslaved in that sense, being forced to work against their will, had a greater fear of retaliation by the labor crew leaders who had beaten people before, than they had trust in the law enforcement who were offering them safe passage off of those locations.
Story_ID: 633356
Speaker 1: So it was often, the slavery cases were often migrant laborer cases, but I also had a slavery case involving child slavery, peonage in a religious cult.  There was a charismatic religious figure who built a compound where he attracted women and their children.  Whether they were married women or not, he would somehow lure them out of their married home settings to come and live on this compound, attend his church, bring their children with them, and then he would persuade the mothers to take the children out of school, and to put them to work in cash payment factories.  For example, a chicken processing plant in North Carolina I went to that had a high manual labor requirement, had an agreement with this minister that he would provide laborers and workers.  He would show up, and have enforcers be there at the factory to make sure none of the children left.  Those who did try to leave would be captured, brought back, beaten in front of the other children, as an example.  And he'd show up on--the minister in charge of this--would show up on Friday.  Come pay day when the children were supposedly paid in cash, and he presented himself to the factory owner as the one who would be the agent working for the children, and just collect the cash.  The children didn't see a penny of it.  They were transported back to the compound, and they were required to stay there, and not leave the compound.  And they were forced to work against their will.  And this went on for a long, long time, and the women who had come into this compound fell under the spell of this very charismatic man unfortunately, and almost felt trapped and helpless, when their own children were being mis- mistreated and abused by the leaders of this religious cult.  But, there, too, a raid had to be staged, and a lot of the women and their children were freed.  Some were still under the spell of this minister, and trusted the minister more than they trusted law enforcement.  So, over time, after the minister was arrested and incarcerated, and his daughter and a son-in-law and another henchman, they came to realize that they were free, that they had been indoctrinated in a way and that they could open up and, and talk to us, and tell us what happened.
Speaker 2: Now, two questions, what year was this and what was the name of the cult or the cult leadership?
Speaker 1: The church was called the Church of God and True Holiness Principles [Church of God and True Holiness].  It had facilities, I believe, in Florence, South Carolina; Wilson, North Carolina, uh, Wilson--is Wilson in South Carolina or North Carolina?  Is it Wilson, Florence, and possibly outside of Raleigh [North Carolina]?  Reverend Robert Allan Carr was the name of the head of the church.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: His daughter was Glo-
Speaker 2: Well, finish this.
Speaker 1: --his Glo- daughter was Gloria Asanthia Carr Cain [sic. Asanthia Carr Cain], married to a Mr. Cain [Larry Cain].  I forgot his first name.
Story_ID: 633357
Speaker 1: We were just finishing up the child labor of, the child slavery story.
Speaker 2: Right.  The, the minister in charge is Robert Allan Carr, Reverend Robert Allen Carr, and his daughter was Gloria Asanthia Carr Cain [sic. Asanthia Carr Cain].  Her husband was, had a last name of Cain [Larry Cain].  He was involved as well.  And they had a man whom we dubbed the enforcer [Jimmy Conyers].  It turned out that the minister ended up entering a plea of guilty to slavery, and got ten years in prison.  His daughter and son-in-law pled guilty as well, and they got five years each in prison.  The enforcer fled.  After he was indicted, he skipped town.
Speaker 1: Was he ever apprehended?
Speaker 2: He was apprehended.  And it was in the summer time when I was on vacation and out trying to go to Mexico and California.  But I told my office, if he gets captured, then I'll fly back, but please let me go on vacation.  So, they let me go on vacation with that proviso, and as things happened, he got captured when I was probably in Mexico somewhere, or maybe California, and they called and said, "You have to come back and try this case."  But I did.  We took, took him to trial on a ten count indictment that alleged involuntary servitude and slavery and conspiracy.  The jury convicted this henchman.  He was the enforcer.  He would inflict the beatings on the children.  And after he was convicted in a U.S. District Court in the Middle District of North Carolina [U.S. District Court for the Middle District of North Carolina], before Judge Hiram Ward [Hiram Hamilton Ward], at that time in 19--I think, '81 [1981], Judge Ward, who had been on the bench for many, many years, he was a veteran judge, had tried many, many cases, made the comment that with the exception possibly of a premeditated murder case that he had presided over, this was the worst and most heinous evidence he had ever heard in his life.  And he sentenced this defendant, the henchman, to collectively, twenty years in prison.
Speaker 1: Now, was there a racial aspect of this at all?  What race were these people?
Speaker 2: All of the children were black.  All of the people in the hierarchy of the church were black.  The enforcer was black.  The minister was black.  His daughter and son-in-law were black.  So, it was not an issue about racial discrimination with respect to the church's hierarchy treating, treatment of its flock.  The poultry processing plant owner, who employed these children, and his wife were white.  They were not charged with having inflicted any of the summary punishment on the kids or enslaving them, but this was a case of a cult leader who built a flock and abused them.
Speaker 1: Were the, was the poultry, how did the poultry manufacturer defend his use of child labor?
Speaker 2: Our section did not have authority to enforce any of the labor statutes or penalties.  That fell to the jurisdiction of the State of North Carolina, and possibly the federal [U.S.] Department of Labor.  And so, to the extent he answered to anyone, he answered to them, and I was not a part of that process.  I hope that people did look carefully at what was going on though.
Story_ID: 633358
Speaker 1: Is there another good story associated with this?  Well, I know there are probably lots of cases but what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, one other interesting development in my own background, when I finished law school [Columbia Law School, New York, New York], I had to take the bar exam.  I took it in New York.  The New York bar exam generally took five, six months to get the results out.  I took the exam in July.  The results, I think, didn't come out until January.  No, no, they came out in November, but after November, they went through a process of doing a character committee investigation of you to make sure that you had sound character.  My investigation didn't end until about February, so I didn't get sworn in until February of the next year.  In any event, so I had to wait.  While I was down in Washington [D.C.] at the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] from September of '78 [1978], I had to wait until February of '79 [1979] before I could actually go into court, and hold myself out as a practicing lawyer.  But the first, very first criminal trial I was able to participate in, as a federal prosecutor, was in Columbia, South Carolina before Judge Matthew Perry [Matthew J. Perry, Jr.].  Judge Perry had recently been appointed to the United States District Court for South Carolina [U.S. District Court for the District of South Carolina], having served on the United States court of military appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces] here in Washington [D.C.] for many years.  And the case I worked on was a slavery case--again, a labor crew leader who was charged with having beaten some elderly people whom he had recruited to work out in the fields in South Carolina, and threatened them with, with pistols and hijacked them essentially to go out into these fields, and required them to work against their will.  So, this labor crew leader and his wife were indicted and were facing trial.  The case got assigned to me and for trial purposes, was assigned to Judge Perry.  It was my very first federal criminal trial, and it was Judge Perry's very first federal criminal trial as a U.S. district judge.  So, so we had two firsts that we could celebrate at that time.  Judge Perry, of course, was one of the bravest and most well-known black lawyers in South Carolina before he became a judge.  It was Judge Perry who helped bring the South Carolina case that culminated in Brown v. Board of Ed [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  The Brown v. Board of Ed opinion out of the [U.S.] Supreme Court in 1954 was a combination of cases out of South Carolina, and I believe Washington, D.C. and Kansas.  Well, Judge Perry was the one who was responsible for bringing that case to South Carolina, and so many other civil rights cases.  He was really one of the leading civil rights lawyers in South Carolina of his time, and was rewarded later on with appointments to the bench.  And it was a gratifying experience for the son of a South Carolinian to go to Columbia, South Carolina in the very federal courthouse where Judge Matthew Perry was presiding over his first criminal trial.  That was a meaningful moment for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.
Speaker 2: The courthouse, brand new courthouse in Columbia now, has been named after Matthew Perry [Matthew J. Perry, Jr. Courthouse, Columbia, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he's still alive, and he's still presiding in that courthouse.
Speaker 1: You got to give us his phone number so we can interview him (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Will do.
Speaker 1: That's what, that's what we need.
Story_ID: 633359
Speaker 1: This is a civil rights issue, you don't hear so much about.  Are slavery cases common in the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice]?  I mean, how common are they?
Speaker 2: Well, you would hope that, that's not a common problem.  But the fact is there were enough complaints about involuntary servitude and slavery and peonage, and people being forced to work against their will that [U.S.] Congress funded enough of a budget for the Civil Rights Division to create a section of federal prosecutors who were focusing principally upon that, and other criminal civil rights matters.  And we had a full docket.  At some point before I left, I was appointed to be the coordinator of involuntary servitude cases.  And so, I had to coordinate among all of the different federal districts across the country who were encountering this problem, litigation strategies, and research assistance, and litigation assistance, and so on.  So, it's not unheard of and even today, I believe the department is focusing upon human trafficking cases.  They've expanded beyond cases that focus simply on migrant labor abuse to cases involving traffic in women, international traffic in women who are being forced to sell themselves against their will, and other laborers.  So, the, the process (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, now that's more common than people think, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  That's going on, and I think their, their docket is fairly full of those kinds of cases now.
Speaker 1: That's right.  I know that was even a--I know we were investigating it as international phenomena, and Wright State [Wright State University] in Dayton [Ohio], and we found out that it was an issue in the State of Ohio (laughter), and every state had an issue about it, you know.  It was an issue in a lot of states.
Story_ID: 633360
Speaker 1: So you're with the U.S. Attorney's Office and you took the--kind--there's a brief gap where you worked for a law firm, and then you went back to the U.S. Attorney's Office.  So, for how long (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I left the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice], I went to a law firm here in Washington [D.C.], Covington and Burling [Covington and Burling LLP], to get some civil litigation experience.  I knew I wanted to be a litigator, and I had done criminal.  I wanted to do some civil to round out my background.  But, at some point, I felt the lure of home.  I'm from New York City [New York, New York] originally, and when I had an opportunity to go back to New York to work in the U.S. Attorney's Office in the Southern District of New York [U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York], that was what pulled me back home.
Speaker 1: So, that's in '86 [1986], right, 1986?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay. Any stories from the New York period?
Speaker 2: One of the attractive things about the idea of going to work at the U.S. Attorney's Office in New York at that time was that the fellow who was the United States attorney decided that he wanted to have an emphasis on white collar crime.  And what happened was, he'd investigated and prosecuted a number of violations out of Wall Street.  And you ordinarily will turn on the six o'clock evening news, and when they do the police beat, you will see blue collar defendants being paraded in front of the cameras with handcuffs on, escorted by police to, you know, the police paddy wagons, and so on.  This U.S. attorney decided, what's good for the goose is good for the gander.  And so, when he indicted some of these Wall Street executives, they were doing the perpetrators' walk just like the blue collar defendants.  He had them handcuffed in front of the cameras and paraded with their suits and ties and five hundred dollar jackets and so on, in front of the cameras to face the same kind of justice anybody else was facing.  And I must say, I felt at that time there was a certain sort of leveling of the playing field about that approach that, frankly, I was rather attracted to.  And I said, well, you know, I think I could work in an office like that.  That U.S. attorney happened to be Rudolph Giuliani [Rudy Giuliani] at the time who later went on to establish more of a history for himself.  But I, I went to that office and worked there for, for three years.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, he was a state district attorney in New York?
Speaker 2: He was the U.S. attorney, federal prosecutor for that, for that district (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, federal, okay for that, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 633361
Speaker 1: You stayed in that position until--
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-eight [1988].
Speaker 1: --eighty-eight [1988], okay.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I've often said career planning is not my strong suit.  I went to law school [Columbia Law School, New York, New York] to become a criminal defense lawyer, ended up, first job out of law school as a prosecutor [for the U.S. Department of Justice].  So, career planning was my short suit, and I guess social planning was something of a short suit as well.  As soon as I moved from Washington [D.C.] up to New York [New York] to join the U.S. Attorney's Office [U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York], I began dating a lawyer [Vonya McCann Roberts] down in Washington.  So, we had this commuter relationship, but we got very close, and we got engaged.  Once we agreed to get married, somebody had to move.  I volunteered because I had fallen in love also with D.C. while I had spent time down here.  And so, we got married in 1988, and I moved back down here, was able to go the U.S. Attorney's Office in D.C. [U.S. Attorney's Office for the District of Columbia] after my marriage, after my wedding.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, this is in 1988.
Speaker 2: That was in, right.
Story_ID: 633362
Speaker 1: Oh, now you were here for the [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry case.
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: So, so, well, tell us about that.  Now, what, is he, you know, he cried out on the spot, he was set up, you know, was--
Speaker 2: Well, I tell you, it's a case I somewhat stumbled into.  I had mentioned to my colleagues in the Southern District of New York [U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York] that I would be leaving because I was getting married, and I wanted to move down to Washington [D.C.] where my future bride [Vonya McCann Roberts] was.  And then, I was able to land a position at the U.S. Attorney's Office in D.C. [U.S. Attorney's Office for the District of Columbia].  That was the time when the then U.S. attorney, or the previous U.S. attorney, who had been in office at that time, had been conducting investigations of Marion Barry who was the mayor for quite some time, but not producing any charges.  My colleagues in New York [New York], when they heard that I was moving to Washington, and I was going to be joining the D.C. U.S. Attorney's Office, all said, "Oh, yeah, you're going down 'cause you're getting married.  Sure, we don't believe that.  We think they're bringing you down there to investigate and prosecute Marion Barry."  I said, "Don't even spend a moment's thought about that.  There are plenty of good, solid, able, veteran AUSA's, assistant U.S. attorneys, in that office, who certainly would want to be able to do that, and would be in line to do that far before I ever got to the office.  So, perish the thought, that's just not going to happen.  I'm not going down there for that.  I'm going down there because I'm getting married."  I come down to Washington, and it was December of '88 [1988].  As the new kid on the block, the new kid on the block always has last dibs on selecting when to take leave.  The folks already there had already selected their holiday leave time.  I was the only one left, so I had to get assigned to holiday duty.  So, during that winter break, Christmas break period, I was the one that had, I was assigned to be on duty during that week, while most of my colleagues were enjoying vacation time.  Well, for whatever reason, Charles Lewis, who was from the [U.S.] Virgin Islands and was a friend of the mayor, decided he was going to come visit Washington at that time, decided that he was going to bring with him some cocaine, decided that he was going to offer some cocaine in a little baggie to one of the maids in the hotel.  She rebuffed that offer, and went to inform management about this overture.  And management then summoned the police to come to investigate.  Well, as it turns out, Mr. Lewis was also a friend of Mayor Barry, and he had apparently called the mayor and said, "I'm in town, why don't you come see me?"  And the police by then had arrived at the hotel, expecting to stage some kind of an undercover investigation to find out if there's some drug person up in the upper reaches of the hotel.  So, when the hotel gave them permission to pose as hotel janitors to make their way up to this Charles Lewis' room, in walks Mayor Barry, heading toward that room.  The hotel manager at the time said, oh, my goodness, the mayor is here.  I don't want him to get snagged in this.  He withdrew his permission from the police, who had been dressing up as undercover janitors to go into that room, and called them off.
Story_ID: 633363
Speaker 1: But meanwhile, the mayor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, he was like loyal to the mayor.  Was he a friend of the mayor--the hotel manager?
Speaker 1: Unclear whether there was loyalty, friendship or just--
Speaker 2: General consent, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) fear of having to generate some kind of, some kind of complication for the chief executive of the city while there is a police undercover operation going on.
Speaker 2: Was the manager black?
Speaker 1: I think he was not.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I think he was of color, but he was not black.  And so, he got on his walkie talkie and told the detectives, "You have to come back.  I don't want you to do your undercover operation while the mayor is in the building.  I don't want any, you know, thing to be compromised," so they had to call that off.  But, eventually, someone found out, and it turned into a story that police were summoned away from an investigation that might have ensnared the mayor with some potential drug guy.  Somehow the press got hold of that and it became a bit of a story.  But in any event, once that story got to the U.S. Attorney's Office [U.S. Attorney's Office for the District of Columbia], I was sitting in my office, brand new kid on the block.  I'd been given a whole bunch of new cases that were set to go to trial, and I was told, "Okay, you just go try these," sitting there working, preparing my cases for trial.  Chief of the criminal division walks in and knocks on my door, asked me what I was doing.  I said, "Oh, I had about five or six files I was preparing for."  He said, "Well, put those aside.  I have something I want you to work on."  And the rest, as I say, was history.  I was assigned to work on the investigation of the mayor's, and the growing allegations that were beginning to emerge that the mayor had been using crack cocaine with others in Washington, D.C. and other places.  And we did go forward with a grand jury investigation, having uncovered a number of witnesses, who said that they had indeed seen or participated in having the mayor use crack cocaine.  So, that case did get charged.  It did go to a jury.  And it was a rather high profile case.  The jury ended up acquitting the mayor on one count, convicting him one count of possession, and they couldn't reach unanimous agreement on the remaining counts of the indictment.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The judge presiding at the trial sentenced the mayor to six months in prison, and the mayor served that time, I believe, in a facility in Virginia.  I remember hearing from a number of people that, well, "That's the end of the mayor's career.  That's it--he's washed up."  But the one thing that people who had been in Washington knew was you never count [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry out.  Marion is a brilliant man.  He was almost a Ph.D. in chemistry.  He was devoted to the Civil Rights Movement, and chose that over completing his Ph.D., engaged in quite a bit of the civil rights struggle, came into public service in Washington, D.C., and did a number of things.  And so, when I'd hear comments about, well, that's the end of the mayor, that's the end of his career, I remember remarking, "No, don't, don't assume that.  I think it's a matter of when and not if.  Marion Barry will be back.  I don't know when.  I don't know how, and I don't know in what position, but he will be back."  And he did come back, perhaps sooner than I thought, and in ways that I hadn't really dreamed of, but he did come back and won a city council [Council of the District of Columbia] seat, and then ran for mayor, and got reelected as mayor, and served out an additional term as mayor.  And after that, he retired, and did some investment banking, but I think he had public service in his blood too much, and came back into the public arena and, again, ran for city council, and was elected, and is still serving.
Story_ID: 633364
Speaker 1: So you described it an incident with Charles Lewis, but many of us saw this incident with a woman in the hotel room--Rasheeda Moore?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did that incident play any part in his indictment or sentencing or--I mean, was that, was he charged with a crime there, you know?  Was it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As the investigation moved forward, we were receiving a number of reports from individuals who said that, historically, they had been doing drugs with the mayor [HistoryMaker Marion Barry], or giving drugs to the mayor.  But all of these were historical accounts of essentially one on one interactions with the mayor.  And there was little current information about whether this is a current crime being committed, whether this is going on, or whether this was all in the past, and he has turned a corner.  The conclusion was reached that there's really no way to know if this is an ongoing problem, but to see if he is still doing it, to create some situation where he would respond as people had said he would respond to offers of drugs or crack cocaine.  If he says no, he's clearly turned the corner.  It's a case that needs to be shut down.  We need to move on to other things.  If he says yes, well, then, that'd be another issue.  Rasheeda Moore was an interest of his from the past who, I think, had been stopped by the police out in California on some traffic matter.  But when the authorities learned that she had been stopped, since the authorities learned that she had been his interest of his before, they approached her, talked with her, debriefed her, asked her what she knew.  She herself was on hard times at that point, and was hoping to free herself of substance abuse problems and so on.  And she, for her reasons, agreed to participate in what came to be called the sting.  And so, she was set up in a hotel room that the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] had put a camera into, called the mayor, and said, "I'm in town, if you want to come by, I'm here."  I frankly thought that, that had a 20 percent chance of success at the time.  I didn't think that with the mayor having been under such so much public scrutiny and having so many investigations going on, that he'd ever agree to something like that to fall for, you know, some old interest of his, bringing him into a hotel room.  But ended up that he accepted her call, said, "Yes, I'll come and see you."  He went to the ele- went to the hotel [Vista Hotel; Westin City Center, Washington, D.C.], went up in the elevator, went into the room, and the rest of the transaction was captured on tape.  She engaged in the conversation with him of the type that they had engaged in before.  One thing led to another, and the topic of crack and drugs came up.  She had offered, when the topic came up, to have a friend bring them some crack.  It was an undercover FBI agent who did come in.  And after that agent left, the mayor was seen taking a piece of the crack that came, put it in a crack pipe, and lit it, and smoked it.  I guess I concluded at that point that we really did not appreciate perhaps the depth of the illness that could grip people who have been using these substances.  But for the mayor of the city to have sort of fallen for this, and to have gone and gone ahead, and smoked crack with somebody he hadn't seen in so long, said that, you know, that, that substance had a grip on him.  And it was, frankly, rather sad.  It was not a moment for rejoicing.  But it, that did lead to his arrest, and he was indicted after that, after that, for that event, as well as a number of other events that witnesses have told us about that this essentially corroborated, and for having gone into the grand jury, and lied in denying involvement in narcotics.
Story_ID: 633365
Speaker 1: But it came at a time when the City of Washington [D.C.] was suffering from just a spiraling level of murders in the streets over crack cocaine sales (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: --and whatever, you know.  Even Marion [HistoryMaker Marion Barry] even addressed before the National Press Club on public radio.  I heard him say that these are--, "Washington wasn't dangerous.  These are just some killings.  They're not, you know, really murders," and that sort of thing.  Now, but for a man that bright, and who'd had that much commitment to civil rights and who--a lot of people in the City of Washington still love Marion Barry.  Do you know him or do you have a--I mean (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we obviously ran into each other quite a bit during the investigation.  And I was there in the grand jury when he was called on the grand jury, I was there in the courtroom during the course of the trial.  And I would see him occasionally, when he was out and about in the town.  I remember one time I was walking to lunch with some colleagues outside, not far from the courthouse.  I was going into a building that he was coming out of, and he had a security detail with them, but we caught each other's eye, and he stopped, and said, "Oh, there's my prosecutor."  And he came over to me and we shook hands, and he's actually a lovely man.  We were quite cordial with each other and we, you know, outside the view of the cameras, would be able to speak and say hello to each other.  And I remember that during the course of the trial or the pretrial time, Nelson Mandela came to Washington after he had been freed.  And that was everyone's dream to be able to go to the Convention Center [Washington Convention Center, Washington, D.C.] to see Nelson Mandela when he came to Washington.  I was fortunate to be able to go, and I ran into the mayor.  We both sort of took a break from this trial to be able to go to the Convention Center to see and greet Nelson Mandela.  Of course, in front of the cameras during the course of the trial, his role was not necessarily to be friendly toward the government.  It was to put--paint and portray a different picture.  But off camera, very gregarious, very warm, very cordial.  And I see him today, and we exchange warm and friendly greetings.  And, you know, he's a very likeable and very, very smart man.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's what they say.  Yeah, very sad, kind of a sad story, but he's functioning now apparently, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  And I wish him nothing but good health.
Story_ID: 633366
Speaker 1: Okay, so how long did you serve in the, as a--
Speaker 2: I stayed in the U.S. Attorney's Office [U.S. Attorney's Office for the District of Columbia] as an assistant U.S. attorney through 1993.  At that time, the president [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] named Eric Holder [HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.] to be the first African American U.S. attorney for the District of Columbia.  Eric and I actually knew each in law school.  He was a third-year student when I was a first-year student.  Eric was among people from Columbia Law School [New York, New York] at that time who had begun something of a migration from New York [New York] down to Washington [D.C.] to launch into public service.  And there were many of us who followed in his footsteps the year after he graduated, and the year that I graduated, and the year after I graduated.  And so, we were acquaintances in law school in his third year.  We remained acquaintances and friends.  And after I moved down to Washington, he was already here.  He was here in the Public Integrity Section of the Criminal Division at the U.S. Department of Justice.  We remained friendly and lived in the same neighborhood.  Eventually, he went on the bench in the Superior Court [Superior Court of the District of Columbia], was a judge there for five years.  The president then named him to be the U.S. attorney.  I was already in the U.S. Attorney's Office at the time, and he named me to be his number two.  So, in a private moment after he was named and he took office, I remember sitting in his office.  And we were remarking--he is from Queens, New York, I'm from Queens, New York.  He went to Stuyvesant High School [New York, New York].  I went to Music and Art high school [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York].  He had to take the bus and the subway to get into Manhattan [New York] to school; I did, too, so we had a lot of commonalities and similarities.  We both had a sort of a New York sense of humor.  I remember a quiet moment in his office after he was named to office.  He was fully sworn in, and we were sort of sitting down.  He was the head of the office.  I was the number two.  And we looked at each other and said, "My goodness, they've put the inmates in charge of the asylum (laughter)."  But we, Eric--I saw my role as essentially sort of orienting him to the office he hadn't worked in before, and letting him know where the levers of power were, where the traps might have been, where the great resources were, where he could go to get things done, and just sort of helped orient him because after that, I knew he could soar like an eagle and do wonderful things, and he did.
Story_ID: 633367
Speaker 1: Now you're the assistant U.S. attorney here in Washington, D.C., so in the district, right, so--
Speaker 2: And at that point, I was the principal assistant U.S. attorney under U.S. Attorney Eric Holder [HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.], and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's '93 [1993], right?
Speaker 2: --and held that position through--I think, it was June of 1995.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was recruited at that point by attorney general Janet Reno, and assistant attorney general Deval Patrick [HistoryMaker Deval L. Patrick], who's now mayor of--I'm sorry--the governor of California--of Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Massachusetts, right.
Speaker 2: Sorry, it's getting, getting older--to come head the Criminal Section, Civil Rights Division because the, my predecessor had been appointed to the superior court bench here in Washington [Superior Court of the District of Columbia].  And I saw that as an opportunity for something of a home-going.  That's exactly where I had started my career as a low-level line lawyer, and they were asking me to come back and be the head of that very section.  And it was a very exciting opportunity and a fun challenge.  So, I went back and did that for three years under the leadership of the attorney general Janet Reno and, initially, Deval Patrick, who was the head of the Civil Rights Division, and then Bill Lann Lee, who succeeded him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is '95 [1995] to '98 [1998]?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any significant stories out of this--
Speaker 2: Oh, we had lots going on.  That was the time you may recall when there was a rash of burnings of African American churches throughout the South.  And there was a major fear about whether this was all organized, whether there was a major conspiracy, whether, you know, people could feel safe going to their houses of worship for fear of having, having them burned.  And it created a great deal of tension, great deal of uncertainty.  And so, we poured a fair amount of resources into trying to get to the bottom of these church burnings.  We created a church arson task force, and staffed it up with additional prosecutors that were operating under the Civil Rights Division's leadership, but we coordinated it with the treasury department [U.S. Department of the Treasury], the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms [Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives].  And the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] were working with state and local agencies as well to try to coordinate information about these church burnings, and track down leads to find what was really going on.  Where are these racially motivated fires?  Who was behind this?  Is there a larger conspiracy we need to know about?  Are they isolated incidents?  Are these folks who are doing this for racially motivated reasons?  Might it be insurance arsons?  But it was more than a coincidence.  It seemed that many of the victim churches were black churches, and there were many of them down South.
Speaker 1: Just for the record, that's when the federal government steps in when it appears to be a civil rights violation, not just a local arson case, right?
Speaker 2: That's correct--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, that was, that was an ongoing project that really did consume a great deal of resources.  And when we were able to bring closure to some of those church burnings, I think people felt that the taxes they paid to fund the federal government were well spent.  Not all of the arsons were solved, but we certainly put as much effort as we could into trying to get to the bottom of it to restore people's faith that their houses of faith could be safe sanctuaries for them, and not be places they had to fear.
Story_ID: 633368
Speaker 1: Anything else from this period?
Speaker 2: Well, we had, interestingly enough, there was an event called the Good Ol' Boys Roundup that was a--I guess it was something of a picnic, an annual picnic that had been coordinated by certain agents from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms [Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives].  One picnic in particular during this time period apparently featured some skits and other paraphernalia that were overtly racial in content.  And it got quite a bit of media coverage, and raised quite a bit of questions about whether the agents who were participating, federal law enforcement agents, who were participating in this kind of conduct, really belonged in law enforcement jobs when part of their job was to make sure that equal justice came to those without fear or favor, without regard to race or color.  And so, we--I guess we ran into some difficulties at times when here we were moving forward with the ATF to investigate these church burnings, encouraging people to speak with us, give us whatever information they had, and at the same time, they're seeing stories about ATF agents hosting these Good Ol' Boys Roundups, where they put signs on the entrances to these roundups prohibiting the entry of, for, by African Americans, or using the N word in, in different ways, or hanging nooses in some mock way that really was offensive.  So that was something that had to be investigated internally and worked through, so that was another challenge that we had during that period.
Speaker 1: Rust never sleeps, as they say.
Story_ID: 633369
Speaker 1: We had just finished participating actually in the prosecution, along with the U.S. Attorney's Office in California [U.S. Attorney's Office for the Central District of California], the Rodney King case.  You may recall that the Rodney King police were tried locally in Simi Valley [California] with a jury--I think it was all white--that just acquitted the police officers, didn't hold them responsible whatsoever for what you saw in that videotape of Rodney King being beaten.  The federal government moved in and said, "Well, we're going to prosecute this case as a federal criminal civil rights case."  And just before I got there, they had people in my section, along with the U.S. attorney in California, had prosecuted it criminally, and gotten convictions of Sergeant Koon [Stacey Koon], and one or two others for criminal civil rights violations of the Rod- in connection with the Rodney King beating.  So, the matters, the post-trial matters were going on in that case after that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, this is post-trial business (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 633370
Speaker 1: You were appointed to the bench in 1998, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's correct.
Speaker 1: And, well, tell us the circumstances leading to your appointment as best that you can describe them, I guess.
Speaker 2: At that time, the, I believe the Democrats had control of the [U.S.] Senate.  Well, actually, let me back up.  The Democrats did not have control of the Senate.  The Democrats had control of the White House.  President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was in the White House.  And there was no senate or senator representing the District of Columbia.  Ordinarily, U.S. district judges are named in part because the home state senator will send the name to the White House, and the president will appoint district judges from among the names sent by the home state senator.  D.C. [Washington, D.C.] has no senators.  What the White House did, President Clinton did, at that point, was to turn to Eleanor Holmes Norton, who was our member of [U.S.] Congress in the [U.S.] House of Representatives for the District of Columbia, and accorded her the same senatorial courtesy that the White House accords to senators in the selection appointment of U.S. district judges, U.S. attorneys, and United States Marshals [U.S. Marshals Service].  So, Congresswoman Norton assembled a panel, as did many senators, of lawyers and lay people to review potential candidates for these vacancies.  And a panel of the size, I can't quite remember, probably twelve to fifteen, interviewed a number of us, and sent to the congresswoman for each single judge vacancy, three names of possible candidates.  And she would interview those slate of candidates, and select from that slate a name to send to the White House.  And she was able to do that for, I think, nine positions of the fifteen on our District Court bench [U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia].  And I was fortunate enough to be one of them.  And so, I was nominated, I believe, in January of '98 [1998], and the Senate confirmation came roughly in June of '98 [1998], and I was sworn in, in July of '98 [1998].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you surprised--well, you climbed the ladder, I guess, but were you surprised that you were selected at all?
Speaker 2: Oh, I suppose you can always say surprises.  One of the things that hit you in the face when you get that call saying, you know, you're, you've been named (laughter).  I was hopeful.  I wasn't expectant, but I was pleasantly surprised.
Story_ID: 633371
Speaker 1: Once again, what are some of the highlights, I guess, or some of the incidents, the cases that you had to deal with that you can talk about, I guess?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, there are a number of cases that come across your desk and your bench, some more exciting than others.  I remember an early criminal trial involving a campaign finance task force indictment against a Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] fundraiser from Tennessee who had been raising money for the Clinton campaign.  But the task force had investigated his money-raising techniques, and alleged that what he was doing was evading the campaign finance maximum limits by having employees donate, and he would reimburse them.  But the donations would be made in the name of the employee, so that he could evade allegedly, the campaign limits on how much one could contribute.  So, the money was ultimately, allegedly coming just out of his pocket in excess of the campaign limit, but it was in the names of these straw donors.  This was a white, law-trained business man, quite wealthy, from Tennessee, and many pundits had assumed that facing a jury in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], his chances would be quite slim of escaping conviction.  It was of note that part of his defense was, well, "Yeah, I'm a lawyer, but look at my law school transcript.  I was at the bottom of my class."  So, in theory, the defense was, "Well, yeah, I was a lawyer, but I was a dumb lawyer, so don't convict me." The defendant was acquitted.  I think many people were surprised at that.  It was a, not a terribly high profile case, but it did get quite a bit of press.  And he was represented by, in part, an African American lawyer named Ted Wells [HistoryMaker Theodore Wells], who has now made quite a name for himself, and has always been a splendid, splendid lawyer.
Speaker 1: Oh, he's the Scooter Libby lawyer, right--Ted Wells?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That's correct.  And many, many other high profile people in between and probably still.  So that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Went to school with Clarence Thomas.  He went to Holy Cross [College of the Holy Cross, Worcester, Massachusetts] with Clarence Thomas.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's what I heard.  That's right, that's right.  They were contemporaries.  So, that was an early case that drew some press, but I've had other cases.
Story_ID: 633372
Speaker 1: As you know, many of the judges in my court [U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia] have been assigned cases involving petitions from the Guantanamo base detainees currently seeking to be released [from Guantanamo Bay detention center, Cuba], or at least to have some kind of a hearing.  Those are ongoing cases, so I can't talk about them, but those are matters that are pending.  But, you know, sometimes the cases that can tend to mean the most are often ones that get the least ink.  One of the cases to which I had probably my most profound reaction was a case that got no press attention.  It involved two young black women who worked at the corrections department [D.C. Department of Corrections] here in Washington [D.C.].  They were clerical employees.  And a supervisor in another chain of command in that corrections department allegedly came by their workstations on a regular basis, engaged in very boorish behavior that was just repulsive, rejected their entreaties to, "Stay away, stop doing this, no, don't touch me, don't say this, get away."  And he continued to press himself on them, and continued to make their lives miserable in their workplaces.
Speaker 2: Now, is this a black man?
Speaker 1: This was--it happened to have been a black man, yes.  And they did everything that, that organization had told employees to do, and they did everything that could be expected to do, to try to put down that kind of behavior, to try to report that behavior, to try to seek some redress for this kind of mistreatment.  They told their supervisor.  They went above the supervisor to the next person above.  They filed a complaint.  They went then to the local administrative body that takes complaints about sexual harassment.  They did everything that could be expected of them and, essentially, met with no relief.  The man kept coming around, and the more they tried to play by the rules and tell people that something needs to be done, the more cocky the man got and feeling, well, I'm, "I can do this with impunity," and the worst and more boorish his behavior became.  Well, no one was taking their side.  No one was saying, "I believe you, and we're going to do something."  Everybody was sort of giving it the back of their hand.  They had nowhere else to turn, but the legal system.  They could not afford a fancy lawyer.  They found a lawyer who had never tried a case in her life.  She agreed to take the case because it seemed to have merit.  The lawyer filed the case.  The company did not agree.  The corrections department did not agree to settle it, and they hired some trial lawyers to go ahead and try it, and try to beat them at trial.  They probably perceived that the plaintiffs' lawyer was somewhat green, had never tried a case before, was not that experienced in litigating and filing motions, and so forth.  I will tell you that I spoke to the jury after the case was over, after these two women, for whom this was sort of their last gasp, took the stand.  They testified.  They talked about how badly this man would treat them, how often they would have to tell him, "Please, stop, don't do this."  And they were met with no help.  Nobody backed them up.  That, that trial went forward.  It got no ink.  And I talked to the jurors after the case.  They decided in favor of the plaintiffs.  They said, "We thought that she had, that these two plaintiffs had a green lawyer who really didn't know quite what she was doing, so we were pulling for those plaintiffs on our own."  But it was plain as day that the system these women worked in, the system these women put their faith in, to try to do something, completely fail them.
Story_ID: 633373
Speaker 1: And we returned the verdict for the plaintiff because she was, the plaintiffs, because they were wronged.  When the jury returned the verdict, announced it in open court, and the two women were sitting there, and they heard that the verdict was going to be in their favor, those two women broke out in tears.  I almost did, too.  And then the jury went back into the jury room, and I went back to thank them as I usually do with jurors.  And they said, "Judge, do you think we did the wrong thing?  We saw those women crying.  Do you think what we did was not enough?  What do you think happened?  Why were they crying?" I said, "Members of the jury, be assured what you saw were tears of joy, not of sorrow, not of pain.  If you would like to speak with them, you may."  "Oh, can we, please?"  "Of course."  I went back out and told the lawyers that the jurors would like to meet with the plaintiffs, if the plaintiffs were willing.  The plaintiffs went back into that juror room, and the jurors rushed those women.  The jurors said, "Good for you, you stood up for what was right.  You did the right thing.  You have now made it easier for women behind you in that institution to be able to be free of this kind of boorish behavior.  You have blazed a trail to allow other people to be treated right.  Good for you, and you did the right thing, and we're proud of you."  All kinds of hugs and, you know, congratulations.  I left that experience saying, it's all worth it, it's all worth it.  If I can just have one case where that kind of justice is done, then all of this other stuff is worth it.  That was one of the most profound cases, a simple case, but it was one of the most profound cases to see simple justice done for people who had been deprived of simple justice.  That was a great case.
Story_ID: 633374
Speaker 1: Not to spoil the mood--but is it common for things to turn out just the opposite? Or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, absolutely.  The employment discrimination cases that are brought in federal courts, when they go to trial, they do not have a high rate of success.  When they do succeed at trial, they have a significant rate of reversal on appeal.  And so, you do not frequently see a high number of victories in employment discrimination cases in federal courts.  And so, it's unfortunate where there are cases that are meritorious that just don't make it.
Speaker 1: Is this because the people being sued have so much, so many resources in terms of lawyers and money that they can't, that they, you know, it makes it extremely difficult to fight against them or--
Speaker 2: I think that can have an impact on occasion when you have resources on one side that are far deeper and, than they are on the other side.  You can afford expert witnesses.  You can afford to fly people from place to place.  You can afford a larger battery of lawyers.  You can afford to hire more experienced lawyers who might charge more.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but is that general--I mean, do you have a perception that, that's probably what's--they're outgunned.  That's why they really can't, they don't succeed (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, sometimes that happens.  Sometimes it's a matter of inadequate lawyering on behalf of the plaintiffs.  Sometimes it's a matter of needing to sit down with plaintiffs that don't have a very strong case, and telling them litigation is not going to be the best way to pursue this issue.  The rate, you know, the likelihood of success in courts is not going to be very high.  What you need to do is to mediate or arbitrate.  What you need to do is to work around some other way to achieve what you think you deserve.  Sometimes it's a matter of the lawyers not sitting down and telling the hard truth to plaintiffs.  This does not constitute a violation of the employment statute.  You might feel mad.  You might feel disappointed.  This does not constitute, though, a violation, and you should not try to sue 'cause it's not going to work.  If a lawyer doesn't sit down and have that hard conversation with that hard truth, and proceeds with the case, it, it's not going to go anywhere, so that happens sometimes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Is there a--I guess a significant portion of these cases that settle out of court in some way or before they even--
Speaker 2: Only about 1 percent of civil cases that get filed in our court [U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia] anyway end up going to trial.  So, that means 99 percent of the civil cases go out somehow.  Sometimes they go out because the cases just aren't there, and they're not violations, and a party will file a motion to throw the case out, or it'll get thrown out.  Sometimes the case will go into settlement discussions or mediation, and they'll reach an agreement where they can reach some common ground and decide, look, litigation is going to be too expensive.  This is not the way to go.  Let's just try to agree on something, and they settle them out.  That does happen and that's common.
Story_ID: 633375
Speaker 1: Now what is your judicial philosophy?
Speaker 2: That's one of the hardest questions I can imagine.  I didn't come into the bench with a judicial philosophy.  I can't say that ten years on the bench [at the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia] have created something I would identify as a judicial philosophy.  I come at this as a public servant.  People pay federal taxes for a variety of purposes, one of which is to be able to have a federal judiciary that can resolve disputes between people and entities in a peaceful way, in a predictable way, in a way that's according to the law and the rules.  Many parts of the globe don't have that kind of a system.  People have to resolve disputes by resort to self-help, by resort to violence, by resort to wars, by resort to all kinds of other mechanisms.  I view myself as a public servant who is carrying out a task that the taxpayers have funded our government to do.  I will try to do my best to bring resolution to disputes that they bring to me.  I will try to do it according to the law that pro- provides guidance and predictability to parties when they are trying to determine, well, what is the way that I must proceed according to the rules.  How do I play by the rules?  But I also try to resolve those disputes in ways that will bring fairness and justice to the parties that bring to me disputes that call for my exercise of discretion.  I don't know that, that describes a judicial philosophy as much as it describes an approach to my view about my responsibilities and my obligations.  But that's how I try to attack some of these disputes that I'm paid to try to resolve.
Story_ID: 633376
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I have worked here in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] with a volunteer organization I helped to found--I don't know, twenty years ago--called Concerned Black Men of Washington, D.C. [Washington, D.C.] that has a focus on the young people.  We've done a lot of things working with young kids.  When I started having children [Jordan Roberts and Jillian Roberts], I had a lot less time to work with the organization, but I continued to pay dues and, and make contributions.  But one of the things that I see, at least on the bench [at the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia], with respect to the African American community, at least locally, that is replicated in many other cities, is the large number of young black children growing up without guidance from working men in their lives.  They're growing up without a father in their homes whom they see getting up every morning, putting on whatever uniform they wear to go to work, going to work, coming home every night to their mothers and to the children, coming home every Friday, putting that paycheck on the table to help buy the groceries, to pay the utility bills to, you know, buy clothing for the kids and so on.  Too many children grow up in environments where the only modeling they see of men is of men who are not gainfully employed and, unfortunately, some are engaged in narcotics trafficking, for example.  Men who, because of the absence of men in their own formative lives, have grown to view relationships with women in ways that are very unhealthy, very disrespectful, and sometimes quite violent.  And so, children grow up modeling relationships between men and women that are just unhealthy for our community.  Children grow up with images about how to live that's based upon unhealthy behaviors they see.  They become adults who then don't know how properly to rear children and give them the kind of guidance, so that the next generation will be able to grow up with a sense of responsibility and contribution to a community and going back.  And it is a difficult cycle to break when you have a government, or local, or state, or federal that has not invested in the kind of infrastructure and support networks to provide the kind of support for communities that really need it.  Public schools in many places are failing students.  Social service agencies are not adequately staffed to be able to bring some of the help as a safety net for kids who are falling through it.  I worry about that.  I worry that generations are coming up with completely unhealthy views about male-female relationships, about what is a positive thing toward which to aspire, career-wise and future-wise.  And I can only hope that people who have opportunities to do work, people who have opportunities that have grown up in positive households will be able to reach back and work with communities that are underserved, and be able to show those communities there is a different way.  And there are ways that young children and young people can lead positive and productive lives, and can see ways other than some of the abysses that we've fallen into in some of our neighborhoods.  But I see so much of the product of that in our court system every day that, that's a worry that I have.
Speaker 1: How's the response been to Concerned Black Men or--
Speaker 2: How is--
Speaker 1: Yeah, how has the response been from black men to Concerned Black Men?  Are you--is it easy to recruit men to participate?
Speaker 2: Well, when we first formed a chapter probably back in 1982 or '83 [1983], maybe '84 [1984], many of us had just come to Washington, young, you know, people getting new jobs straight out of school.  And we were able to recruit quite a few people to do quite a few things.  And, that was then.  I started having children of myself in the '90s [1990s], so I haven't been keeping up with the recruitment effort after that.  But it seems to ring true in the community when black men step forward and say, "I'm here to work with young kids."  Schools come and say, "Oh, can you come in and work with our kids?"  Organizations come say, "Oh, can you come mentor our kids?"  And it's something that does ring true with a lot of communities, so I think it's working pretty well.
Story_ID: 633377
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you'd done to this point, is there any major thing that you would differently if you could?
Speaker 2: I suppose you're talking to someone who is trying to balance that obligation to do the work that I've been sworn in to do, but also to do what is, for me, my first obligation, and that is to be a good parent.  If I could readjust what I have done, I would try to pour a lot more time into all of my efforts to rear my own children [Jordan Roberts and Jillian Roberts], spend more time with them, be more of a presence in their lives, instead of saying sometimes on weekends, "I've got to go into the office to do a few more things," or not getting home until after 8 or 8:30 or 9 because I've been doing things here at the, at chambers [of the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia].  In other words, I'd like to try to find a way to get my job done more efficiently, so that I can be home earlier, and leave home in the morning a little bit later to, to be there with them.  But I do think that one of our greatest callings is to be life-givers and parents.  As much as I honor and respect the trust given to me as a judge, my first job is to bring those children up as well as I could.
Story_ID: 633378
Speaker 1: One of the other questions we always ask is at this juncture in your life when you look back at what you've done, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I can tell you that at my ripe young age, I have never tried to think about what would be a legacy.  I assume I will have to leave that to others to decide, but I suppose that if I had to say anything about it, it would be that I have tried to treat people fairly.  I have tried to accord the respect that people deserve to them.  I have tried to model for my children [Jordan Roberts and Jillian Roberts] a method of behaving with respect, so that when you give respect, you can get it, and to remember that while I perform my judicial role as well.  There is no party who is too low to be treated with dignity, to be accorded every bit of attention that anyone else receives, and to be spoken to as ladies or gentlemen.  So, I hope that in part, one thing I've tried to do in my life, in my work, is to follow that Golden Rule: "Do unto others as you'd have, as you'd have them do unto you."  And I thank my parents [Angeline Tynes Roberts and Beverly Roberts] for ingraining that in me, and helping me to remember that that's a very important thing.
Story_ID: 633379
Speaker 1: I was thinking here, with so many examples of, and you know, the history of some of the black judges or federal judges, do you have any role models or any favorite judicial figures?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, that's interesting. That's a question that I was asked when I was being interviewed for this position.  And it's difficult to identify a single individual, black or white, man or woman.  What I mentioned at that time was that there were a number of characteristics that I wanted to try to emulate when I got on the bench.  And I remember that one of the characteristics was to call them as you see them.  And there were a couple of judges before, whom I had appeared at that time, who exemplified that characteristic.  One was Judge Norma Holloway Johnson.  She was the first and only black woman appointed to the United States District Court [U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia] as a district judge in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.].  She served as our chief judge before she retired, but she was an active judge at the time I was appointed.  And Judge Johnson ran a no-nonsense courtroom.  She called them as she saw them.  I was appearing at that time as a prosecutor.  If the government messed up, she'd call us on it.  If the defense messed up, she'd call them on it.  She showed no fear, no favor.  She called them as she saw them.  There was another judge, Roy Lamberth [Royce C. Lamberth], whom I appeared in front of.  He was a former assistant United States attorney, chief of the Civil Division [U.S. Attorney's Office].  And one might assume that he would favor the government when the government appeared in front of him.  It didn't happen.  He called them as he saw them.  If the government messed up, he'd call you out on it.  If the defense messed up, he'd call you out on it.  He called them as he saw them.  He happens now to be our chief judge and has taken that position effective today.  Today's his first day as chief judge of the United States District Court.  Another quality that I had hoped to emulate was the quality of the judges, who would let lawyers try their case, and also give you a full and fair explanation for any rulings that they were making on motions that you have brought with them.  There was a Judge Joyce Hens Green, whom I had appeared in front of.  And another Judge Thomas Hogan [Thomas F. Hogan].  Thomas Hogan was most recently our chief judge and jus- ended his term yesterday, and turned it over to chief Judge Lamberth today.  But I had tried cases in front of both of those judges.  I had been in motion hearings with both of those judges.  And those were judges who would give you absolutely well-reasoned, well-thought out, well-articulated, and thorough rulings.  They'd tell you exactly what they were doing, and they would tell you they were doing it.  They would tell you the precedent that supported the reasoning that they came out with.  And I thought that, that was the kind of thing that every judge ought to do.  Indeed, when you're finally at the trial stage, those were judges who would let you try your case.  There were some judges who were more interventionists, who were more hands-on, who, I guess at that, that time as a trial lawyer, I thought, were really sort of interfering with your ability to try your case.  I remember thinking that Judge Green and Judge Hogan were absolute joys to try cases in front of because when you tried to come to court, well-prepared as I always tried to do, they would appreciate that.  They'd know that you knew what you were doing, and they would give you the leeway to try your case.  They wouldn't try to interfere with you, second-guess you, butt into your preparation.  And I thought that was a quality and characteristic that, that I admired.  So, those are some of judges who reflected those characteristics that I looked up to, and I hope I've tried to learn a bit from when I am in court myself.
Story_ID: 633380
Speaker 1: Now, have your parents [Angeline Tynes Roberts and Beverly Roberts] been impressed by your career so far or are they--
Speaker 2: Well, I was lucky enough to have my dad still alive when I did get sworn into the bench here [U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia] in 1998.  We had an investiture in our ceremonial courtroom.  And he was sitting in the front row and could see what was going on.  He was quite up in age then, and ailing, but I knew that might be the final public opportunity I'd have to put the spotlight on him.  And so, when I was finally sworn in and was turned to, to give brief remarks, I gave him public thanks in front of the hundreds of people who are assembled, and I asked him to stand up, so they could see him.  And I went over and gave him a big hug and told him thank you.  And I saw a smile on his face that I think stayed through the rest of the time that he lived.  So, I think he--and I think my mom has been smiling down on what I've been doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell us a little about your family.  You have children, right, you have--
Speaker 2: Yes, I got married in 1988.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: I got married in 1988.  And my wife and I had our first child in 1991.  Nineteen eighty-eight [1988] is when we got married.  We had our first child in 1991.  Our son [Jordan Roberts] just turned seventeen, which means that he has gotten his provisional driver's license.  It means, I'm hearing, "Dad, can I borrow the keys," a lot more.  And it also means that we're beginning our sort of one year of parent anxiety about college preparation process.  We took, a month ago, a week off when my son was on spring break to drive around to colleges he was interested in looking at.  He told me that he wants to go someplace that has a cold climate--go figure.  And he wants to look at small liberal arts colleges, principally in the Northeast.  So, that made planning an itinerary for driving around fairly easy, and we saw about six or seven schools.  My wife [Vonya McCann Roberts] and I had our daughter [Jillian Roberts] who is now fourteen.  They're both now in the same high school.  My daughter was actually quite interested that she's now in the high school of her big brother.  So, when she sees big brother, or at least when she started the ninth grade, and saw big brother in the hallway, she'd wave and say hi.  And big brother, of course, was into, I don't know, I'm an eleventh grade or now--don't blow my cool, you know, hold on.  But, happily, they've been two that have, we have those two children.  They have actually gotten along pretty well.  The sibling rivalry, of course, can't escape any group of children, but we're blessed that they have been very good kids.  They've done well in school and they've, so far, walked a fairly straight path, and we're quite proud of them.
Story_ID: 633381
Speaker 1: My wife is a lawyer, though I had promised myself when I got out of law school [Columbia Law School, New York, New York] that the one thing I would not do is marry another lawyer.  There was something irresistible, however, when I met her, and was able to talk with her, and the wisdom that she had for a person as young as she was, overwhelmed me.  She was also funny, a great sense of humor, and looked pretty good, too.  So, we ended up getting engaged and got married, and I was quite happy to have broken my promise that I would not marry a lawyer.  She was a lawyer in private practice at a major firm here in Washington [D.C.], and worked her way up to the ranks to become partner in that firm, and stayed until President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] appointed her to a post at the state department [U.S. Department of State] where she held the rank of ambassador, and was in charge of all international telecommunications and information policy.  She would head U.S. delegations to, to various conferences where treaties were, treaties were being negotiated involving assignment of parts of the telecommunication spectrum to different entities or countries, and other kinds of telecom and information policy matters.  So, she'd be the ambassador leading the delegations and had many other duties.  We thought that she'd spend two years in that position, which is sort of a typical political appointee position.  But she was doing so well at it and enjoying it so much, she ended up spending five years in the state department and, finally, came out.  And she went to join Sprint [Sprint Corporation] where she is an executive with Sprint now.  So, that's my family.  Vonya McCann [Vonya McCann Roberts] is her name, and we've been married since--this will be our twentieth year in 19--in 2008.  We'll be looking forward to celebrating our twentieth anniversary.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Now, is there anything we need to talk about before I ask my last question that you can think of?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I guess it depends on what the last question is going to be.  But I realize that in describing my wonderful children, I didn't mention their names.  My son is Jordan Nash McCann Roberts [Jordan Roberts], and my daughter is Jillian Amadi Roberts [Jillian Roberts].  Jordan, of course, gets his middle names--Nash is my father's middle name.  My father was Beverly Nash Roberts [Beverly Roberts].  He was named for a prominent South Carolina politician [William Beverly Nash] back in the days when he was born.  My son's second middle name is McCann, which is my wife's family name.  My daughter, Jillian, has a middle name of Amadi, A-M-A-D-I.  Amadi, we learned, is an Igbo word for rejoicing.  We wanted to give her, in part, an African name reflecting our own heritage, but we also were happy to find this name that reflected exactly how we felt when she was born.  And so, those, that's a little more of a footnote about my children.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they're doing--both quite well at, in school now.  We're happy about that.
Story_ID: 633382
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: You know, I heard that question asked of a late judge from this court [U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia], Aubrey Robinson [Aubrey E. Robinson, Jr.], who had served as a chief judge here.  And I think he gave a simple answer, which was, "Just remember me as a journeyman judge who tried to do his job as best he could."  And I don't think I could ask for more than that with respect to the work that I do.  With respect to the life that I lead outside work, I hope I could be remembered as a dad who cared, a husband who tried his best, a family member, and neighbor who would walk the extra mile for you.  Those things to me would be important, and I hope I can live to live up to those standards.
Speaker 1: All right.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --a pleasure.
