Story_ID: 438414
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer with The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me, including your middle name.
Speaker 2: I'm James E. Roberson, Sr. [HistoryMaker James Roberson].  First name is J-A-M-E-S, middle initial is E, name is Earnest, E-A-R-N-E-S-T, last name is Roberson, R-O-B-E-R-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth?
Speaker 2: June 14th, 1943.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Your occupation or former occupation?
Speaker 2: I am retired from all walks of work.  I have been a public school teacher, taught biology and science.  I've been a middle school and senior high administrator.  I have been a salesman with the automobile industry, a graduate of Ford Motor Company's dealer development program.  I'm an entrepreneur.  I've owned U-Save Auto Rental and Budget Trucks [Budget Truck Rental].  And I own property and manage property.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: The interview is being held at the Civil Rights Institute [Birmingham Civil Rights Institute] in Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March the 21st, 2007.
Story_ID: 438415
Speaker 1: I'm gonna start by asking you what I call People magazine-ish type questions, okay (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: All right.  What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you like to eat?  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Really have no choice in food, believe it or not.  My wife [Linda Thompson Roberson] can tell you I'm very difficult.  Basically I'm eating more fish than anything else.  And when you get a certain level of age behind you, you become conscious of what you're eating.  I'm a sweet lover.  I--anything from coconut cake to pound cake, and I eat something sweet every day, small portion, but something every day.  I have no desires for anything beyond whatever my wife prepares for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: We travel a lot as a family.  I try to expose my kids [James Roberson, Jr., Shayla Roberson, and Jemia Roberson] to different cultures and different climates.  And probably of all the vacations that we've had, any of the Caribbean islands are good.  I like the water, and the sun, and the relationship of the people.  And some of the places we've gone have been devastating to my kids to see how people actually live.  One example was Mexico.  They were very shocked, the condition of life in Mexico.  I've gone everywhere I want to go in the world, including Africa, except two places.  And my wife has taken me to Alaska.  And the other place I want to go is to Brazil, to Carnival, without her.  And she says that won't happen.  Other than that, we've been all over the world and had a good stay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year, believe it or not, is the springtime.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To me, I'm the opposite of my wife.  She loves fall because of the coloration in the mountains, being from Florida.  I like spring because it brings forth life, and the colors, and the trees, and the living in Alabama you have a variety of colors and backgrounds, and people begin to move.  And spring is probably my favorite time of the year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: As an old administrator, I have a lot of them.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: But I'm just gonna, I'm just gonna share two.  And a lot of time in trying to inspire young people, I say, stone walls do not a prison make nor iron bars a cage.  And from that, I try to let people know the potential of what things are or actually how you see them.  And then from a religious standpoint, Jesus is the center of my joy, and I don't allow anyone to steal my joy.  And I--it took my wife a long time to understand what that meant, but now she understands that having your own joy and having your own happiness is a very precious thing.
Story_ID: 438416
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mother.  Tell me her name and spell it for me please.
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Aressa, A-R-E-S-S-A, last name was Craig, C-R-A-I-G [Aressa Craig Roberson].  And my mom to me was probably one of the most influencing persons on how to treat people.  My mother grew up in a rural area of Alabama called Clanton, C-L-A-N-T-O-N, where her father [Abraham Craig] was the big time minister and preacher in that area.  But she grew up sharing and giving, and she was the one to instill within me whatever you have, you have the ability to share with others, and it multiplies.  She was a person who endured a lot, based on the location of where we lived and what community we lived in during the civil rights struggle.  She had a lot to be concerned about over the safety of her family and kid.  She was a type of mother who prepared a meal every day.  And she had a lot of rules in the house.  And one rule was, whatever was placed on your plate had to be consumed by you.  And I had a lot of problems with that because being a black child, I didn't like cornbread, and cornbread was a stable of blacks.  Everybody ate cornbread that had soul.  So I would stuff my cornbread in my pockets or pass it off to my brother [Lawrence Roberson] to get rid of it.  And sometimes she would catch us and sometimes she would not.  She assigned chores to every member of the family.  And your chores were not only p.m. chores, they were a.m. chores.  She had rules about your bed had to be made and your room cleared and straight before you departed.  But yet at the same time, if we had a basketball game going in the backyard, she would come out and play basketball with us.  And my mother is one of my miracles.  I have two miracles in life.  My mom, as she got older, we became closer together.  And being the only child left in Alabama, I took care of her, but she never lost her independence.  I took over after my father [Mack Roberson] passed.  She didn't have an income that she normally had.  Mom would still write checks to the church and write checks.  And I took her checkbook, and she went to the bank and made new checks.  And they bounced all over, so I had to have a separate account with the banker in case she writes a check.  She lived to be eighty-five years old.  And in her latter life, she had a tremendous impact on my girls, who loved her because of her kindness, and she always gave them that special love.  She was the kind of mother that made sure that you understood that your father was the head of the house, and his word was the last word.  So, if you went to dad and he said no, you might as well not go to mom because she'll say, "What did your dad say?"  And that's basically was important lesson to me that we could not conquer and divide our parents because of the relationship that she had.  She did work one part of her life as a dentist hygiene [dental hygienist].  And then she got us through high school, and she went out and became a cashier at a friend's school of mine.  She did that until she decided she wanted to come home.  After my father died, I made a promise to her that she would never be put in a nursing home.  Had to break that promise in the latter phase of her life.  But if I had to say anything about my mom, she was a giving and very warm-hearted person who sacrificed for everyone.  And mothers today just don't have that same degree of giving.  I have two daughters [Shayla Roberson and Jemia Roberson] and a daughter-in-law, and they're good ladies, but they don't have that commitment of sharing, giving before you receive.  And to me it was a joy to have her as a mom.
Speaker 1: How much education did your mother have?
Speaker 2: My mom was a high school graduate, which was a big thing then.  So many people in the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s] did not finish high school.  But she graduated from high school, and she graduated from dentist hygiene school, did further study as--to work in a dentist's office.  But both my parents were high school graduates, and they both emphasized the importance of education.
Story_ID: 438417
Speaker 1: And she was your first miracle?  Is that what you were saying (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I've had two miracles.  One was--two miracles, and one was Reverend Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth], who was a civil rights leader in Birmingham [Alabama] during the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s].  I saw and witnessed the bombing of the Bethel Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama] and the parsonage on Christmas night in 1956.  And based on the devastation of the house and the destruction around the--for blocks, it was not humanly possible for anyone to survive that degree of powerful dynamite that went off.  But I saw Reverend Shuttlesworth walk out of that house that was torn away, had fallen in on him, without a scratch, without a drop of blood, without loss of sight, without deafness, and came out and preached about love for all mankind.  So I tagged him as my first miracle.  And when I have an opportunity to introduce him, I have introduced him as my first miracle.  My mom [Aressa Craig Roberson] is a miracle.  In her age when she became sick, and we took her to Atlanta [Georgia] to stay with my sister [Bernita Roberson Sawyer] in Decatur, Georgia, they called and said that she was passing away, and we needed to hurry, hurry to Atlanta if we wanted to see her alive.  And we rushed to Atlanta, and when we got to Atlanta, she had recovered.  The doctor said, "We don't know what it is.  She's back, she's normal."  And so I talked to my mom, and my mom told me about her trip to heaven.  And I said mom, wait now, you know, you don't, you don't--she said, "Look, I know what I saw."  She began to name people that were dead she saw.  She talked about a light that she had seen and how beautiful it was, and then all of a sudden, she remembered coming back.  And I said, "Well, mom, are you sure?"  She said, "I know what I'm talking about."  So I classify that as a miracle, and the doctors did also.  She had a chance to come back and live approximately another fifteen years.  And so she got a chance to see her grandkids and her great-grandkids only because of that miracle that she did.  And I equated that miracle to the kind of life that she lived.  And she received a blessing from the positive blessings in the bank of eternity.
Story_ID: 438418
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Aressa Craig Roberson] share any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Basically, we shared some.  My mother was not a big storyteller, but she had a sense of pride about my grandfather, Reverend A. Craig [Abraham Craig], had twenty-one kids.  And we had a standard joke.  My wife [Linda Thompson Roberson] kids me all the time about she's not gonna be like my granddaddy and have twenty-one kids.  But we had conversations about growing up and walking to school and walking for four and five miles to school, how important that was.  She shared about sleeping in the cold in the house when all--there was no heat, and they had to stoke the fireplace.  And she was in charge of getting up, waking the fire back up.  And she also shared about farming.  And we laughed about it because my grandfather had a farm.  And even as a young lad, my mom, and my Uncle Joe [Joseph Craig], and all the kids would be sent to Clanton, Alabama, to stay with granddaddy and grandma.  And at that time, granddad had mules, and he would get the guys out and make them plow.  Now plowing is actually a lost art, where you walk behind a mule and split the earth.  And I was so city that I didn't learn how to do it.  My mama had told me how she didn't learn how to do things so they didn't make her work, so I never learned how to plow (laughter).  And granddad talked about it, but I was smart enough I didn't plow.  He worked the rest of my boy cousins to death plowing for him.  And she talked about how granddad would pray every Sunday before breakfast.  And as a young lad, when we went down, there were fifteen of us then, everybody had to pray.  So the food would be ready, and by the time we got through praying, it was an hour gone, food would be cold, and no--and then when we all, when all the grandkids got through praying and all the younger siblings of my mom, granddad would then pray another fifteen minutes.  So everybody knew the food was gonna be cold, the eggs were gonna be cold, the biscuits gonna be cold.  But she shared that and I had a chance to experience some of her own experiences by having an opportunity to be with my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about your grandmother.  What was her name?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was--well, my grandmother was actually Eunice Craig, and that's E-U-N-I-C-E.  Grandmother that I knew was as young as my oldest uncle.  So, that became a little problem because the older set of kids did not particularly care for my grandmother because she was a young grandmother.  And Uncle Ben [Benjamin Craig] was twenty-one, and I think she was twenty, so granddaddy married him a young lady.  And grandmother was very kind and quiet, but she did not interact like granddad because he was such a dominating person.  She would do all the domestic work.  She was the pastor's wife, so she would make all the prayer meetings and all of that.  And she would emphasize to us the importance of listening to your elders and obeying.  Whatever you want to do in life, remember you have to give respect.  And she was a very strong disciplinarian.  And she actually would send us out into the field to bring back sticks to be punished with.  And if it did not measure up (laughter), she would plait them together.  So she was--today she would be arrested (laughter).  She would definitely be arrested because she would--that was her way of punishing you.  And she was very religious and very kind to us, but she was not the kind of grandmother that would come up and embrace you and hug you like that.  But I remember her, and she outlived granddaddy about ten or fifteen years.  And as she got older, we got closer together, and I would go visit her.  And she loved to walk out.  And I had an opportunity to take my kids [James Roberson, Jr., Shayla Roberson, and Jemia Roberson] to see her, to go out into the--pick peaches from the trees.  In Clanton, Alabama, they are known for their peaches.  But a very sweet person.  Don't know anything about an education level.  At that age, I didn't ask.  I'll assume that she might have finished high school, but I'm not really sure.
Story_ID: 438419
Speaker 1: Do you have any knowledge of slavery on your mother's [Aressa Craig Roberson] side of the family?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side of the family, we went back as far as we can go.  And I had an aunt in California who did a family tree.  And she indicated that we--our race tree was a mixture of Indians [Native American] and of white slaves.  And my grandfather [Abraham Craig] was fair-skinned, because of the Indian mix.  Did not know anything specifically.  She said that we were from North Carolina or Georgia.  I have that book, have not done any research with it.  But slavery, as young people might think of slavery as locked in chains, and put away, and second-class citizen, but to me slavery is a mental thing.  And slavery dictates to me where we were in the '30s [1930s], and the '40s [1940s], and the '50s [1950s], and the '60s [1960s] because you were enslaved mentally.  And from the mental standpoint, we're still breaking away from slavery.  But actually knowing details, I do not know any specific (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --detail.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 438420
Speaker 1: On your father's side, tell me your father's name.
Speaker 2: My father--thank God that my name was changed.  My father is Mack, M-A-C-K, Earnest, and he spelled it E-A-R-N-E-S-T, Roberson [Mack Roberson].  Dad was born in Monroe, Georgia, and migrated to Birmingham, Alabama because of the steel mill and the jobs that were here for blacks.  My dad was a very strong disciplinary person, and a person that had a tremendous commitment to doing what's right.  He was a natural leader in the community.  He was well-known because he dealt with young people in football, basketball, baseball.  He was like the recreational athletic director for the community.  He worked--he was gifted in a lot of ways.  He worked for L&N Railroad, Louisville and Nashville Railroad.  And we had the pleasure of getting what we call passes.  If you work for the railroad, you could get free passes to ride.  So it was very frequent that we would take a pass to St. Louis [Missouri], or a pass to Cincinnati [Ohio], or a pass to Atlanta [Georgia] and ride the trains.  Things were segregated then, but we felt fantastic getting on a train and riding.  My dad was a writer of poetry and plays.  And a lot of the young people who are now my age and younger were participants on his plays.  And he did one play about the future.  He talked about leadership, and airplanes and things, so every year he would do a play for Easter, or a play for Christmas, or do a play for youth day.  He did a lot of writing, and his writing actually had an impact on a lot of the young people in our community.  One young lady that used to be in the plays is Virginia Fields Clark [C. Virginia Fields], who is a bigwig in New York [New York].  And she credits my daddy for teaching her to stand up and speak.  She's, she is a not the mayor of New York, but she's a--they, they have a title, and I can't think of it, of the borough of Manhattan [New York], and she's elected.  And she gives dad credit for the opportunity of teaching her how to speak.  We have several guys that are in medicine and chemistry.  They always relate back to--and everybody called my dad Mr. Mack.  When Mr. Mack made me do this on the play, or he made me do that, he taught me how to do football, he taught me how to do--I could not play for my father's teams because he was probably a little too strict on me.  I was always the scapegoat.  And he'd knock a softball to one of the other guys, and they'd catch the ball, and he said, "Great deal."  He'll hit mine so fast, you were scared to pick it up, and then he'd get on me for not standing in front of it and catch it.  So I told my mom [Aressa Craig Roberson], I'm not playing for dad.  I think my brother [Lawrence Roberson] played for him, but I didn't play for him.  I played on another team because he wanted me to be the best.
Story_ID: 438421
Speaker 1: What I respect about my dad [Mack Roberson] was he made me believe and told me I could be whatever I wanted to be.  He didn't tell me I had to be in a specific place or I had to act a certain way.  He said get an education, and you can do anything you want to do.  So he pushed me in the grades.  Every grading period we had to stand and present our report cards to him.  And Cs were not an acceptable grade.  And my dad was a very strict disciplinarian, and he would also be arrested today on some of the things that he had done.  He gave us chores early in life.  And we kid about this all the time.  We had an old car that it took two people to start.  One got on the inside, start, one choke the carburetor, pour--yeah, I know you don't know anything about that--but pour gas in the carburetor and choke it with your hand to get it started.  And my job was, whenever they were going somewhere, was to get the car out of the garage, and bring it around to the front, leave it running so that it would be warm when he got in it.  One Sunday morning he was taking my grandmother to the train station, and he said, "Get the car ready."  So I got up.  The car wouldn't start.  Went and got my brother and said, "Come on and choke the carburetor where I can get the car started."  He said okay.  He came out.  It wouldn't start.  I said, "Go tell dad that I cannot get the car started."  Lawrence [Lawrence Roberson] goes back and gets into bed and go to sleep.  Dad walk out the front door, no car.  He come back through the house, looked at me.  Before I could say anything, he actually pulled a peach tree out of the ground.  And I have that tree today (laughter).  I have that tree today, and I wrote a note on it.  That tree is about a half a inch in diameter, and he would commence to just beat me like I was a real slave.  And I couldn't tell him that I had told Lawrence to tell you.  He said, "No, it was your responsibility.  It was your job.  It was your responsibility to tell me.  You should not have sent a message.  You should have brought it to me directly."  And he beat me so bad 'til I had bruises and cuts in my back.  My mom [Aressa Craig Roberson] was furious with him.  She said, "Don't you ever beat my child like that."  And she was--oh, mama stood up.  I was so proud of her.  She stood up and told him.  And then, and I said, "Daddy, I thought you loved me, but I don't think you really love me."  My dad, with his mean, headstrong self, went to the store and bought some ice cream.  Now dad went and bought ice cream--dad doesn't shop--brought the ice cream back, and tried to share ice cream with me.  I refused to eat it.  I said, "No, I'm not eating anything with you."  And I think that kind of brought him down 'cause he--I don't think he realized how viciously he was attacking me and the amount of body damage on my back that had been done.  And from that forward he never, never use a peach tree.  Now he used a belt, but he never used a peach tree again.  But he was a very proud man.  He enjoyed the way he spoke.  He would tell you to look at people straight in their eye, don't look down, keep your shoes shined, hair combed, well-groomed.  You represent me.  And until he passed, he was that kind of a person that really wanted to make the best out of us.  And he lived by example.  He was a--we did no smoking in my house.  We did not drinking in our house.  We did no cursing in our house.  We did no game playing, cards, dominoes, checkers, none of that was allowed.  And I had an Uncle Johnny [ph.] from Chicago [Illinois] who came down.  And Uncle Johnny was a drinker.  And my daddy went in the guest bedroom and saw Uncle Johnny had some Scotch in his house.  He politely got the Scotch bottle, Uncle Johnny's suitcase, and put him out.  And Johnny said--he said, "No, you can't come in my house."  And so he would--and everybody knew that about him.  So if we wanted to dance, we had to go to someone else's house and dance.  If we wanted to play checkers or cards, we had to go to someone else's house to dance.  He was a very strong discipline, but at the same time, he taught us a lot of valuable lessons.
Story_ID: 439964
Speaker 1: We were talking about your father [Mack Roberson], and you were saying that he wasn't very affectionate.  And you had a story about that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, my dad was not a touchy person.  I grew up under his rules and regulations.  I was the kind of son that was a little defiant.  I was the one that would stand up.  I can remember as a young lad I disobeyed him.  And he attempted to say something to me, and I walked away.  He grabbed me, I grabbed him.  The next thing I know I was up in the air coming down head first on the floor.  I never made that mistake again.  He was a type of person who wanted the best for--he was very creative.  He could hang paper.  He could build houses.  He could do automobile mechanic work.  We had--my dad wanted me to be all well-rounded.  He put a golf course in our front yard.  We're talking 1940, 1950.  We had the flag poles, and dad taught us how to play golf years ago, and we laugh about it.  We had the only golf course in the, in the ghetto and in the area.  We didn't know, we didn't know, actually I didn't know we were poor, didn't know what poor was 'cause my daddy provided so many different things for us.  I was given a car that was not a complete car.  I had to work to buy parts for it to put it together.  And those were the kind of lessons that he taught me.  But he was never a, "I love you, son," type daddy.  He was never the kind who would come up and embrace you.  He dealt with words.  So, and I reflected.  And I--when I was, as an adult, and my mother [Aressa Craig Roberson] and father were celebrating their fiftieth anniversary, and we wanted them to have a suite in a hotel, limo service.  It was a black-tie affair, beautiful affair.  We invited a lot of the people from the different levels of Birmingham [Alabama] that knew us.  And at that reception was the first time that my father ever embraced me.  And I say that emotionally because men did not embrace.  It was a sign of weakness.  And my father actually embraced me.
Story_ID: 439965
Speaker 1: So as a dad, and as a principal, as a teacher, I took on the crusade of letting my kids know I love them.  I took on the crusade of embracing.  I took on the crusade of letting them know it was all right for men to cry.  It's all right for men to say I love you.  But when your time comes to be a man, make the decision like a man.  So I have a son, Jay [James Roberson, Jr.].  He's a junior.  And then we have another James, Tres [James Roberson III], his son.  And I tell him I love him.  I embrace him.  My daughters [Shayla Roberson and Jemia Roberson], I do the same thing.  Dad was not that kind of person, but he showed his love by his standards, his actions, and his pressure, and putting on you to make sure that you would never disappoint him by doing something that was wrong.  And I grew up in a community where--before integration, and I worked very hard at integration, did a lot of things during the sit-ins and all of that.  But before integration, there was a canvas of a beautiful community where every adult in the community was your mom, and every male that was an adult was your dad.  And if Mrs. Reddrick [ph.] reprimanded me and spanked my behind, I didn't want to go home and tell mama [Aressa Craig Roberson], because if I told mama, I was gonna get another one.  If Mr. Revis [ph.] told me to come over and help him do some work, we did it.  So we had that kind of community, and that was a sense of pride.  You are Mack Earnest's [Mack Roberson] son.  You are going to be somebody.  You are going to lead.  You are going to do--and he expected it.  I had to be home at a certain time.  Oh, I used to hate it.  You know, when you get fourteen, fifteen you want to hang on the block, whistle at the girls.  My dad--I had a nine o'clock curfew.  So at nine o'clock if I was not in my house, he would stand on the front porch and whistle.  And it--and my friend said, "Your dad's calling you.  You got to go."  And so, it was embarrassing, but I had to leave.  There was a special place in the community where it was black-owned, little, hamburger, hot dog, pool table, and everybody would hang around there.  Dad told me that was off limits.  So, he whistled at nine o'clock one night, and there was no James [HistoryMaker James Roberson].  And he kept whistling, so he began to walk.  And he walked about four blocks from our house, and there I was in the snack shack with my buddies.  And they said, "Ah, your daddy's coming."  I looked around, and daddy had a tree (laughter) coming behind him.  And before I would let him beat me in front of those kids, I raced all the way home.  And he took out behind him.  I actually ran three blocks and beat him home.  And when I got home my mama stopped him, you know, 'cause he was gonna actually--he was that kind of person.  He said--and now I look back at some of those young guys whose parents did not mandate certain standards.  Some of them are in jail, some of them are dead, some of--and I don't know if that's all of it, but my daddy had high expectations for us.  And he did it for my brother [Lawrence Roberson] and my sister [Bernita Roberson Sawyer].  All of us are college graduates.  All of us have advanced degrees.  All of us work, and all of us been blessed to have good kids.  And I reflect back on the fact that my dad put those standards within us.  And some of them were bordering on unlawful, but (laughter) they were the kind that stuck with me and gave me a good feeling about who I was and what--and it gave me the nerve to challenge a lot of the segregation laws that were in Alabama because I had been taught that I was just as equal.  If I could think, and I had the ability, I could participate.  And so I went out and began to challenge the automobile dealers in Birmingham, Alabama, where there were no black salesmen around.  We had one guy working part time (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 439966
Speaker 1: Before you go on to that, I want to go back and talk about your grandparents.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me your father's mother's name.
Speaker 2: My father's mother's name was Lola [Lola Roberson].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And grandma was an educator.  She taught school in Georgia, and then she came to Birmingham [Alabama] when they moved.  And I don't--I think, as far as I can recall, she was a homemaker.  She was the kind that--she was like national secretary of the Baptist Convention and things of this nature.  I could remember, used to love to go to grandma and granddad's house and spend the weekend.  Oh, I would love to do that.  Grandma used to have real wavy, used to have real wavy hair.  And grandma would get up and do my favorite breakfast, and then she would comb and rub my hair and comb it.  And she'd clip it and comb it.  And then we would walk hand-in-hand from her house to 22nd Avenue Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama], where she was a clerk, and she sang in the choir.  So I had a chance to go up in the choir loft with grandma and sing with her.  And I can remember her saying now, don't you just sing now, smile.  Don't sing.  But, you know, she didn't want me to sing, but she would do that for me.  Granddad was--and they called him J.W [James W. Roberson].  Granddad was kind of an entrepreneur.  He used to buy and sell coal.  We didn't have natural gas, and a lot of black folks didn't have electricity.  They heated by coal.  So he would go to the mines or wherever and load his truck up.  And he had a coal route, and he was doing that.  And my daddy [Mack Roberson] used to tell me war stories about how hard granddaddy worked him.  So I know how he worked me, because his daddy worked him that way.  Granddaddy got like--he wore a shirt and tie, a shirt and bowtie all the time.  Very proud, very dignified, kind of quiet-spoken but provided for his family.  And granddaddy died when I was very young, but I--my brother [Lawrence Roberson] and my sister [Bernita Roberson Sawyer] cannot recall him because they were young, and he died before they got of any ages of memory.  But both of them were people who had a sense of pride about family, and they had high expectations for all of us.
Speaker 1: Did your grandparents on both sides or either side own property?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, oh yeah, yeah.  On my dad's side, when you say property, my dad bought their house when they came.  And they came to Birmingham from Georgia, and they lived with an aunt in Pratt City [Alabama] who had a big house.  And then they bought a house, and so they lived in their own home.  They--I don't--I know they did not rent.  To my knowledge they did not rent, but they owned their own home.  And it was a small house but a very well kept house.  Grandmamma was immaculate.  She did a lot of sewing and things on my daddy side.  On my mother's [Aressa Craig Roberson] side, my grandfather owned 120 acres of land because he was farming.  And of that 120 acres I own eighty acres of it now, and that's a different story how I got that eighty acres.  But I own the--and the--my grandfather's farm in Clanton, Alabama, was 120 acres of land, and he farmed it.  He raised twenty something kids on it.  I--granddaddy--I was, I just reflect, I remember when grandfather would pick me up in Clanton in a horse and wagon.  I mean a real wooden wagon with horses pulling in front.  And I was embarrassed to ride all from Birmingham, and so I would get down in the back of the bed of the wagon.  And it would take us sometimes an hour to get home in the wagon.  And then as a preacher, he finally moved up to a car.  And the cars were not automatic, they were standard shift transmission.  And nobody would ride with granddaddy.  Reverend Craig [Abraham Craig], no, we'll walk home.  We'll walk on home 'cause granddaddy would be driving, and get ready to stop, and forget that he's in a car, and say whoa, whoa (laughter)!  Granddaddy!  And so we wouldn't, nobody would ride with, nobody would ride with granddaddy because he would sometimes forget he was driving a car and was not a good driver.  And most of the time one of my uncles would take him around.  But I can remember coming down the hill and granddaddy hollering whoa, and the car would not whoa for him.  But both of them owned property, and they've (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --always had property.
Story_ID: 439967
Speaker 1: Now the Roberson family, do you have any knowledge of any of those family members or ancestors being in slavery?
Speaker 2: Yeah, only after talking to my dad [Mack Roberson].  He indicated that his granddaddy was.  And, but they were I think--and I started doing research.  I did go and find, find some information about my last name.  And because it's Roberson, R-O-B-E-R-S-O-N, we have all derivatives in my family.  And I'm the type of person that believes in pride in what you own and what you have, so I wanted to know the real name of my name, because my uncle, Charles [Charles Roberson], who was my favorite uncle, who taught me how to drive, and, and I used to go with him to nightclubs when I wasn't supposed to go in, Uncle Charles was in the [U.S.] Navy.  And they said, "What's your name?"  And he said, "Charles T. Roberson."  And so they spelled his name, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N, and he never changed it.  So I had to tell his son.  He said, "Why's your name spelled different from mine?"  And I said, "Ask your daddy."  And he said, "He won't--he told me to ask you."  I said, "Well, when he first went into the Navy that's how they spelled his name, and he never changed it."  Grandmamma Lola [Lola Roberson] did not like Roberson, so she put a T in it and made it Robertson.  Uncle Albert [ph.] in Atlanta [Georgia] spelled it the same way, but he pronounced it Robertson.  So, I went to Monroe, Georgia, to look up to see how granddaddy's daddy's name, and I don't recall his name, how they spelled it.  And it was R-O-B-E-R-S-O-N, so that solved that problem.  I'm reflecting a little bit now on going back, trying to do some heritage.
Story_ID: 439968
Speaker 1: When my daddy [Mack Roberson] was old and dying and my son was quarterback for a football team, we were playing in the Atlanta [Georgia] stadium.  And my daddy said, "I wanna do one thing before I die, son."  I said, "What is that you want to do, dad?"  He said, "I want to go and visit your granddaddy's grave."  Now, my granddaddy's grave was in Monroe, Georgia.  I went with my daddy when I was about seven or eight years old to put a tombstone on that grave.  My daddy made tombstones also.  So I can remember my granddaddy going next door to Mr. Will Henderson [ph.], who was a contractor, to buy cement.  And he made a tombstone for James William Roberson [James W. Roberson].  And he had his date of birth on there and the day that he died.  And it was--that tombstone was 150, 200 pounds, and it was lying on its side.  And I said, "Daddy, how we gonna get this?"  So we had an old 1949 Ford, and my daddy backed the truck up--the car up to open the trunk, and got two-by-fours there inclined, pushed it on it, and it slides right in the trunk, boom.  I thought my daddy was the smartest man in the world.  He just put it in the trunk.  Then we started to Georgia, back end down, front end up.  And when we got to the gravesite, how in the world is daddy gonna get this two hundred-pound tombstone out of this trunk?  I know he can't pull it out.  I said, "Oh, Lord, how is he gonna do that?"  My daddy had a car jack, jacked up one side, put some bricks on it, jacked up the other side, put some bricks on it, jacked it up again 'til it got up right above the lid of the trunk, and then he pushed it out.  I said, "Oh, my daddy's smart."  So I remember that as a young child going to Monroe, Georgia.  Here it is in the 1990s, my dad wants to go visit his grand, his--my granddaddy, his father, and I had not been there in forty years, had no idea.  So, Jay [James Roberson, Jr.] was playing football.  The whole family was visiting my sister [Bernita Roberson Sawyer] in Decatur [Georgia].  And I said, "Dad, we're gonna get up in the morning.  Anybody who want to go with us on this expedition to find granddaddy's daddy's gravesite, you're welcome to come."  Well, we got up at six o'clock.  It was raining heavy.  Nobody wanted to go.  Daddy was not able to walk and was in a wheelchair.  And I pushed him out to the car, put him in the car, and said, "Dad, we're going to find granddaddy's tombstone."  Drove to Monroe, Georgia.  Hadn't been to Monroe, Georgia in years, had no earthly idea where to go.  First thing I saw was a black guy walking down the street, only somebody walking in Monroe.  I stopped.  I says, "Excuse me, sir.  I'm from Birmingham [Alabama].  This is my dad.  My grandfather is buried somewhere in this town, and he was a Baptist.  That's all I know."  And the guy said, "Well, sir, there are two Baptist churches still around, one, if you keep down this street, and make a right, and go through this pasture, just keep on going, you'll run up on the church.  And the other one is right up the street."  And he said, "That ain't--that one hadn't been here that long."  So we took the route of going through the pasture.  When we got there, when we pulled up, I can remember a white wooden-framed church.  It was a red brick church.  I said, "Oh, man, daddy."  I'm trying not to disappoint him.  You know, he's very sick.  And I said, "Well, daddy, Sunday school time's about to come."  So when Sunday school time started, I got out and asked a guy, I said now, an old guy, I mean seriously old, I said, "Sir, I'm here with my father.  I'm trying to find my granddaddy's gravesite.  I haven't been here in a long time."  He said, "What was your granddaddy's name?"  I said, "They called him Uncle Ike."  He said, "I know Uncle Ike.  This used to be his church."  I said, "This used to be his church?"  He said, "Yeah, this used to be his church."  I said, "Where is the graveyard?"  He said, "Just go around."  I said, "This used to be a white--," he said, "Oh, man, we tore that church down.  We built us a new church."  I was ecstatic to know that we had found the place.  So I go to the car, and I said, "Daddy, this is the place."  So we go around to the back of the church and there are hundreds of graves.  It's a huge cemetery.  When I was there it was a small cemetery.  I said, oh, God.  Daddy said, "Well, no, just get me out.  You need to find a tree.  If I could find this tree, I know where it is."  The tree had grown.  Daddy said, "Think it's right over there."  We walked over there.  I walked over there 'cause he was still in the car, and I found James.  So I said--boy, I was probably as happy as I'd been in a long time.  I went back to the car.  I said, "Dad, dad, dad, I found it."  He said, "You found it?"  I said, "Yeah, I found it."  He said, "Come on."  He got out the car, and, and I put him on the cane, and he walked to that site.  He said, "Yeah, this is it."  He said, "This is where we did this years ago."  And to me, there was nothing else I could do to make him happy.  When he died I had no regrets.  When he died I never shed a tear about his dying because I had been there with him, and I had fulfilled his goal.  I think because of what he put into me, to have a goal and to accomplish it, was a great thing.  And because he did it and instilled it in me, I tried to instill the same thing in my kids.
Story_ID: 439969
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Aressa Craig Roberson] and father [Mack Roberson] met?
Speaker 2: I could tell you, I can tell you my mama's version of it.  My daddy had a different version.  My daddy said she pursued him, but he said that that was not what happened.  My mom was a very quiet person.  She was a very skinny person.  She wasn't skinny when--for a long while.  And she had long legs.  And they were at a dance, used to have community dances.  My mom was new to Birmingham [Alabama].  She had just come up from the country, from Clanton [Alabama], and my daddy saw her.  And he said, "I was a pretty good dancer, so I was dancing with her, and we started to talking."  And then she started calling and wanted to find out who I was.  And at that time they had party lines.  And he said, "After a period of time, I thought she was a pretty good old woman, so I asked her to marry me."  So, I said, "Where did y'all get married?"  So, they said, "Well, we went to the pastor's house, and we got married in the pastor's living room."  And I said, "So y'all didn't have a big wedding?"  He said, "No, we got married, and that was the most important thing."  They met in Birmingham at a social event.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 439970
Speaker 1: You've had a lot of childhood memories, but what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory?  Oh, my God, earliest childhood memory is, God, when my father [Mack Roberson] was building his house.  Again, my dad did a lot of things.  He was gifted.  I could do a lot of things.  And, but my earliest childhood memory is my father adding room by room on our house.  And he was determined not to owe a dime on it when he finished with it.  I can remember my house being black.  We had a black house, and it was black because he was using black roofing felt to insulate the outside of the house.  And he was getting wood from the L&N Railroad [Louisville and Nashville Railroad] when they would break down a boxcar and throw away the wood.  And he would go up and load it up and put it on the house.  So as a young child, I could remember him doing that.  And I didn't understand why my house was black, and everybody else's house was white, yellow.  And eventually when he finally go through building, he put the siding on it.  That's--and I can remember I've only lived in one house all my life.  I was born in that house, not literally born, but I grew up in that house.  And all my life was there.  And that house was right across the street from a church, Bethel Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama], the church that actually became the headquarters for the Civil Rights Movement in Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: What was the street?
Speaker 2: The church is at 29th Avenue and 33rd Street North in north Birmingham.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we lived across the street.  My parents' home experienced three bombings, and I experienced the first one in 1956.  And I was probably closest to it because my room was on that side of the house.  And all the mass meetings and things took place there.  Reverend Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] was there.  My mom [Aressa Craig Roberson], on the second bombing, my mom almost had a nervous breakdown because it tore out the shelves she had--she loved whatnots, and that bomb blew away all of that.  But it, that house has withstood, and I still have the house, I still have the house now.  It still--it has a lot of sentimental value to it.  I have some people in it.  But that's the only house I've ever lived in until I moved out on my own.
Story_ID: 439971
Speaker 1: Okay, so now you are--to go to kindergarten is probably around 1948.  Is that right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can remember kin (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You--
Speaker 2: --I can (laughter)--now you know, you'll cause me to flashback.  I (laughter)--let me tell you about kindergarten.  And I had--see, this is good because I haven't thought about kindergarten in fifty years.  My mother [Aressa Craig Roberson] was determined that I get an education.  So a Reverend George Pruitt ran a taxi service.  And we went to a kindergarten that you had to pay for 'cause the public schools did not have kindergarten.  And so Reverend Pruitt would go around and put about fifteen of us in his little four-door car and take us to ACIPCO [American Cast Iron Pipe Company, Birmingham, Alabama].  I can remember the teacher's name, believe it or not, Mrs. Harris [ph.].
Speaker 1: ACIPCO was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, American Cast Iron and Pipe Company.  ACIPCO is, it was in the-- it's a--well, let me give you some brief history.  In Birmingham [Alabama] you had steel manufacturers, so you had Woodward [Woodward Iron Company].  You had communities named adjacent to the areas in which the company--ACIPCO was American Cast Iron and Pipe Company.  And ACIPCO had a community named after the steel mill.  And they had a school there that the workers would go to.  And if you were not one of their workers, and it's--and reflecting back, U.S. Pipe had its own company.  Woodward had one.  And so you have three communities named after that.  And then a lot of their companies did not pay in real money.  They paid in their own money.  They had their own sheet money.  And so at payday you would get fifty dollars of sheet money or company money, and it can only be spent at the company store.  So when you got your paycheck and your money, you go over there and use that money to buy.  So you had a lot of communities named according to the manufacturer.  But ACIPCO was a big plant.  And I attended the kindergarten there, and they gave me my first educational exposure.  And it was a very beautiful time in my life.  And I hadn't thought about that in years.  Thank you for reminding me of ACIPCO.
Story_ID: 439972
Speaker 1: So Ms. Harris [ph.] was your teacher (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, I could remember she--
Speaker 1: What other things do you remember about kindergarten?
Speaker 2: I can remember she taught us health and hygiene.  And we had our own toothbrush.  You had assigned seats, and we had to take naps.  And then every so often we had to do a little play or a little program.  It was my first socialization skills.  And, but mom [Aressa Craig Roberson] and dad [Mack Roberson] wanted us to go.  A lot of the parents did not see the value of it.  But I went there, and the ABCs were taught, and manners were taught.  And when I went from there to Hudson Elementary [Hudson Elementary School; Bertram A. Hudson K-8 School, Birmingham, Alabama], I thought that I was--Hudson Elementary was the only elementary school in my community.  And again, before integration, you had elementary schools within the community, and then you would transport yourself.  As blacks, you would either go to A.H. Parker High School [Birmingham, Alabama] on the north side of town or you would go to Ullman [Samuel Ullman High School, Birmingham, Alabama], U-L-L-M-A-N, on the south side of town.  And that was basically it in the days, and then they ended up putting a school in the western side of town.  But when I went to Hudson Elementary, it the same elementary school that my father had attended.  And T.J. Sells [ph.] was the principal.  And unusually that not like schools then, the principal lived in the community.  He lived right there in it.  He would leave the school, walk one block, make a left, go two blocks, and he was at home.  So the principal was in the school, and a lot of the teachers were in the school living in the community.  Now that's, with the community so divided, we don't have that.  But at Hudson Elementary I was a pretty smart little guy, and I got skipped a few times, so it end up my coming out of, coming out of high school at fifteen.  And so I skipped several grades.  Might not have been a good thing, because when I got to college [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] I had to lie about how old I was because I had people that were two and three years older than me when I went off to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But T.J. was a strong disciplinarian.  He wanted you to learn.  He had a belt with a wooden handle on it.  Back then you could--and during my administration I did too until recently--you could actually punish.  But the problem was no child wanted to be sent home or get a note sent home by the principal.  That was a no-no.  In my house that was sentence of death (laughter), if you came home with a note from the school about something you had done wrong.  And so, one of my favorite teachers is still living.  We attend church together.  Mrs. Bohannon [Mabel Bohannon] was my music teacher and a good friend of mine.  And she remembers, and because of my relationship with Mrs. Bohannon, my sister [Bernita Roberson Sawyer] was very close to her.  Those were the people who loved us, Mr. Eaney [ph.], and, and complimented us, and encouraged us.  So when I left, when I left Hudson and went to A.H. Parker, it was a conglomeration of all kids from all over the city.  So now you have to have a buddy system, because if you were only from, if you were from north Birmingham, you might have get to fighting with the guys from ACIPCO [American Cast Iron Pipe Company, Birmingham, Alabama], or from Enon Ridge [Birmingham, Alabama], or Fountain Heights [Birmingham, Alabama], or Woodlawn [Birmingham, Alabama].  We all came together.  So then you had to identify with someone to survive.  Things were not as dangerous as they are now.  There might be a few fist-fightings or something like that, but no weapons, no knives or things of this nature.  But Parker High School was the largest black high school in the United States for years.  We had about three thousand students at one time at Parker High.  And it was the high school that--Buck Buchanan was one of them famous athletes that went there, and a lot of other people went to Parker High School.  But the unique thing, Parker High School was on the north side of town, and then the Ullman High School was on the south side of town.  And Professor Bell [George Crenshaw Bell] was Mr. Johnson's [Robert Charles Johnson] brother-in-law.  So we had brother-in-laws, principals of the two schools.  So there was always a rival between Parker High School and Ullman High School.  When integration came, Ullman has been closed down.  University of Alabama in Birmingham [Birmingham, Alabama] has bought all of that properties up.  You still have some predominantly white schools in the area, but they did not have the same type of mixture or the same type of expectation.
Story_ID: 439973
Speaker 1: Going back a little bit before you get to high school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], you were talking about the bombings at Bethel [Bethel Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] and your home.  How were your parents [Aressa Craig Roberson and Mack Roberson] involved in the Civil Rights Movement?  Why was your home one of the homes that was bombed?
Speaker 2: Well, I do a lot of human relations things and racial relations things with--today when I'm invited to speak.  I happened to be born and grew up in probably one of the most sacred parts of black history in the United States, on the corner of 29th Avenue and 33rd Street.  That location gave me an opportunity to share and meet Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Reverend Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth], all of those people, because we were right across from Bethel Baptist Church, where Reverend Shuttlesworth was the minister.  And he was the one crazy enough to challenge segregation and brave enough to make a stand.  So my father supported Reverend Shuttlesworth.  And we started off as the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], as an agency, and then the State of Alabama outlawed the NAACP.  It would not exist in Alabama.  So Reverend Shuttlesworth said, okay, no big deal, so he changed it to Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights.  And every Monday night, every Monday night, we had mass meetings.  At those mass meetings, people from all over Birmingham [Alabama] came and had church services, and revels with Reverend Gardner [Edward Gardner].  And the rest of the ministers would then tell us what we're gonna do.  Then Reverend Shuttlesworth would come in and, and preach, and it gave us a sense of awareness.  So, because of the location, because of the location of being there, just another blessing, being on that corner, with my house directly across, church here, the parsonage on the other side, we--and I experienced so many things, so much hatred on that corner from Birmingham policemen.  We had what we called guard houses, where we used to act as security on porches, on front porches with shotguns and rifles.  See, in Alabama it is not unlawful to carry a long barreled weapon.  You can take a shotgun, put it up in your truck.  Long as it's visible there's no problem.  But a pistol or a handgun was unlawful.  So, because of the dangers of the life of Reverend Shuttlesworth, we spent nights, from evening time, all night, sitting there with weapons to protect him.  We had, we called them guard shacks.  We had one on Mr. Revis' [James Revis] porch directly in front of the church.  We had one in the third level of the church itself looking that way, and then we had one on the side, where men would volunteer.  They would volunteer to come and sit all night long to watch over that area because of the danger that was involved.  I was in love with one of Reverend Shuttlesworth's daughters.  And I had a chance to see him today, and he was laughing about some things we had done.  And I grew up right there, so when they targeted Reverend Shuttlesworth, they targeted me also.  My dad believed in what he was doing, so he never missed a meeting.  And they honored him for the years of service from the state.  After things got better, they honored him and some other people for the things they'd done.  As a young lad, I experienced that first bombing.  And until you experience a bombing, you have no idea of the intensity of the noise, the amount of devastation.  It can--I can imagine what the people in Iraq are going through because unless you experience that type of vicious power, you don't really understand what it is.
Story_ID: 439974
Speaker 1: From that, it gave me the fortitude to lead the demonstration in Huntsville, Alabama, as a college student.  It gave me the fortitude to challenge the automobile industry in this area to hire blacks.  It gave me the fortitude to be the first black family to move over the mountain in the upscale areas, because I believe that if I need it and want it, I could do it.  I never operated out of fear.  When I told my mother [Aressa Craig Roberson] that I was moving over the mountain in a white community in 1972, she said, "I'm a pray for you, son."  She said, "You just don't know."  But we never had any problem.  And I was in, a part of the influence to the whites that lived there, because some of them had never had a relationship with a black person that could look at them, and talk to them, and understand them.  They had had servants for years.  Black people would go off and cut yard and be maids, and butlers for them, but mine was a different thing.  So we ended up being called, if you can go back to the Cosby family, Bill Cosby.  You had the pretty kids.  But I was there for a purpose, and it was my home.  My wife [Linda Thompson Roberson] chose that mountaintop to live on because she was from Florida.  She had no idea about Birmingham [Alabama] and segregation.  And she was a military brat.  So we went there.  So, being in that area in Birmingham, I had a chance to witness on Easter Sunday when those white kids--for the first time in my life I saw white bloodshed when they beat those kids up at Anniston [Alabama] at the bus station.  They had just left Birmingham, and they went to Anniston.  And then we got a phone call.  Reverend Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] said the bus has been set on fire in Anniston, and the kids are hurt.  So they formed a caravan of cars, and went to Anniston, and brought those kids back.  And these were white northern kids who were freedom riding or whatever they were doing.  And I, and, and, and it dawned on me at that time, when I saw white kids bleeding, that segregation must be a monster for somebody to mistreat people the way that they mistreated them.  Because they wanted equal rights, they wanted equal access, they wanted to be treated normal.  And these white kids supported what was going on, and to see them in tears and in pain was devastating.  But because of where I live, I got a chance to witness and deal with that.  And when Martin Luther [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] would come in, he would try to be regular and low profile.  And he would be eating, and walking around, and talking.  And Reverend Shuttlesworth and would be getting together and talking and, and planning.  But we knew that all the phones in the community were tapped.  The FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] had my mom's phone tapped, the reverend's phone tapped.  So if we had to talk about something private, we would go a few blocks away to a safe house and use the phone, because they were tapping everything that was going on.  J. Edgar Hoover was very deeply involved in trying to stuff and stop some things that were going on in his own way.  So because of that location, I had an opportunity to experience, and it had a profound, a very, very deeply moving effect on who I became and, and what I am.  When I became the first black principal in a white school, I had no fear, I had no problem.  Once white folks know you're qualified and you can do the job.  Some of them didn't want me to paddle their kids, no problem.  Sign this release, I won't paddle them.  But when I take them from my school and deliver them to their job and say your son's (laughter) been suspended, you take care of him.  All of a sudden you get that letter.  "Mr. Roberson [HistoryMaker James Roberson], please remove this letter."  And then they have confidence in you.  So then I became an ambassador.  I have as many white students--well most of them were white--and white families that love me because of how I've treated them, as I do blacks, because I always tried to--it's all because of that opportunity of being in Birmingham, Alabama at 29th Avenue and 33rd Street that carved me into the kind of person that I am--
Story_ID: 439975
Speaker 1: Let's go back to talking about you as a child now.  We've gone from elementary school [Hudson Elementary School; Bertram A. Hudson K-8 School, Birmingham, Alabama] to high school.  Tell me some of the extracurricular activities that you were involved in.
Speaker 2: Okay, at, in high school, I was an academic student.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the way they did it at Parker High School [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], and we laughed about it, all the honor classes were A, B, and C.  So if you were a D, E, or F, or G section, you were not in the honor class.  So everybody said, "What class you in?"  I'm in 10A, 10B, 12A, 12B.  So I was academically honor, and I worked.  I wanted to have my own money.  I worked on the school newspaper.  I did not play any sports.  My daddy [Mack Roberson] wanted me to play football and basketball.  I did not play anything, but academically I finished with honors.  I wrote.  I took up commercial printing, and I learned how to run a printing press and a lot of things of this nature.  At Parker High School they were pushing academics.  And I had a friend of mine that was in AB with me, and he played football.  And he's a chemist, and he brags about I didn't play (laughter).  I said, "No, I didn't play, but I had money in my pocket."  I, I had my first job, my first job, and I thank my father for helping me.  My first job was a newspaper carrier for the Birmingham [Alabama] newspaper.  Now, I inherited that job from a big brother of mine, Julius Clark.  Julius was like a big brother to me.  And when he went off to college, he gave me his paper route.  So the only thing about the paper route was people didn't half pay you.  It was like seventy-five dollars a week or something like that--seventy-five cents a week for a paper.  And when you come time to collect, "Paper boy, come back tomorrow."  So what I would do: everybody wanted the Sunday paper.  If you didn't pay me, I didn't leave my Sunday paper.  So I became a businessperson.  You, I said, "No, unh-uh, I'm not leaving the Sunday," so they would end up paying me.  I did the paper route.  In the wintertime it was very difficult because you'd have 150 papers, and you going to these houses.  My dad would get up with me.  And he would drive the car, and I would throw the papers.  And I threw papers and then won an award.  I got my first picture in the Birmingham paper--not my last, but my first one--as an outstanding paper carrier.  And I still have today that little round crystal ball that they gave.  My daughter has gone to--my oldest daughter [Shayla Roberson], has gone to my mother's [Aressa Craig Roberson] house after she passed, and she has confiscated--she said, "Didn't steal, daddy."  But I have all--she had letters, love letters that I had read, and she has everything.  And she said, "Daddy, you look so funny with that smile on your face holding up that ball."  And I won a trip to Atlanta [Georgia].  And I graduated from Parker High School in May of 1960 and received a scholarship to Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], partial scholarship, based on grades.  My dad said, "Son, I can't afford to spend a lot of monies on you going to Tuskegee.  You need to go somewhere where I can help you get an education."
Story_ID: 439976
Speaker 1: Julius [Julius Clark] was going to Alabama A&M University [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama].  So he said, "Mr. Mack [Mack Roberson], I'll take him up there with me."  So I applied to Alabama A&M University in Huntsville, Alabama, and was accepted and went up as a freshman.  And I used to always love to dress and had nice clothes.  And people from Birmingham [Alabama] dressed different from the rest of the people in the state.  And at Alabama A&M, I led--I was president of all my classes.  I led the demonstration against the student--the students led a demonstration on campus.  I was a political broker on campus.  You had to come by me to get anything done on campus if you wanted anything done.  And in my sophomore year I believe, '61 [1961] or '60 [1960], a young man from Greensboro [North Carolina] came to campus and found my room, knocked on my door and said, "Reverend Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] sent me up here, told me you was in the movement."  And I said, "Yeah, I am."  Said, "We want to get some things started in Huntsville, Alabama."  No problem.  So we sat down and we had a strategy.  We rode through Huntsville and looked at places.  So we selected the first restaurant in Huntsville, Alabama to integrate, and it was Shoney's Big Boy [Shoney's Big Boy Drive In Restaurant, Huntsville, Alabama] on Memorial Parkway.  Now Huntsville is probably the most liberal city in the state.  You had a lot of Germans, a lot of foreigners because of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] and Redstone Arsenal [Huntsville, Alabama].  So there was no segregated housing at all in Huntsville.  There was no ghetto communities in Huntsville 'cause it was young and aggressive.  The only thing we could do was lunch counters and food facilities.  So Hank [ph.]--I can't remember Hank's last name--we sat up, and he said can you--I said, man, I'm president of sophomore class or junior class, whatever one it was.  I said, "I can get a bunch of people from Birmingham."  I said, "I got representatives in each dormitory."  So I called a meeting, and we said, "We're going to do a test run on Huntsville, Alabama.  We're gonna integrate Shoney's Big Boy."  So a group of us from Birmingham dressed up in our best clothes.  I had a green leather jacket that I was so proud of.  I put on my green leather jacket, and we parked at Shoney's Big Boy and walked into Shoney's Big Boy.  Now remember, we're violating the law.  The Jim Crow law said that you cannot serve and eat in the same place, separate but equal.  So we were violating the law and could be arrested for walking into the restaurant asking to be served.  So, our plan was not to get arrested but to bring awareness to segregation in Huntsville, letting the newspaper pick it up and the radio station.  So we got ourselves together now.  This is not an easy task because you are black.  You and your life, not on the same plane.  You're getting ready to walk into a white establishment with all white people, eating on the weekend, having a good time, and ask to be served.  I spoke to a group the other day, and I said--I spoke to an integrated group of government workers during Black History Month.  And I said, "To get a feel of how tense it was, right now in this auditorium, if I would cut out all the lights and tell you I'm releasing ten rattlesnakes in this room and tell you to come on and walk out," I said, "if you can visualize and feel that tension of those snakes probably will bite you and kill you, that was the tension."   This was a real confrontation.  Because first of all, it was a mental confrontation because we were not supposed to do that, so we were enslaved within our minds.  Secondly, it was a confrontation of the rights of whites and those of blacks.  And thirdly, I had to confront it because I knew it was wrong.
Story_ID: 439977
Speaker 1: So when we walked in [to Shoney's Big Boy Drive In Restaurant, Huntsville, Alabama], you could hear the chattering and the silverware ticking and clacking, and all of a sudden it got dead silent.  And everybody turned around and said, "The audacity of these colored boys to walk into this restaurant."  And it was just quiet, totally quiet.  And then somebody said, "You get the tar, I'll get the feathers, and we'll get these niggers out of here."  And we turned around and looked at him like he was crazy.  Everybody was--it was--it was just, it's quiet.  So a manager came up to us.  He said, "Hey guys, I know what you're doing, and I understand that.  I'm from New York.  I understand, but you just can't do it here."  I said, "Sir, we want to be served.  We have money.  We're dressed appropriately.  We're not causing any problem.  We just want to be seated to eat."  He said, "You can't do this.  Guys, I'm gonna have to call the police."  Said, "Well, do what you have to do.  We want to be served."  And so he went and dialed the police.  We knew that they had about--we had about a two to three minute window to escape.  We, we were not planning to be arrested.  So as soon as he dialed the number, and we let him dial the number--we had to let him dial the number, 'cause they had to get a call out for them to come, and the TV people and the radio people gonna have the same radio.  We knew that.  And we waited and said, "Sir, we'll be back.  This is not our first trip.  We'll be back."  So we left out immediately and drove over to White Castle and did the same thing.  So now we had two places that had been invaded.  It hit the newspaper.  It hit the TV.  And then the kids on campus wanted to know what was going on.  So then we started the sit-ins at the, think it was Kresge's [S.S. Kresge Company] in Huntsville [Alabama].  We went in.  And how we did the sit-ins were, the whites would be sitting across there.  As soon as one got up, a black would sit down.  And it was offensive for a black man to sit next to a white person, and he would jump up.  When he jumped up, we would sit down.  All of a sudden we got the whole area with black people.  Now nobody's eating.  We can't be served.  They're not making a dime, and we're getting there.  And Huntsville police were very reserved.  Nobody got arrested to my knowledge.  And I got taken away, but I was not ever booked or anything.  But it brought attention to this.  On the college campus, I had professors saying, "Stick to it.  You're doing what's right."  I had other people, "You, you're a troublemaker; you're a rabble-rouser.  You're creating problems for the university [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama].  We're here to get an education.  We don't need this."  But we stuck it out, and then changes took place.  And I credit Dr. Hereford [Sonnie Hereford III], who was my cytology and histology teacher, to making a giant step in Huntsville 'cause he took his son [Sonnie Hereford IV] to integrate the schools during that same time.  And then Huntsville, as a whole, immediately cleared their problems up, and it's still a very liberal city.
Story_ID: 439978
Speaker 1: I graduated from Alabama A&M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] in--
Speaker 2: Did you pledge?
Speaker 1: You know I (laughter)--yeah, oh yeah, yes, yes, yeah.  At Alabama A&M, I started another tradition.  And Julius Clark, my big brother, was an Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity].  I was Omega to the die--to the bone, 'cause all I knew was Omega.  Everybody I knew was Omega.  When I went to Alabama A&M, the Omegas were a little on the rough side.  I won't get into that.  And when they came into a room and beat up a young man about going with one of their brothers' girlfriend, I kind of stood off a little bit.  Then I was tied into the Civil Rights Movement, and Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was an Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], and I knew he was an Alpha.  But Alpha from Birmingham [Alabama], north side, no such animal.  So I called my dad [Mack Roberson], and I said, "Dad, Julius wants me to be an Omega, but I'm gonna pledge Alpha."  Well, daddy don't know the difference between Alpha, Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], or Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] (laughter).  He said, "Son, do what your heart tells you to do.  Do what you want to do."  So, at Alabama A&M, on Sunday morning, after the initiation, everybody would come to the dining hall to see the pledges walk in.  Well, the money was I was gonna definitely be an Omega.  And the way I dressed and played with the girls, I was gonna be a Kappa, but definitely wasn't gonna be no lame Alpha.  And Lord, when I walked in the, proudly walked in as a (unclear) with Alpha Phi Alpha, people said, "That joker went Alpha?"  And when I went Alpha, then some other brothers from Birmingham went Alpha, and it went on and on.  I pledged Alpha Phi Alpha in '62 [1962], and I am a life member.  I've been president of the local chapter [Omicron Lambda Chapter] and had the pleasure of going to witness the groundbreaking of Martin Luther King [Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial] in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] not too long ago.
Story_ID: 438437
Speaker 1: So 1963, the year--but you're a junior now.  This is a significant year since your family was involved in civil rights right here.
Speaker 2: I think--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --my dad [Mack Roberson], when--let me call my daughter--my sister on that one.  I know I didn't go.  That was my, beginning of my senior year or junior year?  Sixty--I graduated in '64 [1964].  I was a senior, graduating senior in '63 [1963].  I think dad went on the bus.  I have to call Bernita [Bernita Roberson Sawyer] on that 'cause I, see, I was--once I started at the school [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama], I didn't come back home during the summer.  I left Huntsville [Alabama] and went to Washington, D.C., and I worked--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I worked in Washington.  And then I was gonna go back.  I would come home for holidays, but actually coming home and doing that.  My sister was--my dad--don't let me say what my dad did 'cause I can't recall.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine.
Speaker 2: But I did not go to, I did not go to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The March on Washington.
Speaker 2: --March on Washington, no--
Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine.
Speaker 2: --no, no.
Story_ID: 438438
Speaker 1: But you were working for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, and it helped me when I, it helped me when I got--I retired at 48 or 49 with thirty years of service.  Because I had worked at NASA, they allowed me to buy those years I worked there toward my gradua- toward my retirement.  So I left NASA and went to work with Ford Motor Company.  But NASA selected bright and upcoming science students to come on base and work on--I worked on the study of the Explorer 7 satellite's meteorology impact on the climate as it predicts weather.  And we used to measure the interference in the ionosphere based on tapes that were being sent down by the satellite.  And we had our own little room and desk that we would go in there and pull out our data, and measure and do that, and they paid us.  We got real money.  And when I, when Ford Motor Company called and invited me to be a part of their dealer's program, I called personnel and told them I was thinking about retiring.  Said, "Mr. Roberson [HistoryMaker James Roberson], you're not fifty years old yet.  You can't retire."  I said, "Would you check?"  And she said, "Oh, my God, if you stay to May, you'll have thirty years and three months."  How in the world did you do that?  Well, the city--the state allowed me to put in money during the time I was working at NASA.  So that gave me three years of time.  Plus I had, like, two years of sick days I had never taken.  So I was able, I was able to retire with thirty years of service and go to work with Ford Motor Company.  But I did work at NASA and at Redstone Arsenal [Huntsville, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay, and this was--I'm sorry.  You said it was where?
Speaker 2: Well, NASA, NASA.  Redstone Arsenal is a place in Huntsville.  I was a college student at A&M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] on this side of the mountain.  Then there was a--they built the rockets in Huntsville.  The Saturn V rockets that actually lift up now, they were built in Huntsville.  So, there's built a military base called Redstone Arsenal in Huntsville, and then there's George C. Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville.  Huntsville is a center of the beginning of space, the space race.  So they came over and got some minority students to come in and work on it.  They gave--we weren't doing any rocketry design, but we were doing ionic interference study based on weather satellites--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Story_ID: 438439
Speaker 1: In 1964, you graduate.  And tell me what happens next.
Speaker 2: In 1964, was a proud moment in my family's life.  Being the first born of three, I had to set an example of graduating from college.  I was president of my class.  And I had done several things during my tenure at Alabama A&M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama].  I was there when the university was a college, and was petitioning Southern Association of Colleges and Universities [sic. Southern Association of Colleges and Schools] to become a university.  And I had planned a student strike and demonstration at that same time because there were rules and regulations that were outdated, and the administration would not listen.  The day that the, a review team was coming to Alabama A&M, was a day that all students were gonna wear black or white and not to go class.  So when the people came in to observe, there would be no students present.  At two o'clock in the morning the police campus security came to my dormitory, and they said, "Get up.  The president wants to see you."  I said, "President Morrison [Richard D. Morrison] wants to see me?"  "He wants to see you in his office."  So I said, okay.  And then they had gone to another dormitory and pulled one of my comrades and set both of us in the president's office and said, "We know that you are behind a student strike against this college for tomorrow.  We know that.  But we want to ask you to call it off, because we have worked hard with getting doctorial instructors, library materials, and you are going to stop that from happening.  And you will not graduate from a university.  We know that you are behind it, and we need for you to call it off."  And Dr. Morrison was there.  One of my play fathers, Mr. Patton [L.R. Patton], who actually ran the school; he was a treasurer.  He said, "Roberson [HistoryMaker James Roberson], we know you're behind this.  Now let me tell you why: if you don't call it off, we're gonna fail.  And we know that there are some things that you are not pleased with and the student body's not pleased with.  We're willing to compromise, and that's okay."  Will you do this?  Will you, yeah, yeah, we--I said, "Now, Mr. Patton, I want you to keep your word on this."  I said, "I'm not saying I'm behind anything.  What will happen to us who led this demonstration and strike?"  They said, "Look, if you can get these people in those classrooms, nothing's gonna happen.  We just want it to go away."  I said, "Okay, you need to call all the house mothers," and at that time they had mum, females in each dormitory, "and ask them to call down."  And I asked them to call down two or three students.  Only one of those were the leaders, and she knew the password to say if it was gonna be called off.  But I didn't want them to be jeopardized by being identified, so I--we called all them we could and said, "Strike is off, things been settled, go to class."  So they passed the word around.  Luckily enough, enough students went to class that the people on campus who were evaluated did not know.  They just saw a lot of folks in black and white.  They didn't understand what was going on.  After that visit, President Morrison called me and Mr. Patton, and Dean Ray [ph.], and we talked about all the things that needed to be done.  And they made some tremendous improvement in living conditions, not locking the dormitory with chain after nine o'clock.  A lot of things took a play.
Story_ID: 438440
Speaker 1: In May 1964, I graduated from Alabama A&M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] with a bachelor's degree in biology, certified in education.  Thank God I was certified in education.  Dr. White [ph.] said, "Boy, you're going into pure science, you'd better get you some education as well.  You might have to teach."  So I did that.  And I graduated and passed the national teachers association exam [National Teacher Examination; Praxis Series].  Went to my first interview at Southern Research [Southern Research Institute; Southern Research] here in Birmingham, Alabama.  And the Southern Research is still in business, and they're doing research work on cancer and a lot of other things.  They were very rude and everything to everybody who was applying for the job.  "If you don't have a degree in biology, or chemistry, or math, or physics, don't get in line."  I said, "I have one."  So they came and called me and took me in for an interview and told me they were going to hire me.  My starting salary would be $2010 a year.  A year.  I said, huh?  So, Dr. E. Paul Jones, who was director of Negro schools at that time--see, the county system had a segregated school system where they had a director of Negro schools.  Then they had a white superintendent.  Dr. Jones said, boy, he saw me do student teaching at Hooper City High School [Birmingham, Alabama], which is a closed high school in the county now, and said, "If you want a job, just call me.  You got a job."  So I called Dr. Jones.  He said, "You really want to be a teacher?"  I said, "Yeah, Doc."  He said, "You got the job."  And so I went to work with Jefferson County Board of Education as instructor of ninth grade science and math at Roosevelt Elementary School in Roosevelt, Alabama [Roosevelt, Birmingham, Alabama].  Roosevelt, Alabama was the only black town in town, had a black mayor, a black police department, totally segregated.  But I went to work there.  And after a year there or two years there, they built A.G. Gaston Junior High School [Birmingham, Alabama] in honor of Dr. A.G. Gaston, the millionaire who did so much for people in Birmingham.  And then when integration came in 1972 or '73 [1973], they called me and said, "Roberson [HistoryMaker James Roberson], you need to pack up your box.  You've been transferred to Gardendale High School [Gardendale, Alabama] as teacher of biology."
Speaker 2: Gardendale?
Speaker 1: Gardendale, uh-huh, Garden, D-A-L-E, High, as teacher of biology.  And I told my principal, I said, "I'm not going."  They said, "You're not going?"  I said, "No, I'm not going."  I said, "What y'all doing, y'all taking all the strong black teachers, sending them to white schools, and sending the poorly prepared white teachers to the black schools.  I'm not going."  So I refused to go.  My principal called the superintendent and said I refused to go.  They didn't say anything.  A few months later they called me.  Mr. Roberson, you've been transferred to, again--it was another white school.  I refused to go.  Think it was Gresham Junior High [Gresham Junior High School, Birmingham, Alabama].  I refused to go.  Rocked on again, the superintendent called and said, "Tell Mr. Roberson to report to the central office downtown.  We need to talk with him."  So I went downtown.  They said, "You are a qualified biology teacher.  We're having to integrate this school system.  You have refused to go.  I am mandating and ordering you to report to Leeds Junior High [Leeds Junior High School; Leeds Middle School, Leeds, Alabama] as instructor of earth science and life science.  If you do not go, you will be terminated for insubordination."  I said, "Well, Doc, look like I'm gonna to have to go this time."  So I went back to A.G. Gaston, packed up and went to Leeds Junior High.  Leeds Junior High is a community outside of Birmingham, predominantly white, semi-rural.  And I had a white principal.  When I walked in, I told him, I said, "I'm James Roberson.  Dr. Burkett [William Burkett] has sent me here to teach science."  He said, "I don't need no science teacher."  I said, "Okay."  I said, "I was sent here to teach science."  "I don't need one."  I said, "What are you telling me?"  He said, "Do what you want to do," so I went back home.  I went back home and called Dr. John McCain, the direct- he was a--no, he was the highest ranked black in the county system.  He was a fraternity brother of mine and like a father of mine.  I said, "Doc, I went over there.  They told me they didn't need me."  He said, "Oh, they need you.  You go back."  He said, "But you go on and rest today.  Stay at home."  So I stayed at home.  The next day I went back.  Mr. Smiles [ph.], who looked like a bubble, big white guy, you know.  And I didn't care if he liked me or didn't like me.  He said, "Your room's down the hall.  Go down the hall, turn to your left, and you'll--first door on the right, you'll--," so I walked down there.  And when I walked in a white male teacher was telling the kids that I had taken a job, his job, and he had to leave, and they would be getting a new teacher.  When I walked in the kids booed, and they booed.  I let them get through booing, and I said, "You don't know me."  I said, "I'm not here because I wanted to be here.  But looking at this science lab, y'all need a lot of help.  I'm gonna do some things to work with you," and said, "let me tell you what my rules are," so I wrote my rules down.  After the first year, I won teacher of the year at Leeds Junior High.
Story_ID: 438441
Speaker 1: So Smiles [ph.] said to me, "Roberson [HistoryMaker James Roberson], we know Dr. Burkett [William Burkett] said you could come back if you want to.  But if you will stay with me, I'll work out something for you.  Not supposed to do this, but we know that you are selling cars at Brownell Pontiac [Birmingham, Alabama], and I'm gonna let you off on the last period of the day.  And if you want to leave, you can do whatever you want to do.  Just, if you stay with me, if you stay with me, you can do that."  So, Mr. Smiles, who hated me when I first got there, ended up being a strong supporter of mine and then asked me to go into administration.  So, because of Mr. Smiles, when he retired, I took his place as acting principal.  Now here I am, the guy that nobody wanted, now I'm acting principal at Leeds Junior [Leeds Junior High School; Leeds Middle School, Leeds, Alabama].  Did not have my certification, so I could not be the principal.  So I went back to school in the University of Alabama at Birmingham [Birmingham, Alabama] and received a degree in educational leadership.  Educational leadership is a certification in all, K through twelve.  And at that time they had an Alabama state evaluation of teachers.  You had to pass the exam to be paid.  Well, a good friend of mine, Lawrence Carter, who is now director of personnel with Jefferson County [Alabama], we took the exam.  We took the exam, and we passed, and got certified.  A black lawsuit took place.  The black teachers said they could not pass the exam because it was not written for them to pass, and they sued.  They successfully won the case.  They got monetary awards for being discriminated against.  Lawrence Carter and I got zero.  The judge said, "You were not discriminated against because you passed."  So I became assistant principal at Leeds Junior.  The superintendent called me in and said, "Roberson, I need you to go to Erwin [E.B. Erwin High School, Center Point, Alabama] with my son.  Michael's [ph.] over there.  They got a lot of problems at Erwin.  You need to go over there."  I went over to Erwin High School.  Erwin High School was 99.5 percent white.  They had two black students, a thousand and some white students.  And I walked in, and they had a smoking pit.  I said, "A smoking pit?"  If a child had a note from his parent, he could go in the smoking pit and smoke.  I said, "Oh no, my, that's not gonna work."  I said, "No, no, no."  He said, "Man, you don't know about this school."  I said, "That's not gonna work."  So Mike's dad said, "Do whatever you want to do."  Michael was a military man, so he left and did a military thing and left me there.  So I closed down the smoking pit.  I gave them notice that effective so and so date there will be no more smoking in the smoking pit.  Teachers, you will not be able to smoke in the teacher's lounge.  We'll have a smoking lounge for you on the other side of the school campus.  And I enforced that.  The next--after I did it that first week, the next week I come back, all my windows were knocked out.  The school just--my office torn up.  But I stayed there with Michael until the superintendent called me in and said, "Roberson, you need to go back to Leeds Junior as principal of Leeds Junior.  They got--we have a white guy out there that white folks are throwing rocks at.  Black folks are throwing trees at him.  You need to go back and get that school under control."  So, overnight, without any notice, I was sent back to Leeds Junior High.  When I walked in there were people glad to see me back 'cause they had worked with me as a teacher there.  There were people that did not like me.  There were people that had never had a black supervisor before.  So I called a meeting of the staff, and I said to them, "This is a new day in the history of Leeds Junior High School.  Things will change.  Any white person on this staff that cannot work for a black superior person can leave.  All you have to do is let me know that you don't want to work.  Those of you who want to stay, black and white, things will change.  I am gonna change the discipline.  I am gonna change the curriculum.  I am gonna change the school.  And if you don't want to work, get off this train 'cause this is a new day."  In two years I hired about thirty teachers.  I changed, put honors curriculum, Advanced Placement things in.  And my school became one of the shining jewels of the school system.
Story_ID: 438442
Speaker 1: Then I got a call from Ford Motor Company.  My brother [Lawrence Roberson] worked for Ford as one of the first blacks.  He was the first black group of M.B.A.'s in the United States.  The federal government selected thirteen black males, sent them one year to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and one year to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], and they came out with M.B.A.'s.  So everybody, IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company], Pepsi [PepsiCo], General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], Ford, everybody wanted one of these guys.  My brother's just flying all--getting all kind of interviews.  So he went to work with Ford Motor Company and made the front page of The Wall Street Journal on something he did with Ford Motor Company.  He called me and said, "Man, this is the last class of minority dealers for Ford Motor Company.  If you want to be a dealer, you need to get in this class."  So I had a major decision to make, to stay with the school [Leeds Junior High School; Leeds Middle School, Leeds, Alabama] that I had turned around, had built up, had gotten excellent marks, or leave and take my dream of becoming an automobile dealer.  I was the first black in the state with Pontiac Motor Division, and started that in 1970.  So I decided that I would leave education.  It was a very difficult decision to make when I went to my staff.  I called a meeting, and everybody--and I had said I was leaving, going downtown.  I was leaving, going downtown.  "I'll tell you he's packing his box.  I've seen him leaving.  He's leaving, going downtown."  So I announced that I would be leaving and going to work with Ford Motor Company.  They cried.  Tears fell.  I had become close with them.  I left, retired from Jefferson County Board of Education in 1990 and went to work with Ford Motor Company in their dealer development program, a very interesting program where Ford Motor Company, because of the shortage of minorities that own dealerships, set aside special funding and special monies for minorities who could pass the test to become dealers with Ford Motor Company.  I did pass the test.  I became a Ford candidate.  I traveled throughout the United States with Ford and came back to Alabama.  And my training dealership was Ernest McCarty Ford in Alabaster, Alabama.  Ernest McCarty was a long dealer in Ford Motor Company, a very good person, but had not done a lot of things that I thought that modernized his dealership.  So, Ernest and I became best of friends.  He helped me with, through the death of my father [Mack Roberson].  I helped him through the death of his father.  And I was allocating a dealership--allocated for a dealership in Birmingham [Alabama].  It is in existence now.  I am not the owner.  I had to have $1.5 million for this dealership.  I had acquired 1.5, had my money.  The dealership moved that I was going into to another location.  The people over there did not want big trucks.  Ford Motor Company sent that dealership back with big trucks and said, "Don't worry, Roberson [HistoryMaker James Roberson].  We're gonna build a new dealership."  They built a new dealership.  They called me in and said the investment for the dealership is $5 million.  And I said, "Let me off of here, mister conductor."  I said, "I am already retired.  I can go home and sit down if I want to.  I'm not gonna go and put my sticks up."  And we call sticks your house.  A lot of black dealers did that to get in that, 'cause they could see all the rich money.  They would mortgage their house, put their house up to come up with the hundred thousand, two hundred thousand of real money they needed.  And when the dealership closed, they had nowhere to live and nowhere to work.  I was not gonna go that route, so I told them I was not gonna put up my house.  And I left Ernest McCarty, went home and said, "I got too much money.  I need to see somewhere I can lose some money," so I opened up a rental car company, U-Save Auto Rental and Budget Trucks [ph.], in a section of the Birmingham area called Bessemer, Alabama.  Bessemer, Alabama, is named from the Bessemer [Henry Bessemer] in England, the blast furnace that was called Bessemer.  And I went--there was not a rental car dealer in that town.  It was a suburb of Birmingham, about ten miles out of Birmingham.  And I didn't know why, but after I got there, after I had in--bought a couple hundred thousand dollars' worth of cars and, and put up my--rented my lot, and my office, and computers, all that, so many people in Bessemer did not have credit cards.  They still went to the store and paid their water bills and their light bill.  And I said, "Oh, my God, now I understand."  So, here I am, I've set up a business that would operate basically off of credit cards and checks in a community where they don't do checks, and they don't do credit cards, a lot of them.  A lot of them did not.  I had Budget Trucks and cars.  And I stayed there, and I was the only black merchant in the north side of Bessemer.  Don't know what they means, but everybody would say, you're the only black dealer, only black business in north side of Bessemer.  I don't know what that meant, but that's what I was.  And I had rental cars.  I rented cars and ended up losing a lot of money.  If I had done--know what I know now, I would not have done that.  But that was a good experience.  It made me humble enough to realize that it's just money.
Story_ID: 438443
Speaker 1: For the last few years I still buy and sell cars.  I do a--I'm on a lot of board of directors.  But basically, for the last year I've been technically retired.  But Bessemer [Alabama] will always be dear to me because there was no demographics done on Bessemer, and I understood clearly where money was and was not after I was in Bessemer.  It's a good area, but it was not a good rental car area, so.  I could still get a dealership.  Don't want a dealership now.  A lot of my buddies that got them are having hard times.  At this stage in my life I'm looking forward to relaxing, and traveling, and enjoying the grandkids, enjoying my son [James Roberson, Jr.], and my grandson, and my granddaughters, and my family.  And I've been truly blessed to have good kids.  We were the first black family to move over the mountain.  In 1972 I built a house on the side of Shades Mountain in an all-white community.  I actually built the house.  I had nerve to go ahead and tear the ground up and cut into the side of the mountain and put a house on the mountaintop.  Made the front page of the Birming- the state paper, Birmingham Post-Herald.  Black family moves over mountain, builds hundred thousand dollar house.  And my picture on the front page with my only child at that time, my son, and my wife [Linda Thompson Roberson].  Got upset with the newspaper because they put the cost of the house.  A hundred thousand dollars was a lot of money in 1970.  And I'm in the retail business on cars, and you're telling people that I make so much money.  And then a lot of time black people would have the tendency to say, "He has gotten so good now, he don't want to live with us anymore."  The only reason I moved over there, my wife was from Temple Terrace, Florida, and she wanted to live on the side of the mountain.  And my belief was, from a child on, if I had an opportunity and could afford it, race was not gonna stop me.  So we've been there since 1972, '73 [1973].  My son quarterbacked at Homewood High School [Homewood, Alabama] as a black quarterback.  My daughter was captain of the Star Spangled Girls, a dance group.  And it has been a good life for them.  I served on the parks and recreation board, probably the longest tenure of anybody.  I was there for ten years with the park and recreation system.  And it has been a good life based on the decision that we made as a family.
Story_ID: 438444
Speaker 1: You have a doctorate of law degree?
Speaker 2: I was awarded a doctor of law degree by--it is an honorary--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I feel like I should have earned the degree.  But at the time I was making so much money, it didn't matter.  I had accomplished a lot of things.  Based on the selection of the president of that college [Faith Grant College, Birmingham, Alabama], I was awarded a honorary doctor of law degree for my service and my fortitude in the things that I had done over my life.  It is recognized.  I put it on resumes.  I don't use it that often.  A lot of people get up and they just think it's the best thing in the world.  I'm used to earning it.  But I was awarded it, that, I was given that honor.  I'm thankful for it.  But the most important thing, it was based on what I had done and the kind of lifestyle that I had lived over the years.
Story_ID: 439979
Speaker 1: I asked you was there--was anything else you'd like to talk about (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: And you wanted to go back and talk about--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can do, I can--
Speaker 1: --a time in civil rights.
Speaker 2: --I can do both of them, and I'm gonna get the regret out the way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: First, I have been truly blessed to have a good life that has actually afforded me a lot of experience and allowed me to afford my family a lot of experiences.  Probably the only regret that I have is not continuing to follow my desire to be a medical doctor.  And I accept that I made the change at the time when I was making money and did not follow through.  I was hoping that one of my sib- one of my offspring not sib- would--I have two daughters [Shayla Roberson and Jemia Roberson].  Both of them are excellent medical students.  One worked as a veterinarian and loved it.  The other one worked medical.  But neither one of them chose, neither one of them chose to go in education.  Neither one of them chose to go in medicine.  So the only regret--I've been blessed with a loving wife [Linda Thompson Roberson] and family and good friends.  The only thing would be that I did not--when I went off to college [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] as a freshman, it was to start off in biology and end up in medicine.  I have no regrets.  And I'm reflecting back on the Civil Rights Movement, I can remember when my mom [Aressa Craig Roberson], after one of the bombings, said she could no longer live in Alabama.  She wanted her kids to get away from the hostility of whites.  And she wanted to leave Alabama, so she kind of demanded that my dad [Mack Roberson] ask for a transfer to Cincinnati, Ohio.  And we had relatives in Cincinnati, Ohio, so we moved.  Mom took all three of us to Cincinnati, Ohio, because they were killing black people, bombing was going on, segregation was strong, Ku Klux [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] were in full garment at four-way stops collecting money.  I just had a flashback.  I, I have a Ku Klux Klan paper that I took from a Ku Klux Klan in Georgia.  I need to give it to the institute.  So we moved to Cincinnati.  And I had a southern accent.  I was a little colored boy from Cinci- from Alabama.  So I attended Samuel Ach Junior High School [Cincinnati, Ohio], A-R-C-H [sic.], Junior High.  And when I walked in the classroom, they said, "Man, you talk funny.  You from down south?"  I said, "Yeah, I'm from Birmingham."  Birmingham, Alabama?  I said, "Yes, Birmingham, Alabama."  So they started calling me Bama.  I accepted Bama.  And they made fun of my accent.  But when we got in class, they were so slow in math and science, I was, I just showed out.  Everybody, oh, my God.  So then I became popular because I was the smart little boy from Alabama, and math is one of my--I used to do a lot of math in my head.  And so my mom had us living in a second floor of a relative house.  We were lonely, not used to the cold, not used to the snow.  My brother [Lawrence Roberson] said, "Man, we've got to go back home.  We got to go back home."  So my daddy came up and talked to my mom and said he could not get a transfer.  She had to move back.  We shouted for joy.  We were going back home.  On the train we stopped in a little town called Decatur, Alabama, and I wanted something to eat.  So I stopped off at--got out the train.  You know, conductor tells how long you gonna be there.  And I ran into this cafe.  And the lady looked at me said, "Nigger, get out of here!"  And I turned around and looked at her.  Who's she calling (laughter)--then I realized that I was who she was talking to.  So it kind of hurt my feelings, so I got back on the train.  My mother said, "Baby, you're down south.  You're in Alabama.  You got to remember that."  So we got home, and that experience stuck in my mind that basically she didn't know if I was a good child, a bad child.  She didn't know if I was a saint or a sinner.  She looked at the color of my skin, and she automatically put me in a category.  So then within myself, I began to compete for--to make sure that black people got recognition.  When I, when--on Sundays we'd come to downtown Birmingham, and we couldn't eat at the place where they come on 4th Avenue, where all the black businesses were.  And then we couldn't drink out of the same water fountain.  We couldn't use the same restrooms, so I asked my mom, "What is this?"  And she said, "It's segregation.  It's a bad thing, son, but it's gonna end."  So I was determined to be a part of that ending because I could not understand why we were being mistreated.  So in my mind I used to compete with white folks all the time.  When the traffic light would stop and the when the sign said walk, I outwalked all of them.  I beat them all across the street.  I had my own competition going.  And I was determined that I was gonna be as good or better than any white person on this planet because you were not gonna judge me by the color of my skin.
Story_ID: 439980
Speaker 1: So then I looked around in Birmingham [Alabama], and there were no black salesmen, any (unclear) so I took it on my own to do a resume.  And I walked into these dealerships and said, "You're taking black people's money, but you don't have any of them working for you.  I want to work for you.  I'm a college graduate."  And nobody would hire me.  And then I bought a 1969 Grand Prix [Pontiac Grand Prix] from a white guy named Merlin Allan.  And I told Merlin, I said, "Merlin, only reason I'm buying this car from you is because I like you.  Y'all don't have a black face anywhere on this dealership floor, but you're taking my money."  He said--and I said, "I came here to talk about getting hired here, and they wouldn't hire me."  He said, "Who'd you talk to?"  And I told him the name Pillar [ph.].  Mr. Pillar was a redneck, face, drinks a lot so he had a red face.  He said, oh.  So, about a month later my mother [Aressa Craig Roberson] called me and said, "A white guy keeps calling here, wants to talk to you.  You need to call.  His name is Blaine Brownell."  So I said, "That's the owner of this dealership," so I called him.  He said, "Mr. Roberson [HistoryMaker James Roberson], Merlin Allan talked to me about you.  He indicated that you said that nobody wanted to hire a black person.  Would you come have dinner with me?  I want to talk to you."  So I said sure.  And we met and went to a private club on Morris Avenue where you had to get a membership to get in.  And black folks didn't go there 'cause you were not a member there.  But he took me right in, and I sat down with him.  And he had another gentleman with him, and we ate.  I had good manners 'cause my mama had told me how to use my knives and my fork, and I knew what to do.  And he said, "What happens if somebody calls you a nigger?"  I said, "Well, that has no influence on me 'cause I'm not what they call me."  And so the other guy asked a series of questions.  He said look--after the dinner he said to me, "You know, I got one black friend.  I'm gonna call him, and I'll let you know something."  So he called a Reverend Ed Blankenship [Edward Blankenship].  Ed Blankenship was a Methodist minister, and he was on the city council of Birmingham.  And Ed said, "Now whoa."  He said, "I got a young black guy that's been working doing some promotion with Ms. Black Alabama and some other things.  James Roberson's a man you need to hire."  He said, "That's who I'm talking to."  He said, "You need to hire him."  So Blaine Brownell called me and said, "Come in.  I want to talk to you.  I'm gonna get some slack out of the automobile dealers in Birmingham, but I'm hiring you as the first black.  And anything I can help you to do to be a success, I'll do it."  So I went to work.  And now I'm teaching school during the day, and I'm coming to the dealership in the evening time.  First (unclear) didn't like that, 'cause now he's teaching school, and he's gonna come and work here and make the money that we make.  And so I knew Tall Paul [Paul Dudley White] on one of the local radio stations.  We announced a promotion together.  I knew Shelley the Playboy [Shelley Stewart].  I knew a lot of the guys, so they got on the air and gave me some free time.  "I got a buddy friend of mine selling cars at Brownell Pontiac [Birmingham, Alabama].  Y'all need to go over there and check him.  Tell him I said hello.  He's black too.  He's a colored boy too (laughter)."  And so all of a sudden my business increased tremendously, and I became one of the top salesmen.  But I was gonna--had a lot of difficulty.  The white salesmen would hide the keys on my cars.  They would take cars I had sold and put them on the street a block away.  They would change the numbers of them so I'd write down the wrong serial number.  And, but I didn't, I didn't complain.  So one day in a meeting, Blaine Brownell got up, the owner, and said, "I want to say one thing: I want to commend James Roberson for his leadership and what he's done for this dealership.  He has sold more cars than some of you guys here all day long.  And he has done a good job, and I have not heard him complain about anything."  An Italian guy named Louis Pecane [ph.] said, "Mr. Brownell, I want to say something."  He said, "James has been here, and he has gone through so many hardships."  And Blaine said, "Hardships?"  He said, "Yes sir, and I've been a part of some of them.  They've thrown keys away.  They've hid cars from him.  They have misnumbered cars for him.  And I want to apologize."  He said, "James, I want to apologize to you.  You're a better man than I am, and I want you to forgive me."  And it was like a church service (laughter).  Mr. Kelso [ph.] got up, and he said, "I want to say you're the best I've ever seen, and I love you to death."  And from that day forward, I had a good relationship at that dealership.
Story_ID: 439981
Speaker 1: I was the only black salesman in the United States to win a prize.  And they rented a 727 [Boeing 727] and flew us to Canada.  And we were the only black people on there.  And I had a white friend of mine, Tom Reed [ph.], he's--Tom, Tom Reed was my son's Uncle Tom.  My son had the only white Uncle Tom in Alabama.  He loved Uncle Tom.  And at Jay's [James Roberson, Jr.] wedding Tom came and cried like a baby.  But it gave me an opportunity to show people that you can look beyond the color of a person, and look at his character, and look and expect good, and good become.  And because of that, I've had a good life.  The only thing I would ever change would be the mere fact that I did not go to medical school, and I don't have any medical kids in my family.  Other than that, I've been blessed with a lot.  And I think I've had an impact on how people think and how people see life.  I've been able to look people straight in the eye and tell them how I feel about things.  I've been able to make a change in the community, and I've been able to help a lot--I have a lot of white and black sons and daughters that I adopted and helped get through life.  And they still call, they still come.  And as I travel, they come.  Claude [ph.] is one of my white boys whose daddy was killed in an automobile accident.  And I used to travel with Claude, and he used to love to tease people.  We walked into a place, and he's white, and Jay's black, and I'm black, and my wife [Linda Thompson Roberson] is black, and he'll say, "Daddy, can I get you--," and the folks would look at--I said, "Don't do that, Claude."  And now he's a success in real estate, got married to a doctor.  Andy's [ph.] in--a white boy that's a friend of mine's son that's in Texas.  Reverend Lee [ph.] has been on the board of education.  He's black.  So I have had an influence on them because of what my parents [Aressa Craig Roberson and Mack Roberson] taught me and the experiences that I share, being born in Birmingham, Alabama, during the turbulent times of the '60s [1960s] and '50s [1950s].  And I've been able to enjoy and see many changes in people because of what Alabama has become.  And it is better.  I had another group come in to do some movies here, and they were afraid to come to Alabama.  And they got here, and they fell in love with Alabama.  And I said, "Yeah, we're not living outside.  We're not afraid.  We go where we want to go."  Things have changed.  I think they've changed for the better.
Story_ID: 439982
Speaker 1: What are your hopes for the African American community?
Speaker 2: I think the African American community is in dire need of two things: spiritual awakening and male leadership.  And if things don't make a change, we will be back like we were in the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s].  There is a vast loss of male input in the African American community because he is rightfully not taking his leadership role because the value system that I was given and taught are not being expressed now.  Moms are have--and they use terms that I think are so derogatory.  My mama's baby, my mama's--my baby mama, whatever, yeah, yeah.  I had--my daughters had to explain to me, and they had to explain to me what hookup was.  It's a different era.  Unless young men--and I work with 100 Black Men of Birmingham [100 Black Men of Birmingham, Inc., Birmingham, Alabama]; I work with Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.].  And we're trying to impart knowledge to these black males that there's an expectation as a man, as a role model, as a breadwinner, as a husband.  And that's sad that so many black females can't find mates because they're either in jail, unemployed, lazy, or their living a different lifestyle.  And to me it's a sad commentary.  And from a spiritual awakening, we have instant god now.  We're--people really don't worship like they used to.  Preachers don't preach like they used to.  My wife [Linda Thompson Roberson] says I'm hard on preachers.  I know a lot of them, and I know them, I know them in the light and out of the light.  But I think without leadership, male leadership, the African American community is destined to failure and in slavery again.  And without some spiritual awakening, the United States as a whole is--if I ev- if I could get all males and just make them become men and, and have some value, we're missing that.  And in case--I went--I'm gonna share this, and maybe I shouldn't share.  I went to a store a month ago at 11:30 p.m.  And I looked at the people in the store, and they were my people.  And I went back--my daughter is an elementary teacher--and I said, "Mia [Jemia Roberson], I saw people with blue hair, red hair, purple hair, teeth all gold in front of their mouths, clothes hanging, butts showing."  She said, "Daddy, that's normal."  I said, "Well, what, what do they expect to become?"  She said, "Dad, it's a different day."  And I say, "If this is what is out there, the world has a long ways to go to get back."  And I think somehow or another we're gonna have to tell our young people that there are standards.  You've got to speak a certain way.  You've got to act a certain way.  You've got to dress a certain way.  You've got to have a degree of pride about who you are and what you can become.  And you don't get anything by not working for it.  The quick dollar and the drug open doors, jail, prisons, and graves.  And I used to tell my students, "Show me an old drug dealer.  Find me an old drug dealer.  Find me an old drug dealer, and we can talk."  I said, "Either they're in jail, or they're dead, or they hooked and in their own world."  We must refocus.  And there might need to be some special class for males, because a woman can love a male, but she can't really give a male what he needs.  I think male leadership and spiritual impact is our way.  I don't want to talk about money, 'cause that's a whole different about money.  We, as blacks--and I use the word black, you know, and people say--I did an application of the day on a government thing, and it said AF AM.  I said, "What is AF AM," (laughter)?  She said, "Afro American."  I said, "Oh, my god," (laughter).  I said, "I've been BLK for years, so now we got--," I said, "we're African American, we're black, we're Negroes, we're colored, whatever."  I said so, but in reality, we really need to focus on what we're about, and who we are, and what we can become.
Story_ID: 439983
Speaker 1: I hear a lot of people talk about what we need to do with the youth but nobody really doing anything.  I know you mentioned the 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of Birmingham, Inc., Birmingham, Alabama], and I know that they have a mentor program.  But we have to look at the younger generation or look at the older generation who are in leadership.  And I don't see any of the old leaders taking these younger men and passing the torch.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: What do you think about that?
Speaker 2: I would say you're right, but there are organizations that are doing something about it.  I call the age from thirty-five to maybe eighteen as a lost generation for males.  They're lost basically because they want it now.  They'll buy a car that's worth $500 and put $2,000 worth of wheels on it.  And it has no application and it has no value.  People are happy about those people acting that way because they're not a threat to anything.  There's no leadership, that's no threat.  We, I have taken it personally to demand standards and teach.  I teach young men in one of the mentors' program as one of the teachers there, and I've seen changes in my boys.  When they first came in they walked in head down, slouchy, clothes hanging.  I said you--I said, "Take a snapshot of yourself.  Stand on the stage.  Let somebody look at you.  Who do you think you are?  What do you look like?"  And I said, "All right, stand off."  Then I called some men that were dressed.  "Look at him.  What does he look like?  He looks successful.  How you know he's successful?  I don't know, but he looks successful.  Until you start portraying yourself in certain images and learning how to get there, you won't get there."  So we're trying through examples and through experiences to take these young men--I teach a course in etiquette, how to open doors, how to say thank you.  I had a session where I gave away--I love string ties--a tie.  And I lined up a whole clothesline of--and I said, "Go up and go shopping.  You only get two.  Some of them cost $15, some of them cost $150.  Some of them are handmade.  All of them are silk, but you're welcome to have one.  Now when you get one or two, have a seat."  Then I said, "Now, I want you to tie it around your neck like a businessman."  Most of them had no idea.  I said, "Today we're gonna teach you how to dress for a businessmen."  And so when we had our banquet, some of their moms come up, say he loves that tie.  He know--he will never get over you teaching him that.  Now he feels comfortable putting one on.  I, and so I think by examples, by people teaching them--everybody now, we don't really have a true leader.  And I don't want to talk about who we have leaders now.  I know Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton].  I know Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson].  I know what Jesse's role was with the minority dealers.  I know where he is now.  It's gonna take individuals.  We'll never have a leader like Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan].  Those guys are getting old.  We'll never have those kind of leaders.  It's gonna take small men doing big things in schools.  If you go to public schools, 90 percent of the teachers are women.  The principals are women.  The teachers are women.  They go home.  Ain't no, there's no dad--I'm talking colloquially--ain't no daddy there, so they don't get that influence.  So it's gonna take fraternities, churches, summer programs, charter schools to be of value into this generation.  That generation, eighteen to twenty-five, is all about clothes.  It's all about good time, living for the day.  I talked to a group of young men, and they told me, "Kill me, I ain't got nothing to live for."  I said, "Are you serious?"  They don't, they can't visualize being somewhere.  They have lost a dream 'cause they were never given a dream.  So it's left up to us, and we're trying to have an impact.  But when a mom is working and trying to feed her kids, she can't do all.  She needs that mate there.  If she doesn't have that mate there, she needs to make sure he gets to 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of America, Inc.], or to a church program, or a Boy Scouts of America.  Boy Scouts of America is the greatest program for people that don't have a lot of money that can teach understanding and responsibility.
Story_ID: 439984
Speaker 1: Make sure you put your child--I had a mom at one of our meetings say, when she gets in her car, her kids make her change her radio station.  I said, "Would you say that again for me?"  "Well, when I get in my car, they be complaining about they want to look at 96.5."  And I said, "What do you do?"  "I go on and change."  I said, "Who's the mama?  They're riding in your car.  They're putting gas in your car?  They're paying your car note?"  She said, "No, sir."  I said, "You tell them: this is what we'll listen to in my car.  When you get your car, then."  I said, but you have to take a--if you allow your child to dictate to you, he makes you what he wants you to be, and you won't make him what he needs to be.  So I think a lot of parenting needs to be given.  But I think a lot of the guys that are older are not reaching back 'cause they see the disparity between what we had and what they have now.  And I hope in the next ten years--I'm making sure my grandson, I guarantee he's gonna be straight because I demand certain things out of him.  And I think if more men would demand certain things and help the moms--and I know at our meetings 90 percent of those parents that are there are women, and most of them don't have families.  But they are pleased that we are able to take their kids to football games.  And I took them up to Talladega to meet the director of Talladega racetrack [Talladega Superspeedway, Talladega, Alabama].  They were at the civil rights museum [Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, Birmingham, Alabama] this past weekend, exposing them to good things.  My kids have been all over the world.  They've seen their mom [Linda Thompson Roberson] and dad at the Grammys [Grammy Awards].  We've done a lot of things.  We know--they know that if you work hard and do like daddy, or do like Uncle Ruben [ph.], or do like Uncle Cecil [ph.], you can be.  And that's the thing I planted in my kids.  I made all of mine learn how to manage their money.  They all had, they all had budgets in my house.  When I gave out allowance, I gave them out.  And then I said, "Anybody owe anything?"  My son [James Roberson, Jr.] was always a poor paymaster.  "Shayla [Shayla Roberson], how much do you owe?"  "Daddy, he owes me two dollars."  "Your wages have been garnished by two dollars."  I snatched his two dollars, and I give them to her.  He learned that if you don't pay people, people gonna take your money.  And when you're out of money, you're out of money.  So I started mine out every month, the first through the third of the month, my son pays all his bills.  He puts his checkbook up after that.  That's what I do.  He invests his money.  And he buys things.  He invests.  I want his money to work for him.  I don't want him to work for his money.  So I've done that.  And if more men would actually teach--my daughter is going to learn how to can food.  That's a lost art.  That used to be a great salvation with the black community.  We canned peaches, plums, and pears.  Nobody is doing it anymore.  I have a parent of mine that when I went to Leeds [Leeds Junior High School; Leeds Middle School, Leeds, Alabama] in '73 [1973], has given me canned goods.  And if I don't come get my canned goods, she gets upset with me.  This time, she called me for my canned goods, and I gave her a cash supply.  And now she's gonna teach my oldest child a tradition of canning.  And my daughter is looking forward to going and doing that.  Making quilts, things that we used to do, is something that we should be responsible for, transmitting it and transferring it into the next generation.
Story_ID: 439985
Speaker 1: Go ahead and tell me your wife's name (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have been blessed to be married thirty-five years to the same woman.  Linda Thompson Roberson is the mother of my three.  She's unique because she was born in Japan to a Japanese mother and a black father.  And she's now--she was a teacher, a principal, and now she's director of personnel for Birmingham school system [Birmingham City Schools].  The thing I love about my wife is that she has taught my family how to be good people and to love.  We had a project of trying to locate her parents.  And she was naturalized as an American citizen as a baby and was told that she was adopted.  And my daughter said, "Daddy, we want to know who our grandparents are on mom's side," so they did research.  And lo and behold, my son, Jay [James Roberson, Jr.] went to Montgomery, Alabama, to play soccer.  And my wife said, "Get a phone book."  There's something that's, I think is, from research, and we got her name, Watson [ph.].  My wife called Montgomery and talked to this lady, and she said, "Oh, that's my brother."  She had never met her blood biological dad.  And so we then prepared--and it's a story in its own--we prepared to reach out to him, but she had to accept the fact that he might not want to reach out to her.  But through God's grace, we reached out.  He reached out, and now she has four brothers and two sisters, Japanese mom, black daddy.  And God has really blessed her to meet her family and actually enjoy having a family like we have.
Story_ID: 438452
Speaker 1: This picture is a picture of my early days in 1943 with my mom and dad, a picture that I'll always treasure.
Speaker 2: This is at the Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] Omicron Lambda Chapter scholarship ball and gala.  As president of the chapter, I'm awarding one of my sons, Alex Dijonay [ph.], the presidential award, being assisted by my best friend, Ransom Davis, in the background at the Alpha Phi Alpha ball.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The year?
Speaker 2: Probably in 2000.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me in the yearbook at Leeds Junior High School [Leeds Middle School, Leeds, Alabama], 1998, principal of that dynamic institution.
Speaker 1: Is that '98 [1998] or '88 [1988]?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, '88 [1988] (laughter), 1988.  Thank you, dear--'88 [1988], 1988 at Leeds Junior High.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Another event, the National Guard flew in a helicopter as a part of our honors day program, principal of Leeds Junior High School, 1989.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This a picture of my lovely family.  Starting to the left, my son, Jay, who's actually James, Jr. [James Roberson, Jr.], my wife Linda Carol [Linda Thompson Roberson], my daughter Shayla Jamelle [Shayla Roberson], and my daughter Jemia Lenae [Jemia Roberson].  They're out eating while daddy is at work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This one?
Speaker 2: This a picture at another Alpha event, where the national president, Brother Johnson [Harry E. Johnson, Sr.], is there.  And from left to right, Ruben--from left to right is Ransom Davis, the Hilliard brothers [John Hilliard and Earl Hilliard], the mayor of the City of Birmingham [Alabama], the national president of Alpha Phi Alpha, Johnson, county commissioner, Jeff Germany, Senator Spratley [ph.], another brother who owns a McDonald's.  And I was the president of the chapter during that time, 2001 or '02 [2002] in Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: My wife Linda and I on a cruise.  We cruise all the time.  I'm gonna say this is probably, with her hair cut short, 1995 or '96 [1996].
Speaker 2: This is a very special picture.  This is a picture of my immediate family.  To my left Lawrence Roberson, who's president of Wealth Management [Wealth Management Group, Inc.] in Detroit [Michigan], my mother, Aressa [Aressa Craig Roberson], my father Mack [Mack Roberson], my sister, Bernita Sawyer [Bernita Roberson Sawyer], who is, lives in Decatur, Georgia, and I'm sitting there with my big afro.  This picture was probably 1963 or '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of [HistoryMaker] Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth, civil rights leader in Birmingham, Alabama, presenting an award for me for my service and leadership in the Civil Rights Movement, taken November, 1988.
Speaker 1: A very special time in my life, the groundbreaking ceremony for the Martin Luther King Memorial [Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial] in Washington, D.C., 2005.
Speaker 2: I thought that was last year.
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, baby, '6 [2006], you're right, sorry, 2006.  Thank you (laughter)--Martin Luther King, 2006.
