Story_ID: 482048
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines and I'm the interviewer, Matt Hickey [Matthew Hickey] is the videographer.  Would you s- start by stating your name spelling it out for me including your middle name?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Harry Robinson, Jr., H-A-R-R-Y, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N, Jr.
Speaker 1: Tell me your date of birth and where you were born?
Speaker 2: September 16, 1941, I was born in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is Thursday, May 4th, 2006.
Speaker 1: And the location of the interview?
Speaker 2: We're in the Royce and Carol West reading room [Royce and Carol West Library] of the African American Museum library and research center [African American Museum of Dallas, Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: Museum director.
Story_ID: 482049
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you a few People magazine-ish type questions--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Red beans and rice.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: The color that you love?
Speaker 2: (Pause) There's no one color but if I had to choose one I think it would be red.
Speaker 1: And what is your favorite destination for a vacation?
Speaker 2: New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: Super.
Story_ID: 482050
Speaker 1: Okay we're gonna get started and we're gonna talk about your family history.  So, if you would, tell me your mother's name and spell it for me and tell me her date of birth and where she was born and where she was raised?
Speaker 2: Okay my mother's name is Ruth Robinson [Ruth Farlow Robinson], R-U-T-H, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N; her maiden name was Farlow, F-A-R-L-O-W.  She was born in Raceland, Louisiana which is in Lafourche Parish, on February 27, 1921, she still alive.
Speaker 1: And that's where she was raised?
Speaker 2: In Raceland.
Speaker 1: Raceland?
Speaker 2: Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell me something about your mother.
Speaker 2: My mother's (laughter) very interesting person. She's a very strong woman, she has--my mother is not a lettered person, I think she had about a third grade education, but she's very intelligent and she's very principled even today at eighty-five, she believes in certain things and she doesn't cut any slack on what she believes.  It's either right or wrong, there's no in-between, no gray-ishness with her.  And it frustrates her about some of the things that have happened in the past that she can't do anything about in our family.  But she's the kind who is very perceptive, and I can remember incidences when we were kids, or when I was younger and my mother would speak out against them, in the family, and she has the creole accent, matter of fact all of my family had, except me, but when something came up and it was some question about it she would speak out and she would say, "Boy, that ain't right now."  You know, "That ain't right."  And, I can remember several instances where she admonished us that this is not the route to take; she was talking to the family.  But of course, you know she was the third grade--everyone else a little more educated than she really wasn't paying any attention to her.  And several of the things she cautioned us about turned out the way we- she didn't expect it to turn out.
Story_ID: 482051
Speaker 1: What were some of the things; you said you can think of a couple of the instances (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we had an incident in our family where one of our aunts remarried and my aunt was about our complexion and she had a kid that was very fair, you couldn't tell whether the kid was--what the kid was.  So, you know, gums started flapping about the ancestry of this kid and so my mother [Ruth Farlow Robinson] said, "You all shouldn't say that."  She said, "It could be that--," and she didn't use this line was bull, she was telling us was that we didn't know the child's father's ancestry and there could've been people way down the line in this family who were this child's complexion."  "Oh--you know, Ruth doesn't know what she's talking about."  Well, this man died and the family came to town and (laughter) they all looked like this little girl.  None of them looked like him.  So my mother just looked, she didn't have to say anything.  I think a lot of them had forgotten that they were castigating--casting aspersions on this--talking about her.  But that was one incident, then, another incident happened where one of my uncles died and he and his wife had been separated for a while, the family, my mother--my dad's folks, took it upon themselves to just disregard the wife even though he was still married to her.  And my wife told--my mother told my dad, "Harry [Harry Robinson, Sr.]," my dad was the senior, "Harry, that ain't right now."  She told him that somebody needs to call this wife, she said, "'Cause she's still married to (unclear) you need to talk to 'em, blah, blah, blah."  Nobody paying attention to them, well that didn't turn out right; it turned out differently and in a bad way.  But had they listened to my mother I think it would have turned out okay because the wife was not a bad person, but she was ignored so she just went on about her business, just collected the checks that were due her, but that was my mother, she always had a sense of what was right--
Story_ID: 482052
Speaker 1: I had to make a decision with my job.  I was working at a college and had a vacancy, called the dean of my library school, and back in those days you can call the dean and she would send you whatever you wanted.  "Dean I need a catalog, I need a reference librarian," and you knew if the dean sent the person, pretty good.  So I called and told her I had a vacancy for special collections librarian.  She sent me a young man, bright fellow, neat, well--just nice fellow.  He was gay, well, I, I, had talked to the president back in those days you didn't need a written contract if you had the president's commitment it was good as gold.  So I talked with the president, he told me to go 'head and hire the boy, the young man, brought him on and they'll get the contract after you get there.  So, the young man came and about two weeks, no contract, so I called the president's office, secretary said, "Oh, we'll get the contract to you."  Another couple weeks passed, no contract, so then the secretary--president's secretary said, "Oh, have you talked to Mr. So-and-So," this was the vice president who pretty much ran the place.  I said, "Oh, that's where the problem is."  So I went down to see him and he, you know, began to chastise me about, you know, he ran the place and he saw this paperwork it went around him and blah, blah, just a lot of stuff.  But then when you turn the rock over you found out what the real issue was, and the issue was I had crossed a woman who was an administrator who was a personal friend of his and this was his chance to get me back in line or to deal with me for stepping out of line with this woman.  So he decided to block the appointment.  So, I talked with him and he said, "Well come back and see me in a couple of days."  Because he had to go out of town, so I went back in about two days, and he said, "Do you know this boy is a homosexual?"  I said, "I didn't know that mattered."  I said, "I didn't care, I was just looking for a librarian I wasn't interested in his sexual preference."  I said, "Furthermore, you know it's illegal."  "Oh, oh, oh, we're not going to get into that."  He said, "Well, we got too much going here and, let me thing about this next couple of days."  I said, "I'll tell you what, I don't want this young man working under that kind of cloud, you just give me a contract for the rest of this semester and I'll get that boy outta here by the end of the semester."  He said, "Well, I'll get it back to you in a couple of days."  But what he did was, he sent me a letter that afternoon, hand delivered letter and it said, we cannot give--to me--we cannot continue the uncommitted--uncommitted was underlined--employment of Mr. So-and-So.  Told me what to do to sever his relationship with the college, well, as I thought through that thing and I went about this in a roundabout way to talk about my mother [Ruth Farlow Robinson], and how she has a sense of what's right and what's wrong and how her influence or, or her up- bringing me up impacted on my thinking even today and as I was thinking through what was going on the thing that kept coming up in my mind was hearing my mother say, "Boy, that ain't right now."  So, I went to the typewriter, typed a letter one sentence, one paragraph, and resigned.  And it was because of what my mother had said and I felt that it wasn't right what they were doing.
Story_ID: 482053
Speaker 1: Of course, the situation was resolved and the young man--the president was gonna give me a contract for him for the rest of the year, but I didn't want him working on a campus under those conditions because it was a small campus, the word had gotten out that Robinson [HistoryMaker Harry Robinson, Jr.] is sparring with administration over this boy who was gay and back in those days, you know, you couldn't be as openly gay as some people are now.  And so I called one of my friends at a major university and I said, "So-and-So, I got a young man here who is gay and I need a job for him."  And he said--and this guy is very progressive and doesn't have all these hang-ups but he was cautious, he said, "Is he flamboyant?"  I said, "What do you mean, I don't--flamboyant?"  He said, "Well, I tell ya what, I have a temporary position and I can put him in that position until January and then after January I can give him a permanent job."  I said, "Fine."  So I went back to the young man and I told him, I said, "Look, you're outta here."  Because first place the boy found out I had resigned and he didn't like that. He said, "You don't have to do that."  I said, "It's not just for you, it's a matter of principle."  And I kept thinking about what my mother [Ruth Farlow Robinson] would say, "Boy, that ain't right, now."  And I had to establish who was gonna run that library, me or the president.  And what was interesting was my wife had just left to go to graduate school so here I was with all of the bills, she's in school, only person working, but I figured it'll work out so I just took my chances and decided to leave and it worked out.  I never had any more problems out of the president or the vice president, matter of fact I had very good relationship with them when it was all over with.  But, it was all because of the influence of my mother and even today, as I do things and make decisions I think of what my mother would say, that's not right, now.  And when I visit her, even today, there are things that happen in my family, she continues to remember and every time I go, it's the same story, "Oh, no, that ain't right now," or, "they shouldn't have done that now." And it just, she's grieved that these things happened and I just listen because she wants to vent.  And sometimes she's on--when I call her on the telephone she will bring this stuff up over and over, over again that, you know, they just didn't do what was right.
Story_ID: 482054
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's talk about your, your mother's [Ruth Farlow Robinson] bring- her upbringing. She was raised where again?
Speaker 2: She was raised in Raceland [Louisiana], in the farm.  My mother worked very hard in the sugarcane field and when I was home last for her birthday, it was in February, I think, yeah, I did go for her birthday, February 27th, and I started asking her some questions about some other jobs she had.  When we were young she worked in the sugarcane field, that's seasonal work and they would get up early in the morning and go out to the sugarcane field and her mother worked with her, my grandmother [Nancy Farlow], would work--she was a widow, and she was working in the sugarcane field also and my mother had a nervous breakdown when we were young and it was this hard work out in the field the pressure and what have you, but anyway, she, she's doing fine.  I was about five or six years old and she had serious problems, you know, but she worked in a sugarcane field.  As we grew up we moved from my dad [Harry Robinson, Sr.] and I, I guess you'll ask me something about my dad. We moved from farm or plantation to plantation because of my father.  Because back in those days you lived in houses that were provided by whomever owned the plantation or the farm, or whomever you worked for, they provided housing for you.  So, we, we moved and I'll tell you about that when I talk about my dad.  But, when I mov- when we--when I got to be an eighth grader, maybe seventh grader, my mother worked at the shrimp factory, shrimp and oyster factory and I asked her to tell me about it again because I remembered some things but I wanted to know more from her.  And she started talking about it and she used to get up early in the mornings and there was a bus that took them down to the lower end of the county and she would go early in the morning, like three or four o'clock and they would what they call shuck shrimps.  And she said there were boats that would come in from the Gulf [Gulf of Mexico], and they'd dump the shrimp and everything and she'd come back home sometimes late at night on that bus.  And since I was the oldest child I was in charge of the other three siblings because my father was working on the farm during the day and he was not nearby 'cause the guy for whom he worked owned the county--the parish [LaFourche Parish, Louisiana], and so he had spreads all over the place and my dad was going around doing things for him.  But my mother worked on that shrimp bus and they did oysters too, I don't remember where she said she was shucking oysters or shrimps but she worked in a shrimp factory.  Then we moved from the lower end of the parish to Thibodaux, Louisiana.
Story_ID: 482055
Speaker 1: Let's go back to your mother's [Ruth Farlow Robinson] upbringing--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --okay, when she was growing up did she share any stories about when she was growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --I--about two Christmases ago she shared a story about her father's [Clarence Farlow] people who lived in Morganza, Louisiana, which is east Pointe Coupee Parish, up near Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and New Rose [Louisiana].  And, she had a first cousin there with her who was about two years older than she but her mother [sic. Robinson's maternal great-grandmother, Sarah Farlow] raised this cousin, they're very close, so my mother--so I started asking about her father's people, we know where did Pop people, Aunt Mar- I remember Aunt Amelia [Amelia Farlow] and some of them who were still in Morganza because some were in Morganza, some were in Oakland, California, some were in Chicago [Illinois], lived on Cottage Grove [Avenue].  So I ask about them and she started talking about this aunt who used to send them--no, no, it was my grandfather's mother I believe who sent them a box every year and she said the box came to the local grocery store.  It was the company store and every year they'd look for this box from the aunt or the grandmother and she said one year somebody forgot to tell them about the box or something and there was food or something in there and it spoiled.  But she talked about how this relative sent her clothing and she said, she remembered, she said, "And I can remember as if it were yesterday."  She said, "She sent me this yellow dress," or a white dress or something like that, so I'm wondering, you know, how much of this is accurate.  The cousin, who's two years older than my mother, was sitting there and she said, "Yeah, and you give me the yellow dress remember?"  So I say well this authenticated--not that I doubted my mother but you know, she's eighty-five, and they talked about that and then she talked about how the two of them came up together and she was teasing this cousin because the cousin, even though they were the same age they went to school at the same time and she laughed about this cousin and she was teasing the cousin about when they first started school they asked my cousin what was her name, well she didn't know what name meant, so she said she ain't got no name, (laughter) and they laughed about it and that was a big joke for them.  But that was one of the stories I remember talking to my mother about.
Story_ID: 482056
Speaker 1: The other thing she mentioned to me [Robinson's mother, Ruther Farlow Robinson] was she was talking about her family lineage and she said her mother, now her mother was ninety years old when she died in eight--1990--1982, grandmother died in 1982.
Speaker 2: What was the grandmother's name?
Speaker 1: Nancy Farlow, she died in 1982, yeah,
Speaker 2: How old was she when she died?
Speaker 1: Ninety. She was about ninety years old.  She, she, she died in May and her birthday was in June, June 1, she was born, she was born in 1891, June 1st, 1891, had to be 1892 when she was born.  But, she was talking about her mother and she said her mother's parents were divorced and she had some divorce papers.  So I'm trying to put my hands on these divor- 'cause I didn't think they had divorce papers--look, if my grandmother was born in 1891, '92 [1892], and her parents were like, I guess, 1890 or early 1900s and, you know, African Americans having divorce papers in the country, but I think they must have lived somewhere nearer New Orleans [Louisiana].  But anyway, she promised me to--that she was gonna deliver them, she knew where they was, somebody had them and she was going to show me, so maybe her sisters or somebody had them, but I'm interested in watch--getting those papers to see what was in those papers.
Speaker 2: So, your mother, you said wa- she was Creole?
Speaker 1: She had the creole accent; they all came up Creole, Creole.  Now my grandmother, my mother's mother spoke Creole and all of--everybody in my family, everybody has the accent except for me and I really regret that that I don't have the accent you know. (Accent) "Don't do that no."  "Come here yeah." "Sure." You know, and I just don't have it, I regret that, I hate that.
Speaker 2: So your mother's father, your grandfather?
Speaker 1: He died when I was very young.
Speaker 2: What was his name?
Speaker 1: Clarence, Clarence Farlow.  He was the one from Morganza [Louisiana].  He, good looking fellow had nice olive complexion, small man, loved life.  I remember that I always remembered them talking about Pa, he didn't drive, but he had one of his sons, who was my godfather who did the driving for him.
Speaker 2: What did he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He died of a heart attack at an early age.
Speaker 2: What did he do?
Speaker 1: I don't remember, I imagine he worked on a farm like everybody else, I don't remember what he did, not on my mother--father's--my mother's side, no.
Speaker 2: Okay, do you know anything about their parents?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No, no, no, I do know about my mother's, mother's stepfather.  Because he lived with my grandmother and I lived with my grandmother for a while.  But he was a stepfather and he raised my grandmother, his name was Tom [ph.], they called him Tom I don't remember his full name but I remember when he died.  I remember he lived with us he was old, and I remember they had the wake and the funeral at the house, 'cause he was not a church person.  He was very old.
Story_ID: 482057
Speaker 1: Let's go to your father's side--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --(laughter) of the family--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's an interesting, that's an interesting side of the family. My (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And your father's name again is?
Speaker 2: Both of my paternal grandparents are deceased.
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me your father's name again?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Harry Robinson, Sr.
Speaker 1: And he was born when?
Speaker 2: He was born February 4th, 1921.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: He and my mother [Ruth Farlow Robinson] were born the same year same month.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Different dates, he was born in the same area, they were teenage sweethearts that got married at twenty years old.  And, remained married until he died in nineteen- no, 2004.  He died March 4th, 2004, a month after his birthday.  My father never went to school at all, but here again he was a very intelligent person, he did all kinds of work and he taught me a lot of things by showing me, he never articulated them, but in terms of character--and I always tell folks there are a lot of things I can tell you about my dad, but there are two things I can really tell you about my dad.  One, he respected everybody and two he demanded that you respect him.  And he had a way of doing it, if you crossed him, and he was fun loving--everybody loved him he was just a fun loving fella, they still talk about him he's always the life of the group wherever he was he made merry--was a merry maker.  But if you crossed him he would let you know it and he would say something like, "You can't do that to me, I'm a man."  Now, you define, you know, take that and dissect it, you know, man.  He worked every day, took care of his family, paid his taxes and was gonna demand that you respect him.  That's what men do, that's what we were taught that men do.  And so, that impacted on us, you know, we demand that people respect us.  Now he didn't go around like some people and say, "Well you know my folks told us you gotta make folks re- ."  No, he didn't say that, he didn't articulate that, but his actions spoke louder than any words.  And everybody knew they had to respect my old man, and he got along with just about everybody but he was not going to take a whole lot of foolishness and, and that carried over to all of the boys in the family.
Story_ID: 482058
Speaker 1: So you were telling me about your dad [Harry Robinson, Sr.] and how he didn't articulate things to you but by his actions, tell me some of his actions that were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I remember, my family, we had a lot of illness and tragedy in our family, there were four of us who lived, and there were six of us all together.  I was born prematurely with congenital heart condition.  The next kid who was born died at birth, the next kid was my sister and she had some health issues later on with her face, they thought it was a stroke but it was a nerve that had tangled, we straightened that out.
Speaker 1: Who is your sister's name?
Speaker 2: Yvonne [Yvonne Robinson Savoy].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then we had another brother who was born, he died a year and a half from diphtheria, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was his name?
Speaker 2: Alton [Alton Robinson], A-L-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The next brother who was born, he died in '86 [1986], from pancreatic cancer, his name was Norman, Norman Lee [Norman Robinson].  The next brother who was born had polio a year and a half; that was the first sweep, that wave of polio that came through.  We discovered on the Monday after Mother's Day in 1903 [sic.] that he had been dead for eighteen months in California.  And so they cremated his body and we had to go and--
Speaker 1: What year did you say this was?
Speaker 2: Nine- 2003.
Speaker 1: Two thousand three [2003].
Speaker 2: Three [2003].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I had to go get his ashes, but that brother was--that's the baby brother, and by the time he was fifteen he had had about ten operations.  Because they didn't know what to do they were experimenting with this surgery and he became addicted in fifth grade, to sniffing glue and just about the rest of his life, except when he was in sixth and seventh grades, he was handicapped he had braces on--he was tall but his legs were about the size of my arm.  When he was in fifth grade--sixth grade, a male teacher got a hold of him, Mr. Jones, Norman Jones, Norman D. Jones, and he knew my brother liked athletics, but he couldn't play.  So what he did, he told Clarence [Clarence Robinson] he'd make him--what were they, the property clerk, I don't know what they call those people, but he would take care of the equipment and property and could travel with the team if he kept his grades up.  And that boy kept his grades up to a B average all of sixth grade and it just so happen- it was fifth grade, then when he got in sixth grade he got Mr. Jones again, so we had two good years of him--when he got in seventh grade just went, you know, all kinds of problems that come with handicapped-ness, you know, he's physically handicapped all kinds of problem.
Story_ID: 482059
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So was your father--we were talking about your father [Harry Robinson, Sr.].
Speaker 2: My father, yeah, (unclear) was I was telling you that all of the tragedies we had and what I was getting at was how my father dealt with those, my father and my mother [Ruth Farlow Robinson].  With all of the stuff that I mentioned to you not once did I see him break down.  He was always there to play the role of that man.  My mother, my sister [Yvonne Robinson Savoy], some of us we would work out the plan what was to be done and he initiated, he provided for us, I mean whatever, you know, we needed he provided.  Now some of the wants we didn't but he had a lot of pride he wouldn't ask his family for anything, I mean he figured out how he would handle it.  But the other thing was he always told me that even though he couldn't read or write, but if you showed him how to do something he could do it and he did.  So he did, and I still haven't figured this out, he did all of the electrical work around the house and we didn't have any plumbing 'cause we were in the out, in the country you didn't have inside plumbing and that kind of stuff, running water and that kind of stuff.  But when it came to electricity, working on his old car he did all of those kinds of things.  And he always cautioned us about--well, there were two of us old enough for him to talk to, and he told us in his own crude way about getting girls pregnant and he would always tell us, and I don't know exactly, but don't do anything to a girl that you didn't want to do to your sister.  And we had only one sister and he, and, and, and she got pregnant at about sixteen, it almost killed him.  But he always told us, you know, to be careful and don't do this and it was his way of--he told us as best he could and I always remember that.  What Pops told us, but the other examples he set were his affection for my mother.  I told you he worked in different jobs (laughter) and the reason he worked in different jobs was because he didn't take a lot, so, you know, we were still during the days of segregation and people just thought that they could treat folks any kind of way, he wasn't gonna take that.  So he'd leave, he'd quit the job if a man called him boy or mistreated him or he put him (unclear), he'd leave.  And so we didn't have a car back in those days and so during the summers or sometime when the weather was nice we would sit out on the porch and if it were during the day we'd see him walking home and my mother would say, "Oh, Lord, I wonder who your pa got into it with now."  But he was comin- and he always got another job, I mean he never had a problem that kind of stuff.  But there were just certain things he was not going to take.  So we moved from place to place, but he always provided for us and Fridays were big days for us because that's when he usually got paid and we were out in the country so he would bring us things like, bags of potato chip, there are four of us, so he'd bring a bag of potato chips, or some other kind of chip like peanuts and he always brought my mother an Almond Joy because he knew she liked Almond Joy, so he'd bring my mother the Almond Joy and we looked forward to--that was a big deal to get potato chips 'cause you know, we were in the country and didn't have that kind of stuff and we looked forward to Pops bringing that kind of stuff to us.  And I remember he would go into Thibodaux [Louisiana] and I never heard or saw a lot of mushiness in terms of emotion between him and my mother, but I do remember he would go to a dry good store, it was Thibodaux dry good store, and he would bring lingerie for my mother and I remember it was like a slip or something and I didn't know what was going on.  But as I grew up I learned to appreciate, you know, what he was trying to do.  I didn't know any other, any of the other men in the community doing that kind of stuff.  But this is what my old man did and it sort of set the example for two of us who were married when we came along and we did those kinds of things in a different way.
Story_ID: 482060
Speaker 1: Back to his [Robinson's father, Henry Robinson, Sr.] responsibility about manhood, when I was in college [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] we ran short of money, as usual and so my mother [Ruth Farlow Robinson] pretty much managed everything at the house--no she managed everything at the house, he ran everything at the house.  So, she and I went around town trying to find money for me to go to college.  Went to the bank, different places, no luck, so finally we had to tell him, well, he could have gotten that money from his mama [Annie Williams Robinson].  Mama and them had the money, but his pride wouldn't let him do that.  So finally he went to the man for whom he worked and told him he needed to borrow some money for his boy to go back to college. What, like about two hundred dollars, 250, something like that.  And he told Mr. Peltier [Harvey Peltier, Sr.] that he had gone different places and he wasn't successful and this man who was no liberal, almost a slave owner, 'cause, you know.  But he looked my dad--he was a lawyer, looked my dad in the face and gave him a going over.  That he was disappointed that he would go all over town for something as important as my education to try to borrow money and didn't come to him first.  And that said a lot about him and he gave my old man the money and took it out of my check--his check every week until he paid it off.  But he was always there to get the money.  I remember once he went to a finance company and you know what they did to you with the rates, but he went and borrowed the money so I can go to school.  And until the day he died I don't remember my parents ever asking me for help for anything where they just needed stuff.  I did provide something twice, I found out they were in problems about something so, whatever I gave them, whatever they got from me was what I gave them 'cause they never asked for ask--because he felt that it was his responsibility to put me through school.  And I never shall forget once I went home for the breaks and he took me down to see my grandmothers, both of them lived in the same community.  And he loved his refreshments and I knew that so on our way back to my house I told him, "Pop's, let's stop at this tavern."  I had a few dollars, "Let's stop at this tavern."  And he used to drink this stuff called Muscat; it's called Muscatel that stuff it's bad stuff.  So--and I knew that that's what he drank so on our way back we stopped at this place and I asked him, I said, "Pop's, you want some Musc- ."  He said, "Oh no, no, no."  He had graduated. He was no longer drinking Muscat, he was drinking Canadian Club (laughter) okay.  So anyway, he got a drink and two of my uncles were there and they walked up to me and they called me and they called my name and they say--and they looked at my dad and they say, "Harry, I know you'll be glad when that boy get outta school, so you can--he can pay you some of your money back."  And he put that drink down and he told them that he was not sending me to school to pay him back, he wanted me to go to school so I wouldn't work with co- work as hard as he had worked.  And so they tucked their tails and walked away and he was through, oh he was mad.  The nerve of them to think that I had to pay him back and that was his feeling.
Story_ID: 482061
Speaker 1: Matter of fact, when I had to take some money to him [Robinson's father, Harry Robinson, Sr.] once, it was for income tax problems and you know can you imagine folks making so little money and having to pay income tax?  But what had happened, my mother [Ruth Farlow Robinson] had taken some of the money to support this brother of mine who was the druggie and she would slip monies to him, you know, my dad give the money--she slip it--that's her baby.  And she didn't know what to do and we didn't know what to do either, and we treated him as a normal person, which I think was a mistake.  We didn't take into consideration the psychological warfares he was having and we found out later on he wrote some notes somewhere, we got letters that he wrote.  They showed them to me a couple of times when I was home.  They just found those notes where he was just revealing what he felt.  But when I went to go with him to take care of this, I said, now the thing to do is to go to the congressman's office, well, the congressman's wife had taught my niece, who we raised, my niece's child.  So, I say, "Pops let's go to Tauzin's [Billy Tauzin] office, (unclear)," and my junior, my high school industrial arts teacher's son was the liaison too in that office.  So we went--it was in another county.  So we went over there and we worked out something where they helped us to take care of it.  My old man was relieved that he could pay--settle it, but what he was more proud of was the fact that they respected me and I had a business card, I was a vice president of something and they looked at the card and they said--and so, all of that--that's what impressed him the most that his boy was there and he was the vice president, of course he went back home and told everybody, well in town: "You know I went in" and such and such a thing.  But I think he deserved it because he had done everything--he had played his role as a man, as a father, he's responsible, he got me where I was and, you know, just made me feel good to be able to do that for him.
Story_ID: 482062
Speaker 1: So tell me about his [Robinson's father, Harry Robinson, Sr.] parents?
Speaker 2: Oh, his (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were their names (laughter).
Speaker 2: --his father, I was one of his father's favorites.  His father was literate.  Now my father was one of fifteen kids and he's the only one in the family who didn't go to school and he was not the oldest.  And so I asked why didn't he go to school and they said he had whooping cough or something, I've heard two different stories.  One he had whooping cough and another one was something else, I don't even remember what the other story was.  But he didn't go to school, but he had others in his family--but his father was literate and I spent a lot of time with that grandfather talking about--when I--even as a kid talking about newspaper stories, because he was the one who got the newspapers nobody else got newspaper, he got the newspaper.  So when we go together we'd talk about the newspapers and he would tell me about Charles de Gaulle and Truman [President Harry S. Truman], and all of those people and he looked forward to my coming because I was the oldest grandchild, and he looked forward to my coming to visit with him so we can talk about these stories and he was telling me this that and the other.  So we had a lot of fun together, now my grandmother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well what was his name?
Speaker 2: Shelvin, S-H-E-L-V-I-N, Shelvin Robinson, Sr.  The oldest son was Shelvin Robinson, Jr.
Speaker 1: And do you know when he was born?
Speaker 2: In lake parish, in Raceland [Louisiana], Lafourche Parish [Louisiana] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In what year?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.
Speaker 1: No idea?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know, I can go back and look at the funeral program.  But it was in the 1890s, 1880s or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Had to be 1890s because he died in eighte- 1980 something and he was about ninety years old.  He wasn't a hundred so it had to be in the '90s [1890s] or something like that.  Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he--
Speaker 2: --it was interesting because with--we called him Papa, but Papa, we pretty much knew his age but with Mama you didn't talk about age with Mama (laughter), that was another--you didn't get comfortable with Mama.  Her name was Annie Williams [Annie Williams Robinson] and she was born in--on the--in the river parish over around Vacherie [Louisiana] and Edgard [Louisiana], I think that's St. John Parish [St. John the Baptist Parish, Louisiana] and she came to Lafourche Parish, I don't know at what point, but I do know that her relatives are still over there in Edgard, it's across the river from where we are.  Mama, we laughed about Mama, I went to Atlanta [Georgia] this past summer to visit my first cousin, he and his brother were raised by my grandmother and so we were sitting and talking about--say, "Boy, Mama was something else wasn't she?"  He said, "Yeah."  And I said, "You know," I said, "Mama was just mean and she enjoyed being mean."  He said, "Yes and I got the brunt of it too."  (Laughter) Because she--I mean she rained terror on those two boys.  And she was just, always after somebody or she was--I guess my grandmother was what you would call, she was uppity, you know, always got her deuces up, getting ready to fight.  And, and my grandfather on the other hand just as calm and he would let her rant and rave but after a while, he was sort of like my mother [Ruth Farlow Robinson], after a while he was, "Enough is enough, that ain't right, I don't wanna hear any more of that."  Now he was a little man, he was smaller than she, but she didn't cross him, nobody crossed him really because he didn't bother anybody he was very, very respected.
Story_ID: 482063
Speaker 1: And I remember when I was in college and I told you my dad [Harry Robinson, Sr.] worked for this man [Harvey Peltier, Sr.] who owned a lot of stuff well he provided housing for all of his employees.  Well he sold that part of his holding and we had to move. I was in college [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] so my folks had to move somewhere they didn't have a telephone and I needed money for my meal card, I didn't have the money, I couldn't call my folks 'cause I didn't know how to get in touch with them, so I called my grandfather [Shelvin Robinson, Sr.], I knew Papa would take care of me.  So he walked seven miles, this man seventy-something years old, he walked seven miles to send me a U.S. money order, postal money order with the money.  My dad was upset 'cause he never--but I couldn't get a hold of him, but he felt that I should have done--I don't know what else I should have done, but my grandmother [Annie Williams Robinson] being her typical self, brought it up to my parents at church the next Sunday, about when we were gonna pay them back, like thirty-five dollars.  And my grandfather discovered she had mentioned it to them and he let her know how unhappy he was that she had mentioned it.  She really didn't need the money but she was always taking in, you know, whatever she can get, she would take the money--now I told you how mean she was.  But she had a special relationship with my mother [Ruth Farlow Robinson].  She was closer to my mother than she was to her daughters.  My mother's--mother's mother [Nancy Farlow], and my paternal grandmother--two grandmothers lived in the same area, so on Sundays we would go from Thibodaux [Louisiana], visit my mater- my mother's mother and then she would go down to visit my father's mother.  She had to go every Sunday.  My mat- my dad's mother made big pots of vegetable soup; everybody went to Mama for vegetable soup and smothered chicken on summer--Sundays.  If my mother did not go and visit her on Sunday, she would call to find out what had happened because she expected my mother and if my dad were ever to do anything or say anything to my mother he had to answer to her.  On the other hand, with the other brother they could do whatever they wanted to their wives, she was always on their side, supporting them.  But with my mother she was different, matter fact the whole family felt that way about my mother.  You know, she was always right, they loved her and they always supported her.
Story_ID: 482064
Speaker 1: Tell me about your, your [paternal] grandfather [Shelvin Robinson, Sr.]; you said that they had money.
Speaker 2: They had more money--them better than the--that's relative (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did they do?
Speaker 2: That's relative.  They were farmers too, now my mother--grandmother [Annie Williams Robinson], on my father [Harry Robinson, Sr.] side never did work.  She had sixteen kids, so she couldn't work (laughter), but my grandmother's--my mother's mother [Nancy Farlow] worked in the field, she worked, she really worked hard.  And she raised geese too.
Speaker 1: She raised geese?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Um-hm, um-hm.  And she sold them.
Speaker 1: So did your grandfather and grandmother, did they own land?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it's interesting, my father's folks--this man I was telling you about who owned most of the county, he had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Harvey Pertltier, P-E-R-T-L-T-I-E-R [sic. Harvey Peltier, Sr.], he owned pockets (laughter) of property so we lived in one community, the whole family did 'cause everybody worked on his plantation.  My granddad on my--my dad's dad and four, five of his sons we all lived in those houses of Mr. Pertltier, matter fact, it was my entire family now that I think about it because my dad's sister and her husband lived in one of those houses.  And then my dad's brothers lived in those houses and they farmed the sugarcane and the corn for this man.  And so my grandparents over there too, later on they bought properties down on a lower end of the county, the parish [Lafourche Parish, Louisiana], my grandmother, my mother's mother bought a piece of property down in that community first and she bought the property with the money that my grandfather [Clarence Farlow] had left her through an, an insurance policy.  I think that was like about five hundred dollars and she bought this plot of land and she built a house on it.  So she moved from the plantation where she was and we lived on that plantation too after we left from where my dad's folks were, we moved down to another plantation.  And that's where my grandmother, my maternal grandmother lived, wonderful time down there--place.  But she bought property and built a house so all of them moved to that community and all of the parent--grandparents are deceased now but their children or grandchildren are living in that--they're small pieces of land, but they can put two or three houses on them.  And all of them are living on that property.
Speaker 1: And where is this?
Speaker 2: Raceland, Louisiana (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Raceland?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the lower end of the county, parish.
Speaker 1: So growing up, well I guess we went to your grandparents, so you don't have any knowledge of anyone in your family being a slave?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I remember my maternal grandmother's mother living to be 105 so that was in 1947 so that meant she had to be, 'cause if you went back to 1847--my, my, my --she died at, before 1947, I was about four or five years old, I was born in 1941, so it was about '45 [1945], '46 [1946], she was 105 when she died, so she had to be a slave and I don't remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who was she?  She was your mother's [Ruth Farlow Robinson]--
Speaker 2: She was my dad's--
Speaker 1: Your father's grandmother.
Speaker 2: --grandmother on his mother's side.
Speaker 1: Do you know her name?
Speaker 2: I don't remember, I knew it, but I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her name.  That's interesting.
Story_ID: 482065
Speaker 1: So now let's talk about you as a, a young child.
Speaker 2: Well, I came up in Lafourche Parish [Louisiana], went to elementary school.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 2: Pitman. Pitman Elementary [ph.], it was in a church house, there were six grades, grades one--the, the church was named--it was in my church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which was Third Zion Baptist Church [Raceland, Louisiana]; there were six grades, two teachers who lived in New Orleans [Louisiana].  They came on Mondays and went back on Fridays; they lived with Miss--lady named Nanoo [ph.], they lived in her house, the two teachers lived--it was walking distance from the church.  And they got the bus to come to work on Mondays and they got the bus, go back.  Well, I went to that school from grades one through three, we had two teachers.  One teacher, Miss Jones [ph.] taught grades one through three, Miss Marrow [ph.] taught grades four through six.  And grades one and two, Mrs. Jones taught me in grade three, Miss Marrow taught me, when I got to the fourth grade they consolidated our school, they moved us further down in the count- parish.  Went to Kent Hadley Elementary School [Kent Hadley Elementary and Junior High School, Raceland, Louisiana], well, it was a brick school inside plumbing, cafeteria, cafeteria was in an adjacent building, but it was better than where we were because with us we ate in a little fellowship hall at the school and it was just different, just, you know, new situation.
Story_ID: 482066
Speaker 1: So we were talking about your elementary school so you went to the new school
Speaker 2: Yeah, Kent Hadley [Kent Hadley Elementary and Junior High School, Raceland, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: Kent Hadley School and that's where my mother [Ruth Farlow Robinson] had gone to school, but they had to walk about seven or eight miles a day, and the woman who had taught my mother, her name was Miss Hadley, Lavonia--Lavinia Hadley [ph.], she was still teaching, she didn't teach me she taught my sisters and brother because she was in the early elementary school.  When I got to that school in the fourth grade--
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. Whatever (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay what year did you start school?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine.
Speaker 2: I was six years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So had to be 1947, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But when we left Pitman [Pitman Elementary School (ph.)], the church schoolhouse to go to--and that was fun being in the church schoolhouse because we had--there was no inside plumbing, we were all there together, but whenever there were funerals there was no school 'cause they had to use the church [Third Zion Baptist Church, Raceland, Louisiana] for the funeral so we didn't go to school and they bring the bodies in if there was a wake, they'd bring the body in there so we got out of school early and we didn't go back to school next day.  But I was--and I often wondered how they counted those days I guess it didn't matter back in those days, but anyway so we went down to Raceland [Louisiana] and that school was a brick school about six or seven classrooms.  So I was in the brick building, that was in the fourth grade, in fifth grade--see when they moved us from Pitman they took the teachers with all of us, teachers, students, everybody.  So when I was in first--second grad, Miss Jones [ph.] taught me, third grade Miss Marrow [ph.] taught me, fourth grade they merged the schools so my fourth grade teacher was Miss Collin [ph.], fifth grade I got Miss Marrow back as my fifth grade teacher.  And I remember--and the brother [Clarence Robinson] I was telling you about who had the polio, I remember I was in her class when he had that polio 'cause they took us outta class when they discovered he had polio.  But I went to that school fifth grade, sixth grade, seventh grade. Eighth grade they moved all of us to Thibodaux [Louisiana], to Thib- to La- to C.M. Washington High School [Thibodaux, Louisiana], they built two, three new buildings there, stadium, the first black football team in the count- in the parish [Lafourche Parish, Louisiana], we had a football team a stadium, new stadium and a band, marching band and the band director was a woman, this was in 1954.  She is a famous jazz musician; she still performs in New Orleans [Louisiana].  See when she came to us she had just gotten out of college (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Germaine Bazzle; Germaine Bazzle's aunt was my first and second grade teacher (laughter), Miss Jones.  'Course we didn't know all of this until later on that when we moved to the school in Thibodaux that was Miss Jones' niece.  And she was very thin lady 'bout thin as that pole but very classy lady and she taught music appreciation so I took music appreciation under Miss Bazzle.
Story_ID: 482067
Speaker 1: What were your extracurricular activities in, in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess what all the other kids did, we had recess and we--oh we had fields day.  Every year in May we went from school to school--well it wasn't but like three or four schools in the parish county [Lafourche Parish, Louisiana].  And we looked forward to May Day or fields day because we had competitions at the schools there was a school in Greenwood [Louisiana], there was one in Lafourche Crossing [Louisiana], these were all elementary schools, then there was one in Thibodaux [Louisiana], Raceland [Louisiana] and there was a school--that was Raceland 'cause the kids from Lockport [Louisiana] and Cut Off [Louisiana] came to us, or did they, I don't remember, but the low end of the parish.  But anyway, on that Saturday we went around from (unclear) had sack races, relay, potato races and all that kind of stuff.  Now that's the extracurricular activity I remember in elementary school.  When I was in junior high, was ninth grade, I entered the science fair and got a second place one year, I don't even remember what the project was (laughter) but I got a second place and I couldn't even go to the competition so I sent my project, it was in another county for the district and I sent the project and got a second place.
Speaker 1: In elementary school did you read a lot?
Speaker 2: I guess I didn't read any more than other kids at school but away from school I read a lotta newspapers and these were used newspapers.  My mother [Ruth Farlow Robinson] worked for some people who were--they were not--I guess they were sharecroppers, they were white, they were sharecroppers and we bought used clothes from them and when my mother worked for them they gave us the paper.  So I would wait 'til my mother come from work and we would get the paper two or three time--she would always bring the paper for me to read and when I didn't read those papers then on weekends when I went down to see my [paternal] grandfather [Shelvin Robinson, Sr.], you know, he would bring me up to date on what we had.  But I did read--
Story_ID: 482068
Speaker 1: You know course I didn't have much more to do because by the time I was in fourth, fifth grade [at Kent Hadley Elementary and Junior High School, Raceland, Louisiana] we had moved from where all of the family members were.  We had moved to down where my maternal grandmother [Nancy Farlow] was and we were isolated from the rest of the community.  It was a separate plantation, this was different from--wasn't Mr. Peltier's [Harvey Peltier, Sr.] plantation, it was another one.  Was a sugarcane company owned that plantation in Godchaux, G-O-D-C-H-A-U-X, it's a big store in New Orleans [Louisiana] called Godchaux [Leon Godchaux Clothing Company], I don't know if they still have it, but it was one in New Orleans, and they owned a big store, big company store, I mean big, big place it would be a super store in those days where you got everything you needed there.  Godchaux, they owned the sugarcane place, so my mother's folks worked for Godchaux, they drove the tractors with the sugarcane.  Mother [Ruth Farlow Robinson] and them worked on that plantation cutting the sugarcane and then they had this big sugar mill.  See, the sugar mill was down on low end--in Raceland [Louisiana], and further up the street was the company store, big store, I men big place, big place and so people would go to the company store to get what they needed and on Saturdays--see the Godchauxs lived in New Orleans, they were wealthy Jews and I remember there was one named Leon Godchaux [Leon Godchaux II], he was the smaller one I remember, and they would come on Saturday and they'd give all of the kids dimes, give you dime, well hell you spent it right in the store so you know, but we remembered that.  The other thing they did was in that sugarcane factory, which is so clean you can eat off the floor 'cause it was sugar, every year for Christmas they would have all of the kids whose parents worked in that factory to come to the plant and they had new toys as far as you can see, nothing but new--you just picked what you wanted.  But, they had two shifts and the school bus would take you and back in our days the school bus drivers were African Ameri- you know they didn't integrate you on the busses 'cause you had dif- black bus drivers and white bus drivers.  But for this event the sugarcane company hired the white bus driver. So Mr. Malonesome [ph.] took all of the white kids to the sugarcane factory first.  They got all of the toys they wanted then they picked us up and I'll never forget, used to be on Saturday, they picked all of us up and we went down there.  Now, wasn't any leftover toys or anything, these were all new, they put out new batches, wasn't any leavings, you know, where they--you got what was left.  And we all had toys, cap pistols, bicycles, little wag- little red wagons all that stuff.  And that was big time.
Story_ID: 482069
Speaker 1: Then we moved back on one of the Peltier's [Harvey Peltier, Sr.] properties, right up the st- road from my [maternal] grandmother [Nancy Farlow].  So then we couldn't go back and, you know, couldn't go back to get the toys anymore.  But where we lived was really isolated, wasn't anything there but us, our house, a shotgun house and it was a nice house, right on the road.  Highway 308, the bayou, Highway 1, Highway 1 runs from the tip of the toe of the boot up to Shreveport [Louisiana], it runs all the way up.  On the other side, on Highway 1 the more affluent people lived, that's on the other side of the bayou.  On this side was gravel road, Highway 1 was always paved, two lanes.  This side, gravel, they eventually blacktopped it.  So we moved to another house that Mr. Peltier owned.  So we were isolated, the nearest neighbor was like about a quarter of a mile, they were white, on the northern side up the road was an older white woman named Miss Luland [ph.], and we had some contact with her 'cause my mother [Ruth Farlow Robinson] knew her, but, so we were there by ourselves so we had sugarcane field on the left, sugarcane field on the back, the bayou on the front with the levy with sugarcane and gardening, fig trees and that kind of stuff.  And on our right was Miss Luland's property, and it was sort of weeded or tree--lotta greenery there and further up the street was a grocery store.  So, what we would do on weekends and sometimes in the evenings is sit on the porch and count the cars that went by because we didn't have anything else to do because you know we had cut the grass and done whatever the chores we had--chores we had.  So, what we would do is my sister [Yvonne Robinson Savoy] and I would sit on the porch, says, "Okay, we gonna see who has the most cars, you count all of the cars going north I count all the cars going south."  And we sit there and count the cars, get dark and so we go into the house.
Speaker 2: So this house had no inside plumbing?
Speaker 1: Oh no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no plumbing, we didn't have plumbing until we moved to Thibodaux [Louisiana].  But we got a television before we moved and, you know, you had the outside antenna and what was interesting was, you know we were forty miles from--living forty miles from New Orleans [Louisiana], seventy-two from Baton Rouge [Louisiana], seventy-two plus fourteen is a little more than seventy-two, so Channel 2 [WBRZ-TV] was in Baton Rouge, 4--6 was in New Orleans, and we can always get WDSU [WDSU-TV], Channel 6.  But sometimes we wanted to watch Channel 2 'cause there's cowboys, westerns on there, but the only way we could get it we had to go out and turn the antenna.  So, you know, someone would stay in the house, we'd raise the window and they would turn, "Turn, turn, no, no, no, go back, turn, turn (laughter), turn," and we (laughter)--so we got television.
Speaker 2: What were some of your favorite shows?
Speaker 1: Oh, 'Wild Bill Hickok' ['Adventures of Wild Bill Hickok'], 'Howdy Doody' ['The Howdy Doody Show'], 'Pinky Lee' ['The Pinky Lee Show'], Johnny Mack Brown.  My brother's favorite cowboy was Roy Rogers we thought Roy Rogers was the sissy cowboy.  We, we didn't think much of Roy Rogers.  But my daddy [Harry Robinson, Sr.] liked Wild Bill Hickok but those were the, those were the, the--we loved the westerns, that was a big deal to watch the westerns on television.
Story_ID: 482070
Speaker 1: What were holidays like at your house?
Speaker 2: Holidays. Here again, my parents [Ruth Farlow Robinson and Harry Robinson, Sr.] always made sure that we had--'cause you know we were believing in Santa Claus and we told them what we wanted Santa Claus to bring us and we pretty much got what we asked for from Santa Claus and we went to the grandparents' house.  We made the visits to the grandparents' house but we always ate at our home.  We, we visited the other and we had got cake and you ate what they had, but my mother always cooked and we always had the Christmas meal at home and then we visit the rest of the parents.  And we'd go to the grandparents' and particular at my dad's parents' house 'cause that's where everybody gathered and Mama'd [Annie Williams Robinson] cooked a lot of food and--
Speaker 1: What were some of the foods that you ate?
Speaker 2: Oh, food, gumbo, you always had gumbo on Christmas.  You had, I don't remember a lot of turkey, I don't remember a lot of turkey, but you had chicken and some of them even had wild food, you know, like, coons and that kind of stuff.  And when you had turkey, when I remember the turkey always stuffed with rice dressing, rice and oysters and that was good eating.  And I never cared much about oyster but I liked the taste, the flavor of the oyster and the rice and even this day I like the taste of the oyster and rice.  And we didn't deal with cornbread dressing, that was, that was a phenomenon for me when I left home, you know, to go away and they--cornbread dressing. You know, I never heard of that, but gumbo was staple everybody had gumbo on--and it was stocked with shrimp, chicken, sausage, everything was in there.  Cake, everybody made cake. Pound cakes, pound cakes, I don't remember what we drank as a beverage, I knew the older people, the adults drank hard liquor, that was big deal during Christmas everybody had, you know, they got--they ordered, they ordered that liquor for Christmas so during that time of the year, boy they had good liquor for, for the Christmas holiday.  Course my old man he drank anything so it didn't matter to him whatever it was, but those were some fun times--we had toys, and when we went up to our grandmother, the family got together at one of those grandmothers' we always had our cap gun, cap pistols with us or the smaller kids had their little red wagon with them.  I don't remember our taking bicycles with us, I didn't have, we didn't have, my sister [Yvonne Robinson Savoy] and I, we didn't get bicycles, now the younger kids, two younger boys got bikes.  I can't ride a bike until this day but the--they had bikes and they could ride bikes.  But we had cap guns and other small toys.  I don't remember our getting clothes for Christmas.  I hear people talk about when--I remember cap guns, I remember the food and the toys but I don't remember getting clothes for Christmas.  Now for Easter I remember getting clothes 'cause went to church.
Story_ID: 482071
Speaker 1: What church did you go to again?
Speaker 2: I was a Baptist, we went to--well, remember I told you about the bayou.
Speaker 1: The bayou, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, on one side of the bayou, on the northern side of the bayou was my mother's [Ruth Farlow Robinson] church, which is Baptist, on the other side was my dad's [Harry Robison, Sr.] church, same pastor, when I was born they had the same pastor.  Later on they got different pastors because back in those days the preacher had four or five churches, you know, once a month.  My dad and I were at Third Zion Baptist [Third Zion Baptist Church, Raceland, Louisiana], my mother was at Bell Baptist [Bell Baptist Church, Raceland, Louisiana]. Each church had a benevolent society, my dad and I belonged to the benevolent society at my mother's church and my mother belonged to the benevolent society on our church and the way that wa- happened, was because my dad's folks had property and were more involved on the other side of the bayou, even though my dad, my granddad [Shelvin Robinson, Sr.] didn't belong to that church he belonged he belonged--(unclear) church, but his sister and brothers were members of that church on the other--where my mother was.  So, we had these two benevolent societies and what they did for you was, you get free medical care, which you paid the monthly dues, but you got free doctor, free prescription, and they buried you.  And once a year they had what they called the turning out that was at the church.  My mother's was out--my mother's society was always on Mother's Day, I remember that, and all of the ladies wore white and everybody was assessed a fee on that particular--it was the anniversary day for the society.  And that's how they raised some of the money in addition to the dues for--now on the other side where we were my pare- my family was involved with that. We discovered--and our society had the cemetery, their side didn't have a cemetery, so they brought--so if you got buried over in our place you'd be better off.  What we discovered couple a years ago was that there are acres of property over there that belonged to my father's family and so we're trying to sort it out now.  My father and my two--no, my father and my brother, baby brother are buried in that cemetery and the rule is we weren't supposed to pay but we didn't know we owned the property.  So I told my mother, I say, "Excuse me, maybe you can get a refund."  It wasn't very much money, but we didn't know we owned that property, now we do know that there was a strip of property  that my father's family owned because my father's aunt and uncle built houses there.  My father's father could have and was asked to build over there with the rest of his brothers but my grandmother didn't like his sister, so she refused--so that's why they bought that property down where my other grandmother [Nancy Farlow] was, because Mama [Annie Williams Robinson]--the mean one, she didn't want to be over there with Zealya [Lucille Joseph], so she refused to build over there.  So they went down to the other end of the county and built, but those churches were interesting, they were interesting churches because my church had church on a third Sunday and my mother had it on a first--on a fourth Sunday.  So when my--the pastor of my church left, that was before I joined, he left and went to Thibodaux [Louisiana], bigger church, so he had to give up our church.  He kept two other (unclear).  We got a pastor from down in Gaines, Louisiana [ph.], he had another church and they were--that church met on third Sunday, so we had to change our Sunday to the first Sunday.  So up until this day we have church on--well we have it every Sunday now, but at that time was the first Sunday.  And the churches faced each other; the only thing that separated them was the bayou and those two highways.  So when we had baptizing it was in the bayou, I was baptized in the bayou and we would go and stand on the banks of the bayou and they would have baptizing out there and we looked forward to that.
Story_ID: 482072
Speaker 1: So now we're going to junior high school [Kent Hadley Elementary and Junior High School, Raceland, Louisiana]--well let me ask you first, was there anybody that influenced you as a teacher in elementary school, inspired you to--
Speaker 2: Yes, you know people can influence you, you don't know it at the time.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: My junior high principal, down in Raceland [Louisiana] passed last year. Was sort of like my father, he went to Leland College [Baker, Louisiana], he and Eddie Robinson went coll- Eddie Robinson who coached Grambling [Louisiana Negro Normal and Industrial Institute; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], team, and Gardner Taylor, well you know Gardner Taylor [HistoryMaker Reverend Gardner Taylor], the preacher, great preacher who did Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], breakfast and that kind of (unclear) he does.  Well Prof [Robert M. Harris] and all those people were together at Leland College, which is right outside of Baton Rouge [Louisiana] in Baker, Louisiana.  He came back from the war [World War II, WWII] in 1941, '42 [1942], after finishing college, got his bachelor's [degree] in chemistry and something else. And taught at the high school in Thibodaux [Louisiana], then they made him principal of the school down in our area in Raceland.  He had to drive from Thibodaux that was fifteen miles.  His mother taught in Thibodaux she taught math, his wife was principal of an elementary school between the two places.  The principal of the high school was not from that area and they made the decision that if--whenever there were vacancy for the high school Mr. Wallace [ph.] would automatically get it because he was from that area, he's well educated, you know, but, he didn't show proper respect for white folks so they punished him and they kept him down at that end of the parish [Lafourche Parish, Louisiana] forever.  He was never able to move up to the high school, but it didn't matter to him because he just went on and had school anyway.  And I remember, now, I didn't know what he was doing, none of us knew what he was doing, but he was light years ahead of his time, we were taking standardized tests back in those days,  is '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s].  And he was measuring us against what other folks were doing, we didn't know that, all we knew was they were gonna take the Iowa test or this test, but see, he had been abroad and he had been exposed and he knew what made up a good school 'cause he was an intelligent person too, very smart.  And all, he was always trying to expose us to different things, took us on field trips, like to the state fair [State Fair of Louisiana] and to activities in Thibodeaux up on the upper end of the, the parish.  Ran a good school and I remember when my baby brother [Clarence Robinson] had that polio and we discovered it on a weekend, and so we went to school that Monday and we told the teachers and they immediately summoned the principal, so Prof came down and he said, "Harry [HistoryMaker Harry Robinson, Jr.], we're going to take y'all home."  So he personally took me and my sister home and told my mother [Ruth Farlow Robinson], said, "Miss Robinson, we don't know what to do," 'cause polio had just come up, "we don't know whether it's contagious or not, so what I did, I brought Harry and Yvonne [Yvonne Robinson Savoy] home and let me do some checking and find out."  And so, you know, he checked around, they told him it wasn't contagious, 'cause they didn't know.  And so he came back a couple of days after, stopped by I remember he had a little black Chevrolet, and he said, "Miss Robinson, Harry and them can come back to school."  But that was that case, but what he did we lived on a route that he had to pass to go home, and if you missed school or there was a problem he would stop, "Uh, Miss Robinson, uh, Harry and them were not in school today."  And she would tell them why we were not there, what happened.  But it was that personal interest he had in all of the kids--
Story_ID: 482073
Speaker 1: And one of the things that I look back on now was how those people did not make a distinction between us, because, look, I told you, my mother [Ruth Farlow Robinson], third grade and my dad [Harry Robinson, Sr.] couldn't read at all, so they were not involved in PTA [Parent Teacher Association] but there were a lot of other people involved in P--but that didn't make a difference between us and the other kids, you know, they didn't say, "Well, the parents don't come to PTA they don't care about their kids."  They knew better, they knew the parents did care, but they didn't know how to do the things that they wanted.  And so those people, Mr. Wallace [ph.] and that corps of teachers, they took it upon themselves; they felt that they were responsible for educating us and providing everything else that went with it, so they didn't badger the parent.  You know, I was thinking about this and I'm sure other kids in the rural area and other schools who had this same experience, but I look at--I, I look back at our school plays we did the set, the costume, we did the whole nine yards and we didn't know what was going on.  But it was just the experience they were giving us.  And you had to memorize--you know how kids get up now reading the pl- no, we had to memorize all (laughter) that, they had to memorize your part and if you didn't you didn't, didn't perform.  And, and again as I look back I s- I think of how they developed leadership and, you know, people talking about, you know, they don't have any self-esteem.  Well, they didn't use those terms with us, they didn't even talk about it, but they knew what they were doing and they provided activities that helped us to develop this self-esteem, you know.
Story_ID: 482074
Speaker 1: So were your teachers black or white? Or a mixture (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no this was during the segregation. All black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All of them, oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you ever go to a integrated school?  Did you ever go to an integrated school?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no, no.  They didn't integrate until after I was in college [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  I was in college when they integrated the school, might have been out of college, I think I was out of college when they integrated the school.
Speaker 1: Well in 1954 they started integration, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not where I came from.
Speaker 1: Oh not--okay.
Speaker 2: Not in Dallas [Texas] either (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: That was the law but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was just slow getting there.
Speaker 2: --but it was not--that, that didn't happen, that didn't happen, Dallas just got out of a school desegregation case from 1972 up until today, they, they said, unh-uh, no that didn't happen. Matter of fact, to my knowledge there were no blacks going to LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] when I was undergrad--when I was in college, graduate students went there, but I knew (unclear).
Story_ID: 482075
Speaker 1: So let's go on to high school, what was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: C.M. Washington High School [Thibodaux, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was in Thibodaux [Louisiana].  When we--when they sent us up there from Kent Hadley [Kent Hadley Elementary and Junior High School, Raceland, Louisiana] where Mr. Wallace [ph.] was, it was a new school, I was in eighth grade and Miss Bell [Vivian George Bell] was my room- classroom teacher.  She was a (unclear) I think Miss Bell was from Arkansas seem like she had a real southern twang, I think Miss Bell was from Arkansas, but anyway, she was my homeroom teacher.  And Miss Jones [ph.] was my first grade teacher was teaching me English, we had the football team; that was a new experience for me, I knew nothing about football, band or anything like that.  Not only did they move our school, there was another school up in northern, northern end of the county- parish that they brought in too and so it was a large--it was one high school in my count- in my parish.  And we had a principal whom we loved; he died (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was his name?
Speaker 2: --shortly after, couple of years later, name was Robert M. Harris, wonderful man, we loved Prof, but he was ill on and off, ill on and off and he died.  And I never shall forge how I saw men crying at that funeral of the principal I was telling you about and Miss Bell's husband [Robert Bell, Sr.], they were Masonic men and I never shall forget at that church [Third Zion Baptist Church, Raceland, Louisiana] when I saw them in the recessional, I mean they were crying like babies and I never seen that before, you know, where the men actually--that's how touched they were, and he was that kind of a person.  And he was from north Louisiana too, had a southern (unclear) and certain way he pronounced words, but he was a very polished man and dressed well.  I mean, dressed well and had a black Chrysler, I believe--I remembered him from the time I was in that church schoolhouse [Pitman Elementary School (ph.)] because he was interested in my elementary school teacher, Miss Jones, the first grade--she was the principal also and he wanted to marry her.  Course I didn't know all of that until later on people would tell us, "You know, you remember Mr. Harris used to stop by."  I thought he was just visiting as another educator, 'cause we knew he was the principal up in Thibodaux.  But he eventually married another lady, oh Ms. Harris, but it was interesting because you had such competition between what they call--remember I told you the bayou, the bayou runs from the tip of the boot up to Donaldsonville [Louisiana] by Lafourche [Lafourche Parish, Louisiana] by--by Lafourche and so you refer to people, "Oh, Harry [HistoryMaker Harry Robinson, Jr.] and them down the bayou."  Or, "So-and-So from up the bayou."  That means north Lafourche Parish and if you're from down the bayou that's south of Lafourche Parish, so from down the bayou.  So you had a down the bayou, up the bayou, and then you had the Thibodaux group and so there's competition.  So what we did the down the bayou group and up the bayou group usually coalesced and we'd beat those people from (unclear).  So, when I was president of student body--well the first Miss C.M. Washington was from down the bayou because down the bayou and up the bayou got together and we out voted the Thibodaux.  And so when I was president of the student body that's how it happened, we had a coalition and we ran campaigns for the president of the student body and we had that kind of rivalry in there.  And of course we felt that the kids from down the bayou were smarter than the kids from Thibodaux anyway. But it was a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: So you played in the band?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't--
Speaker 1: Played football?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: Played no athletics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had health issues all my life and it wasn't until I got out of graduate school [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] that I had a better life, but even in graduate school I had health issues.
Story_ID: 482076
Speaker 1: When did you get interested in history?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was with my [paternal] grandfather [Shelvin Robinson, Sr.], that was a part of it, but, in terms of professional history, it was when I went to college.  I went to college--you remember I told you about Miss Bell [Vivian George Bell], the woman who was my eighth grade teacher when (unclear).  Her husband was my industrial arts teacher [at C.M. Washington High School, Thibodaux, Louisiana] so I wanted to be an industrial arts teacher because Mr. Bell [Robert Bell, Sr.] had really impacted my life and I looked up to him.  I took woodwork and leather craft under Mr. Bell and I had planned to go--hadn't planned to go to college in the first place, planned to go to [U.S.] military.  I was going to the [U.S.] Air Force then get my college in the Air Force, that didn't work--health issues.  But Mr. Bell, I wanted to be like Mr. Bell in terms of profession, so I was gonna go to college and be an industrial arts teacher after I decided I couldn't go in the Air Force.  Well I went and that didn't work, health issues and that kind of stuff, well, I had been working with an old man on the campus whose name was John Brother Cade, who got a bachelor's [degree] from University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] back in the '20s [1920s], he was a historian, had gone to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and got a bachelor's, he got a master's [degree] from Chicago and a bachelor's from Atlanta University, that was back in 1920 something.  Anyway, he was dean of the university and on Saturday afternoons he would go over to that house, it's the oldest house on campus, on the banks of the Mississippi [Mississippi River] at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and on Saturday afternoons he would go over there and I wonder over there too and discovered that all those archival papers--I didn't know what archives were, all I know was those papers were in there and it was interesting stuff.  And remember my grandfather had given me a taste of that with all of this stuff so I started hanging around with Dean Cade and he had me working with him in the boxes and I spent four years working in the college library--university library, so all of that stuff started coming together.  So when I got out of industrial arts a natural for me was history and then I picked up a minor in library science 'cause that's all you could get a minor.  So, I was gonna go back and teach history and be a school librarian.  Well, that didn't work. I went to graduate school, went to Atlanta University, got a library degree and this--
Speaker 1: What, what year, what year are we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay--
Speaker 1: --in now?
Speaker 2: --this is ninete- I went to college in 1959.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And graduated in 1964.
Story_ID: 482077
Speaker 1: So now, while you're in, in college we have the Civil Rights Movement what's going on--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --with you at that time?
Speaker 2: In 1959 I went to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], fall of '59 [1959], spring of 1960, Marvin Robinson, who was president of student body, captain of the track team--and that's the year Southern won the national track championship, he was president of the student body, a business major, I think he's a veteran, was our leader.  And the boys were down in North Carolina, you know, with the lunch counter and what have you and Marvin was leading us in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  So, we just pretty much closed down the school and at that time Southern University was the largest black college in the country.  So we closed down the school and went to downtown because they wouldn't let them eat at Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company] so we marched, all five thousand of us.  Got on the bus and made the bus drivers take us, it was a black bus line that road from Scotlandville [Louisiana] to Baton Rouge and we got on there, those who didn't ride the bus hitchhiked and walked.  President was out of town, his name was Felton Clark [Felton G. Clark], he was very wealthy, Phi Beta Kappa [Phi Beta Kappa Society], Republican, as fair as anybody, I understand he passed at times in New Orleans [Louisiana].  He was outta town, I remember he was at a White House Conference for Youth, Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] was president then and he was up at that conference.  So Marvin called us together in gym, told us what we were gonna do and also told us, "Now you know when Pres get's back he's going to put some of us out of school."  Because it was our understanding that the legislature had passed some bills that we couldn't demonstrate and if we did we were to be put out, at least the ring leaders were to be put out and they couldn't go to any other state institution, in Louisiana.  And of course you know the other southern states are cooperating with this kind of foolishness, so Pres came back, put them outta school and several if not most of them went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And they entered the law school and they got law degrees and some of them went to some other schools in Washington [D.C.].  They took that case to the [U.S.] Supreme Court and they won, well, that was in spring of '60 [1960], in January of '61 [1961], students decide they're gonna demonstrate again, 'cause what we felt was happening was a lot of kids--some of the kids were flunking and they were trying to call the old man's hand that they would demonstrate, get put out of school, well you see they were gonna be put out because of low grades not because of demonstrate--but to go back home tell folks you're demonstrating, but the old man beat us at it, he, he, out-foxed us.  So went over to his house that night, wanted to hear from him, his wife came out she said, "The president's not at home."  Well, some of us decided to go back to the dormitory where we're supposed to be, others stayed out on the lawn, everything happened out there, this is in the winter.  Pres came back to town called a convocation and boy did he let us have it, he said, "I understand you all were at my house last night."  And he said, "I wasn't there, my wife told you I wasn't there and had I been there I wouldn't have talked to you 'cause I don't talk to hoodlums and as far as I'm concerned you're culturally void."  And you know here we country hicks, "What does he mean by culturally void?"  But anyway, and he announced us that he was closing Southern University as of five o'clock that afternoon and everybody had to go home and don't come knocking unless he sent for you.  Girl from Chicago [Illinois] stood up, "Mr. President I live in Chicago."  He said, "Baby pack your things and go home."  Then he told the faculty folks, he said--now those who had tenure--didn't have tenure wouldn't be here next year.  Those of you have tenure were involved in this is going to answer to him personally.  He said, "You've bit the hand that fed you."
Story_ID: 482078
Speaker 1: Well all that was a show.  I didn't discover that until about six years ago.  What had happened was, remember I told you that the legislature had passed this thing that--but the other thing they did was they had called the president and instructed him to get rid of the ring leaders, so he decided the thing to do was put everybody outta school [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] so he got around putting the ring leaders out.  I mean he was just that foxy, smart, and everybody thought that, you know, Felton [Felton G. Clark] had played into their hands, but he hadn't.  And to show you what dislike they had for him, you know, he was, he was, he was polished.  The man was very polished, we didn't like him but we really respected him and Marvin [Marvin Robinson] and I some of those guys I mentioned to you, are here in Dallas [Texas], and that was forty almost fifty years ago we were there.  And we still remember things he told us.  Challenges he made to him, Benjamin Mays, and that group, things they told us in these required convocations and chapel.  Marvin, Peter [ph.], and all of them at that time we didn't understand what he was doing but we found out later when he reached his, his birthday's in October--his birth--he was going to be sixty-five, so that meant, you know, he'd retire in May or something like that.  The board of education gave him early retirement, got him outta there. Broke his heart, 'cause you know, he was just, he would never support that sort of thing happening to him.  So they got him out, he and Ralph Jones [Ralph Waldo Emerson Jones] who was president of Grambling [Louisiana Negro Normal and Industrial Institute; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] were about the same age.  Ralph Jones was a very brilliant man but he would engage in all kinds of buffoonery to get what he wanted and they were telling us that there were times when the president, the two presidents would go down to the legislature to present their budget, the only two black presidents and say some of these legislators would sit back and say, "Oh, we'll wait for Ralph to come to tell us what Felton said."  You know. But I tell you one thing, when Ralph Jones time came for retirement they gave him several extensions, he stayed there as long as he wanted.  He was a fine fellow, kids loved him, he coached the baseball team until he retired.  But he had su- Grambling had high-rise dormitories long before we had because the president had this kind of relationship with them.  And someone was telling us of an incident once where the board of education met and the presidents came and--the two black presidents came and they told them to take the freight elevator.  Felton say he wasn't going on that freight elevator so he sent for the state superintendent of education and he came down and got them and took them up on the public elevator.
Story_ID: 482079
Speaker 1: Do you remember when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], was killed, what were you doing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in graduate school, I was at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] and, you know, we got the word that Martin had been assassinated and we went on to the library that night, library--school library and there's a fellow from Montgomery [Alabama], whom I succeeded later on, who was the librarian at Alabama State [Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama], and he started talking with us about, you know, about Martin and his experience with Martin King, because when I worked in Alabama there were two of my staff members who were members of that church, matter fact, one of my staff members was minister of music at Dex- Dexter, yeah, Dexter Baptist [Dexter Avenue Baptist Church; Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church, Montgomery, Alabama], yeah, I remember what happened and I was at the University of Illinois and they came into see me, 'cause I was working in the library, and wanted to know if I was interested in going to the funeral. Of course, so they took care of all of my expenses, sent me to Atlanta [Georgia] and I stayed in a dormitory at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  But you couldn't get housing anywhere else so I called the woman I know, the woman who ran the dormitory and told Miss Anderson [ph.] I needed housing and could you find a room for me in the dormitory, so I stayed in the dormitories at Atlanta University when I went.  And went to the funeral--went to the church that morning and was in the line because you know there was an opportunity to see the casket before the funeral.  Was in the line, up at the door and the clock struck the time (unclear) out.  So we went across the street and we were standing on one of those little stores across the street on Auburn Avenue.  Well there were so many of us on top of that building that the roof was about to fold, they told us to get off so we got off.  So we moved closer to the church, there was a group of us and I tell you it was an experience I shall never forget. We were standing right on the sidewalk and that procession of dignitaries just kept, was a steady flow of them.  I remember Edward Brooks [sic. HistoryMaker Edward Brooke], he was leading the delegation I think, they came with the congressional crowd and they were leading delegates and we saw one by one just passing up, one by one, going into the chap- into the auditorium.  So then after the funeral--so they broadcast it you know (unclear) so I remember one of the ladies who sang at that funeral had sung at a regular service once, Martin asked her to sing, 'Beam of Heaven' ['Beams of Heaven as I Go'] one Sunday and I remember that voice and name that she sang.  Well anyway, they came out and we walked from Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], to Atlanta University, well those of us who were in school had gone to AU, we knew the shortest route so we took the shortest route and went down, got to the campus, they held the funeral out on the quadrangle. And so the crowds disbursed and the wagon was out in front of Harkness Hall, which is our administration building and they were taking the body out and I knew the only route they could go was, you know.  So I just went around and there was the casket, right there, unattended, I mean, you know, nobody was watching it they waiting to put up--.  And Ralph Bunche, came out and I got his autograph, I don't know where it is, but I was able to get some petals off the casket and I put them in a little plastic bag when I got home, I don't know what happened to them because I was in graduate school and I moved so many time.
Story_ID: 482080
Speaker 1: But I lost it, but not only did I lose that, when I was in graduate school at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], I worked in the Trevor Arnett Library that was one of the jobs, I had three jobs in graduate school 'cause I didn't have any money.  I was in Trevor Arnett and I picked up a book and there was a call slip in there, 1948, that was Martin's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] senior year and on that call slip in pencil Martin had signed that slip for the book.  I don't know where it is, misplaced. But I was there, worked in the library and I never shall forget that my cataloging teacher had been trying to--she had been working with the families who were trying to get his papers--Atlanta, 'cause he went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], his old man was on the board, they were all on the board, pastor, Benny Mays [Benjamin Mays] was his mentor, trying to get his papers.  And I never shall forget we were in the cataloging class and this woman came in and she told us that--we heard that Boston [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] had gotten his papers--and this woman was a hard-hearted Hannah and we actually saw her weep, she wept in class (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was her name, Suzanne something-
Speaker 1: Her name was Annette Phinazee [Annette Lewis Phinazee].
Speaker 2: Annette Phinazee (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Annette Hoage Phinazee, she taught me cataloging, she was an excellent teacher.  And she looked up and she said, "Well class, I guess you can't tell people what to do with their papers."  (Unclear) and we hated that we didn't get them, but it was kind of good for us to see her break 'cause she was a stiff--I mean she showed no emotion for anything, she had emotion, but you know, she just.  But that's my Martin King story.
Story_ID: 482081
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]--
Speaker 2: Oh no, went to Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College] of Baton Rouge [Louisiana] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Southern, I'm sorry (laughter). You went to Southern okay, and then from Southern--
Speaker 2: To Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And left Atlanta University, went to work at Kentucky State University [Kentucky State College; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky], and back in those days you didn't have to worry about interviews, because the directors of the libraries or the presidents of these HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] would call Dean Jones [Virginia Lacy Jones], who was dean of library school, she was a legend, and say, "Dean I need a cataloger, something," she would say--so she sent me to Kentucky State, I had a choice (unclear) she was playing with Kentucky State or Kansas State University [Manhattan, Kansas], so she sent me to Mr. O'Rourke [James O'Rourke] to Southern--to Kentucky State, I went there as a cataloger and the woman [Annette Lewis Phinazee] who was my mentor at Southern just knew I was coming back to Southern to work and I went to Kentucky State so she stopped speaking to me (laughter). So I had to leave Kentucky State in 1966, I left Kentucky and went back to Southern and during that same year Bishop College [Dallas, Texas], where I later went, offered me a contract.  They had opened a new library, new money and they had a very good librarian, very good.  He and I ended up in graduate school together, he's very good librarian, but I had to go back to Southern.  So I went back to Southern and stayed there as long as I could, long as I had to.  And I applied to go back to graduate school to work on my doctorate.  And back in those days you needed two years between the master's [degree] and the graduate work.  So I applied to go back in the fall of '67 [1967], see 'cause I got out of school in '65 [1965], and so I got admitted to Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] but my papers came too late for me to go in the fall so I went in January of '68 [1968], and so my boss was so proud that I was going back to school so she knew that I was coming back to succeed her but that didn't happen.  When I got out of school I went to work at Prairie View [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], she stopped talking to me for about three or four years.  So finally we made up, I went to visit her a couple of times, but I worked at Prairie View for two years then I left Prairie View, went to Alabama State [Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] for two years (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What'd you do at Prairie View?
Speaker 2: Well I was director of learning resources and taught library science.  Then I left there and went to Alabama State, went to Alabama State as dean of learning resources and what happened was I had been offered the job of dean of library school at Alabama A&M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama].  But the guy who went into Alabama State as vice president of academic affairs was a friend of mine so he called and asked me to come with him and the president at Alabama State was such a mischievous fellow, he loved being able to snatch me from Alabama A&M so he offered me a few more thousand dollars.  So I went to Alabama State, stayed there two years, worked with learning resources, the gallery, special collections, just had a wonderful time.  Was one of the most wonderful experiences I ever had, and I left and came to Texas--came back to Texas and I've been here ever since. I came to Bishop College as the library director and museum director for a museum that we didn't have at the time.
Speaker 1: That's the beginnings of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --of this library [Southwest Research Center and Museum of African-American Life and Culture; African American Museum of Dallas, Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so I had a wonderful time at, at Alabama State, wonderful, met my sec- my wife over there.
Story_ID: 482082
Speaker 1: We were talking about the wonderful time that you had in Alabama [at Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama], but I wanna step back to when you were at Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] and during that time the Vietnam War was going on, tell me what was going on during--
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) campus time, as campus goes--
Speaker 2: --we had some disruption on campus and I remember walking through National Guard troops at the University of Illinois.  I don't know what brought them on campus but I know we always had a lot of demonstrations and the thing that stuck in my mind more than anything else is what Vietnam was responsible for and that was the decision of Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] not to run for president again.  And I was a Lyndon Johnson fan; he was my favorite president.  And to watch him on TV and to know why he was not, 'cause that war was getting--it just wrecked him and he had to step down.  And all of my friends used to tease me because they knew I liked Lyndon--I was a student of Lyndon Johnson, everything I could find on Lyndon Johnson I read.  I liked his style; I liked his ruthlessness and his effectiveness.  And that was the thing I--but, I escaped Vietnam, I went--when, when, when I got out of grad- when I got out of Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] I went to--my status changed, my classification, you know back to draft, draft status changed so I had to go for a physical in Louisville, Kentucky and that was during the time when they were really on Cassius Clay [Muhammad Ali], and when I was in Louisville I lived on the street where Cassius Clay lived, it was Newburg Road.  The people I was living with, staying with when I went to Louisville stayed on Newburg Road and it was Cassius Clay, he hadn't changed his name then.  But I remember when we went to that military installation for the physical, we all knew I wasn't gonna pass because I had these health issues, but I had to go.  And boy they sat up and they dogged us out about Cassius Clay and his Muslimism that kind of stuff.  We said nothing because lot of them didn't wanna get caught up in that and didn't wanna go to the war and they thought you'd speak out they might send you.  But I remember that happened, but I went through the physical, I didn't pass and went on back home and left and went to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  And I remember there were some fellows who were in college with me at Southern in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], and they were commissioned cadets and they went--several of them were killed in Vietnam.  I had classmates, high school classmates, several classmates who were vic- fatalities in that Vietnam situation.  I don't believe in war and so that was not very easy for me to deal with, I still don't believe in war.  And there were all kinds of things that bothered me about war because I thought of all of those kids who were eighteen, nineteen years old who were fighting and they, you know, had to be da- you put an eighteen year old, they're afraid of horror and that kind of stuff and it was just nightmarish for me thinking of those people there and I thought of if my younger brothers were there, see 'cause I had been exempt you know, I was out of that thing.  But I thought of classmates and all those other people in that stuff and then you look at television every night, you saw the bloodshed, you saw the war, you saw the fighting and even though I was not in that thing directly and personally it, it weighed heavily on us.  It weighed heavily and you ask about Martin King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and I always think of how far ahead of his time he was when he talk--he was consistent about peace and nonviolence.  And how he was talking about that war and people were damning him like they talk about everything else.  And that's why I tell people about this immigration deal, they say, "Well what do you think about--?"  I say, "Well look, I'm not voicing how I feel about this thing one way or the other,"  I say, "but be careful about what you say or do because as an African American male over sixty I remember the movement and how people--you would've thought Martin Luther King was the devil.  And now, he's a saint." So is this gonna happen again, you know?  So I'm very careful about, you know, being 100 percent for this or 100 percent against that.  I don't think it's, it's black and white-ish as that.  But that's my Vietnam--
Story_ID: 482083
Speaker 1: Well you said that LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] was your favorite president--
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: --well what did you think about Kennedy, John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]?
Speaker 2: Okay, but I was a Lyndon Johnson fan, I was a Lyndon Johnson fan, I was a Lyndon John- I liked his effectiveness, I liked his--and I read everything I can put my hands on about Johnson.  He was ruthless, I liked his ruthlessness, but his ruthlessness was always to get something done, it usually was for the good, you know.  And I lik- and he was such a great negotiator (laughter) I, I, I just liked--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: And I liked his folksiness.
Story_ID: 482084
Speaker 1: So you left Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Campaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], went to Prairie [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] and then on to Alabama [Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Alabama State.
Speaker 1: And you said that was the special time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wonderful time.
Speaker 1: --a special collection. This is where you met your wife--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that was my second marriage.
Speaker 1: Well, well when was the first time you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At Alabama State--
Speaker 1: --were married, you missed that.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: When was the first time you got married?
Speaker 2: First time I got married I was in graduate school at University of Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We got married, got through graduate school went to work at Kentucky State [Kentucky State College; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky] and left Kentucky--went to work at Prairie View, left Prairie View and went to Alabama State to work, we left went to Alabama because we--things were not working in Prairie View for the marriage.  We thought if we changed location it will work out, well it didn't.  So I met my second wife, we got married and we decided to leave Alabama because Montgomery [Alabama] is a small town and to have, you know, my ex-wife there and to be there now I'm getting messy like Churchill [Winston Churchill] said, getting messy.
Story_ID: 482085
Speaker 1: So I left, but I went to Alabama State [Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama], when I went to Alabama State I was given a charge two charges, one, I was to build a new building, two, to keep (laughter) those women across the street out of the president's office (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Whose women across the street?
Speaker 1: Oh, the folks on my staff.
Speaker 2: Oh (laughter).
Speaker 1: You know they were always going to the president with problems and--, "Look, if you keep them over (laughter) you earn your pay."  I didn't have any problem with those people.  But anyway, interesting story about the building project, we got the architect and we designed the building and we had a room for special collections. Well, my current wife was the archivist--my ex-wife, immediate past wife, was the archivist and she had a relationship with someone who knew that the Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy] papers were not committed to anybody.  There was a center that wanted them, but there was some friction there so they couldn't get them.  So this person calls my ex-wife and tells her that, you know, the Abernathy papers are in limbo so, Alabam- he's an Alabama native, went to Alabama State, pastored in Montgomery [Alabama].  I was working with some of the people who were leaders in that movement, like the chairman of transportation committee was an old friend--I got to know him.  So I went to the president, said, "Mr. President, we stand a chance of getting Dr. Abernathy's papers."  He said, "Well, what do we need to do?"  I said, "Well, here's what you need to do, we're coming upon our centennial, so I think what we need to do is give him an honorary degree."  He said, "Fine."  And I said, "The other thing we need to do is name the special collection wing for--."  He said, "Good, write the letter."  So I wrote the letter to the president and he sent it to Ralph and Abernathy accepted the offer.  And said he would give us his papers, except one item in there.  It was something he didn't wanna part with that the pope--that Juanita [Juanita Abernathy] wanted that the pope had given him.  Well I left Alabama, so I don't know what happened, I don't know whether they got the papers or whether they named the room or what, I don't know.  But what happened was while I was in Alabama, I used to host Abernathy; my pastor was a protege of his.  He married, he married him, Martin [ph.] baptized Thomas Earl [ph.], so whenever Abernathy came to town he asked me to pick him up and bring him (unclear) and I remember when we gave him the honorary degree, we're doing the centennial, and I was on the centennial commission.
Story_ID: 482086
Speaker 1: We were in a c- in the meeting of the commission and we were just joyful that Ralph [Ralph Abernathy] had accepted and was coming. And the president announces to us that in addition to giving Ralph Abernathy an honorary doctorate we were going to give George Wallace an honorary doctorate.  We hit the ceiling, did no good, so, we had to live with it. Students got wind of it and they were going to have an uprising.  So the president called me in and he was--he was--now you talking about guy who was character, he was a hum-dinger.  He called me in and say, "Well, oh buddy, I understand the students are," what'd he say, it wasn't uprising, said, up (unclear) or something like that, I said, "I don't know what you're talking about Mr. President."  I did know.  He said, "Look, we're honoring not so much the man as the office of the governor."  He had a very good relationship with George Wallace, very good, special relationship, so he had given me everything I wanted.  He was known for messing over people, I mean that was his reputation.  But I had gotten everything I wanted out of him, special funds, special funds, whatever I wanted.  So he was calling in his chips, I said, "Well, what can I, I, don't know what to do."  And he said, "Yeah, you have the largest number of students."  I had about a hundred students working in learning resources, curriculum, it was a--I had a large area, about a hundred students.  He said, "That's about a hundred students."  I said, "But, I, I, don't."  He said, "You need to talk to them, explain to them what's going on."  So I called a meeting of the student body, who were working for me, and I told them what was happening, I said, "Look, this is a political issue and I need y'all to support me on this one."  Oh they, "Oh Doc, we don't--."  So one student got up he said, "Now wait, wait, wait a minute now, Doc has always been there for us, now whatever we need from him he help us now, I think we ought to support him."  And so they said--he said, "Now Doc you go back and tell these--," he called the man a name, "you (unclear) tell him if he doesn't do such-and-such a thing, you know, we like to break out."  I said, "Okay y'all, I appreciate this."  So I went back to the president and I told him, I said, "Mr. President, for the time being the students have agreed not to do anything."  Well, Ralph came to town, I picked him up and time for convocation, I went and knocked on his room, "Doc, let's go."  'Cause he lived in--stayed in the union building in a room suite.  So we walked out, we were walking over to the arena and I said, "Doc, what does it feel like to be on this stage getting an honorary degree with George Wallace?"  And you know Ralph was slow talking and slow walking and he said--he used to call me Mr. Dean or Mr. Librarian, he said, "Well Mr. Dean, the only thing I can say, the Bible says one day the lions will lay down with the lamb."  And so we walked on to the arena and those of us on the cabinet and the centennial committee were sitting and holding our--'cause we didn't know what was gonna happen.  So they honored those guys, gave them the degrees.  Wallace was on the stage the students got in line, lined up and walked across that stage and Wallace gave them their autograph.  And he broke down cried like a baby. And I don't know why he was crying, was happy or he was guilty, but that happened there at Alabama State [Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama].
Story_ID: 482087
Speaker 1: So, that was a wonderful experience, the other experience I had at Alabama State [Alabama State University, Montgomery Alabama] was hosting a Catholic bishop, [HistoryMaker] Bishop Joseph Howze, he was an Alabama State graduate.  And they asked me to host him and it was interesting that we had a reception and all of the people in that diocese in that area came, the nuns, the priest, what have you, and the bishop and I were standing up in the line, and you know I don't know where those pictures are, really wish I had those pictures, I'm gonna go back to Montgomery, Alabama see if they have those pictures, beautiful pictures, I remember that.  And you saw all these people who were nuns and priests walking up kissing the ring, it was interesting to see that kind of stuff.  But anyway, spent some time with him, had a wonderful time with him and I asked him for his papers and he agreed.  But I left so I don't know what happened, but he's retired now, Bishop Howze, I think he's still living.
Story_ID: 482088
Speaker 1: And the final experience I had was when I went to get the papers of Dr. Trenholm [Harper Councill Trenholm, Sr.], who was president before the sitting president at the time, I had courted his wife for almost a year to get those papers, went up to California during the holidays, sat with her, she used to live in Baldwin Heights [sic. Baldwin Hills] in Los Angeles [California], so I had somebody take me up there and, we went and, I talked with Mrs. Trenholm about the papers, "When are you coming back to Montgomery [Alabama]?"  She had property, so anyway, we developed a relationship so she agreed to give me the papers, I mean this man was president for I don't know how many years and he just wrote, just wrote, wrote, wrote, wrote, wrote, wrote. Registered all of the students personally, about three thousand students.  So it was six weeks registering and that's what got him outta there.  And he had diabetes, so he would go into comas and go to the hospital and things stopped, so they finally got him out.  But anyway, so I got to Mrs. Trenholm and she agreed to give me the papers, well I had a friend who was the librarian at Howard [Howard University, Washington D.C.], and Dorothy Porter [Dorothy Wesley Porter], you know Dorothy, who was librarian over the Moorland-Spingarn collection [Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Washington, D.C.], had gone around the country and see Dorothy was very involved with the Association for the Study of African American Life and History [ASALH] and so was Dr. Trenholm, Dr. Trenholm was the one of the vice presidents and Carter Wesley--not Carter Wesley. Charles Wesley [Charles H. Wesley], who was at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and Central State [College of Education and Industrial Arts at Wilberforce; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio], was president of the Association for the Study of African American Life and History, Trenholm was president of the American Educational--Teachers Association [American Teachers Association], that was the black NEA [National Education Association], and they supported each other.  So Trenholm was Wesley's vice president and Wesley was--and that's where they supported each other with money.  That's a whole 'nother story too she told me about that one. But anyway, she committed to giving me the paper, but Dorothy had gotten a large portion of those papers and they were already at Howard and I knew the librarian so I went up to Moorland-Spingarn saw all of them, they had their inventory and what have you.  So what we decided to do was since you have half of them, the rest of them are in Montgomery, so I will get those half, but them in the university library we'll microfilm them, I'll give you a copy of microfilm that I have you give me a copy of microfilm so we worked that out.  Well, Mrs. Trenholm came down, we went over, got all that (unclear). My ex-wife was the archivist so we got a dump truck, went over there got all of that stuff.  Moved it to the campus and that night Miss Trenholm called--no, she called me the next morning and she said, "Dr. Robinson [HistoryMaker Harry Robinson, Jr.], I'm sorry to tell you that I'm gonna have to ask you to bring that stuff back."  "What?"  She had talked with her son the night before and told him (unclear) and there was bad blood between them and that president and they said, "Nope."  But that night they called Howard University and Michael Winston was here the next day.  So Michael and I knew each other and he said, "Boy this is a sad day for you."  I said, "Yeah."  And Mrs. Trenholm told me, she said, "Oh, Dr. Robinson I just feel so bad about this but my son doesn't want those papers--."  So I went to the president, "Mr. President, those papers got to go back."  Said, "What do you mean?"  Well the president was the kind who love fights and always picking fights so he said, "Well, let's see what'cha got, you got, what, what's in that collection at Howard?"  I said, "Well I have, you know, some of this, some of that."  Had a lot of official records. And he said, "Well these are official records, so buddy don't you think so?"  Well, class roll and receipts for the university [State Teachers College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Albama], yeah, yeah, yeah.  He said, "Well, I tell you what we're gonna do, I'm going to--we're gonna correspond with Howard University and tell them they can do one of two things.  These are official records, they can either send them back here, send them to state archives."  Well I left Montgomery again and they resolved it, something they did that they worked out where those--they would have a coming together of those two collections.  But that was an experience and oh, there was everything, they had everything in that collection and paper.  But anyway that's that.
Story_ID: 482089
Speaker 1: So, you left Alabama?
Speaker 2: Came to Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 1: Came to Dallas.
Speaker 2: Well, I had four or five job offers and I came to Dallas because of the president [Milton King Curry, Sr.].  I'm a Baptist and he was a Baptist.  Bishop [Bishop College, Dallas, Texas] was Baptist related school and I was a member of Mount Zion First Baptist [Mount Zion First Baptist Church] in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] where Reverend Jemison [T.J. Jemison] was pastor and during my time Reverend Jemison was secretary to convention and the president here at Bishop was assistant secretary, so he would visit our church and so I remembered that I admired that old man.  And you remember he offered me a job in 1966.  I still have that contract somewhere, still have it.  And so I decided that I need to pursue this, so I had some job offers, so I came to Dallas for the interview then I went to another school 'cause I was talking to some other people who went there and I was about to sign up there but the day before I got there the president had fired three deans and so I decided to go through this interview and go on back to Texas--back to Alabama, that's what I did.  And I called Bishop and told him, "Hey, let's talk some more."  So I came back and they offered me--they offered the job, they had done it before.  But the thing that made me decide on Dallas over some other places was the question the president asked me.  He said, "I've looked at your record and I see what you've done in terms of the library and art and all that stuff, culture."  He said, "But I wanna know if you come here, what are you going to help Bishop College do for this community?"  He said, "I think the college has gotten much more from this community than it has given back to them."  And that was the thing that brought me here and I had--I was getting married again and that's one reason I was leaving Montgomery [Alabama], so I talked to my wife-to-be, I said, "Now look, this is a private school."  I said, "But you gotta remember we--I have talked this business about my support for black higher education and all that kind of stuff, but I've never taken a risk.  All of my jobs have been at state institutions where I get my check every month so you know we're going in here it's gonna be risky."  And she was willing to take the risk.  And so we came on to Bishop, got married on the 7th, I came to work on the 1st, I never shall forget it was Labor Day and, you know, we just knew we were coming to check and nobody would be on campus, campus wide open everybody working, president said Labor Day meant work.
Story_ID: 482090
Speaker 1: I came and we started developing the idea of this museum [Southwest Research Center and Museum of African-American Life and Culture; African American Museum in Dallas, Dallas, Texas] because there was nothing in this area, no efforts to do anything in Texas or in the region.  The president was an old Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] man, Renaissance man, and I mean, he's got the first--one of the first master's [degree] from Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] when they became graduate school, in math.  And he had a facility in French too (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was his name?
Speaker 1: --and he was a preacher. Milton King Curry [Milton King Curry, Sr.].  And he knew the Kings personally and there's a story about him and the Kings too.  But anyway, he brought Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] to Marshall, Texas in the '50s [1950s], he was just that courageous.  Can you imagine someone brining Martin Luther King to East Texas in the '50s [1950s]? But this old man, he was, he was something else, that's why he's not president anymore, why he got out--they ran him off.  But anyway, I came to Dallas [Texas], I called together a group of people one of whom was a man who had been involved with the Hall of Negro Life [Texas Centennial Exposition, Dallas, Texas] here in 1936, named A. Maceo Smith, and was A. Maceo Smith, the woman who became mayor of Dallas, Annette Strauss another woman who was Stanley Marcus sister in-law, you know, the Neiman Marcus crowd, Betty Marcus, a preacher who's involved in the movement, he pastored the silk stocking church here, New Hope [New Hope Baptist Church, Dallas, Texas], his brother was president of Junior Union University [ph.],  and an old guy who was vice president at the college.  He had worked in Alabama and he was one of the persons they told me to look up when I came to, to this place.  And so he was one of my buddies, so we, I presented the idea to them they all bought in and we moved on from that point.  We had one of the best--we started off as a part of the college.  We had one of the best special collections of African American titles in the country.  I didn't build that collection, it was the guy before me, his name was George Johnson [ph.].  He left here and went to Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio], but he was a scholar.  I don't know where he found those books he had a contact somewhere.  We had Phillis Wheatley's, poems, 1773, we had a part of Walter White's, collection, autograph book by Langston Hughes, limited editions and what have you.  Frederick Douglass--the works were there.  But when I came they were spread throughout the library, just out.  And so the first thing I did was to get a group of students--you talking about several thousand volumes of works.  And so we pulled them all into a room about this size and we had shelves around the walls but there were stacks of books we had and we just pulled them.  It's a wonderful collection.  That was sort of the basis for our research collection because it was a museum and research center at the time.  But this president kept on supporting me, whatever I needed, he supported, he supported me, he supported, he supported me, so. So we decided to pull those books together, 'cause it was easy to do and least people would see something, so we had the W.R. Banks special collection.  Dr. Banks was a professor had been on that campus for fifty-two years, he went down when the first black president went to Bishop [Bishop College, Dallas, Texas] in 1929.  So, we named the coll- we thought, you know, everybody loves Dean Banks, so we named the room for him, carpeted room--about this size, carpeted the room put glass shelves up, just did a nice job.  One of the grad- one of Bishop's graduates who Dr. Banks had been very close owned a carpet company so I went to J.D. Hall [ph.] and told J.D. to give them the carpet at half price or something like that, I'll give you the (unclear).  So he came to the dedication, he saw the room, he said, "Doc, where's the bill?"  I said, "I'll go get it."  He tore it up, paid for the carpet.  I had the graduates to give me some money so I bought the glass shelves and what have you.  It was a beautiful room, a guy who did the senator's picture Arthello Beck, who died last year, he did a portrait of Dr. Banks, so we had the portrait in the room and a lot of other Bishop memorabilia in that room.  Well then we developed the space downstairs which was twice the size of upstairs and we opened that space during the bi-centennial, was February '76 [1976].  [HistoryMaker] David Driskell came and gave the dedicatory address and oh the people were just--it was, it was about the only black event in town of any significance during that bicentennial and we raked and scrapped and got the money. It was about like ten thousand dollars that we raised but we got (unclear) give a hundred dollars, hundred, everybody gave.  It was a big day on that weekend.  We had a weekend of activity and [HistoryMaker] Curtis King, whom you interviewed, Curtis was down in Fort Worth [Texas] over in Fort Worth, and we brought Curtis to town, with the Sojourner Truth Players, this was 1976 and then the next year Curtis came and set up shop here in Dallas.  But he and his crew, the boys stayed at my apartment 'cause my wife was in school so they were in my apt- and the girls stayed in the dormitory and they performed that Sunday afternoon.
Story_ID: 482091
Speaker 1: We were talking about the beginnings of the museum [Southwest Research Center and Museum of African-American Life and Culture; African American Museum of Dallas, Dallas, Texas] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah we, we were in the basement and we decided we wanted to use the old building on campus [Bishop College, Dallas, Texas] which was the first building on campus, it was a--used to be the chapel, it was a church and the campus extension used to be there when the campus was in Marshall, Texas.  They were vacating that building to move to a new classroom building so we asked the president [Milton King Curry, Sr.] if we could use that building and he said yeah.  So we went out to raise the money, we got a fifty thousand dollar challenge grant from National Endowment for the Humanities [NEH] and we went out to raise the--we were talking about like two hundred thousand dollars, for that building.  Well, anyway, things kept happening, things kept happening, the college started having problems so what we did we went to the president and said, "Look, we'd like to incorporate the museum situation, stay here in (unclear), fine."  So we incorporated in 1979 became an independent, but stayed on the campus.  I had a joint appointment, we used the students, we used the facility they supported us and everything just went on as usual.  And then we decided after all of this that this ain't working.  We discovered that there were liens on that building that went way back and somebody dug them up and we had started demolishing and doing some demolition work in the building because we wanted to show some progress, we had collected money.  So then we decided well, we need to move.  So the board, we had the incorporated--we're a board then, they decided to move.  We had looked around for some places and we decided that we were gonna leave the campus and find another location.  The board voted, we went to the college president and told him--new president then, he said, well he didn't--it was the second president after the old man had left.  He said, "Well, I don't like the idea of you all leaving but I'll support you and I'll help you with the campaign."
Story_ID: 482092
Speaker 1: 'Cause we went into a bond election, we were looking at a $2 million building here, this building ended up being 6.8 and with the bond election the city's cultural policy will allow the city to give up to 60 percent of the cost to the building, so we were looking at a $2 million building so we had to raise eight hundred thousand [dollars], the city was gonna give 1.2, we had four hundred thousand in (unclear).  But when we got through the building was up to--well we finally end up with 6 million but when we finally got through with the plan it was like 4.9 million.  We thought it was gonna 3.2 because that's what the architect had gone out and got estimates--they said 3.2, so we went, opened the bids and it was 4.9 and with the City of Dallas [Texas] you cannot start construction unless you have all of the money in the bank, gotta be cash, no promises, no anything.  So, we had gone to--we needed $1.8 million to put in the bank so we'd have enough cash for the 3.9 so, we started shopping and talking to different people and one guy who was a city manag- assistant city manager was helpful to us.  He went to one bank and they said, "Yeah, yeah, we'll, we'll let them have it 'cause they got pledges and what have you for so much."  So we had about 1.6 in pledges, we needed 1.9, so we went to one bank and the banker had been working with us on the plan and he said--so I called him, I said, "Joe [ph.], look we got assistant city manager who gone over to another bank, they willing to do it, but I wanna deal with this bank 'cause you all have worked with--."  He said, "Fine."  And, so, I called him back later on, I said, "Levi's [Levi Davis] gonna come and see you."  So anyway I called him back--I was in Colorado--I called him I said, "Joe, Levi--."  He said, "Oh, Levi is in the office here with me."  'Cause Levi was talking with him, but anyway, he looked at that stuff and he called me back, he said, "Harry [HistoryMaker Harry Robinson, Jr.], you're trying to borrow $1.9 million and you got 1.6 here in pledges."  I say, "Yeah."  He say, oh no, he said, "You got one point--you 1.9--you have 1.6."  I say, "Yeah."  He said, "Wait, you don't understand, you three hundred thousand dollars short."  I say, "I know."  He said, "But well you're gonna have some attrition with the 1.6 and you--."  I said, "I know."  He said, "But."  I said, "Joe, you the banker."  I said, "What about this can-do spirit you always told me about Dallas?"  I said, "You, you can handle it."  He said, "Well you and Hugh get back with me."  Hugh Robinson was chairman of the building campaign, he was a two star general who had been Lyndon Johnson's [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] military aide for the five years Lyndon was president.  And he was in here and he can get into doors I couldn't get into and so he was my man, he was getting money.  So Joe Mossalin [ph.] the banker called him and said, "Hugh" 'cause he told me, "You call Hugh," but he got to Hugh before I did.  So Hugh called me and he was really pressured 'cause I could almost feel the pressure on the telephone.  So I said, "Hugh, you chairman of the federal reserve, go get that money."  He was chairman of the Dallas Federal Reserve Bank [Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Dallas, Texas], and so I think it didn't, hadn't dawned on him that he--so anyway, they worked out of pocket, one bank gave us five hundred thousand and another one gave five hundred thousand and the public gave us eight hundred thousand.  So we were ready to go then.
Story_ID: 482093
Speaker 1: So we were able to start phase one with the building and we got to the point where we had substantially completed the building, we were still raising money, so we had about two hundred thousand left so we said--asked the banks, can we keep the construction crew here and give--no, no, no, no, no, contingency point, no.  Everybody has agreed that a substantially complete, not likely to use this money--no, no, no, no.  So then they say, "Well, if we want to continue and finish out this one point--this building for 4.9 we need $1.4 million."  So, went to the bank and they say, "Well, if you got a million dollars to guarantee."  Well hell, if we had a million dollar guarantee well why would we borrow.  So anyway, so Meadows Foundation [The Meadows Foundation, Dallas, Texas] was working with us and the president of the foundation met with us every Wednesday morning at 7:30 to try to raise this money.  So he called me one day, he said, "Look, if you were to borrow this 1.4 million from the bank--."  They're not gonna let me have it anyway, he said, "You will be owing this much interest and it's gonna put you back in the hole."  He said, I tell you what, you just go on, keep working and The Meadows Foundation will do something they've never done before and I doubt if we'll ever do it again.  We're gonna let you have this money interest free and you can pay it as you raise the money."  Well anyway, they gave us that loan and so--but we had to go down to the city because it's a city building, see the building--we raised the money but the city owned the building.  So we went down to the city and about thirty folks in that room, the three banks, the park department [City of Dallas Park and Recreation Department], Office of Cultural Affairs [City of Dallas Office of Cultural Affairs], Meadows Foundation, and so then they asked, "Well, Curtis [Curtis W. Meadows, Jr.], how much are you all prepared to let Harry [HistoryMaker Harry Robinson, Jr.] and them borrow?"  Curtis says, "As much as they need to build a building the way they presented to the public."  Says, "You can't do that."  "What do you mean?"  If you do one-fourth more than the original cost of the building you've got to go back to city council for resolution, or get this--.  Time run out on us, so we found a way to break that money up (laughter) and found it, so we got the money and we were moving.  So we kept raising the money The Meadows cut off about at least half of that money, they forgave about half of it, and we kept raising the money, kept raising the money and then we got down to 9-11, we owed a hundred and something thousand dollars.  Meadows called us in, "Look, everybody else having problems you must be having problems, how can we raise this so we erase that debt?" that we had.
Story_ID: 482094
Speaker 1: But the story I wanna tell you about this museum [Museum of African-American Life and Culture; African American Museum in Dallas, Dallas, Texas] is that it's a source of community pride.  Now Dallas [Texas] has a lot of problems, lotta problems in the African American community, but this place has been overwhelmingly supported by the African American community.  The only reason we don't get any more money outta the African American community because we don't have the staff.  You know it's very labor intensive with individual gifts, but we have the strongest African American church campaign of any museum in the country black or white and it--not that I'm so bright or smart, but it just so happened that I was in the right place at the right time.  I worked at Bishop College [Dallas, Texas]; we trained a lot of preachers, matter of fact I have to go at 1:30 to pick up a check from one of the boys because we have a storage place and they paying for the storage, it's about two thousand dollars, and so I have to go get the check from those boys.  But those boys have supported us, you know, like five thousand, three thousand, eight thousand dollars. And my church is included.  And I don't have the staff and the time to get to the others because with the churches I have to go personally and deal with the pastors and the people, the leaders.  Organizations, some of them unsolicited, are making contributions to the museum, we have a black foundation that we didn't know existed, they give us money every year and that's in addition to buying tailors--tables for the gala, like at fifteen hundred dollars.  And told us point blank that we're gonna be supporting you for a while, if you go down stairs you will see the Bussey Gallery [Sam and Ruth Bussey Gallery], Mr. Bussey [Sam Bussey] owned a trucking company, Mr. Bussey is not an educated person.  Mr. Buske- Bussey is just a good man, he gave us fifty thousand dollars, check, cash, you know, no pledges and that kind of stuff.  So the folk art gallery is named for him.  The solarium is named for State Representative Helen Giddings, sh- in about two or three years she got about three hundred thousand dollars for us here and there looking out for the place.  The room we're sitting in is the Royce and Carol West reading room library [Royce and Carol West Library], Royce West was a young lawyer when we were trying to put this together and he came to us and started off with twenty-five thousand dollars and we've had several other black families that have come to us, we got one I'm working on now for twenty-five thousand dollar gift.  The wife wants to do something in memory of the husband and we want her to do that.  But the support has been overwhelming; in the last eighteen months we've seen a change in our profile of visitors.  Used to be overwhelmingly maj- African American, but now it's becoming more diverse, more Anglos are coming in.  We have more people coming from out of state, we have some people came from Chicago [Illinois], these are African Americans who saw it on the website, were impressed and got on the train and came to Dallas and we discovered--they told us, they came just to see the museum.  And we have another group that called today, they're bringing some travelers in and the support has been overwhelming.  Now it's been tight, it's been very difficult keeping this place afloat because getting the serious money that we need has been difficult because you know about 85 percent of any serious money comes from individual givers and individual donors, we don't have that kind of donor base for the kind of money we need and the corporations have, have been supportive of us but you know with the mergers and--see when we first started this museum most of the major corporations in Dallas were run by people from Dallas, that's not the case anymore.  Applications have to be done online now, it's very impersonal, you know, if you can't prove it on the paper, you know it's no emotion, no humanism in this stuff and so it's difficult, it's very difficult.  With corporate money you don't know from one year to the next what you're gonna get whereas with our sister institution particularly the large one, they have major individual donors who can plunk down a check for 2 or 3 million, or hundred thousand dollar.
Story_ID: 482095
Speaker 1: Tell me about the museum [African American Museum in Dallas, Dallas, Texas].  What can we see here?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, here you can see the largest collection of African American folk art.  One of our board members, who's being honored next week at our gala won a community service prize back in those days it was five figures, and he gave the money to the museum and we started our folk art collection.  And it grew, it grew and it's growing.  The most--the bulk of that collection came from a white family in Louisiana, Warren [Warren Lowe] and Sylvia Lowe, they're from Lafayette, Louisiana, and every year they'd bring us like fifty, sixty pieces, they had a large home, they had two homes with pieces and then we've had other collectors to make donations to us of folk art here.  We are in the process of developing a decorative arts collection.  If you look in one of the galleries you will see Sankofa, which is collection of African American decorative arts and it's owned by the Center for African American Decorative Arts whose founder, owner and curator is Derrick Beard [Derrick Joshua Beard] who's from Chicago [Illinois].  Derrick went to University of Illinois [sic. University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], got a bachelor's [degree] there in economics and I think in industrial relations, went to New Orleans [Louisiana], did some work and he has amassed this collection of African American folk art with furniture by Thomas Day in 1840s, jugs by Dave the Potter [David Drake], and that collection is one of a kind.  It's been here on an extended loan and it's gonna be here a few more years and we've been able to do a lot of things with that.  We have a part of the Bishop College [Dallas, Texas] archives, you know, which was a college over 120 something years old and they went under.
Story_ID: 482096
Speaker 1: We in Fair Park [Dallas, Texas], which has the largest collection of Art Deco buildings in the country in one place and as I told you earlier the site we're on is where the Hall of Negro Life was in 1936 and that was during the Texas Sesquicentennial--Texas Centennial--Texas Centennial 1936 [Texas Centennial Exposition, Dallas, Texas] and they were building all of these buildings in Fair Park and there was no Negro presence so A. Maceo Smith, one of the guys I told you about whom I called when I first came to town, he was behind all of this.  And he went to the city fathers, said, "Look, there's no Negro presence in the thing we need to--."  "Okay, if you can get the money you can--we'll build it."  Well he didn't have any money so he went to the legislature and they were working on a package to get some money to put up a building.  In the meantime, a guy name Well [ph.] decided he was gonna run for city council school board or something.  So they went to Well and said, "Look, you back outta the race, we'll give you all that money."  He said, "No."  Maceo talked to Well.  No, won't talk to Well, money's off.  So Maceo went to the federal government got a hundred thousand dollars, they gave him fifty for the building and fifty for collection, so they got large portion of the Schomburg [Arturo Alfonso Schomburg collection] and installed it here as a library then they had people like Hale Woodruff, Henry O. Tanner [Henry Ossawa Tanner], and I discovered that Henry O. Tanner's niece was on that committee, Sadie T. Alexander [Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander], from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] she was on that committee.  Robert Weaver [Robert C. Weaver] was somewhere around that committee he had just gotten out of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in '34 [1934] I think with his Ph.D.  So he was on the committee, president of Prairie View [Prairie View State Normal and Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], Fred Patterson [Frederick D. Patterson] who founded United Negro College Fund and was at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] they were all on that committee and they got that money for that building.  Now the building was in the design of the others but it was a temporary building so the fair went on for about a year--nine months, so right after that fair they destroyed the building for the Negro hall of life and the other buildings stayed up 'cause they were permanent.  So, in 1984 when we went into the bond election and won, we decided this was the spot we wanted because that's where our heritage was.  Well, the Music Hall [Music Hall at Fair Park, Dallas, Texas] is right over across on our parking lot, that's where the symphony, the opera, summer musicals and another group were there performing.  So they decided, no, no, no, no, no, you all can come to Fair Park, but not on that spot 'cause that's our parking lot.  So then we got into a fight and about three or four former mayors called me and told me we need to back off, but we couldn't do that we had to have this spot.  So they went through the process, went to the park board, park board stood with us unanimously, nine to zero that we were gonna have this spot here.  And so we're back here in this spot where we started off, so when we had a documentary done on the opening of the museum [Museum of African-American Life and Culture; African American Museum in Dallas, Dallas, Texas] it was called, 'Homecoming' [ph.], and this is where we are.
Story_ID: 482097
Speaker 1: What does this museum [African American Museum in Dallas, Dallas, Texas] mean to the community?
Speaker 2: It's, it's, it's a source of pride to the community.  It's a meeting place for the community.  It's our foremost educational institution when you talk about African American heritage.  But those of us who're in this business and who were mentored by people like [HistoryMaker] Margaret Burroughs who's in Chicago [Illinois], with the first African American museum and Charles Wright [Charles H. Wright], who was in Detroit [Michigan] with what is now Charles Wright Museum [Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History, Detroit, Michigan], John Kinard who was at the Anacostia Museum [Anacostia Community Museum, Washington, D.C.] in Det- in Washington, D.C., they taught us and convinced us that these institutions gotta be centers of liberation, they gotta be centers of education and they gotta be centers of transformation and that's what those of us who are my age are working toward.  We are not interested in becoming a Dallas Museum of Art [Dallas, Texas], we're not interested in becoming a High [High Museum of Art, Atlanta, Georgia], we're not interested in becoming an Art Institute of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], our mission, our goal, and our purpose are different.  Our institutions were founded in response to an expressed need from the African American community.  So, if you go to most of our institutions we don't have these large outstanding collections of art, we were educational institutions many of us didn't have any collection.  You go to some of these places they might have had some Ebony magazine covers, halls of great Negroes and that kind of stuff on a wall, that's all we had.  And we have continued that.
Story_ID: 482098
Speaker 1: And what is happening now is that the major museums are doing more in terms of outreach but a lot of them are using the models that were started with--by the African American museum and the tragedy of this whole thing is the major museums can go to a corporation and get the money to do the kind of program--they won't give us--they only give us a fraction of it if they give us any.  And it's kind of frustrating to us.  But we're moving ahead and what we've determined is we've got to continue to work with these churches because if our institutions are to remain free and independent, do what we want to do, we gonna have to get the money from our institutions.  And you know, I'm reminded of something one of my mentors told me about getting money from different people to do different things, like our HBCU [historically black colleges and universities], he say, "You cannot expect pharaoh to give you money to train your Moses."  And so when you talk about liberation you can't or shouldn't expect or shouldn't want pharaoh to be involved because the freedom is gonna be limited.  Now, I think we're just as entitled to city money and corporate money as anybody else, but I don't think it outta be at the point where you're totally reliant on that kind of money and then you can become totally beholding to the sources of that money.  So, it's incumbent upon us to keep preaching, working, praying, whatever we have to do to convince the African American community for the most part, look, this is your institution.  And if you tell me the road to liberation African American museums can help you to get there but freedom ain't free and you gotta pay for it.
Story_ID: 482099
Speaker 1: And I think the more and more we tell the story the more and more people convinced.  I wish you could sit in our lobby or our rotunda some time and just talk to the people after they leave here.  Or some of them when they come in, and of course, not just with African Americans, 'cause I've seen some interesting things with non-African Americans during the State Fair [State Fair of Texas], which is twenty-four days, about 3 million folks come into Fair Park [Dallas, Texas].  So they call come---some come to this institution [African American Museum in Dallas, Dallas, Texas] too and I never shall forget one day I was standing in the rotunda and an older white lady, apparently hadn't read what was up there, but anyway she walked in with someone else who was with her.  And she walked in she looked up at the, she say, "Do you see what they have, look, look, (laughter) what they have here."  And I just sighed and I say, (gesture) and she saw me, "Oh, come on in, it's okay, come on in."  And so we hope that she was a changed person when she left here, that she was something in here that whatever attitude or biases or prejudices that she had she (unclear) we hope that when our kids come in here they will have gotten a good dosage of their heritage and they'll feel better about themselves.  That they can walk over to that room and see the decorative art that those guys did back in the 1840s and the 1860s.  That ought to be some encouragement to them.  When we get through with our real McCoy learning center that we're working on now, which is going to be a learning center highlighting the contributions of African American inventors, designers and scientists, and we're looking at designers who are industrial designers, most people don't know that Chrysler 300 was designed by an African American, you know, so if kids are interested in cars, if you can't get them interested in architecture or something you bring that car--put that guy in there that designed that car and you're gonna get those kids attention and you can direct them to wherever else you wanna.  You can teach them all of the basic subjects that you wanna do then.  And it's the same thing we're trying to do with our Texas Black Sports Hall of Fame.  For the last ten years we've been inducting about ten athletes, deceased and living, into the Texas Black Sports Hall of Fame.  But we're trying to do several things, one, to recognize the people who made a contribution, two, to collect information from these people like the memorabilia and three, to use it as a source for educating our kids.  You can teach a whole lotta subjects through sports, you can teach biology, if you talking about bats, that's zoa- botany, that's the wood.  You talking about baseball you can talk about physics, the speed of the ball.  You can teach English because more people would say the series are, series is always singular.  But you can teach that kind of stuff--geography, you know, how long it took a person to get from Chicago [Illinois] to here if the Chicago Blackhawks were playing this group.  And you can work out word problems in math, you know, if you're in a '44 [1944] Oldsmobile driving ten miles per hour (unclear)--so you can do a lot of thing--and so what we try to do here is to live up to what John Kinard, [HistoryMaker] Margaret Burroughs, Charles Wright [Charles H. Wright] I'm talking--being centers of liberation, centers of education and centers of transforma- transforming people.  Because we feel that you transform people if you bring them in, give them new information they get new attitude and new attitudes will result in new actions.  So the kids won't go around slapping old ladies around because they feel good about themselves.  They will see the contribution that black women made, you know, we did a book on history of black women in Dallas [Texas] and people can't imagine the stuff that women did.  Took me about ten years to put that book together, along with another person or two, but it's, it's about three hundred pages.  And you know it's like a coffee table book, but just think if we had a more serious in-depth scholarly book with a lot of research what it would reveal.  Because if you see what we got in this book it's mind boggling and that's what these institutions are about, and some of us are trying to grab hold some of these young people and some who are not so young to put them in place to carry on the mission and not try to be what we didn't set out to be.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Our institutions are different.
Speaker 2: Well it's a wonderful institution and hopefully we'll get to look around.
Story_ID: 482100
Speaker 1: But as a last thought when you look over your life is there one or two things that stand out the most for you?
Speaker 2: Well, one thing is I hope that I made some of those people whose name I called proud.  And I hope they feel that whatever they did was not in vain, because I could have talked to you for hours about Mr. Wallace [ph.], J.K. Hanes [ph.], my pastor, who was ninety-one years old, and the role they played in here and the role they played in my life.  And how they put me in place, I didn't know they were putting me in those places--that old college president I was telling you about, Dean Cade [John Brother Cade], and how those people--and I guess if I had to talk about my life I guess it could be summed up in the title of that book that Benjamin Mays, wrote, one of his books, 'Lord, the People Have Driven Me On' [Benjamin Mays].  And this is what has happened, like in Dallas [Texas], I mean, I'm tired, I'm really tired, and it's been real draining, but when you think of Miss Dotty [ph.], who was a retired school teacher still living in the city who got her friends to volunteer and then got her friend to leave us in her will, like about forty thousand dollars, forty-nine, fifty thousand dollars, that's a lot of money for an institution this size too.  But those are the kinds of things that keep you going and you say, "You know Miss Dotty, can't let Miss Dotty down 'cause she work so hard," and they believed in me, they believed in the institution [African American Museum in Dallas, Dallas, Texas], so you gotta--got to stick with it, and the other thing I always tell young people is to stay focused, decide on your goal, what you're gonna do and stay focused.  And that's one of the thing--an, and, a lotta things have come after me, you ought to go this direction, you ought to go there, you ought to go there.  But what I've tried to do was to stay focused.
