Story_ID: 544848
Speaker 1: Good afternoon (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Good afternoon, dear.
Speaker 1: My name is Adrienne Jones, and I am the interviewer.  Neculai Burghelea is the videographer (background noise).  Marsha Reeves Jews is the observer.
Speaker 2: Is she? Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Cotton Club [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Rolling.
Speaker 1: May, may I please ask you to state your name and to spell it?
Speaker 2: And to spell it?
Speaker 1: Yes, please.
Speaker 2: Fay, F-A-Y, Fay.
Speaker 1: Ray.
Speaker 2: Ray, R-A-Y [HistoryMaker Fay Ray].
Speaker 1: R-A-Y?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Today's date is October 18th [2007].  We are at the Cotton Club in Harlem [New York, New York].  What is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a member of the, of the, there's a word for it--the entertainment industry.  And I've done theaters, nightclubs, wherever.  I've performed everywhere, you know, so I couldn't put one name on it--just whatever they wanted me to do--whether it was comedy, whether it was singing and dancing, or just being there, you know, just be a part of it, you know.
Story_ID: 544849
Speaker 1: So I'm going to ask you five People magazine type questions.  And I'll just ask the question--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --and you just answer with whatever comes to mind.   What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I have so many favorites, but--
Speaker 1: Give us a couple.
Speaker 2: All right.  Red beans and rice.
Speaker 1: Excellent.
Speaker 2: More?
Speaker 1: No, no (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall--
Speaker 1: Excellent.
Speaker 2: --when the leaves are falling on the highways and you can see them, you know, as the wind blows.  And the colors, the changing of colors on all the trees and things as you go along.  You know, beautiful, like I've never seen before; in New York [New York], and all around, and in other states like North Carolina, all over the place.  Beautiful, just beautiful.  I had never seen it before.  It's beautiful.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: It looked like it was carved out, you know.
Speaker 1: In North Carolina?
Speaker 2: The colors.
Speaker 1: In North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It's a particularly nice state with good air.  What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Mexico.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A favorite friend?
Speaker 1: Like a favorite phrase.
Speaker 2: Phrase?
Speaker 1: A saying that you like to use--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --perhaps.
Speaker 2: I see.  I, I say so many things.  (Laughter) Which would sound the best?  Well, let's have fun.  That's one of my favorites.
Story_ID: 544850
Speaker 1: What was your mother's name, and where was she born?  Where was she from?
Speaker 2: My mother was from the State of Louisiana, too. Houma [Louisiana]. Houma.
Speaker 1: Homer, Louisiana?
Speaker 2: H-O-U-M-A, Houma.
Speaker 1: What was your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Minnie.
Speaker 1: And her last name?
Speaker 2: Perot, P-E-R-O-T. Perot [Minnie Perot].
Speaker 1: Minnie Perot.  Did she ever tell you anything about her background, about when she grew up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.  All I could remember about that was when I was a baby, and she took me to visit sometimes members of her family.  But I had no real--well, at that time I was a baby.  I don't remember anything that happened between any of us, you know (unclear).
Speaker 1: Do you remember which of your mother's relatives you might have been visiting?
Speaker 2: People that she might have visited?
Speaker 1: You said that your mother would take you to visit her relatives.
Speaker 2: Yes, but I don't even remember them, you know, because that's when I was a kid.
Speaker 1: Very small (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A baby.
Story_ID: 544851
Speaker 1: Who raised you?  Who did you grow up with as a youth?
Speaker 2: Well, I--different families that I was acquainted with, and they had children.  And the children of different families, you know, I'd go home with them and stay with them as long as I wanted to.  Nobody ever said anything about it, so that's, that was a way of life for me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where, where did you meet these children?
Speaker 2: In the State of Louisiana, where I was born.
Speaker 1: Very good, very good.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, how long did you live in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: Until I was around twelve.
Speaker 1: And at twelve, what did you, where did you go?  And how did you go there?
Speaker 2: I caught a freight train and I went there.  I went to Powhatan [Louisiana], that's an Indian [Native American] name.  And it's maybe fifteen or twenty miles from where I lived [in Natchitoches, Louisiana].  And by it being an old train, they had to keep it stocked.  They had to have water, and they had to stop.  And when it stopped, I got down.  (Laughter) I said I'd better go back; it's dark, I'm afraid.  So I got down and I hid.
Speaker 1: Do you know what state or what city you were in when you came off of the freight train?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was still in Powhatan.
Speaker 1: In Powhatan, Louisiana?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And so what did you do then?
Speaker 2: I headed off for home.  I was about ten or fifteen miles away, you know.  I had big feet, get going.
Speaker 1: Did you make it home?
Speaker 2: I made it.  I hid along the way, you know, whenever I saw a car coming, which wasn't often.  People didn't have cars back then, you know.  Whenever I saw that light flash, it was the headlights, so I'd start hiding.  When they'd get along there they'd see me, and I could have gotten raped.  Anything could have happened to me, or I could have gotten bitten by a snake.  But I prayed all the time that God would help me, and he did.  He did, and I said it all the time, "I know you're with me.  I don't see your footsteps, but I know you're there.  Everything I ask, I can have."  And I just relaxed, and he took care of me.
Speaker 1: So you said you went back home?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say I went back home.  I went to somebody else's home that had two kids (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Someone who you knew?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And how long did you stay there?
Speaker 2: A few days until I got sick.  She fed me some food that I didn't, I couldn't digest, and I had to let it up during the night.  And that made her angry, so she told me to leave the next day.  So, I did.
Speaker 1: And where did you go?
Speaker 2: Back to another family.
Story_ID: 544852
Speaker 1: Did you know your father?  Or do you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of course.
Speaker 1: What's your father's name?
Speaker 2: Dave.
Speaker 1: Dave Ray [ph.]?  What's his--
Speaker 2: No, his name was, was Arabic, you know.  He was a foreigner.
Speaker 1: Where was he from?
Speaker 2: Syria.
Speaker 1: And do you know how your mother [Minnie Perot] and father met?
Speaker 2: No, I wish I did.  I don't know, but I know one thing.  They shouldn't have--two people who were ill suited for each other, it was the two of them.
Speaker 1: And do you have a sense of how long you were with them?
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: How long?
Speaker 2: I was with my father until I was like five or six.
Speaker 1: And did you get an opportunity to meet any of his relatives?  Or was he alone, since he had come from Syria?
Speaker 2: He knew that I was his.  And he always stayed kind of in touch with me, like taking care of me or seeing that I had someone to look after me.  Maybe it was someone he knew very well because he was in business.  He had a store.  We called it a commissary, you know, where you could get everything you needed--oil for the lamp, food, water, things that we needed.
Story_ID: 544853
Speaker 1: And do you have a sense of how long you were with your mother [Minnie Perot]?
Speaker 2: Do I have a sense of?
Speaker 1: Of how long she was with you.
Speaker 2: Yes, she, she was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It sound, sounded like you lived with other people.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, she was there sometimes, yeah, in and out, you know.  And it was always misunderstandings between the two of them, which I didn't listen to.  And I, I didn't like it, it was discord.  No kid likes discord, especially when they can do nothing about it, you know.  So, I'd just sit and wait it out.  She'd snatch me away, and he [Ray's father] would come and get me.  Wherever she was, he'd come and take me back with him to the store where we lived.  I was in the store with him all the time, and he cared as much as he could as a father, but I wasn't what he wanted.  Every man wants a boy.  Nobody cares about a little girl.  You know that.  They want a little boy.  They love to have a son first.  Then you can have ten little girls if you want to.  Don't come bringing him a little girl.
Story_ID: 544854
Speaker 1: Did you go to school in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: No, not every day, but sometimes.
Speaker 1: When you did go, where did you go?
Speaker 2: I went there to public school for a long while, you know.
Speaker 1: And what's--I'm going to mispronounce the city, but what city in Louisiana are you living in?  Is it--what city do you live in where your father's commissary is?
Speaker 2: Natchitoches [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Natchitoches?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So is the public school that you attended, was it in Natchitoches?
Speaker 2: Yeah, public, yes.
Speaker 1: And did it cover a certain amount of grades?  What was the school like?  Could you describe it a little bit?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I loved being there with the rest of the children every day, and especially recess.  We looked forward to that, and to be with them and learn new things, you know.  I learned a lot about different things from the third grade, I remember from the third grade on.  I don't remember the first grade, you know.  But I would say around the third grade, they gave me timetables and things.  And I picked it up really fast, because all I had to do was add a number, you know, and keep going.  And I had the answers, and I thought I was being really smart, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of your teachers?
Speaker 2: Teachers?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember them.  One of them died in San Francisco [California], and I was so sorry.  I cared about her.
Speaker 1: Did you have--
Speaker 2: Her name--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Her name was Ada George Dawson [ph.].  I don't know where she was from, somewhere down in Louisiana, somewhere down in there.  But she was a lovely person, and I was on my way to see her thirty-six years later, and she died before I got there.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: And I never got to see her again.
Speaker 1: What subject did she teach you?  What subject did she teach you when you were in school?  Or did she teach you all the subjects?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't.  She taught--I don't know if it was geography or something like that.  Because that's what started me off with the books, you know, and the maps.  And when I saw all of that, I began to, my mind roamed--someday I want to see it (background noise).  You know, I really want to see it, you know.
Story_ID: 544855
Speaker 1: What kinds of places did you see that you knew that you wanted to get a look at (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To go back?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Egypt.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That's for sure, and some parts of Italy that I read about, like Firenze [Florence, Italy], they call it.  It's near Florence [sic.]. Up north, Genoa [Italy], and then south to Ischia [Italy] for the summer, you know, down past Rome [Italy], and I went all out there where they had this town destroyed, you know.  What's it called?  It was destroyed, and it stayed like that through the years, and so they let people in to see it.  Then I learned real quick that they didn't want Americans there anymore.  They'd come in and break off the toes on the statues and put in their pockets, and do things that they shouldn't do, touch things that they shouldn't.  They don't want you to touch it, just look at it.  So they started roping the stuff off, and the next thing I knew, they wouldn't let them back in there anymore.  I didn't want any part of that, because I wasn't part of it how they were acting.  I would never destroy anything that belonged to somebody else like that, you know.  They'd let you go in and look.  They had it roped off.  That was, what was the name of that place?  You see, my memory fails me.
Speaker 1: That's okay.  Can I ask you some more questions about Louisiana?
Speaker 2: Oh, but of course.  I just wanted to tell you the name of that one place I visited up there.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: I took a bus in Rome and went out there.  It was about maybe, I don't know, forty miles.  I don't know how long it took me to get out there, but I got out there.  It was called something, I can't remember the name of it.  But that's where I saw the walls all crumbled, and all these things, you know.  And they told me that it was also in the Bible.  So, I was looking at history when I looked at all that stuff.  Those walls were as red as that, (gesture) and pictures were painted on there.  And it was like they did it yesterday.  And I saw how they baked bread out in the open.  And things--I just learned things from all of that, you know.  And I was lucky enough to get jobs that took me there where I wanted to be, you know, what I wanted to see.  I learned so much from those people all over the world.  Everywhere, I went everywhere.
Story_ID: 544856
Speaker 1: How long did you live in Louisiana, and when did you leave Louisiana to begin your travels?
Speaker 2: Honey, I left there as soon as I could get on something that would take me away from there.  I left two, three times, but I had to go back, because I didn't have any money.  So, I had to figure out how I was going to eat.  That was the big problem, the food and the lodging.  Where was I going to sleep?  What was I going to do?  So during each time I left, I'd meet people, you know.  And some of them were young, and some of them weren't so young.  See, when I left the first time I ended up in Powhatan [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: It's the place above me, between me and Shreveport, Louisiana.  The next time I left, I went the other way, and I ended up in Alexandria, Louisiana.  That was past a town called Colfax [Louisiana], C-O-L-F-A-X, and on down.  I went on down, I kept going.  And the family (background noise) that I stayed with there, the lady was a very old lady.  The last time my father took me to her and told her to keep me, she was a member of the (unclear)--what is that?  It's a group of people, it's called--these men, they wear them little fez hats and little things, you know.
Speaker 1: Fur hats?
Speaker 2: Fez, F-E-Z.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Fez, fez.
Speaker 2: The fez hats, who's the member of--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Like an Elk [Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks of the World]? Like a--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, men belonged to it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And women, too.
Speaker 2: Like a--
Speaker 1: It's a--
Speaker 2: Like a lodge, or--?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: Like that.  And I stayed with her.  That was the first time I knew anything about sugar.  And I had been taking it from my father when he left me in the store by myself.  But I could crawl up there and get anything I wanted out of that candy, anything.  But now she turned me on to cake and fried chicken, stuff that she was eating, you know (laughter).  And when she'd come from this lodge meeting, she would bring this stuff in her apron and put it in her lap and call me. I was little. She said, "I'm going to give you something.  I have cake for you and chicken, and all this."  But she said, "You got to, you got to, you've got to sing for me, or dance."  I said, "I'll sing.  What do you want me to sing?"  And she told me, and I sang.  I sang the song that was popular with grown people, (singing) "I got the world in a jug, and a stopper in my hand," ['Down Hearted Blues'].  She liked that.  So she said, "Can you dance a little with it?"  I said, "Oh, yeah, I can do the mess around, you know."  And I started with it, you know, I was little (laughter).  She was teasing me, giving me this cake and stuff.  But I was so happy then.  But she died, she fell.  She walked out in the back of the house to go down the steps to go to the cistern to get water, and she fell and hit the back of her head.  And she had a son, his name was Fonsy, I called him Fonsy.  It was Alphonse [ph.], but I called him Fonsy, that's all I could say.  And when she died, I went to live with her daughter next door.  Next door. Not next door, but the next house--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --on the property.  Because I believe that her family owned it.
Speaker 2: Owned the property (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm not sure.  I know one thing, I didn't get any of it.  That's the only thing I remember.
Story_ID: 544857
Speaker 1: I went to stay over there with her, and she was married.  Well, when my mom died--the old lady, I had no one.
Speaker 2: What was her name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And her husband started abusing me. Um-hm. Those are the bad things that started entering my life that I didn't know anything about.  I didn't know nothing about sex.  Nobody had told me anything about that; I didn't know nothing.  And it was all bad, and all downhill, if you can get downhill.  And need I say more about that?  All my little friends who came to see me, they got in it, too.  So, he abused us all whenever he got ready.  He told me I better not say nothing about it, because I wouldn't be able to eat.  So I wasn't going to mention it, I had to eat.  So I could keep a secret, you know.  I wouldn't tell nobody; I thought I wouldn't eat.  If you think you're not going to get anything to eat, you wouldn't say anything either, you'd shut up if you know what shut up means.  I had to get away from there.
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.
Story_ID: 544858
Speaker 1: So I went again, and I ended up in Alexandria.  I was on 9th [Street] and Lee Street, 9th and Lee Streets in Alexandria, Louisiana.  There was a house, and music was coming from there.  So I went over there to check it out, and it was a whorehouse, with women selling themselves.  So I had fifteen or twenty cents, that's all I had.  I went and bought a hotdog and I ate it, and I went back over there (background noise).  I had always had an affinity for the piano.  I always wanted to play the piano, and I could learn some things about the piano.  And they didn't have to teach me.  I could pick it out on there myself, and I could watch other people who played the piano.  I watched their hands, and I could sit down and copy them; I watched them that close.  So I picked up a lot that I knew about it, and I went in this house where they were dancing.  Women were dancing, and the lamps were full of soot, smoke and stuff.  And sooner or later I had to learn how to clean it, you know, and to clean the outhouse and do all the work and all that.  I got sick of all that kind of drudgery, you know; that wasn't what I wanted out of life.  I had seen a couple of things in the movies, and that's when I saw Shirley Temple, and this inspired me.
Story_ID: 544859
Speaker 1: So, will you continue to tell us about seeing Shirley Temple in the movies?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  She made-(pause) with Bill Robinson [Bill "Bojangles" Robinson].  He taught her the little routines, you know.  And by her being young and I was little, you know, I said, "Oh, I can do that.  I can do that, I can learn how to do that."  And I'd watch her, and I'd sit there as long as I could, over and over and over until I learned something from her.  And I'd go home [in Alexandria, Louisiana] and practice it, you know, that's what I'd do.  I'd get out in that backyard and try it, you know.  They had a few chickens, and I'd say, "Go, go, shoo.  Let me see can I do this again."  And when they left me in the house by myself, I'd push the things away so I could see myself in the mirror doing it, you know, and I tried it.
Speaker 1: You were having a little rehearsal.
Speaker 2: I was trying, and I kept trying.
Speaker 1: And did you also play piano?
Speaker 2: Yes, a little bit.  I didn't learn the music, but I learned on my own by watching others, you know.  And I could do the same thing they were doing, A, B, C--and back again, you know.  So I had, I had, I had that--well enough to do, so I ended up in that house.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And a girl came over there.  They danced off the music, and I was banging it out.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And they danced on it.  And she came over there and stooped down and said, "Piano player, can you play such and such?"  And she said, "You ain't nothing but a kid.  What are you doing in here?"  And I said, "Shhh, don't tell anybody.  Don't talk so much.  I'll tell you everything you want to know, if you just leave me alone."  She said, "Yeah, don't you go nowhere, stay right here."  I said, "Well, will you help me?"  She said, "Yeah."  She said, "Yeah, I'll help you."  And she did.  I stayed, and she helped me, she did.  She took me home with her.  She said, "When I get my day off--." Pretty girl, nineteen years old, whore.  She told me she took care of her whole family with that money that she made out there.  That's what most of them did.  They wanted to make the money and give it to the family.  They got brothers and sisters and things, and they could put food in the house.  That's what they did.  I mean that's understandable when you explain it to them like that, you know.  Nobody asked them any questions.
Speaker 1: How long were you there?
Speaker 2: I was there long enough to go home with her when she got her day off.  She took me to meet her mother and her sister and her niece; her little niece was my age.  So I was with her practically every day while I was there.  And when we had time off, she, she would take us places with her.  So she had a boyfriend, and she took us with her.  And so many things happened from that, you know.
Speaker 1: Where would she take you?
Speaker 2: Back to the town I came from [Natchitoches, Louisiana].  Because she had a boyfriend from there, and he had some kind of rattletrap car and he could take her for a ride or something.  But the town was dry, they couldn't drink.  That's called--
Speaker 1: Prohibition?
Speaker 2: Prohibition, that's the word, thank you.
Story_ID: 544860
Speaker 1: I've been here [New York, New York] over fifty years, and these are the worst children I have ever seen in my whole entire life, and I've played with a lot of families with children.  I even stayed with them, slept with them, ate with them, did everything with them.  Whatever we had, we shared it together with each other and all.  And the people I grew up with--now they have all died and left me here by myself, I remember.
Speaker 2: You said we should remind you about Prohibition.  And--
Speaker 1: Prohibition, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right now you're in Alexandria [Louisiana]--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) They got in trouble, this girl.
Speaker 2: --and you're taking rides with your girlfriends.
Speaker 1: That's when I got in trouble with the boyfriend.  They had a bottle in the car drinking, and the radio was playing loud.  And she had his hat on her head, and they were all hooked up and going down the road having a good time.  And they left us there.  The cops decided to put them in jail.  So, she told them she had to come and get us.  We went to the theater, so that's where they came and picked up us.  So now, they chose to have a good time with us.  They put us in jail first, and then (nods head)--I'm not going to go into all that.  But it wasn't a good thing at all, not at all.  You will have to read whatever book I can get out of this for all the answers that I'm trying to give you.
Speaker 2: I think we, we can hear.
Speaker 1: It was just so much.  But the best part about the whole thing is I lived. I lived. And there was some happy times, and there were some sad times, and there were some times that I thought I wouldn't make it to the next time.  But I managed somehow, and I haven't--I think I have read all the books that all the artists have written about themselves.  But to me, they sound like they wanted to be of a better grade, or that they come from a better family, or they come from--I, I, I just don't know how to say it.  Because all of them wouldn't dare print the things that I would say that happened, you know.  But you got to be true to yourself; you better be true.
Speaker 2: How did you get out of jail that night?
Speaker 1: Well, see, the girl, that was her niece, we were friends.  And she worked for a lady that had a little small cafe, I call it, you know, just a counter.  And she baked pies every day and she had short orders and things, you know.  And this child worked for her, so she said, "Since you like her and you bring her to work with you every day, let her try to help you, and we'll pay her, you know."  So I was making a dollar and a half a week, and she was getting two fifty, you know.  That was all right with me, I could look forward to something.  So I stayed with them a while.  And she was the one who--we were able to get in touch with her, to let her know that we had been picked up.  She came and got us and took us back.  And life went on again, you know what I mean.  We'd grin and bear it and keep on going, you know.  So, that was that.
Story_ID: 544861
Speaker 1: When you left her home [in Alexandria, Louisiana], or you left (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I left them, I went to another town.  I stole off from them, I wouldn't let them know I was leaving.  They lived in a thing that looked like a hall, where people used to meet, and it had big windows around.  We'd just push them open this way.  Well, one morning I had packed a little small bag with my little things that I liked that I kept--a few little rags to wear.  And I let it down out the window at two or three o'clock in the morning, and I eased out the front door, and I didn't make any noise.  That's how I got away from them.  And I went out to the highway that I knew was there, and I knew the mailman would come along.  When he came along I asked him, "Please let me ride to Winnfield [Louisiana] with you."  That's another town that's called--I was in the one called Montgomery [Louisiana], and now I'm in one called Winnfield.  I went to Winnfield with him.  And he let me out and I took my little box and I went on about my business.  And I ended up right in front of a thing where they had prize fights, you know.  And the men got to fighting and going on around there, and I saw this man's back laying open.  Somebody had cut him right straight down from his shoulder all the way down, and he was bloody.  And I had said I wanted to be a nurse.  Well, goodbye, nurse.  I forgot that.  I didn't want none of that.  I don't know whether he lived or died.  I know I got away.  I walked past a black hotel in that little town, and a woman was sitting on the porch, good looking.  She was sitting out there looking at the people going by.  And a woman come along with her little daughter, and she was making over this woman's little daughter.  "Oh, she's so pretty.  I wish I had a daughter."  I heard her, she wished she had a daughter.  I walked right up there.  I said, "I'll be your little daughter."  She said, "Where did you come from?"  I said, "Somewhere. What difference does it make?  I'm here."  I didn't talk that grown up, but that's what it meant (unclear).  And I convinced her that I was out there in the streets.  Was a little, what did they call me?  A little street urchin.  That's all I was; hanging with the hoboes.  I did.
Story_ID: 544862
Speaker 1: Did she take you in?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Did she take you in?
Speaker 2: Did I go?
Speaker 1: Did she invite you into her home [in Winnfield, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did, and I talked more to her.  That way, I could get a meal every day, you know.  They had a gambling room upstairs in the hotel.  She put me next to where I heard all the dirt I wanted to hear during the night up there.  So I stayed around there for a while, and then finally I was in Froggy Bottom, in Shreveport [Louisiana].  Because her husband used to drive all the way to Shreveport to get things for the hotel, you know, different things he needed.  And so I asked him could I please go, and he said, "Yeah, but you'll have to ask Millie."  Millie was her name, Mildred [ph.].  "Ask Millie can you go."  And I asked Millie could I go with him when he went out to get the stuff.  And she says, "Of course, if he'll take you, sure."  He took me.  Well, I don't need to tell you what happened there.  But he also took advantage of me.  Well, when I got to Shreveport, that's all I wanted.  So I got down and I ran away from him.  He never saw me again.  And I went to where the whores were, down in Froggy Bottom.  Whores sat in windows looking beautiful, all made up.  And people were going by looking at them, you know.  They'd come down there just to look at the women.  They were whores, prostitutes.  But they were good to me.  I could run errands for them, and they would give me a little money, enough money where I could get me a little room of my own.  And I got a room for three dollars a week, or five dollars.  I had it made.  I got a job.  I could take the food from the counter to where they were sitting, tables or booths or what--
Story_ID: 544863
Speaker 1: One day, a couple came in there [in Shreveport, Louisiana] from Kansas City [Missouri] looking for girls.  That was my chance.  When I heard that, I went straight to them.  I told that man I was working for, I said, "I'm sorry, but I have to go.  I'm (background noise) going with them, if they'll take me."  She said, "Yeah."  She said, "You'll be living on the train with us."  Well, that sounded like music to my ears.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Rolling.
Speaker 1: You said that you went with a couple who were looking for girls?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Why were they looking for girls?  Who were they?
Speaker 2: They were a couple who was gathering a show together on the road, a carnival life.  I was with them every day, every day through the whole season, and we went to every state.
Speaker 1: What were their names?  Ray?
Speaker 2: Ray Saunders [ph.].  And his wife's name was Inez [ph.].  She was a singer, and he was the piano player.  So it was easy for him to get his band together, for them, you know.  And we worked on it and I enjoyed being with them, because I could eat and sleep for free.  And they said they'd pay me, but I don't remember ever getting paid, but I was there.
Story_ID: 544864
Speaker 1: When I thought I had enough, I took off.  I left them in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and I went to Detroit [Michigan]; that's where I ended up.  I stayed there until I could get work.  I worked for B. Siegel [B. Siegel Company] on Woodward Avenue, a department store.  If you're familiar, you'll know what that store was.  I don't know if it's still there or not.
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  Why don't you describe it a little bit?
Speaker 1: Well, they had one across the street named J.L. Hudson [J.L. Hudson Department Store; J.L. Hudson Building, Detroit, Michigan]; that was another big department store.  So, it was on Woodward Avenue, and I stayed there and worked a long time.  And I was getting prepared all the time to do things on my own, because I had learned how to sing and dance, you know, and I could make it.  And from there I went to different places with different girls who hired other--you know, little towns close by or something.  We all had a job to do, and I could make a little money by myself and on my own.  So, that's what I did.
Speaker 2: Singing and dancing?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And when you worked at B. Siegel's, what department did you work in?
Speaker 1: Putting those things back together in stock, and you know, and helping them to take care of it.  They wanted to make a buyer out of me, but I had other plans.
Speaker 2: You wanted to sing and dance?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I wanted to go another way.
Story_ID: 544865
Speaker 1: What was Detroit [Michigan] like at that time?  I mean, if you could just describe the atmosphere of the city a little bit.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Adams [Avenue], where they had a hotel [Hotel Tuller, Detroit, Michigan] right across from another hotel.  The Norwood hotel [Gotham Hotel, Detroit, Michigan] was across the street from the Adams, on Adams.  And this was near, between Beaubien [Street] and St. Antoine [Street].
Speaker 1: Were these black hotels?  Were the Adams--was that a black hotel?
Speaker 2: Hotel, yes, uh-huh.  And it had a nightclub up the street called Jap Sneed's [Club Plantation, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Jap Sneed's.
Speaker 2: And the Three Sixes [Club Three Sixes, Detroit, Michigan], that was between Beaubien and Hastings [Street].  I know where they were.  By then, I had met other artists in the business who made money, you know, and they could help me.  And they did help me, you know.  If they could get a job for me, I had it, you know.  I kept going; a piece here, a piece there, getting up all the time, you know.  And I mean I stayed in every city, because I could always find some kind of work, you know.  And I figure as long as I had hands and I had it in my heart, I'm going to make it.  And I prayed for it, and that's what I did.  I did my little work, and thank God I made it.  And everywhere I worked, people liked me.  I even helped people in hospitals who couldn't get the help they wanted to write letters.  They wanted to get in touch with others, you know.  I'd go out and get the stuff they wanted me to get.  If they had the money, I'd go get like a tablet, you know, or stamps or whatever they needed for it--pencils, and things.  I tried to help them.  One woman told me she was hungry, that they weren't feeding her.  And she believed if she had food, she'd get well.  Well, I wasn't no great cook, but I tried to give her some of what I ate.  I'd sneak it in and give it to her.  And she did get up and walk out.  So that let me know that a lot of them people weren't being fed right, you know.  They needed something that taste like food.  Hospital food don't taste like food, it tastes like garbage.
Story_ID: 544866
Speaker 1: Even here [New York, New York], I went to visit a dear friend of mine just last week.  He died in the hotel--in the hospital, Lincoln Hospital [Lincoln Medical and Mental Health Center; NYC Health + Hospitals/Lincoln] over on 3rd Avenue and 149th Street in the Bronx [New York].  He died.  Well, he smoked too much, that's what killed him.  I couldn't save him, he died (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: And now I'm going through it, because I was the only one he told anything to.  He was a loner.  He never spoke about his family to me or no one.  He'd stop talking if you wanted to talk about his family.  He wouldn't say nothing.  "How is your mother, or who she was" or whatever, nothing.  He was estranged from them.  All I knew is where he was from.  He was from Virginia, the state.  That's all, that's all I could tell him.  Now he's over there in the morgue, right now.  And I'm trying to help the girl that lived with him to see if we can get him cremated, you know.  It's the shortest route to go, but it's kind of nice.  It's a little better than just putting him on a pile with the rest.  I wouldn't like that myself, you know.  So I got to thinking about that, and now I'm at an age where I'd better start thinking about me.  Because I don't want to go like that. I don't want an expensive burial, but I don't want to go like that, you know.  I would like a burial, if I knew where I was going to be buried, you know, or--
Speaker 2: Or what was going to happen.
Speaker 1: Who's going to look after me, you know? (Cough) And then I could go a little further, you know.  Well, it wasn't all that good, but I kept going, I tell ya.
Story_ID: 544867
Speaker 1: From Michigan?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: When you were in Michigan--we were talking a little bit about you being in Michigan.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Michigan.  I was with the deaf mutes.
Speaker 1: You met, you learned sign language.  Did you learn sign language in Detroit [Michigan], or in Michigan?  Sign language is the language of the deaf mutes.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, of the deaf, yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about learning that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I learned it.  They taught me.
Speaker 1: At the hospital? How--
Speaker 2: No, I was with them everywhere they went.  If they'd go to--you know, games or anywhere.
Speaker 1: How did you come to get that job?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't work at it.  I learned it, but I only went with them wherever they went.  And they would take me, because I could speak.  And I could try to tell them what they were saying--try to help them all the time.  And when they would get married, I could help them because I could tell the man what they were looking for or what they want, and this and that and the other.  So I stayed around them, when I got jobs in Detroit.
Speaker 1: How did you meet a deaf person the first time?
Speaker 2: I met them because they were working at a club that I went to work in Hamtramck [Michigan], outside of Detroit; it was in the neighborhood, you know.  They would come to see me there, you know, and we were always in conversation.  And they would stop and they would take the time to spell it for me, you know.  And that way I learned the whole alphabet and the whole thing.  And then I could make it into words, too, like they did, you know.  See, this was the hospital and this was the train--different things, you know, I could pick it up.  And I went with them everywhere, and they were harmless people.  But they did comedy, too.  Because we'd get to the gate and we'd go into another place like Canada.  And they told me, "Don't say a word.  Don't say anything."  Okay, I didn't say nothing.  And the man would say, "Well, they all dumb, and I don't know what to do with them, you know."  "Yeah, okay, what kind of dumb?"  I said, "They're driving a car, they got license to drive."  That's right, they had a car.  They worked at Chrysler [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC] and Ford [Ford Motor Company] in Detroit, out in Belle Isle [Belle Isle Park, Detroit, Michigan].  You know, I know Detroit.  We got by, got away.  And I got really good at it, you know.  And I was tickled.  I said if that day ever comes when I have to use it, I can help others.  And I mean I was offered a job, you know, and I kind of helped them.  Because you see girls doing it on TV for them, let 'em know what's going on.  You couldn't do that.  It was easy for me.  I could do it first, the way they were taught, and then with one hand.  Because the alphabet is different with one hand than it is with the other way they did it.  Because the other way was the old way, A, B, C, D. You know.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Show us, show.
Speaker 2: Be quiet.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, show us. Show us.
Speaker 2: Would you please show us the language?
Speaker 1: (Signs) A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W, X, Y, Z.  That's how you make it, the new way.  The other one was (signs) A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q--you know, it's just old that way.  But they don't do with two hands; they do it only one--(signs) A, B, C, D,--fast, you know, it's faster.
Story_ID: 544868
Speaker 1: Anything happens to me, I'll be able to take care of myself.  And I said I'm going to go about, I'm going to learn to read braille.
Speaker 2: Braille.
Speaker 1: And when I get through with that, I'm going to learn something else and something else.  And I'll just keep going with what I can do.  Helen Keller did it, uh-huh.  I read about people like her when I learned how to read.  I'd go to the library and study, and look and read books in hospitals and everything, you know. That's it, um-hm. Make use of yourself, you know.  I knew what it meant to have a nickel on Sunday, a nickel where I could get one ice cream cone.  I was real happy when they said they'd give us a double dip.  And then when I'd get outside I'd give somebody a lick, and it would fall in the dirt.  I cried many times, but the tears turned to joy sometimes when somebody would come along and buy me a Nehi for a nickel.  You never heard of nothing like that.  That's all a soda cost, one nickel.  Coca-Cola was one nickel.  That little bottle was like that.  But I got one, I got one of those bottles, I got one. That's funny? Adrienne [Adrienne Jones], you've got the most beautiful teeth.
Speaker 2: Thank you so much.  Yours are fabulous also.  And I am going to have to get some lashes like yours.  They're fantastic.
Speaker 1: I need, I need--yeah, but I need all that, too.
Speaker 2: The lashes are fun.
Speaker 1: I'm hoping that one day it'll turn out different for me.  You know, somewhere along the way I'll be able to have a nice home.  You know, that's all I wanted.  Because I mean it'll be nice to say, you know, "Come over and see me.  Come have tea with me, Sunday."  Life have meaning, you know. Somewhere. It's not over yet.
Speaker 2: Not yet.
Speaker 1: Not yet.
Story_ID: 544869
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How long did you live in Michigan?
Speaker 2: I stayed in Michigan--
Speaker 1: Because I assume at some point you moved to New York [New York].
Speaker 2: I sure did.
Speaker 1: But not necessarily straight from Michigan.  And I don't want to skip anywhere.
Speaker 2: No, from Michigan I went to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And I lived in Chicago--
Speaker 1: Do you know about what year?  It doesn't need to be exact, but just maybe about what year you arrived in Chicago?
Speaker 2: In the '50s [sic.].
Speaker 1: Can you describe Chicago in the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Well, I had met people like Joe Louis, like Leonard Reed, people of another ilk, you know.  And I had been around musicians, and I mean I had intermingled with different people in the business.  I got to know everyone.  Louis Armstrong was a very good friend of mine.  He was from my state [Louisiana], and he was good to me, helped me a lot.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit more about meeting these people.  Where did you meet Louis Armstrong?
Speaker 2: I met them on the jobs I worked on (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And--
Speaker 2: Because they always had a star, or maybe sitting in the audience.
Speaker 1: So tell us a story about Louis Armstrong, just some small thing.
Speaker 2: Louis Armstrong, yeah.  Well, he used to send me telegrams and things that say, "Keep up the good work.  You're still beautiful," you know.  And whenever he'd be in town, you know, he'd let me know to come down and see him and all.  And if I wanted somebody to meet him, I'd take them and introduce them to him, and then I made friends with all the stars.  Ella Fitzgerald was one of my dearest friends.  Pearl Bailey was one of my dearest friends.  They were all my friends.  I loved those people, because they were making it, you know.  And I was still--that's all right, but I was there, too, you know.
Speaker 1: In Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Chicago.
Speaker 1: So tell us a story about Ella Fitzgerald.
Speaker 2: Ella, what story can I tell you about Ella?
Speaker 1: She was something.
Speaker 2: A beautiful person.  All I know is the girls I work with was telling me that at first, when she first did her thing, that she didn't even have a dress to wear.  And they put that money together and bought her a dress, you know, put her out there beautiful.  She never looked back.  She played the harmonica first, they liked that.  But they told her, you know, try singing.  And she tried singing.  And there was a drummer named Chick Webb.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Who helped her, you know.  And boy, when she started singing (background noise), that's all she needed to do, was open her mouth and sing.  And she could, she did that until the day she died.  That's the truth.  And I knew her very well.  She was a sweet person, really, really nice.  When she got ugly, it was because somebody had mistreated her, you know.  It was always the women who got mistreated.  Lady Day, Billie Holiday, I lived next door to her. (Laughter) Billie Holiday.  She used to come knock on the door, or she'd call me, "Fay [HistoryMaker Fay Ray], look out the window."  I'd look out the window, and she was all wrapped up in her beautiful fur coat.  I said, "Where you going, as cold as it is?"  She said, "To get a bottle," (laughter).  I said, "You better hurry up and get it and go on back in, because it's going to snow some more, you know."  And she opened this fur coat, and she didn't have nothing on under there (laughter).  She was funny, she was funny.  I knew so many of 'em.  That girl who sang, 'Walking by the River,' did you ever hear that song?
Speaker 1: I have, but I don't know who sings it.  Who sings 'Walking by the River'?
Speaker 2: Her name was--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can you sing a few bars?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can you sing a few bars?
Speaker 2: Neculai [Neculai Burghelea] would like you to sing a few bars of 'Walking by the River.'
Speaker 1: (Singing) "There's dew upon the ground, and not a soul in sight.  I'm walking by the river, 'cause I'm meeting someone there tonight.  The moon (unclear). I hear a distant sound, I see a far off light.  So hurry on your way, my friend.  If you don't get there soon, there may not be a moon to guide you to that--," something--, "shore."  Oh, I don't know.  I know the song, but I can't think of all the words, you know.  But she sang it, Fats Waller was her mentor.  And I liked him, I liked him.  So, when I met all these people, I thought I was going to heaven, because they were the ones I wanted to be with and be like, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I wanted to become a star.
Story_ID: 544870
Speaker 1: Will you tell us a story about Pearl Bailey?
Speaker 2: Pearl, she was one of my best friends.  Pearl called me up one day and asked me to come over to her house.  I said, "Okay."  When I got over there, she had a man there with a whole litter of puppies running all around in the living room.  I said, "Is this what you called me up for?"  She said, "Yeah, pick one."  I said, "I don't want one."  "Why not?"  I said, "Pearl, I could never feed that big old dog.  Are you kidding?  Get him out of here, I don't want him."  "Go on, take him, Fay [HistoryMaker Fay Ray].  He'll eat grits."  (Laughter) That's what she said.  (Laughter)  And you know what?
Speaker 1: Did you take him (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He did, he did (laughter).
Speaker 1: What did you name him?
Speaker 2: He ate a lot of grits and rice and bread and everything else.  I told her I'd never be able to feed that big dog.  Are you kidding?  I didn't want no dog; I didn't even want a cat, you know.  You've got to, you've got to take care of these animals.  You can't just--people think you can just take them and--you can't do that.  You got to take them to the doctor, you got to--you got to do everything.  You got to feed them, you got to keep them clean, you got to--you got to do it.  So that's what you teach your child when they want to bring a cat home, or a dog or something, or a bird or something when he's got to have something to play it.  I mean, you got to take care of it.  Now if you can take care of it, you can have it.  I'll help you, but I'm not going to be the caretaker all the time, you know.  I think if you teach them right, they'll do right, that's what I think.  How are they getting all these guns and things?  And they're the ones that's buying them, the grown people in the house.  Where do they hide them?  Under the pillow, up there in the--anywhere.  The kid raises up the pillow and it's under there.  So, he tries it, you know.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: When you were in Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, anyway, I'll skim all over Detroit [Michigan] and everywhere.  I went there with Pearl Bailey.  And Pearl had a beautiful family, I loved all of them.  Her brother [Bill Bailey] was a great dancer.  And she had a sister that sings very well, and she had another little sister that didn't.  I knew her whole family and everything, you know.  They were from around Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and Washington [D.C.] and, you know, people strewn around different places.  And I lived in all those places and I worked with all those people.
Story_ID: 544871
Speaker 1: I worked with all those big bands on Broadway.  I was on Broadway three times.  So that's a record for anybody that's been in the business, you know.  That's what I did.
Speaker 2: And when you were on Broadway, did you dance in shows (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Can you tell us which ones?
Speaker 1: Well, I worked--there was a nightclub there, the Zanzibar [Cafe Zanzibar, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Have you heard about it?
Speaker 2: I have.
Speaker 1: I worked there for a year, and I worked across the street where they had that other show going for a whole year or more.  I forgot the name of it.  It was one of those--right across the street.
Speaker 2: Across the street from the Zanzibar?
Speaker 1: Then I worked in Bill Miller's Riviera [Fort Lee, New Jersey].  I worked at the--
Speaker 2: Well, I know Zanzibar is in the 40s.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Where is Bill Miller's located?  And then the theater that you mentioned--
Speaker 1: Fifties--
Speaker 2: --next is across the street.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then you said Bill Miller's is in the 50s?
Speaker 1: Yeah [sic.].
Speaker 2: Okay.  And when you were at these places, were you, would you have described yourself as a chorus girl?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And what did chorus girls do, exactly?
Speaker 1: We did different shows.  Every six weeks, we'd change shows on Broadway.  We had different wardrobes and different things we had to do, numbers we had to do.  If we were going to do an African number, it had to be an African number.  If we were going to do a salsa, we did that too, Spanish.  We did some of everything.  Being a chorus dancer, you have to be flexible.  And we had choreographers to stage it for us, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Or to guide us in that direction, or play the music.  And then we'd think up things to do, you know.
Speaker 2: Where did you get your costumes from?
Speaker 1: From the big houses downtown where the Radio City Music Hall [New York, New York] had--they had the same thing, costumes.  Some of them got the same ones we did, you know.  Some of them would--we used some of the costumes they had, you know.
Speaker 2: And was being a chorus girl, was that anything like being a Rockette?
Speaker 1: Yeah, precision, you know.  We never got that good, but we tried, you know.  It was a wonderful life.
Story_ID: 544872
Speaker 1: What was your favorite jazz band to work with as a dancer?
Speaker 2: (Background noise) Oh, I loved Duke Ellington, and I loved Louis Armstrong.  I worked for most of them, and they were all good, you know.  We had wonderful musicians during that time, in the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s], you know, just wonderful.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: The bottom fell out because all of the big nightclubs and men--whoever to keep these things going were men of the rackets, you know.  It was something to do with the waterfront, or something to do with the people they'd get money from every now and then or whatever.  But they were the ones that handled all the money and handled all the nightclubs; they kept it going.  And when they killed up everybody, like in Chicago [Illinois]--the massacres and the things they did--you know, they all died out.
Speaker 1: In your showtime.
Speaker 2: Everything went.  That was it.
Speaker 1: And about what year did the bottom fall out?
Speaker 2: The bottom fell out in the '40s [1940s].  It started, you know, started going bad (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And--
Story_ID: 544873
Speaker 1: I asked you if you were a chorus girl.  Did you become a Silver Belle when you were in New York [New York] as a youth (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't become a Silver Belle until I came back here from Europe.
Speaker 1: Until, until you came back later.
Speaker 2: I've been with them [Silver Belles] now--
Speaker 1: For a while?
Speaker 2: --for ten or twelve years.  But they were going before that.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: All the pictures that you saw of them, I wasn't on the pictures.  Because I was a late bloomer, you know, with them.  But I've, I've been with them most of the time now, you know.
Speaker 1: And were you a member of a union?  Did you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: --and your sisterhood create a union while you were working?
Speaker 2: No, no, no. I, there was no union where I was working.  There were clubs, but there wasn't any union.  We were happy to have something to do.  Because I was getting paid like twenty dollars a week, fifteen dollars a week, something like that, you know.  And that was big money for me (background noise).  I'd never made that money in my life.
Speaker 1: What were the working conditions like in New York in the clubs?  Was it a respectful and nice atmosphere?  Or was it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, very.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, everybody was on their good manners that we hung out with, you know.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: They were very nice.  They'd take us out.
Speaker 1: And what about your audiences?
Speaker 2: The audience, very nice.
Speaker 1: Respectful?
Speaker 2: Nice people.
Speaker 1: Would the audiences be all-white?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, now, if you got a gang of us anywhere, we're going to start a fight or something at some time, sooner or later.  You know that from what's going on now.  I believe something bad is going to happen to one of them boys out there now.  It's very bad, you know, very bad.  They have no respect for black women.
Speaker 1: But that was not true when you were performing?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: People were, men were--the atmosphere of men was better, perhaps?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, because they wanted to be somebody, you know.  They wanted to be seen with us, you know.  And with us, they had a nice bunch of girls, because they were nice (background noise).  They weren't hoodlums, they were very nice.  They came from nice families.  These people who got their services had to tell their families they were going to take care of them, you know, and see that they come back home, and they did. So that wasn't bad, you know, to be a part of something like that, that somebody cared about, you know.
Story_ID: 544874
Speaker 1: Can you describe Harlem [New York, New York] in the 1940s?  Did you feel like it was a more formal time?  People were more, dressed up more?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sort of had more of a--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us, can you talk about that a little bit?
Speaker 2: They did.  They wouldn't be caught out and they didn't have all their accessories, you know.  They cared about themselves, people on 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard], they just did.  They don't care now.  But I came here--when I came here, you couldn't get a job in the stores on 125th Street.
Speaker 1: It was all-white?
Speaker 2: Jewish.
Speaker 1: And did all-white people live--so it's Jewish all around 125th Street in the Harlem area?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And so where did black people live at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, they were wherever they could find lodging, you know.  There was no special, they had no special--
Speaker 1: Particular place.
Speaker 2: --area.  You know what they used to say?  They're across the tracks.  You go over there, you'll find them, you know.
Speaker 1: Like in a southern town?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  It's just something; that's the way it was.
Story_ID: 544875
Speaker 1: Does the bottom fall out of entertainment about the same time as the war [World War II, WWII] starts?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: It all fell out.  Because, see, like I said, those bad men shot up each other and all.  They just about killed everybody; that was it.  They had nobody else to deal with.  And they made movies, you know, and got bigger all the time, they just made money, you know.  And it's still going on today.  I'm seeing things about Jesse, Jesse Woodson James [Jesse James].  And I'm seeing things about different women who were famous back then, you know, and they'd write stories about them.  And I say well, maybe one day they'll write one about me.
Speaker 1: I'm sure they will.
Speaker 2: Who knows?  Yeah, because I started driving cabs here when I didn't have a job.
Speaker 1: After you were dancing?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Then you became a taxicab driver?
Speaker 2: I sure did.
Speaker 1: How did you get into being a taxicab driver?  Did you somebody who'd been doing it?
Speaker 2: You meet people.
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: Sure, I met them.
Speaker 1: And how did you decide to do that particular job yourself?
Speaker 2: Because I could drive.  I knew how to drive, and I went to the company and told them I'd like to have a job, and they hired me.  Columbia [Street], in the '40s [1940s] near 10th [Street], 11th [Street], 12th [Street], over that way near the water, you know.  This is where they were located.  And I told them that I didn't want to drive a raggedy car, don't give me a bad car.  Give me a good car, and I'll drive.
Speaker 1: Did you rent the car for the day?
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't have to rent it, I drove it.  And I worked for a certain amount of money.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know--
Speaker 1: Per day?
Speaker 2: My little money was, it wasn't great.  But I lived, you know.  I learned.
Speaker 1: Were there other women cabdrivers?
Speaker 2: Sometimes.  We'd run into it sometimes.
Speaker 1: How did you enjoy that job?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed it, because I learned a lot about the Bronx [New York]. I learned a lot about New York [New York], Long Island.
Speaker 1: You knew how to get around.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you better believe it.  When they would take me--people would get off the plane and they'd come from Ireland or somewhere, and they'd want to go (unclear) up in the Bronx.  And if I didn't know where it was at, I'd get my card out and look and see where it was, and I'd get going.  I always found it some kind of way, you know.  And I drove for about two years.
Story_ID: 544876
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And did you begin welding after that?
Speaker 2: Yes, I went, I went to Rhode Island.
Speaker 1: How--tell me--
Speaker 2: I went up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me about how you came to do that?  Like, if you back up just a little bit.
Speaker 2: I was talking to a singer, I think it was, who lived up there, you know.  And they told me how nice it was, and I should go up there and look around, and I did.  So I just tried it.
Speaker 1: Was she a welder (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I went to work with one of the ladies that worked in the shipyards.  So I went down there and asked them could I learn.  And they told me sure, they'd teach me.  And I had to get the kind of clothes they were wearing--you know, like pants and things, you know, and shoes.  I had to protect my eyes, and I had to do this and that.  They gave me a hardhat and everything, okay.  I learned it, and I learned to weld.  And I got good at it, and then I made money.  I made some money then.  And I was--
Speaker 1: What kind of money?  You said twenty dollars a week dancing.  You weren't--you said you weren't making as much money as a taxicab driver.
Speaker 2: No, but it went into--
Speaker 1: Give us some loose numbers.
Speaker 2: Loose numbers?  Hundreds.
Speaker 1: Ooh, for one job?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure, I made money.
Speaker 1: You could make hundreds of dollars?
Speaker 2: Yeah, anytime I did that kind of work, I made that kind of money.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because it was exactly the best, you know.  And clothing, I had these things on I had to wear, like--
Speaker 1: Coveralls?  Dungarees?
Speaker 2: Better than denim.  You know, like leather.  Like, you know, like spats, like everything.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: To keep the stuff--because you had--it was dangerous.  You had to be careful.  So I learned, and I became good at it, got good at it.
Story_ID: 544877
Speaker 1: And what kind of project--you said shipyards.  But what other kind of projects did you do in Rhode Island?
Speaker 2: Rhode Island?
Speaker 1: In Providence [Rhode Island].
Speaker 2: In Providence?  I had a little job working for a woman who had a, she had a, what do you call them stores where you can get everything there?  Screws and nuts and bolts (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A hardware store?
Speaker 2: That's it.  She had, she owned it.  Her name was Toles [ph.].
Speaker 1: Toles.
Speaker 2: Mrs. Toles was her name.  And her husband was in the [U.S.] Navy, I think he was in the Navy.  And I made friends with her.  And she had a family and I grew to fall in love with her kids, you know, and I helped her a lot.  She lived in Providence.  That's how I came to know all the rest of the people there, you know.  And I helped her with the kids, and I grew to care about her, because she was a nice woman.  I remember her.  I wish I could find her.  She was really a nice person.  She left her car on the driveway one day.  That's how they found out I could drive.  And all the windows were down.  And it started this big rain, you know, and I jumped in the car and put it in the garage, you know.  And her girlfriend got angry.  Her girlfriend, who came there with her little boy to see her and her children, she got mad.  She was the one who got mad.
Speaker 1: Because you had driven the car?
Speaker 2: Because I drove it, yeah.  And the only place I did was to take it off the driveway and put it in the garage and pull the windows up, you know.  People got mad for nothing.  You didn't have to do very much to make them angry, you know.
Speaker 1: Did they push you away as a result of this driving incident?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I stayed there with her a long time, you know, because she was a friend.  And she liked me, and I liked her.  Her husband was nice, and I like to be around nice people, you know.  They would take me everywhere they went.  I could go with them, you know.  I could do anything I wanted.  So I hung around for a while, then I left.
Story_ID: 544878
Speaker 1: Did you do any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I quit doing that I came back to New York [New York], and I decided I'd do something else.  I took time out and I went to college and I learned to--all the things that you have to know when you're working in an office, you know.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I learned all that stuff--those machines, how to type, how to do this, how to do that.
Speaker 1: Which, which machines?  The typewriter?  Did you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --do stenography?
Speaker 2: Manual typewriter, I did--you know.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I did all that.  That's why it would be easy for me to learn the, the computer, because there's really nothing to it.  You just have to know about typing and know how to get the things that you want to know with the rat, the mouse, whatever they want to call it.
Speaker 1: With the rat?
Speaker 2: I don't know what it was.
Speaker 1: It's the mouse, actually (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, it's there.  I'll get around to it.
Speaker 1: That's it, exactly.
Speaker 2: I got one now in the house, but I haven't, you know, done anything with it.
Speaker 1: You haven't used it too much?  Did you work in any offices when you came back from Providence [Rhode Island]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I did some things for Joe Louis, you know.
Speaker 1: What kind of things?
Speaker 2: He had a record company, Triangle company [Triangle Records], out in Los Angeles [California].  I helped him, because I took care of his part.  And another man named--you know, I can't remember all their names.
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: But this other man had a division in the same company. When Joe had the record company, he had merchandising and different things.  And it was three of them there that I took care of until I could get another job in show business.
Story_ID: 544879
Speaker 1: And when I went to one of those big white hotels in Miami [Florida], you know what I did?  I left those jobs (laughter) and went, went with the show business (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To, to go dancing?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Well, did you do any dancing during the war [World War II, WWII] on the USO [United Service Organizations] tour?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Did you do any dancing during the war as a part of--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --any of the USO tours?
Speaker 1: No, I kept that up until it was over.  Everything I did, I did it until--you know, when it ended, it ended, and I wasn't angry and they weren't angry.  And I have letters to prove that everyone I worked for appreciated me, because I did the job to the best of my ability.  I tried to do it right, so that I would be invited back.  And right today, if I wanted that job back, I could have it.  They sent me a beautiful letter asking me why did I leave?
Speaker 2: This is Joe Louis' company [Triangle Records]?
Speaker 1: Driving.
Speaker 2: The taxicab driving?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay, tell me.
Speaker 1: I can get that job anytime I want.
Speaker 2: I would love to ride in a cab with you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I wasn't bad.
Speaker 2: I would imagine that you were--
Speaker 1: I wasn't bad.
Speaker 2: --quite good.
Speaker 1: I never had an accident in New York [New York], no, no.  I turned around downtown on Houston [Street], and a very big cop was standing there looking right at me (laughter).  And I went to make my turn, and he says, "Oh, no you don't."  (Laughter) He didn't give me a ticket, either.
Speaker 2: Good.
Speaker 1: He started giggling, too.  He started laughing at me, because I just went on about my business.  I say, "Well, I got to finish the turn, you know, and then I'll talk with you."  (Laughter) "I'll finish my turn, and we'll talk."  I didn't do that no more, but I remember it, you know.  I mean, you can't drive unless you do something wrong sometime, you know.  People do, you know.  But I got the best record I think.  They gave me a license that lasted me eight or ten years.  I don't have to go back to the DMV [Department of Motor Vehicles] to be renewed and all that, because I had a good record, see.  And I got it right now; I keep it.  My driver's license means a lot to me, and my passport.  Those two things mean a lot to me.  I keep them correct, because you got to have ID, and both of those things tell you who I am and what I'm about.
Story_ID: 544880
Speaker 1: When you were working with Joe Louis and working at that division [Triangle Records], can you tell us maybe some anecdotes about Joe Louis (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it was fun.  He--yeah, oh, I loved him.  He was from Detroit [Michigan], that's where I met him, you know.  We all knew him, because he was lovable.  And he was right there, you could touch him all the time.  Yeah, I--he liked me because I was full of fun, you know.  I could tell him jokes.  I could bang on the piano, I could do a lot of things to keep him company.  So he took me with him, you know, when he'd go to work out; he had to go and work out.  I went to these places with him--French Lick Springs, Indiana [French Lick Springs Hotel, French Lick, Indiana], and up here where he went in Jersey [Lakewood, New Jersey].  I can't think of the name of it, that little place where he went all the time here; I went there.  I went everywhere he was.  I got pictures to show you what all I was doing then, you know.
Speaker 1: You brought them with you?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Excellent.
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't have them with me.
Speaker 1: No, not today?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not going to have them tomorrow either.  That stuff is all packed up.
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: You have no idea what I've gone through in the last two years or so.
Story_ID: 544881
Speaker 1: It's all messed up, you know.  Because the first place, they were trying to get us out of the building.
Speaker 2: You spoke about--
Speaker 1: They can't get me out.  That would be against the law to put me out on the street.
Speaker 2: Can you repeat where, what building it is that you live in?
Speaker 1: Where I was living?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: When?
Speaker 2: You said that you were living in the building that they were trying to remove you from.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, they always trying to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I thought that that building had a name.
Speaker 1: Because the man that owns the building was, he was the best landlord I ever had.  He owned the building, he was good to us.  He'd come and have sessions with us about it and all that.  And when he got sick, old and sick and getting ready to die, he came back and sat down and told us all, "I got seventy-five apartments in this building.  I've kept it up so far.  My wife and I both are too old now to take care of it.  So, if each one of you give me a thousand dollars, you can have it, it's yours."  Well, they came up with all kinds of excuses.  Pardon me.
Speaker 2: Quite okay.
Speaker 1: "Well, I don't have any children.  Well, I'm not interested in owning it."
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: And I got tired of hearing it; really, I did, you know.  I said, "Okay, if that's the way you feel about it.  If you don't want nothing, that's the way it is."  They don't want anything--people that work for a living and get paid on a Saturday, and Monday they can't get to work because they're hanging over.  And really, that's what's wrong with us.
Speaker 2: Did you buy your--
Speaker 1: So, I'm not going to talk about all that.  So I don't want you to put none of that crap down.
Speaker 2: I don't have it down.
Speaker 1: But it's the truth.
Speaker 2: Did you purchase your apartment?  Or did all of you had to do it?  Or none of you?
Speaker 1: Oh, everybody had to move, get out of it once or twice to let them--better conditions, you know.  Because places deteriorate, just like your shoes or your clothes, or anything, and things just fall apart, you know.  And the house was famous, because there was nothing there but artists from all over the world.
Speaker 2: Tell me the name of the house again.
Speaker 1: 270 St. Nicholas Avenue [New York, New York].  That's where I live.  I've been there for over fifty years.
Story_ID: 544882
Speaker 1: Did you travel the world after--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) the war [World War II, WWII] was over?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I was, I was--
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about your travels?
Speaker 2: It's the agents that I had--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --who were alive, you know, when I was younger.  They'd send me everywhere.  And because I was easy to, you know, pick up languages and things--I could sing in their languages--I'd get with them.  And overnight, I got them, you know.
Speaker 1: What countries did you go to?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Which countries did you visit?  You told us about Germany earlier.
Speaker 2: I went to Paris [France], I went to--I went all over.  You name it, I went.
Speaker 1: You went.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Which was your favorite?  Or which do you remember most fondly?
Speaker 2: Fondly?  Sweden.
Speaker 1: Why come?
Speaker 2: Because I was invited there, and they took me there.  That's where I spent last Christmas.  And I flew from Newark [Newark Liberty International Airport, Newark, New Jersey] to Brussels [Belgium].  It was nice, the trip was, so far, until I got to Brussels and found out they had an American lady working in there to search me.  I said, "But they searched me in New York [New York].  Why you got to search me here?  I don't have my luggage here, you know."  I said, "It's en route, it's in transit, you know."  She's an American lady, and she embarrassed me on that issue.  Because she called a man from the other side of the airport to come over there and see what I had in my bag, my carry on bag.  And I don't have to tell you what was in there at my age, because I guess you could guess.  But she was out there waving it all around in front of all these men and all.  And it's not like in America.  They wouldn't do that here in America, because they got better sense.  Somebody would have told her, "You don't do that."  Well, she did, and she wasn't through until she went down in there and found my straightening comb and hot irons use and stuff I use, you know.  When I'm situated on a job, I have all this stuff to take care of myself, you know.  All these things are personal; you don't broadcast this to the world.  Women have certain things they do, and certain things they have to have, you know.  You understand?  That's, that's life.
Story_ID: 544883
Speaker 1: Will you tell us about how you joined up with the Silver Belles?
Speaker 2: I came from Europe to stay home.  I left my trunks over there in Paris [France] at the Wells Fargo [Wells Fargo and Company] (laughter).  I came here and got a job and got my trunks home, and I kept working as a barmaid.
Speaker 1: Which bars did you work in?
Speaker 2: I'm not going to tell you--
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: --'cause they don't even exist anymore.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's why I need to hear them, so that someone who's watching like me who hasn't heard of them--
Speaker 2: They were fun, because all the fun people, that's where they would run to.
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: To drink, you know.
Speaker 1: Tell me--
Speaker 2: People who liked to drink.  I never did.
Speaker 1: I recognize--
Speaker 2: I don't drink.
Speaker 1: I notice that.
Speaker 2: And I don't smoke.
Speaker 1: But which bars did you work at?  Which bars did you work at, and what are the names of some other bars that were popular?
Speaker 2: Well, I lived right across the street from a little bar.  It used to Nat's bar [New York, New York].  And I enjoyed it for a couple of years.  I got my trunks home and I got out of debt, you know.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Everything went just, okay, you know.  And, and, and Cleo [Cleo Hayes] was working at the Flash Inn [New York, New York]--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --up there.  Cleo was a barmaid up there over fifty years.  She stayed.  I didn't have that kind of staying power.  Because if somebody offered me something, to go to Florida or to go anywhere, I said, "Okay," (laughter).  And I'd pack a bag and I was on my way, because that was what I wanted.  See, when you're an artist, this is what you will do.  You will leave any job to go do what you like to do, you know.  That's the way it is.  So, I went about in the world, because I had the right agents here.  One saw me downtown; I went there with a friend of mine.  He had a beautiful act, he was a great artist.  He was part of a team called Howell and Bowser [Bert Howell and Buddy Bowser].  It would have to be somebody up in age to know, to have seen them.  I worked with them, and I ended up being his partner when one of them went to Europe and stayed; he didn't come back.  So the girl he was going to marry, she married somebody else and kept moving on, you know.  And I joined his act, you know, because it was helpful to me, because he taught me a lot.  He put me on the road for comedy and everything.  So, I did some.
Speaker 1: And you did some tap dancing?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was good at it.  I got jobs tap dancing all over the United States.  I worked all the--you know, like Ohio, West Virginia--small towns, but I was working, you know, using my talent.  And I was able to join a lot of boys who lost their wives to other men on the road.  And they had contracts to fulfill, so I would learn their act and do it with them so they could make the money and go, and I could go my way.  I did that a lot to help them, you know.
Story_ID: 544884
Speaker 1: Because the opening on this tape that you're going to buy--I hope you buy it.
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: That will be me tap dancing, I did it right here.  And a girl took the pictures, you know, and I treated her really bad.  I don't know why she wanted to photograph me, because I was awful.  I just wasn't nice at all.  First place, she wanted to get in my house to look through all those pictures and all this.  I could not--I don't want to do that, you know, and I wouldn't.  So I was terrible to her, but I soon relented and I let her have them.  And you know what?  She turned out to be my best friend.
Speaker 2: And she did a nice job.
Speaker 1: She's a sweet girl, yeah, she's sweet.  Heather [Heather Lyn MacDonald], she lives downtown on 12th Street [New York, New York], way down.  But it's funny how I met her.  She followed me with this camera, and I'd say, "Girl, go away with that camera.  I don't want people following me around looking at me."  Like, you know, that's no fun to me.  It might be for some girl that wants that publicity--posing and--I don't want it.  I didn't want that, because I don't want people to know who I am and what I can do, you know.  I wasn't out there advertising, and I didn't really want it.  But she stayed with it, she never stopped.  And all the rest of them was telling me, "Fay [HistoryMaker Fay Ray], she's going to get you.  She'll get you sooner or later."  And she did.  (Laughter) She followed me to the bitter end, she did. And I'm on it, good fashion.
Speaker 2: And that's included in the documentary, 'Been Rich All My Life.'
Speaker 1: 'Been Rich All My Life.' That's it, she asked me to help her think of a name for it.
Speaker 2: Why did you choose that one?
Speaker 1: I didn't choose it.  She did it on her own.  And I told her, I said, "You had, you had to be thinking of me."
Story_ID: 544885
Speaker 1: Because I've often said I've been in about just every European city.  I've been all over the world, and I mean I've met lovely people, lovely, everywhere.  And I mean, I got books with addresses.  I know I may never see them again, but they wanted me to come back, you know.  Like, people would come and take me--they'd sweep me up, take me.  I left here at Newark Airport [Newark Liberty International Airport, Newark, New Jersey], and I ended up in Brussels [Belgium] for Christmas.  And I said I didn't know a thing about it.  I had refused the trip.  And they said, "Oh, yes, you're going, because I got the tickets."  Look, the girl had the tickets, a young girl.  She liked me and took up with me, you know, and I couldn't get rid of her.  She had the tickets and everything.  I couldn't say no, so I went with her.  From Brussels, I went to Copenhagen [Denmark].  From Copenhagen, I went to Stockholm [Sweden].  And I had worked all these places, so I knew people everywhere.
Speaker 2: This was just last year?
Speaker 1: This was last Christmas.  She thinks I'm going this year, but I'm not.  That was beautiful.  When I got to Stockholm, I told her, "Look, look, look.  I'm tired of these planes.  I'm, I'm, I'm not flying anymore."  I thought she'd say well, "We'll go home."  Well, she didn't.  She said, "Okay, we'll go on the train."  I said, "Oh, yeah.  Where?  Show me."  Girl, they got the most beautiful trains you ever saw in your life, or you will ever see.  And cleanliness, the word is clean.  She lives in a town, I don't know whether it's north, east, or west of Stockholm.  But it's not far, because I went back to Stockholm that way, you know, by myself.  I met her there, and we came on back to the United States.  But I went to this town where she took me.  She lived in Sweden.  And we went on a train, and it was a beautiful train.  Everything was so clean--the platforms, the garbage pails--everything.  It's not like here--dirty, and garbage all everywhere in the streets, and people dipping their hands in muck to eat, or to get the bottles to sell, whatever they do, you know.  It don't exist over there.  The story of this little town, it's in Sweden.  In the 1800s, it burned to the ground.  They rebuilt this little town.  The houses are all stone.  It's just beautiful.  You never saw anything like it.  It's just where she took me, to her family.  Her mother, her sister, and her brother met me and welcomed me.  Each one had their own home and their own Christmas trees, and under there were gifts for me.  For me.  I didn't even know these people.  How nice.  That thing never happened to me like that.  But this is the kind of Christmas I had last year.  But this year I don't think I'm going with her.  I don't want to go back; I, I don't want to do that over again.  I, I have to do something nice for them, you know.  Because I went to each one's home, just beautiful.
Story_ID: 544886
Speaker 1: And she's a beautiful girl, and she came to work here because she wanted to see America.  Her father's American, and she went to England from Sweden when she finished college, and she went there to school and played with the basketball team.  Then she decided she wanted to come to America, so her father had gotten her a passport.  She's got a dual passport, Sweden and America, because he was an American.  And she came here and she met me.  And god, I couldn't get rid of her.  It's the truth.  And she said, "I want to be in show business."  I said, "What are you going to do in it?"  I said, "You can't sing.  You can't dance.  You can't act.  What are you going to do?"  I said, "You're going to get up and go to work, just like what you're doing right now."  (Laughter) They sent her here from England on a job, and she's still on it.  She's in California right now taking care of business.  You know, I told her, I said, "You got to get a smaller job, something that won't be so confining to you, you know.  Then you'll have time to take lessons, because you have to learn something."  Now, if I go down there for an audition and the man sees me, "Oh, she'll be fine for the part."  This is what he'll say.  "Can you dance?"  That's the first thing he's going to say.  "Yes, I can dance."  That's fine, I'm hired.   He's going to look for somebody else now for another part, you know.  But she's going to get up there and say, "No, I don't know how to--." Unh-uh, you're not going to even get a tryout.  They're not going to even interview you, because you can't do nothing.  And I told her how important it was.  So I got busy, and I taught her one chorus.  And one chorus is you can sing a song straight through and you can dance that whole chorus.  I taught her that much.  She got that much now, and I told her, I said, "Do it every day.  Do it, keep doing it.  Do it until you just get sick and tired of it."  I helped her, I did my part.  I tried to help her, you know.  But she's here, she's doing it, she's working for a company here that they sent here.
Story_ID: 544887
Speaker 1: You started to tell us about how you joined with the Silver Belles.  And you said that--
Speaker 2: I can--
Speaker 1: --you all were working at different bars.  So, will you tell us about how you came together?
Speaker 2: Cleo [Cleo Hayes], from that bar up there [Flash Inn, New York, New York], she's the one I stayed with most of the time in New York [New York].  So she wanted me to join, because she was with them, you know.  And I said, "Yeah, all right.  It'll keep me doing something, you know."  Because I didn't know what it was going to be, and it turned out to be really nice.  We do things at all the colleges here.  I've been in all the colleges.  I went to LaGuardia College [LaGuardia Community College, Long Island City, New York] two or three times, you know, with the same group, with them.  And we have everything going for us.  We have a special day in October in Connecticut at the, at the college, you know.  And it was just a nice working thing.  Cleo just don't work up there anymore now.  She goes sometimes and sit, you know, and talk with them because she knows them so well.  But she, I don't think she's going to work anymore.  She's in her nineties, you know.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And the rest of them, they're getting older.  Time goes by.  Time's flying, you know.  You look around, you've got another birthday.  I mean every time you turn around now, it's going to come faster.  That's the way it's going to seem to you, because it will.  Me too, darling, I'm not above it.  (Laughter) But I became a Silver Belle.  So now, you've got to get that tape.  Now they got DVDs, that's where you can see the thing ['Been Rich All My Life'].  They got tapes, and they got, they got everything on it.  And I told her [Heather Lyn MacDonald], I said, "You thought of that name, because you know me so well now."  And I didn't want to do anything, but I did meet a lot of people in the world.  So I'm glad you chose us, because it fit me perfect.
Story_ID: 544888
Speaker 1: Can you tell us some stories, maybe some of the stories from the documentary ['Been Rich All My Life'] about the group of you dancing together? Maybe some (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I love it, because that documentary will tell you all about us [Silver Belles], because they just talk about how they feel on it.  I didn't, I didn't have nothing to say much, because I wasn't that sure I would like it, you know.  You may like yourself at certain times, but when you got to come over with people, you might not want to do that, you know.  So, a lot of people stand up in the wings of the theater and look at us and say, "I can do that, I can do that."  But you put them on out there, and you'll see what happens.  They'll either flop or they'll just walk off.  They, they--it's not as easy as it looks, to go out and face an audience of hundreds of people sitting there looking at you.  You better do something when you get up there.  You better tell them something that they want to hear.  That's how it is.  You have to tell them the truth (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you have a repertoire of dances that you all do?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we have--
Speaker 1: Do--or, are you still making up new things?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we do things.  Yeah, we sure do.
Speaker 1: Will you tell us about perhaps one of your favorite performances?
Speaker 2: Well, we do it here a lot when they have parties, you know.  People from the boys club, they give parties here [Cotton Club, New York, New York].  People that come in here and, you know, he rents the place out to them.  It belongs to him, J.B. [John Beatty], and they have, every one of those trays are full of food, all kind of food in here. And it's packed, it's crowded all the time.  That's the reason I asked you had you been upstairs.
Speaker 1: I have not been upstairs.
Speaker 2: Oh, it's a nightclub up there, too.  (Gesture) It's, that stair go all the way up.  You're steady walking around until you get up there, you know.
Speaker 1: And can you see on the television, perhaps, the show from down here upstairs?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  They'll show it to you, it's really nice.  But we rehearse here all the time.
Story_ID: 544889
Speaker 1: We met your manager, Geri Kennedy [HistoryMaker Geraldine Rhodes Kennedy], and spoke with her at this same location [Cotton Club, New York, New York] before (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Geri was the one that asked me to do this, you know.  So I said, "All right, I'll do it."  But the rest of them, I don't think you'll be able to--because Cleo [Cleo Hayes] is not too well.  She's in her nineties.  The other girl is--
Speaker 1: Marion?  Marion Coles?
Speaker 2: Marion, she's not too well, but she would have done it if she felt like it.  But I don't think she feels that good right now.  She's got a pacemaker, but that's not the thing that bothers her now.  It's her foot, you know.
Speaker 1: And what about [HistoryMaker] Elaine Ellis?
Speaker 2: Elaine isn't too well.  So that's just about at the end.  You would have a good thing, to have this thing among your--
Speaker 1: We've already spoken about it.  I'm going to get the DVD ['Been Rich All My Life']--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --so that I can see in particular your opening tap dancing act.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But I do want to ask you if you feel like bringing the Silver Belles together after, you know, your initial togetherness--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as a support organization.  But in the eighties, when you decided to start dancing again, do you feel like it enhanced and prolonged everyone's life?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And if so, how so?  Can you talk about that a little bit?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because it's good for people to still exercise and to still love music and to still dance, if they can.  If they can't, try.  They'll find fun doing it, you know, they will, and we tell them that all the time.  You'd be surprised at the old people that will come see us do it.  They say, "Oh, I'm going--yeah, I'm going to get with the kids tonight when they come over, you know.  And we, I'm going to get--." I told them I still go to discotheques.
Speaker 1: I heard that you dance to hip hop music, and that you enjoy many different types.
Speaker 2: Oh, listen.  I get right in the middle of them when I go out.  Right now, if I go where they are and they're doing it, I get right in the middle.  Because I want to know about it, too.  That's the truth.
Speaker 1: And a little bit later I'm hoping you're going to show me how to do the shimmy sham.
Speaker 2: Oh, the shim sham, you should know that--
Speaker 1: The shim sham.
Speaker 2: --so you could get up there with them.
Speaker 1: I don't, so I need to learn.
Speaker 2: They always ask the people, "Come up and do it with us," and they do it.  And it's a form of it that you can do.  But it's really a tap dancing routine, that's if you're going to tap it, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm going to try it out.
Speaker 2: But we don't tap it, we just stand and do it, you know, with our feet.
Story_ID: 544890
Speaker 1: Now, my understanding is that you all have some, some new members now, like Karen Callaway Williams.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I know that you worked with [HistoryMaker] Mercedes Ellington.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So are you opening the group to new members, so that it continues on?
Speaker 2: They love us, and they're always there, you know.  Duke Ellington's granddaughter is very good at organizing and rehearsing and getting it together for us.  And Karen is a very good tap dancer now, very good, she's strong.  She's carrying it on, see, that's good.  So this is what we try to show in all our things we do.  And when we opened at the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] for the first time as the Silver Belles, this time Karen was with us, and so was Mercedes Ellington.  And I never had anyone to make over us as much as they did.  And these were our people, looks like they come from out of the woodwork.  I don't know where they came from, but they were there, man, they supported us.  And that was something.  There were times when they didn't even get a hand in there, you know, they just did it.  But it turned out to be nice, you know, it turned out to be nice.  And I love being with them, you know.  I don't know how far we'll get to go with it, because we're all up in age, you know.
Story_ID: 544891
Speaker 1: Well, what are your future plans right now?
Speaker 2: Right now, I'm just doing this, you know.  And sooner or later I guess I'll get into something, you know.  There are many things I can get into, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you have any ideas?
Speaker 2: Oh, I have lots.
Speaker 1: Can I hear two?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Can I hear one or two?
Speaker 2: Well, I love comedy.  And I will add the hip hop with it, you know.  I'm not saying I'll be as good as they are, but I will give them my part of it, you know.  See, let me see you come up and do that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: You know, I, I'll be closer to 'em.
Story_ID: 544892
Speaker 1: And when your career is finished, what do you want to be remembered about you?
Speaker 2: When I'm through with?
Speaker 1: When you're done.
Speaker 2: Well, about all the things that I went through, you know, if they have that documentary ['Been Rich All My Life'] or even be able to read anything that I've written about it, you know.  Because there's much more to write about it.  So the other things that I do, I get to talk about it, you know, things that I wouldn't even mention now.  (Laughter) But it was one heck of a life, that's all I can say.  And I met just everybody that was in it, you know.  And now they're now all dying or they have passed, most of the musicians.  You know, I miss them.  We had a priest over there on Lexington [Avenue], on 54th Street at that church who was crazy about all the performers.
Speaker 1: What street did you say? 54th and Lex?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, St. Peter's [St. Peter's Church, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: I'm not sure about--
Speaker 2: That church.
Speaker 1: --ministers from there.
Speaker 2: There were artists that died here in New York [New York], and he saw that they passed through there.
Speaker 1: At St. Peter's?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  And they had things in honor of the dead person, you know, always did.  You could go there and see them for the last time, you know, you could say goodbye.  The church was always packed.  Lots of artists went through there, because people were crazy about some of them, you know.  And they're gone, that's it.  Yeah, I would like for them to remember that I did my best, and especially if all the stuff is documented, you know.  Let them hear it, let them read it, let them know life isn't as easy as they think it can be.  I mean, you have to work at it, you know.  God gives you everything to work with, so it's up to you to make use of it, and do his work continuously.  Don't stop because you found something that was not right.  Or, that's not the thing to do.  You've got to be right.  You've got to do it right.  You've got to live good so people will be proud of you, you know.  It's a lot that young people can get from olders, if they choose.  Some of them don't want to listen.  They don't want to hear nothing you got to say, because they say you're old, you're outdated, you don't know what you're talking about.  You know that.  "You don't know what you're talking about," you know.  They talk back, you know.  They won't get up and give you a seat on the subway.  People look at my hair, white as snow, and wouldn't give me a seat.  I stand up there and rock 'til I get where I'm going.  They ain't going to give me no seat.  But they sure honor you in other countries--in Mexico and anywhere I've been.  Honey, they get up and let you sit down, that's right.  But they won't do that here.  Oh, these kids--you'll stand up.  They say, you don't work like I do.  Stand up like a man.  You work like a man, you're getting a man's salary.  Stand up."  That's the way it is. (Points off camera) Where did he come from?
Speaker 1: He wants to be part of the interview.
Speaker 2: He's over there after you.  Sees something sweet he found.
Speaker 1: He understands how important our talk is today.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We want to thank you for taking the time to talk with us today.
Speaker 2: Listen, I appreciate you, too.  I thank you for putting up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I want to thank you for persevering.
Speaker 2: --with me and having to come sit and talk to me all day (laughter).
Speaker 1: Fantastic.  I enjoyed it quite a bit.
Speaker 2: I hope she brings me, I hope she brings me a smoothie when she comes back.
Speaker 1: We're going to make sure that you get a shake, even if she doesn't come with it right now.
Speaker 2: That will help me get back my twenty pounds.
Speaker 1: Fantastic, we will work on that right now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and yeah, well, if you ever hear or see me anywhere, come to see me.
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: You know, 'cause I'm still around.
Story_ID: 544893
Speaker 1: I'm still over there by Magic's theater [AMC Magic Johnson Harlem 9, New York, New York].  Do you know where that is?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.
Speaker 1: That's where I live, over there.  It's not the same kind of neighborhood, it's--the neighborhood has changed.  There's a lot of foreigners now, you know.  We got a lot of people, and the black people are insulting them a lot, because they always remind them that they're immigrants, and this and that.  Well, you have to come from somewhere, you know.  So, why be mad at anybody because they're immigrants?  That's not right.  Why are you angry with them?  Because they don't see things your way?  Give them a chance, that's all you got to do.  Or, be a certain way that will--you'll be blessed for it, for helping them and showing them.  Because I show people the way all the time when they ask me.  Who am I to refuse?  People had to help me.  I wouldn't have made it this far if they hadn't.  And these were all big families that I was a part of all the time.  So maybe one day they'll hear about me, you know, and say, where am I?  Because Marion [Marion Coles], who I work with now, she, her daughter [Isabelle Coles Dunbar] tells me all the time, she says, "I wish that we had known you when I was born."  She said, "Because I want to be just like you."  She'd tell me that, you know, Marion's daughter.  And I told her, "Stop saying that in front of your mother.  You know, she's jealous, you know.  She don't want to hear you say you want to be just like me, you know.  Maybe be like her."  She's a teacher, and she does nice things, you know.  She had a good marriage.  She married one of the best dancers we had, Honi Coles [Charles Coles].  Everybody knew him.  He did those Broadway shows, and he's very good, he worked with the best.  But the other girls, they were just line dancers, you know, they had good jobs.  They were pretty girls when they were young; all of them had something.  They were hot, as they say.  Well, at that time you were hot, you know.  I tell them all the time, "Boy, I was hot then."  (Laughter) But I'm not hot anymore.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, you are.  (Laughter) I hate to tell you, but indeed you are.
Story_ID: 544894
Speaker 1: (Fay Ray teaches interviewer Adrienne Jones the shim sham dance).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Story_ID: 544895
Speaker 1: (Fay Ray dances).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Wonderful.
Speaker 1: Fantastic.
Speaker 2: See how you use your feet?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (Fay Ray dances).
Speaker 1: It's easy. I could teach it to you in two days.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: (Fay Ray dances).
Speaker 1: Fantastic.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) She almost did it, she almost did the first one.
