Story_ID: 71229
Speaker 1: Mr. Rhem, can you give me your name and spell it?
Speaker 2: Sylvester O. Rhem.  S-Y-L-V-E-S-T-E-R.  O is for O'Neal.  O-apostraphe-N-E-A-L.  Rhem: R-H-E-M.
Speaker 1: Any nicknames?
Speaker 2: Well, sometimes they used to call me Sly (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Why did they call you that?
Speaker 2: I don't know, just, I didn't do anything to deserve that name, but some fellows would call me Sly, I guess short for Sylvester.
Speaker 1: Oh.  Your birth date?
Speaker 2: November the 19th, 1929.
Speaker 1: City and state of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Your parents' names.
Speaker 2: My mother was Martha Wilson, was her maiden name, and my father was Sylvester O'Neal and then my mother married Edward Rhem.
Speaker 1: Then, birth place of your mom.
Speaker 2: She was born in Little Rock, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: And your father?
Speaker 2: He was from, O'Neal was from Little Rock, Arkansas, too.  My stepfather was from Youngstown, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Your sisters and brothers in birth order.
Speaker 2: My sister, she's deceased.  Well, my brother's the oldest, Lonnie Rhem.  L-O-N-N-I-E, Rhem, R-H-E-M.  And my sister who's deceased was Lois Marie Rhem, who I named.  L-O-I-S, M-A-R-I-E, Rhem, R-H-E-M.
Story_ID: 71230
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well, I always craved beef stew.  I don't know why, I love beef stew.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year.
Speaker 2: Fall.  I think I like the change of the colors of the leaves.  I used to love the smell of the smoke when you had to, could burn leaves.  I wish, I miss those days.
Speaker 1: And your favorite color.
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: Hmmm, it has changed.  I used to say Freeport, Bahamas, but now I think I'd rather go on a cruise, take cruises.
Speaker 1: And, what is your favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: It's a good question.  When I was working with the Department of Model City CCO, I used to always say, "A good rep don't get wet."  That was my field staff and I was saying they were a good rep if they wouldn't get wet out in the rain.  So, that's a phrase that's stuck with some of my colleagues who I worked with in those days.
Story_ID: 71231
Speaker 1: Tell me, what is the most vivid memory from your childhood, your earliest childhood that you remember?
Speaker 2: I guess I can probably go back when I was about four or five, I was staying at 4338 Forrestville [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  And the sound truck used to come around playing [sings] "the music goes around and around, woah, and it come out here."  And I can recall when Joe Louis would win how everyone would come out and be beating on the old tubs and it used to always amaze me how they would just come out and so delighted that he had won. And I had one little school mate, I mean a neighborhood friend, she was Evelyn Bell.  And we used to make mud pies together.  And I had to always taste the mud pies.  I didn't want to, but she would say, "You have to, because you're the man of the house."  (Laughter) I can recall those days.
Story_ID: 71232
Speaker 1: Okay.  Describe your mother to me.
Speaker 2: Beautiful person.  Hard worker.  My father passed in late 30's [1930s] and she worked all the time after that.  She started at the Hines, Cook County Hospital [Illinois] as a nurse, as a nurse's aide.  And then she moved to the [Edward Hines, Jr.] Veteran's Hospital [Illinois] and served over at Huron Hospital where she retired from.  And she worked in the men's medical division and all the patients just loved her, even the neighbors now, veterans who were in the hospital during that time, always had good things to say about her.  She was just a very kind person and when I was a kid when the lights would come on, I could hear her coming out, she would come out, "Sylvester, it's time to come into the house."  (Laughter) And all the kids around the block would be remarking, would mock what she was calling me.  But she was kind, did the best she could for us kids in those days.  We are proud of her, and miss her a lot.
Speaker 1: Is there a particular event or memory in your relating to your mother directly that you, that stands out for you, that stands out?
Speaker 2: Well, she was always someone I could go to when I had troubles making decisions, she would always give me a Christian viewpoint of things, and I would go from there.
Story_ID: 71233
Speaker 1: What do you remember most about your father?
Speaker 2: I remember most about my father how he would go away for a length of time and I later found out that he would be out trying to find a job.  And he would do a little hoboing.  And my mother would be so glad when he would come back.  And that's about the only thing I remember, and also, he had an Essex, 1931 Essex.  (Laughter) And I used to want to drive that car, and I would get in it when he wasn't around and play with the steering wheel.  I remember those things about him.  That's about all, because he passed when I was quite young.   My stepfather, I didn't know my real father.
Story_ID: 71234
Speaker 1: Do you know anything about your grandparents, maternal or paternal?
Speaker 2: Yes.  On my mother's side, my grandmother Wilson, I remember her.  She would always take me to the store with her.  We were living at 62nd and Throop [Chicago, Illinois] and we would come to the Englewood Shopping Mall [Chicago, Illinois], and she would buy rock candy.  And would always get me some candy, whatever I would like.  And I was kind of like her little boy that she would like to carry with her.  And she liked for me to comb her hair.  She had nice long, black hair and I would comb her hair for her.
Story_ID: 71235
Speaker 1: Your grandfather?
Speaker 2: My grandfather on my father's side, Edward Rhem, he was a minister in Georgetown, Illinois.  And we would go down there in the summertime and had to stay down there.  They had the outhouses.  (Laughter) And I remember that he would, I didn't go to any of his sermons then, but I know he was, I can picture him, he was a minister.  And my grandmother on the Rhem side, she used to bake bread and he would always love to have her put a lot of butter on his bread.  And, well, it was margarine then.  (Laughter) So I remember he would, the butter, the margarine would be running down off his bread onto the plate.  And it looked so sloppy to me, because I didn't care for it that much.  But those are what I remember about my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Is there any significant stories that perhaps you heard your parents or grandparents talk about that was their experience that you remember stood out for you?
Speaker 2: Not particularly, no, I don't remember that off the top of my head, no.
Speaker 1: What type of child were you?
Speaker 2: Quiet, bashful, that's about it (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Were you the youngest in your family?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: You're the oldest.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.  (Yes.)
Story_ID: 71236
Speaker 1: At what point did you realize you had certain big dreams and aspirations, those that you wanted to hold on to?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I would think that, I always had a dream that I wanted to live on the Gold Coast, up on the North Gold Coast [Chicago, Illinois].  And I can recall when we would drive the outer drive [Lake Shore Drive, Chicago, Illinois], I said, "One day, I'm going to live up here."  And that was my aspiration of doing that, and I did finally make it.
Speaker 1: What was it like growing up in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Oh, we had a great time.  I grew up in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] and it was the home of the athletes, and everyone had to play some sport.  And I was participating in baseball, the usual things that kids done and in those days we were able to play in the school play lots until nine o'clock at night, which I think it was great.  It gave the kids something to do.  And then we had all the block games from shooting marbles, playing with the pegs, with the "niners".  I had a great childhood.  We made all our own scooters out of crates that we had left over from after chopping up wood for the coal stoves.  So, it was a great childhood.  I went to McCosh, it was just fun.  I had a lot of fun, and we used to like to hit home runs over into White City, it was called in those days, on 63rd and South Park.  And it was breaking lots from South Park that it was called.  It's King Drive now [Chicago, Illinois].  All the way to Vernon, and we would try to hit the ball from Vernon all the way over across into the old condemned White City Park.  So that was a lot of fun I used to have.
Story_ID: 71237
Speaker 1: And name your elementary, middle and high schools.
Speaker 2: McCosh grammar school and Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: Grade average?  (Laughter) I, in some subjects I did pretty good.  I guess I was about a C plus.
Speaker 1: Did you like school?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed school.  I enjoyed, I think I enjoyed grammar school more so than high school.  (Laughter) But, I guess the war [World War II] was coming on and a lot of fellows was leaving, going to the service.
Speaker 1: And who were your favorite teachers?
Speaker 2: In high school, or elementary?
Speaker 1: Elementary.
Speaker 2: Elementary, Mrs. Hill in grammar school.  I guess she was my favorite teacher because she would let me do little chores, like go to a, I was captain of the patrol boys and I used to go down to the Chicago Motor Club and pick up the badges and she would let me go to the store, I guess I was spoiled (laughter) by her.  But she was kind and Mrs. Rose was a nice lady.  She lived in the community.  She taught art.  And my music teacher was pretty good.  She was very good.  We had several teachers that lived right in the neighborhood.  So, I had several teachers that I really enjoyed.
Speaker 1: And your teacher that let you go on the errands, what did she teach?
Speaker 2: She was just general, general teacher, yeah, uh huh (yes) she lived out there in Beverly Hills [Beverly, Illinois] as I recall.
Speaker 1: And in high school, did you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: High school, I guess Mr. Burnham, my machine shop teacher, because he made me learn that rule, the ruler.  It was split the, down the 16ths down to the 32nds, and you had to read that rule.  I mean, all parts of it.  And you had to learn all the different laths and the mills in the machine shop.  And I thought that was very interesting.
Speaker 1: Did you ever use any of those talents later?
Speaker 2: Not, you know, yes.  Because I worked at corrugated box factories in my younger days, and being pretty good with the ruler, helping them measure, the corrugated boxes for cutting it up and putting the dyes and pictures on the cover, it paid off.
Story_ID: 71238
Speaker 1: Who most influenced you?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think, who most influenced me.  I don't have any particular one person.  I would think it was different parts of my life that came across various people who helped to give me advice.  Reverend Dunn, who was our pastor at the Church of God at 62nd and Langley or was it 43rd and Prairie [Chicago, Illinois].  He was an inspiration in my life. Later on, Michael Spiotto when I was in the police department.  Deputy Superintendent Reardon.  Later on, [Chicago Third Ward] Alderman Tyrone Kenner, in the political life.  [Representative] Cecil Partee, so it was different ones in my life careers that kind of helped me.
Story_ID: 71239
Speaker 1: When you were in school, how did you spend your time?
Speaker 2: Well, when I wasn't in classroom, I was with my future wife [Rose Rhem] at the time.  We courted during high school, so I didn't have much time.  She was with me, usually we'd walk home from Englewood [High School, Chicago, Illinois] together.  And I would go to her house and come home and do my homework, and back to school.  So I didn't get a chance to, this was from my sophomore year, that's when I met her.  And that's most of who I spent my time with.
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about what it was like when you first met your wife-to-be.
Speaker 2: Yes, as I say, I was bashful, and she was a little more forward and kind of taking me by the hand and saying, "I like you."  So we starting courting, and I used to get the biggest kick out of waiting for her to walk her home from school and to carry her books.  That was quite a walk from Stuart all the way to Langley, 64th and Langley [Chicago, Illinois].  And we married right after we graduated.  Married when we were twenty.  I couldn't even go into a tavern.  (Laughter) We were the first blacks married at Holy Cross Church, 64th and Maryland in 1951.  Two years after I had graduated.
Speaker 1: What kind of work did your [step] father do?
Speaker 2: I don't know just what he done.  Any kind of way to make a living.  He worked at the stockyards, he worked at security.  Various different odds and ends jobs.
Story_ID: 71240
Speaker 1: When you graduated from school, you got married?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to Wilson Junior College [Chicago, Illinois], and I was taking up electrical engineering, that's what I wanted to be and the professor said, "You know, you won't be able to make it being black in this profession."  I can recall those words.  Instead of me continuing, although I was courting Rose [Rhem] at the time, we did get married.  And I'll always remember that statement that he made to me.  I don't know whether that helped me to go ahead and get married, but it did reflect on some of my decisions at that time.  I can recall that.  Because my mother wanted me to go to Tuskeegee [University, Alabama].  But, no, I didn't want to leave home.  I wanted to stay home with my to-be wife.  So that's what I done.  (Laughter) We got married.
Story_ID: 71241
Speaker 1: At what point did you start moving into thinking about politics?  But before you answer that, what was your first job as an adult?
Speaker 2: Leo box factory.  No, no before that, Pepsi Cola.  While I was in school Pepsi Cola was at 63rd and Calumet [Chicago, Illinois].  And I worked there doing it in the summer months.  And then I would leave there, I was working two jobs, International Harvester [Company] on the four to twelve [o'clock] shift.  Those are my first jobs.  Oh, wait a minute, before that, Walgreens.  Walgreens at 63rd and South Park [King Drive, Chicago, Illinois].  (Laughter) Yeah.  I was making thirty-five cents an hour.  (Laughter) During the summer months.  And I worked at Stop and Shop at the school running the elevator, freight elevator.  Then, that's where I first started. Yeah.  Walgreens, then Stop and Shop and then Pepsi Cola during the summer months, and then National Harvester.  My first full time job after school was Leo Box Factory.  That's where I learned to make the corrugated boxes and things.  And from there I went to the post office.
Speaker 1: And at what point did you decide you were going back to school?
Speaker 2: Well, I went back several times, but I never, you know, really, I went to a trade school, couple of trade schools.  I went to Real Estate for Dearborn Realty School and obtained my salesman license.  And it was later on in when I was in Model Cities CCO program that Irving Franz encouraged all of us administrators to go back to school.  And that's when I entered the DePaul University under the School for New Learning.  Using your life experience.
Story_ID: 71242
Speaker 1: You married and you were working at the box company going back and forth to school.  And now, politics is starting to creep in?
Speaker 2: Well, politics came into play, I guess, when I made twenty-one, I started to vote.  Oh, I voted since I was old enough to vote, and I knew my precinct captains, even then.  I wasn't active in politics until I guess when I moved to my, 74th and Evans [Chicago, Illinois], I became a member of the Young Democrats.  It was the Sixth Ward. At that time Gene [Mayor Eugene] Sawyer, a former mayor, Gene Sawyer, was our precinct captain and I think that's when I began to get into politics, to think about politics.  I was working in there as assistant precinct captain.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: That was in 19, it was in 53 [1953], 54 [1954], somewhere around in there, 1953, 1954.  And I used to ring the doorbells and pass out literature at election time.  I never worked on the polls, on voting day, but during that, I would always go around and pass out the campaign, I mean the literature.  And when [Chicago Third Ward] Alderman Tyrone Kenner became alderman, he and I knew each other from the police department.  I came down to the Third Ward and started the volunteers for him.  And that's, I was the president of the volunteers and that's when I became more involved in the politics, in the Third Ward.  And when the former mayor, Harold Washington, went to Congress, I was selected to go to Springfield.  Jim [James C.] Taylor moved to the [Illinois] Senate and I went to the [Illinois] House [of Representatives].  I was appointed to finish out the term.  And that's how my political life started, with the Third Ward.
Speaker 1: Tell us when you were selected, tell us how that came about.
Speaker 2: Well, the five ward committeemen of that legislative district, which was the 26th Legislative District, had to come together and vote you into that, and their vote weighted on their electoral number of votes that they had at the last general election.  And I had to make my presentation as to why I wanted to be an alderman, I mean, why I wanted to be a state representative to these committeemen, and they voted to put me, to appoint me to finish out the term that was left by then [later Mayor] Harold Washington, [Illinois] Senator Harold Washington.
Speaker 1: How much time was left?
Speaker 2: I had the full, I missed one month of coming in at the beginning of the term.
Speaker 1: So, that was good, you didn't have to start campaigning.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: What was it like, your first early months in the [Illinois] House [of Representatives], days, weeks.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, it takes a good term to learn your way around Springfield, and learn your way to the capitol.  I think I spent the first six months trying to find my way around through the tunnel.  They have a tunnel there that you can go through.  And just learning the nuances of the General Assembly.  It was quite an experience.  I had great help from my colleagues then.  Senator Emil Jones and [Illinois Secretary of State] Jesse White and [Taylor] Pouncey, and several more.  They all kind of helped me through those trying months of learning what it was to be a legislator.
Story_ID: 71243
Speaker 1: Is there any experience that sticks out?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yes.  Yes.  I can recall my first bill.  (Laughter) It was a circuit breaker for senior citizens.  And after I made my opening statement of Sylvester Rhem, Representative from the 26th District [Illinois], I'm introducing this bill, and I froze (laughter) in the middle of my presentation.  I just froze completely and I can recall that [HM] Larry Bullock, Representative Bullock, stepped up and taking the mike and completing my first bill for me.  (Laughter) And then the vote went off.  Everybody was saying, "No, no, yes, no, yes, no."  And finally said, "First bill," and they all voted yes for it.   But I was so embarrassed and so afraid, I really wanted to leave Springfield [Illinois].  (Laughter) Yes, I froze right in the middle of my presentation.
Speaker 1: But you were glad your bill was passed.
Speaker 2: Yes, it passed through the [Illinois] House [of Representatives] and over to the [Illinois] Senate.
Speaker 1: Did it make it through the Senate?
Speaker 2: Yes, it made it through the Senate, yes, and the government, yes.  My first bill.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that bill, what did it do for the people?
Speaker 2: It was a circuit breaker bill that would, was dealing with the senior citizens checks.  I don't remember all the particular details of it at this time, but that's what it was primarily concerning.
Story_ID: 71244
Speaker 1: Now, as you got more acclimated to the [Illinois] House [of Representatives], what things did you start to like and dislike about being a state representative?
Speaker 2: Well, there is nothing that I disliked about it, that I can say.  It was all educational for me.  And one of my greatest experiences was with I introduced a Casino Resolution Bill [1981].  It was a resolution at that time, where I thought that we should have a casino enterprise in the, well, my bill would have been for a city of over five hundred thousand people would have casino.  And my dream was to have it at Navy Pier, the casino.  And like I said, it passed the House, but it failed in the Senate.  Later, you know now, we do have casinos.  What I was told by some of my colleagues that I should have went with a bill instead of a resolution.  But I was thinking I had put out a survey in my district and there was about sixty against it and forty for it.  So, for casinos at the time.  So I felt with a resolution to have a study commission set up, a study committee, we could really, really explore it further.  So later I did find out that it might have been best if I put in a bill.  But it has come to pass.  We do have, though, we do have the -- My rationale was that it would provide jobs.  And I could see that you need more unskilled jobs because with industries changing and everything, high tech coming in, you know, a lot of people wasn't qualified for the various jobs, and I know with the casinos there would be a lot of jobs that people could fulfill.  Plus that was another way of bringing revenues into the City of Chicago, State of Illinois.  And that was quite a crisis then for monies for the Board of Education.  I wasn't particularly interested in this money being zero for education, but it could supplement the city's budgets to put more money into education, using casino monies to fill in the other gaps.
Speaker 1: So when the, were you in the House when the [Illinois] Lottery came about?
Speaker 2: No, that was right before my time.  Yeah, the Lottery, I'm trying to think who bill that was, whose bill that was.  But that was right before my time, the Lottery.
Story_ID: 71245
Speaker 1: We were just talking about some of the activity involved in getting a bill, introducing a bill, the whole political process.  Can you revisit some of your activity in the [Illinois] House [of Representatives] and especially around this casino bill.  And tell us how that all came about within the political process.
Speaker 2: Well, I'd taken the route of introducing it as a resolution.  Where it wouldn't be just a bill, but I wanted to form a committee to study the feasibility of having casino gambling in the State of Illinois.  And to do that, you have to go through the first, second and third reading in your own house, which I was a member of the [Illinois] House of Representatives, where I introduced the bill.  It passed the first and second reading, then it went over to the Senate, where it was killed on the first reading, I believe it was.  But in politics, in my short time there, your word is your bond.  I mean, when you make a commitment to a fellow colleague, you are going to vote on one of their piece of legislature, you have to do that.  Because you've given your commitment.  And I find to get legislative through the process, you have to have support on both sides of the aisle.  And to do that, you have to really understand your, your fellow colleagues, work with them, support them on issues that you know will not affect your beliefs.  Because a lot of bills don't affect your part of the country that you come from, but it will help them.  So, by doing those kind of things, you win support for bills that you bring in.  Then you have to have the leadership behind you.  If the governor, the speaker of the house, thinks you have a good bill, he can put his weight on it, too.  And it's good to have good cosponsors, who can carry the ball for you, too, in their particular districts that they come from.  So those are some of the avenues that I found would be helpful that you had to do.
Story_ID: 71246
Speaker 1: Yes, also I would like to say, if you could have, be fortunate enough to have good staff, as part of your political body, then they do a lot of research work for you.  I think it's key to research your ideas that you want to introduce, have all the statistical facts of it, how it would benefit the area that you're trying to proceed in.  But if you can have good research personnel, I think it would help you a lot.  Outside of the legislative help that you get.  Some people have budgets that they can afford to do that with, and some you can get some volunteers from the universities who can earn degrees in that area, help toward their theses and things who can be a tremendous help to you in getting the data that you need.
Speaker 2: Did you get a ---
Speaker 1: I didn't, I wasn't there long enough to get to that point, but that was my thinking, that I was going to pursue if I had of continued being a legislator, that would have been the route that I would have went to try to get the young people that's in your colleges around to be part of my study committee, I would say.  On different issues that I was going to present.
Speaker 2: Another way to get there ---
Speaker 1: Yeah, the interest and curiosity and also put them out in the field to get the feelings of your constituents on different issues that you want to present into the [Illinois] General Assembly.  Yeah, yes, well, I had put out a newsletter with a, a questionnaire newsletter about casino gambling in the State of Illinois.  And the results was about sixty percent were against the bill, against having casino gambling.  And about forty were.  So, from there, that's one reason why I think I didn't go with the right bill.  I went with a study, I wanted to go with a study commission, a study committee to study the feasibility of it.  Because I thought that if they could see what good could come out of it, my thinking was mainly the jobs.  And other revenues that could come, like I said, stated before, that could be used for city government.  Infrastructure, you know, we need a lot of monies to do an infrastructure in our cities, and that could be an avenue.  I understand now they use a lot of it for education, but I would have probably used it in other ways through the city government.
Speaker 2: Tell us a little bit about the actual fight in the [Illinois] House [of Representatives].  Give us a feel for that exchange.
Speaker 1: You mean between the (laughter) the one side of the aisle and the other side on different bills?
Speaker 2: Well, those who were for it and those against it.
Speaker 1: On my bill?  Oh, well, in the [Illinois] House [of Representatives], I didn't have much problems in the House.  It kind of went kind of nice, because like I say, I was running a bill resolution.  But I understand in the [Illinois] Senate, I caught the flack.  A lot of my colleagues said they couldn't vote on the bill for one reason or another, and they'd taken a walk and when I say colleagues, I'm talking about ones who I thought would go with me.
Speaker 2: Tell me who they were.
Speaker 1: I don't (laughter) I don't want to mention fallout no friends (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Now the casino gambling is one of your (Talking together.)
Speaker 1: Well, Senator Smith, she couldn't go with the bill, she sent it to [Representative] HistoryMaker Charlie Chew, [Representative HistoryMaker] Earlean Collins.
Speaker 2: What kind of argument did you give Mr. [HistoryMaker Lycurgus] Connor, when you bring him a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, actually, I didn't have enough expertise to talk to the [Illinois] senators.  See, they were senators, now, and you kind of go upper [Illinois] House [of Representatives], upper Chamber.  So I used Representative Doug Huff to kind of be my liaison person with the senators, to go over there and try to talk them into it, because he had more years, tenure, down in Springfield [Illinois], and knew them better than I did.  But those that I did know, they said for one reason or another, they couldn't go with the bill because it might hurt them politically back in their communities, voting for a gambling bill, which I could understand, in a sense.  Newhouse, he couldn't go with it, Senator [Richard] Newhouse.  So it flopped.  On the first reading in the Senate.
Story_ID: 71247
Speaker 1: What year was it when we got the casino, legalized gambling?
Speaker 2: I had left, it must have been in the late 80's [1980s], I think.  I'm not sure just of just exact date.
Speaker 1: What were some of your thoughts when you finally came?
Speaker 2: Oh, I said, "Oh my goodness, there goes my bill.  It's made it."  And I really thought of all the jobs that I thought were going to be coming to Chicago, but they, the casinos is not in Chicago [Illinois].  They're downstate.  So all the jobs are downstate.  I was thinking more about the Chicago area for jobs.  But it has helped.  I mean whereas we can see the revenue that's coming in from the different river boats that's operating.  My bill would have been land based.  The difference now is riverboats that's out on the lakes and rivers.  But it has helped, I'm sure it has helped the budget, I mean not the budget, but the coffers of monies coming into the state and city.
Speaker 1: And are you aware of some or any of the problems commensurate with the casinos?
Speaker 2: Now today?  No, unh-uh.  The only thing I feel, it'd probably be more beneficial, more effective and probably had been better if the state had of been running the boats.  I think they're all privatized and a certain handfuls of people are making the money.  My idea was for the city to, or the state to control the operations of the casino enterprise industry.  I'm not for it being privatized the way it is because there's only a handful making millions off of the poor people.  Where my thinking was to let the state or the city control the bills and spread the wealth to the underprivileged through jobs and other support social programs.
Speaker 1: So, when it finally passed, and since it's a private ownership situation, then was it a Republican led bill?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Like I say, I was out of politics than, and my life tuned into other directions, and I didn't really even keep up with how the bill was, who carried it or what went on with the bill.  I just know that it came in as riverboats and not land based.
Story_ID: 71248
Speaker 1: Let's reflect back to your years as a police officer.  What do you remember most, what sticks out for you?
Speaker 2: Well, I think my two and a half years as working undercover on consumer credit fraud.  I was assigned to work under Chief Justice Bowles office out of municipal courts with Judge John King, who was a commissioner then.  They were having problems with merchants having people sign blank contracts.  You go into a jewelry store, anywhere, and they have you sign your name, and then they fill in, you know.  And that's how the retail and installment act came in.  So, John King went to Magna, who was the chief of the detectives at the time.  He wanted a couple, three sources, so Aurelio Garcia, who was a Spanish-speaking officer and myself, went into this unit and I posed as a southern emigrant from the south, and on my first arrest was we went into Cole Jewelers downtown on State Street [Chicago, Illinois] and I bought a watch.  And they switched watches on me.  I think it was a Lady Nelson.  They switched a Lady Nelson watch.  I had wanted an Elgin watch.  But he brought me some off the brand watch, I think it was Lady Nelson.  And we had the news media with us.  Mike Royko and Jack Mabley and the [Chicago] Defender was all outside.  And they all came in and we arrested the sales person.  That was our first bill.  And they kept the unit.  We just stayed there for two and a half years.  We made a lot of arrests.  The penalty was only five hundred dollars fine, but still it was the publicity that these unscrupulous merchants would hurt them.  And that was one of my greatest thrills of being a police officer during that time.  And we were able to enact, what, like I say, from that came the consumer credit fraud laws.  Where everything has to be filled in on a contract, and before a person can sign it, they have to make sure everything's completely filled in.  You can't switch merchandise on the people like they used to do.  And we would, in another incident we used my home, my furnace, we had the people to come out.  My furnace wasn't working properly and they came out and tore my furnace all apart and wouldn't put it back.  So, we arrested them for credit, the way we had the contract written up, it was all wrong, so we arrested them on that and they had to put a new furnace in my house.  So, we done a lot of good on that unit.
Speaker 1: A lot of what you learned and/or experienced as a police officer, I'm sure that information helped you in your [Illinois] House [of Representatives] experience.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think my experience of being in working in the different communities when I was working on the task force, that's when we would go to the different areas of the city on a daily basis, and I got a chance to learn the whole City of Chicago [Illinois].  I think that helped me a lot too, to see where the underprivileged were.  What their problems were and I found that we were fighting apathy.  I still say we're fighting a lot of apathy in our communities and we just need more education and we, if you don't have it at book learning, at least get you a trade.  I think we should have more trade school for kids, where these young people can learn a trade, because that can really be helpful for you throughout your whole life if you have a skill or a trade.
Story_ID: 71249
Speaker 1: Can you tell me in a little detail about your friendship with [Chicago Third Ward Alderman] Tyrone Kenner?
Speaker 2: Well, Ty and I, we go back as police officers.  And through the years we've been friends.  We're still friends.
Speaker 1: And when he was, he introduced you to politics.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Just give me an idea how that process worked between the two of you.
Speaker 2: Well, Ty[rone Kenner] was the alderman, and I came down to the Third Ward and taken on the chore of establishing a volunteer bank.  Outside of the precinct we had volunteers made up of people throughout the city who were friends of mine and his, and who worked in the Model City CCO program that we both were working in at one time. And I, we were just a volunteer army.  We would give fund raisers, and we would do campaigning, and we would hang up posters, tear down signs, for Tyrone [Kenner].  And we was just his right arm.  And we got along with the precinct captains.  We didn't infringe on their territory.  We stayed over in our volunteer area.  So that was my role and functions with Tyrone in the Third Ward.  And from there, he introduced me to consider running for, I mean, being appointed to the General Assembly.
Speaker 1: And what was it like during a difficult period of his legal challenge?
Speaker 2: Very hectic, very hectic.  A lot of the precinct captains as we found out were working in the other camps.  I can understand that, they were thinking about about their jobs.  It was a hectic time, unfortunate time but a hectic time.  I don't care to say much more about that because I didn't involve myself in it no more than what I had to, and I tried to do my part to keep things going, but you needed someone that's on the local level when you, as an alderman or a committeeman and he was both, so I spent most of my time dealing with the legislative part in Springfield [Illinois].  But it was very hectic.  And quite naturally, those things happen in life.
Story_ID: 71250
Speaker 1: What would you like to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: I think I would like to be remembered as a person who was concerned about his fellow man.  Wouldn't ask anyone to do anything that I wouldn't do myself.  And always trying to help those unfortunate.  Which I'm trying still to do today.
Story_ID: 71251
Speaker 1: And what message or lesson do you have for children or students?
Speaker 2: Well, as we all say, stay in school as long as you can.  But if you can't stay in school because of economic reasons, try to at least get you a skill or trade.  Or, if that don't work, go into a government job.  At least there is some longevity in most government jobs at this time.  That would be my recommendation.
Story_ID: 71252
Speaker 1: And what would you say to the apathetic non-voting citizen?
Speaker 2: They're hurting us all.  Everyone should get out and vote.  And all I can say to them is to look around, if they want them to see changes, they'll have to get out and vote.  It's the only way you can do it.  You're part of politics when you're born and when you leave, you're going to be part of it.  So, you might as well be part of it by voting.
Story_ID: 71253
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Do you want to talk about how you became to be a police officer on the force?
Speaker 2: Okay.  It was in 19--I was in the post office working at the Jackson Park [Chicago, Illinois] post office as a carrier.  And there was a big push for bringing on police officers, mainly black police officers.  And several of my colleagues at the post office who were carriers, they went and joined the police department and came back with their guns on them and everything.  It looks pretty exciting.  And at that time, this was in, I'm trying to think now, it was back in around '54 [1954], '55 [1955], 1954, 1955.  And finally, I did ask my wife, I said, "What do you think about me change jobs from the post office and go to the police department?"  She wasn't for it too much, she say, "But that's your choice, you know, you're the light, you're the bread winner.  You've got to do what you think is best, so what do you want to do."  So, I decided I didn't want to be a fireman, because I'm a little afraid of heights (laughter), so I thought I would try the police department.  Just to, I guess, follow along with what my friends were doing.  I'd never really had a big desire to want to carry a gun, but it looked so, I don't know, what can I say?  It looked intriguing to me to be a police officer, and so once I was over at the academy, I began to see where it could be a good career.  And I was fortunate enough to be assigned to Burnside, which is 92nd and Cottage Grove [Chicago, Illinois].  And that was an experience.  Because my first post was from, on 103rd Street from State to Stoney [Island Expressway, Chicago, Illinois].  And I used to walk that post on the midnight, I was beating my club on the sides, trying to put dents in it so I could look like an old timer.  And then one day these group of police officers came into Burnside.  Oh, they looked tough, they were called the "Ryan Raiders".  All these bikes came in there, and I said to myself, "That's what I would love to do."  So I made a phone call to a friend of mine who was part of them.  And said, "Can you get me into that unit?"  So after about six months, I was called down to the task force, and by that time it was called the "Flying Squad". And I can recall my first assignment was to go to Fillmore to pick up a bike that had broke down the night before and bring it back to 48th Street area.  (Laughter) It was my first time being out on the streets in traffic on the three-wheeler.  Coming from the west side back to the south side.  That was quite an experience.  I think it was (laughter) it took me about four hours to make it back, I was going so slow.  (Laughter) And I can remember that.  That was quite an experience.  And from then, from the task force, as again, black officers began to move in to the bureau, the detective bureau.  At that time we were only working in robbery and narcotics.  But then we began to venture into the other units of the detective division, stolen auto, burglary. A friend of mine was one of the first ones that went to the homicide unit.  So I got a call to come to the burglary unit.  And I was one of the first six black officers in the burglary unit.  And that gave me experience of being a detective, doing detective work.  And from there, I went to the vice control division, working on the prostitution unit.  And from there into the 18th District.  And then that's when I went on leave of absence and went to the War on Poverty program, which was called Chicago Committee on Urban Opportunity.  That was in 1964.  I was taking a leave from the police department.  I was on leave for about fourteen years.  The time that I spent with the CCO and became Model Cities CCO.  So that was my experience as a police officer.
Story_ID: 71254
Speaker 1: What was it like for African Americans to be police officers in those early days?
Speaker 2: You know, good question.  I find we had more, we progressed more I think than I see today.  What I'm trying to say, I noticed at the last exam, I mean, there were only so few blacks made the detective exam, passed the detective's exam.  We're supposed to be more educated now than what we were then.  But I think we had more black police officers working in the detective division then than I guess we have now.  I'm sure it's changed now in the year 2000, but I was much surprised.  My tenure in the police department, I didn't run into too much prejudice.  It was there, but I knew how to deal with it, and it didn't stop me from being a good police officer.  And I, in fact, I got some good assignments, especially from Mike Spiotto and James Reardon.  I mean I was very fortunate.  I don't know if I was a tokenism or not, but I didn't run into too much one-on-one prejudice.  But it was there, we know it was there.
Speaker 1: And you were active in the union in the force?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was there, well, the Guardians came in, the Black Guardians was just starting up as my last years as a police officer.  I was a member of the guardians.
Speaker 1: Why did they find a need for the guardians?  Can you trace that for me?
Speaker 2: Well, just in order to better the conditions of black police officers.  Mainly, I guess for promotions.  See, when I came on, you only had a few sergeants, lieutenants, and that was probably the main reason that they wanted to really help police officers get promoted. Because it's still there, I don't know, but it's still there, the racial, I mean the city's balance is way off.  It should be quite, much more, many more minorities in the promotional lines than what they are.  I just don't understand why.  Because I think we're more educated now than when I was there.  I think the, you have to have a college degree now.  Now two years of college, I think it is now.  When I came on, you only had to have a high school education.  But I just don't, those questions that are there, there are answers, but I just don't know them because I've been away from them so long.
Story_ID: 71255
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you have lived your life and what is important to you?
Speaker 2: I've had my ups and downs in life.  I think it's been a fruitful life so far.  I hope to see many more years.  (Laughter) I find my retirement life is very exciting.  I've been able to occupy my time with things that I didn't have a chance to do when I was coming up because I worked two jobs a lot. I'm the family babysitter.  I have six great grandkids.  Two of them I've taken care of since they were three months.  So, I've enjoyed my times with my family.  I have children's day once a month.  I have them all over and they can just do what they want, eat what they want (laughter) and no, and the parents are not allowed over for that weekend.  Also, I'm more involved in the church, I do more stewardship work now.
Speaker 1: Which church?
Speaker 2: St. Columbanus.  I'm a member of the Knights of Peter Claver.  I'm a grand knight.  And we just won the council award of the, national award of the year last week.  We had a convention in Kansas City [Missouri].  Also I was voted the Grand Knight of the Year by the Northern District this year.  So, I've been very involved in my [Knights of Peter] Claver work and in my church.  And we have a new minister there who is young, and we're trying to get more young people involved in church.  And I'm getting in the process now of developing a junior knights' division of the Knights of Peter Claver in our parish.
Speaker 1: So you have one son and your son has how many children?
Speaker 2: He has three, he has three daughters.  So, they all have young kids, and I'm the, like I said, their official babysitter.
Speaker 1: That's a good point to stop on.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 71256
Speaker 1: Maybe just one more question concerning what would be the importance of the young people learning about state government.
Speaker 2: I think when I was coming through high school, we had civics.  You learn a lot about government.  I don't know if they still offer that in school, but I think young people should know more about their legislative branch and also the municipal branch.  And the national branch.  I think if it was taught more in the home and in school, if it's not being taught, you would probably get them to be more knowledgeable for why they should be voting, or why they should vote.  And then when they become eighteen to vote, and I think we would have more people voting.  I think we really, the society is losing interest, in my opinion.  Because of not being taught at an early age.  The value of being involved, of knowing about politics, knowing your candidates, what they stand for.  What you see that you want in a candidate.  Who you want to see be the mayor, be the alderman, be the state rep [representative].  And who knows, you might be one yourself.  And I just encourage kids to join the Young Democrats, or the Young Republicans, whatever is their choice, or the Young Independent Party.  But at least get involved so you can learn about politics, because it is part of our life.
