Story_ID: 660718
Speaker 1: I'm Denise DeBurst Gines [Denise Gines], an interviewer with The HistoryMakers.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Sallie Ann Robinson, S-A-L-L-I-E, A-N-N, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: August 4th, 1958.
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born on Daufuskie Island, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation is I am a cookbook author.  I am also CNA, certified nursing assistant.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: The location of this interview at 216-B Tybee Island [Georgia].
Story_ID: 660719
Speaker 1: So we're going to start with some very simple questions.  Okay?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What is your v- favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is red and black (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  You can have two favorite colors.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And what do you like to eat, Ms. cookbook author (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I love seafood.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina] (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what time of the year do you like the most?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite quote or saying?
Speaker 2: Life is precious.
Story_ID: 660720
Speaker 1: Now, we're going to begin with talking about what you know about your history.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Family history.  So let's start on your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Tell me her name, where she was born and what year she was born if you know.
Speaker 2: My mother--name is Albertha Robinson Stafford.  She was born on Daufuskie Island [South Carolina].  She was born January 18, 1926.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is she still alive?
Speaker 2: No, she's not.
Speaker 1: Do you know when she passed away?
Speaker 2: Yes, October 17th, 19- 2013.
Speaker 1: Did she tell you any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.  She--
Speaker 1: You wanna share some with us?
Speaker 2: My mom was a storyteller, and she loved family.  If we had a question about who we were related to, she would pretty much run down the whole tree.  A lot of people we didn't even know or heard of, but she wanted us to be aware of their names and the connection.  Oh, my grandparents, who happened--who was her parents, her mother, Louvenia Robinson [Louvenia Bentley Robinson], known as Blossom.  We lived on the island not too far from her, and grandmother's house was where we always went to just hang out because she had the fields, and she had, you know, hogs and stuff.  Even though we had that, but it seemed different going to grandmother's house.  We used to love to go in her garden, which were, like I say, fields, to pick tomatoes and beans.  The only thing I didn't do was go in the okra field.  She always had work for us, something to do.  We knew never to say, "I ain't," or, "I'm not gonna do it."  So we would--when she asked, whether it was pumping water, feed the hog, feed the chicken, go in the field to gather some vegetables, we did it.  We did not grumble, dare (laughter).  My grandfather, Josephus Robinson, he was a outdoors person.  He liked going in the woods.  He liked to hunt.  He liked to fish.  He liked to fix stuff around the house, so he was like the handyman around the house, fixing and repairing stuff, and also making sure my grandmother's tools were sharpened for the garden (laughter).  Together, they were a unique couple.  A lot of time, we would see them.  It wasn't as if they didn't say much around each other, but they always had a conversation of something, you know, of interest, when people asked, and very, very sweet.  My grandmother was a excellent cook.  Love when she cook 'cause you could smell the aroma of the food way down the road coming (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  That--I mean, that's fine.  You're doing just fine.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 660721
Speaker 1: Did you know your great-grandparents?
Speaker 2: I did not know my great-grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was named after my [maternal] great-grandmother, Sallie.  Her name was Bentley [Sallie Williams Bentley].  My mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] loved her great-grandma, her grandmother.  Oh, she--her eyes would light up talking about her.  She talked about her having this long black hair she used to love to comb.  She talked about how kind she was, what a hard worker.  I had inquired to several of the people who knew her, and they always say she had a smile on her face, and she was always doing something.  She was always a busybody.  I find myself being like that.  Even though I didn't know her, I feel--I--a lot of presence of her guiding me, things that, very curious to me.  I want to know.  So it have led me on a journey to do research on more of my family.
Speaker 1: All right.  So did your mother describe life for her on Daufuskie Island [South Carolina] as she was growing up as a child?
Speaker 2: Hard work (laughter).  Very serious business.  She love Daufuskie as a place of growing up, as a place of an adult.  Basically, because people there was a community who knew one another and took time to do things with one another.  She was a very friendly person, and everybody knew who she was, and in time of need, if something happened, she'd be the first one to jump and volunteer to help out with folks.
Speaker 1: What, what kind of education did your mother have?
Speaker 2: Sixth grade education.  She wanted more.  She even joined a class years later.  When some folks came to Daufuskie and offered adult education, she was right there, so (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and what about the culture on Daufuskie?
Speaker 2: The culture, Gullah culture.  I actually learned I was Gullah once I left the island.  It was never a word we heard.  And when it came up--you know--upon us, it was like, you know, for me, "Whoopy that, no, I ain't."  (Background noise) Speaking the language, living the life, but not knowing what Gullah was, so the culture itself was really--I mean, they're much, a lot, I should say, but, like I say, we just didn't know that we were a part of that.
Speaker 1: So once--well we'll talk about once you were outside of--went off the island and discovered that.
Story_ID: 660722
Speaker 1: So let's talk about your father's side of the family.  And can you just tell me your father's name?
Speaker 2: My biological father was Alton Ward [Alton Ward, Sr.].  I didn't know much about him until I was older.  My mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] had spoken about him, but because he wasn't in my life, you know, she had little to say.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so you did have a stepfather then--
Speaker 2: I did--
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: --have a stepfather.  My understanding, he met my mom when I was four months old, and pretty much I learned everything through him.  He was a very funny, hard working, and determined man.  He was full of life.  He was--always had something to do.
Speaker 1: What was his name, and when was he born?
Speaker 2: And his name was Thomas Stafford, December 25--I can't remember his year.
Speaker 1: All right.  All right.  And is he still alive?
Speaker 2: No, he's not.
Speaker 1: All right.  And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born on an island called Bull Island [South Carolina].  That's across from Daufuskie Island [South Carolina] in the area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what type of work did he do?
Speaker 2: Oh, jack of all trade (laughter).  There was really nothing he couldn't do that he didn't challenge.  I mean, seriously.  He--if it was to be done, he would do it.
Story_ID: 660723
Speaker 1: Do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: I do.  I have four sisters on my mother's [Albertha Robinson Stafford] side.  I have a--I have--let me see.  I'm sorry.  Two living now. There was three stepsisters and two stepbrothers.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: And on my biological father's [Alton Ward, Sr.] side, there's a sister and a brother.
Speaker 1: All right.  So would you name your siblings and where you fall in with the Robinsons?
Speaker 2: Jeanetta Robinson [Jeannetta Ward Robinson], my oldest, Catherine Ward Gueye, my next oldest, and then I fall in, and then there's Linda Marie Robinson Stafford [Linda Robinson Stafford], and Lois Faye Robinson Stafford [Lois Robinson Stafford].
Story_ID: 660724
Speaker 1: Can you tell me your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Wow, growing up on Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina] (laughter). Feeding the cows (laughter).  Having yard work to do, pumping water, cutting wood (laughter).  Farming, a, a good tough love life (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you--as you were growing up, obviously, you lived in a farm area.  What was it like, let's say, if you got up in the morning, what were some of your specific chores that you had to do?  Or, you know, things that you did that were different.
Speaker 2: Well, first and foremost, when you got up, you had to make up the bed and clean the room (laughter).  Then we went out into the yard to make sure the chicken was fed, the hog was slop.  We had to make sure my mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] had enough water in the house because we had an outside pump.  We didn't have indoor running water.  The cow was moved to fresh grass.  And even if it was a school period, year, we had to do all this before we go to school, so we had to make sure our animals was taken care of before doing anything else.  Even breakfast, we had to make sure they ate before we did (laughter).
Story_ID: 660725
Speaker 1: So tell me now about, about elementary school.  What school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I attended Mary Field elementary on Daufuskie [Mary Fields School, Daufuskie Island, South Carolina].  Fun, fun, fun, fun (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So describe, describe your school.  Tell me what the classrooms looked like and your teachers.
Speaker 2: It--the school I went to was built back in the '30s [1930s].  It's a two room school, and in each room, there were four grades; first through fourth and then there were fifth through eighth.  In elementary, we had a teacher called Ms. Frances Jones, very unique lady from Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina], born and raised.  You knew everybody that came to school because they were family or friends.  And growing up there, I mean, we just had a great time learning the things that we were not taught at home, which was basic math, spelling, reading, things that our parents really, you know, had little knowledge of, so us going to school was to better our self and to do things that they didn't have the opportunity to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 660726
Speaker 1: As far as, because (pause) where you lived, it--you didn't have--you, you said you didn't have indoor plumbing.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what about radios or televisions, the types of games that you played?  This is the elementary school years--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --we're talking about.
Speaker 2: We didn't have indoor plumbing.  We didn't have electricity.  My mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] always had a battery powered radio.  She only played that on Sunday for her gospel music (laughter).  We didn't have TV because there were no electricity, so our games and entertainment was our parents telling stories to us about their years of Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina] growing up, things that happened.  That was always interesting.
Speaker 1: Was there any stories that, that stick out in your mind?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  The many people that was once there.  Over a thousand people living there at one point.  The big boats that used to bring the people back and forth, the oyster factories.  There were two there.  The lumber company that was there and a train that actually ran from one end of the island to the other hauling the lumber.  The [U.S.] military that was there.  Hearing these stories was like, whoa, where were these things on the island?  Because even though as a child, we had an opportunity to roam the island, none of it was visible, so the story was really intriguing and, and just for me, mind boggling, and I just grew up remembering these things like, you know, you, you walked the dirt roads, and you go through the woods, and you wonder, where were these things, but, you know, how did they exist pretty much?  Because they would tell us about it, but we didn't know the visual part of it, so it was always fascinating to kind of vision what it was like.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you described your school [Mary Fields School, Daufuskie Island, South Carolina], but we didn't describe your, your house.  Tell--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Give me a description of your house that you lived in (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We lived in a wooden, tin roof, two bedroom house.  To many, it was just an old house.  To us, it was home.  It was comfortable.  It was, it was warm in the winter and cool in the summer.  We didn't know about things we didn't have, so it never bother us to wonder what having new things was.  Everything was used and useful (laughter).  And we made do with what we had.  It, it wasn't about wanting something you didn't know about.  So our life of--on Daufuskie as a child growing up for me was pretty much the way I visioned most people living, even though they didn't, some of them, so (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 660727
Speaker 1: If you can think of a smell, a sight, or a sound, that would take you to that time, what comes to mind?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, peaceful, fresh, clean, aroma of flowers in the springtime when the new berries or, or fruit trees would be blossoming, oh.  Everything just seemed to just light up and stand still.  Our world was pretty much just peaceful and quiet.  You could hear the bird chirping.  Everything around you was just growing and budding and, you know, going through transition of year periods that just made you feel like you were the most special person in the world (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  So, being that there was no electricity, so you were up very early and went to bed early as well.
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: We went to bed at nighttime.  Pop [Robinson's stepfather, Thomas Stafford] and them normally went to bed around eight or nine o'clock.  Weekends a little different, but mornings, the rooster would get on the front porch, and, cock-a-doodle-doo, and we knew it was time to get up.  A lot of time, we just didn't wanna.  Especially, when it was cold, you didn't want to get from underneath the warm cover.  And pop always had this saying, "Off and on it, off and on it," (laughter).  And we knew our foot had to hit the floor, and we had to get up because the animals and the duties around the house was needed.
Story_ID: 660728
Speaker 1: In school [at Mary Fields School, Daufuskie Island, South Carolina], so because it was two rooms so you went from one room to another as your grades went--
Speaker 2: Yes, after (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) up, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --you graduated from the fourth grade, you went around the room to the hall (laughter) to the next room where you sat in a room in one (unclear) chairs, and you had another teacher.
Speaker 1: And who was your other teacher after that one, fourth grade, do you remember?
Speaker 2: After the fourth grade, I had a teacher named Ms. Julia Johnson.  In the sixth grade, my teacher became Pat Conroy.
Speaker 1: And tell us about Pat Conroy.
Speaker 2: Pat Conroy came into our lives in the year of '68 [1968], '69 [1969], school year.  He was the first white teacher we ever had, and he was, being a male, which was kind of puzzling to us because we didn't know male taught and (laughter) and him being white was just another like, okay.  What is he doing here?  He not going to teach us (laughter).  But he became one of my favorite.  The one year he was there, he opened up our minds and a lot of interesting things that we read about.  He, he was a teacher of reality.  Things that we would read, he wanted to know if we understood it in a way that, if you had to face this or do this, did you--do you know how it works?  Very fun.  Made learning easy because he was fun.  Took us on trips and did things with us that no other teacher in my school year ever did.
Speaker 1: Where--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --where did you--
Speaker 2: Did--
Speaker 1: --go on your first trip?
Speaker 2: The first trip, he took us--well, he took us on a lot of little trips.  We went to Savannah [Georgia].  We--I'll never forget.  We--he took the boys to see the Globetrotters [Harlem Globetrotters].  Then he took a group of us--we came to Savannah because we knew what news was because a few people had TV on the island and sometime we go to grandmother [Robinson's maternal grandmother, Louvenia Bentley Robinson] house who had a TV.  We would watch the news, and we'd talk about it, so he took us to Savannah to this news station to actually see how TV works.  Very interesting.  Then he took us on a trip trick or treating to Beaufort [South Carolina] for trick or treating, Halloween.  We celebrate Halloween on Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina], but it was always a party at the school.  Pat was intrigued that we had never been trick or treating.  The reason for that, the houses on Daufuskie is far apart, and our parents dare let us go at night (laughter) trick or treating just for candy.  And the biggest trip was Washington, D.C., which was just mind blowing.  It really was for us being at that age, and in this place we only read in the book, so it was an eye opener.
Speaker 1: Was--and how did you travel, by bus?
Speaker 2: No.  He had friends who actually got us all in cars (laughter) and rode up there in cars.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When--was the--was that--any of these trips the very first time that you were off of Daufuskie going to Savannah?
Speaker 2: No.  We had been to Savannah a few times.  Having a houseful of children and a small boat, you just could not pack up children and get them in a boat just to go to Savannah.  Pop [Robinson's stepfather, Thomas Stafford] and mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] mostly did the shopping when that time came.  We got to go on occasion, not as a group because of the amount of kids, and, like I said, the small boats.  We had never been to Washington.  Heard of Beaufort but not been there to my knowledge.  Savannah was also a reason of going there, we had family, lots of family there that had moved from Daufuskie to Savannah, so that was one of the reason we knew more about Savannah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 660729
Speaker 1: On the island [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina], though, growing up on the--now, you said some people had electricity like your grandparents [Robinson's maternal grandparents, Louvenia Bentley Robinson and Josephus Robinson]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --had electricity and they had a TV.  What, what shows--did you ever go over there to watch--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --different shows?  What, what were the shows that you liked to watch?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother only turned the TV on for the news, and her favorite show, the 'Love of Life' used to come on.  If you got around here, you had to be very quiet, and you had to stoop on the floor on your knees in the hallway because you could not go in the actual live--the room where the TV was.  She sat in the hall and watched TV from the hall in the--from the room.  And you could sit around her, but you had to be very quiet, and if you didn't, you had to leave until her show was off.  She'd cut the TV off, and then you got back to work (laughter).
Speaker 1: Why didn't you sit in the living room?
Speaker 2: The living room was like a prize room, her nice furniture, the TV.  She had a coffee table with a glass top that had pictures, and you could not go in there 'cause you was not allowed to touch anything, so in order not to touch anything, she kept you out of there (laughter).
Speaker 1: But she didn't go in there either.
Speaker 2: Well, she went in there just to make sure things was in place, and she felt that she could see the TV from the distant it was to the hallway because it was right in the doorway.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she didn't feel that she had to sit up in there just to watch it.
Story_ID: 660730
Speaker 1: All right.  Going back to, to your house because we, we never got through describing the house that you grew up in.  What about refrigeration since you had no--did you have a icebox?  Or tell me how you preserved food.  And the next question would be about grocery shopping if you did any.  'Cause I know you grew your vegetables and meats and stuff, so tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  In the house, a wooded house, we had couches.  In the living room, I recall there was a big table where we ate, chairs, mix match chairs, and pictures on the wall of things we either drew or my mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] just had it from before.  The kitchen, a wood stove.  Later, I remember later, she had a pump put in the kitchen near the window.  I can see the pot hanging from the walls where things hung from, the pots.  Under the table was the flour or the rice in--she had in canister.  She also had a cupboard where she kept her preserves, pear, a vegetable from the garden.  Behind the wood stove was always the wood box where we kept full of wood, cut wood.  Nice--it was a setup that she had pretty much where she could put her hand on things she needed.  The house also had a wraparound porch, which was--you could run around the porch.  It was also where you sat out the sun if not under the mulberry tree which was in the backyard (laughter).  In the wintertime, she also had it set up where on the porch you could come out of the cold and wash clothes, which we use number 3 tubs and the washboard (laughter).  Everything was set up and designed to meet the needs that had to be done daily throughout the period.  You asked--I'm trying to remember the question you asked again.
Story_ID: 660731
Speaker 1: Just a little more about life on Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina] as you were growing up.  And we were talking about your, your house that you grew up in.  So continue to tell me about the--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) house.
Speaker 2: The house itself, like I said, was a two bedroom house.  It had a living room, kitchen, hallway, dining room.  They were--it was a comfortable house.  It was--it wasn't fancy.
Speaker 1: Did you have a refrigerator and--
Speaker 2: We did not have a fridge--a refrigerator for years to come, because we didn't have electricity.  The reason we didn't have--our parents didn't have the money, so a lot of the fresh food like when killing hog time or chicken they would actually cook--was salted and put in a box and kept in an outhouse, which was not a bathroom, but this was like a corner house where they stored salted meat.  Even--I remember them catching mullets, which is a fish, salting it down and packing it in this box, and you use it as needed.  Now, the fresh meat came from when you just killed the hog basically, and we ate a lot of fresh meat at one point, and then we had the salt meat.  We had the fresh chickens.  Our vegetable, we grew, the garden.  And when the season when in from the garden, my mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] had a lot of that preserved.  She would be in the kitchen for days and one of us as her helper, help stirring, cutting, putting in the jar.  She's showing us how to do this, so when winter weather come, we would have the vegetable.  Sweet potatoes, we would bank those.  Banking means you put it underground in this little house that was shaped like a triangle, and under it, they dug a hole, and they lined it with straw, and then you had croker sack which people call burlap bag today, and you would put the potatoes in it.  You would cover it with pine straw, and then you'd cover it with dirt, and it kept it preserved in the ground.  I also remember one year, my parents would bury meat in the cold ground to preserve it, and it kept it fresh.  A lot of our food was eaten as it was picked, killed or caught or hunt.  A lot of it was also shared because pop [Robinson's stepfather, Thomas Stafford] always felt that if you killed something, it needed to be eaten.  Knowing that we didn't have refrigeration at one point, he would share it with other folks because you could always go back and get more.  So it wasn't a matter of having to refrigerate it like we do today, preserving stuff.  Everything we ate was pretty much freshly picked, killed, or caught.
Story_ID: 660732
Speaker 1: How did people get around on the island [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: A lot of walking (laughter).  We also had carts, wagons.  People say carts today.  We say wagon.  Pulled by our oxen, cow, or a horse.  That was our transportation.  And most folks had a cow and a wagon.  Some had a horse and wagon.  The island is small, but you really needed something to get you from one end of the island to the other, and that was more like the fastest way, but we did a lot of walking.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how did people get on and off the island?
Speaker 2: On and off the island, there were a few people who had small paddle boats with a little motor, twenty-five or thirty-five horsepower.  When it came to big shopping, or if you had a need for a piece of furniture, then once a month or during the holidays, they would actually hire this boat which used to be Captain Sam [Samuel Stevens, Jr.] from Savannah [Georgia].  They would--and the money would come from the PTA [Parent Teacher Association], which was--which they raised from fundraising to have money to do the shopping trip with for the boat.  It wasn't every day.  Then there was, at one point, the government and the state got together and gave the island couple of boats that was used three time a week or maybe two time a week depending on the need, whether it was a period to go to the doctor, shopping.  Shopping was done in Bluffton [South Carolina] because Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] didn't have a store at the time.  Bluffton had a grocery store.  And if you had to go to Savannah, that was done maybe once a month or every six months 'cause most people just went for basic stuff, or, like I say, furniture if they needed that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 660733
Speaker 1: Speaking about a doctor, were there doctors on the island?
Speaker 2: Everybody was a doctor (laughter).  My pop [Robinson's stepfather, Thomas Stafford], you know, there was like, "You ain't got no money to take to them people.  They gonna tell you what you already know," (laughter).  He felt that the illness you had could be cured (laughter).  My mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] knew how to go and get certain herbs and bring it to the house.  We'd clean it or pick it off the bush and put it in a pot and boil it, and you lined up at night (laughter) before going to bed and you took it, and you dare spit it out (laughter) or say, "I didn't like it."  Mom will be the one with the cup administering the concoction (laughter) I should say, and pop would be standing in the corner say, "You better not let it--put--spit it out," (laughter).  How did it taste?  Terrible.  But I assure you.  You went to bed and you woke up a new person (laughter).  They had their reason for treating us the way they did because they was brought up in a way that what they had, they had to make do with it.  And they wanted us healthy, and they figured if it worked for them, it work for us (laughter).
Speaker 1: And you know some of those recipes for certain things like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, (laughter) I do.
Speaker 1: --household--tell me some of the household things that you can use or some ailments because, I mean, you're an author, so--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --I know you know these things, so share with us some of the remedies and household things that were used.
Speaker 2: One of the favorite was a cold remedy that, the minute we started sniffling or coughing, it was time to go to the woods (laughter).  My mom would take her little hatchet or--and go in the woods, and she would break off some pine needles, some branches, some pine needles, and then she would go in search for this holly bush.  She said, "Don't get the one with the berries.  They, they can't have berries on them."  And then they had this bush that grew, this herb I should say, that grew that was called life everlasting.  It just grew wild everywhere, and she would take these three herbs--I call it herbs--and we'd break it up and put it in a pot and it'll boil, and you can smell it, and she would have a lemon to go with it.  That was to help really cut the taste, the bitterness out because the pine is, I mean (background noise), really bitter, on top of the holly bush together, and, oh, you would want to jump out your skin to drink this thing (laughter).  But it was the cure.  This was her cold remedy.  And then there was the honey and the lemon.  You could boil your lemon, and then you'd drop some honey in it and drink it.  Another thing--oh, if we, we loved bare feet, going bare feet, and you end up stepping on stuff all the time because--rusty nail or whatever, and that was a penny and bacon (laughter).  You would take a flat piece of board, and you would pat the injured part, and they would say, "Oh, that's to get the poison blood out."  And then you would take a penny--a piece of bacon with a penny, and they'd wrap--take a piece a cloth and wrap it on your feet, and you kind of walked around with it.  Now, mentally, it did everything for you (laughter).  And it--but, you got better.  You didn't think of it not helping you, the concoction or the remedies or the method, whatever they use had everything to do with your mental part of, this is gonna work.  My mom and them know what they are doing.  So for us, we never questioned why this or why that.  It was, do as I say (laughter) not as I do.  And we, and we understood that, and, and we went by that.  We lived by their rules.
Story_ID: 660734
Speaker 1: Do you know if you had to have immunizations or inoculations?
Speaker 2: We did.  We did.  There was a period when nurses and doctors came from Bluffton [South Carolina].  They had a clinic there.  And it was mandatory; especially, for school [Mary Fields School, Daufuskie Island, South Carolina].  So they would come over right before school start and gather us kids and give us--I remember the polio, the, the lump of sugar and this little drop they put on it, and you had to take it.  And then the immunization.  I remember getting the--
Speaker 1: Inoculation.
Speaker 2: --inoculation, and it was all these little needles, and they stab you with it.  Oh, my god.  I hate needles, (laughter) but, some of us would run, but we got--we had to come back, face reality, and--
Speaker 1: What about the dentist?
Speaker 2: Dentist, no.  Wasn't something that came over and did our teeth.  On occasion, we did go over if we had a problem, but growing up it was like losing tooth, and pop [Robinson's stepfather, Thomas Stafford] had his method of pulling teeth.  You did not go to get one pulled.  He was take a piece of strong thread, tie it on your teeth and run it to a doorknob, (laughter) and he'd like get your attention, just slam the door, and the teeth came flying out (laughter).  Now go get you some salt water and rinse and get out there and get some work done (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, and giving birth, were there midwives?
Speaker 2: There were, one midwives when I was growing up.  I recall my aunt having a couple of kids at the time.  I had no idea what giving birth was at all.  Growing up in Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina], that was not in our vocabulary for you to know that.  That was grown folk's business.  But she was also my midwife growing up.  I, I mean, as a child.  My mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] actually came to visit from Savannah [Georgia] at the time when she was working when she gave birth to me there, and I am so proud to say that I was born there.
Story_ID: 660735
Speaker 1: So were there many people who--there weren't many people who left Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina] to work.  Or were there?
Speaker 2: A lot of people had already left the island during my younger years, better education and work.  Many went to Savannah [Georgia] for jobs because there was--the nearest big city, and there were somewhat transportation at the time.  Most people--a lot of people went to New York [New York], Washington [D.C.], different areas to better themselves.  Many didn't come back because I guess their life just went from where they were and didn't want to come back to the country to farm.  Most of them are like, "I'm not going back there, not to get in no--dig no dirt."  But those of us who were there, thought it was a--pretty good.
Story_ID: 660736
Speaker 1: All right, so let's, let's go back to school [Mary Fields School, Daufuskie Island, South Carolina] now.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so I, I wanted to talk more about Pat Conroy.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Do you know--can you tell me how it happened that he even came to Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina] and why he left after only a year because he made such a big impact, and then he becomes pretty famous and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --then he writes a book ['The Water is Wide'] about Daufuskie and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --a lot of other books and they've become movies.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Pat, I always say, was before his time.  You know, you just have those people who make a mark in life at a time that, that sort of things weren't happening.  My understanding, they were an opening for a teacher.  He was already in Beaufort [South Carolina].  He had taught there.  And I guess he, being a teacher, he saw the opening for the needing of the teacher.  He applied for it.  It wasn't easy to get a teacher who wanted to get in a boat to come to Daufuskie to teach us kids, and I guess it had interest him, and he got the job.  Probably the only one applied for it at the time (laughter).  I don't think he had no idea what he was in for, but he came and he was amazed by the things we should have been learning, not learning.  He made it--he was determined, I should say, to get us to learn everything we possibly can because he saw that we didn't know as much about the world beyond us that we should've because once we left, we had to deal with it, and he was very heartfelt about that.
Speaker 1: (Cough) Excuse me.
Speaker 2: He wanted us to know that there was a world out there that we had to be prepared for.  Growing up on Daufuskie, even though we had a few white families, we had no idea what prejudice was going on out there.  Don't get me wrong.  I know this happened before my time, but during my time on Daufuskie, people were together.  I had no idea there were prejudice.  I had no idea there were hungry people, and it was a really big change seeing this stuff and wondering, why are people not liking you because of the skin of your color [sic.].  Or why are hungry people out there when there's so much food going to waste.  We didn't waste food.  But leaving the island, I saw this, and it was like a real eye opener and still today don't understand why (laughter).
Story_ID: 660737
Speaker 1: What was his teaching?  How was his teaching style different from the other teachers that you had [at Mary Fields School, Daufuskie Island, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Pat [Pat Conroy] was--oh, gosh, how do I say?  His teaching style was, you had to understand it in order to learn the meaning of--or to solve a problem.  For instance, one of the things that--one of many things he taught us I never forgot.  We were learning about the Great Lakes, the five Great Lakes.  We'd never heard about the five Great Lakes, and--but it was a part of what we had to do, and we just could not get the five Great Lakes and why we had to remember them.  And so one day as he was giving us ways to understand learning, he said, "I'll tell you what.  Do any of you know how to spell the word homes, H-O-M-E-S?"  "Yes.  We can--we know that."  So he said, "If you know that, you will remember how to remember the Great Lakes."  And he went, "Huron [Lake Huron], H, Ontario [Lake Ontario], O, Michigan [Lake Michigan], E, Erie [Lake Erie]," I mean--
Speaker 1: You got it right (laughter).
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  "Huron, H, Ontario, O, Michigan, M, E for Erie, and S for Superior [Lake Superior]."  From that day, I never forgot.  That was his technique of learning, to think of something that would help you remember what a question would be.  He also taught us about the planets and space.  I never learned about space.  I didn't even know there was planets out there.  He--like I say, the trips he took us on was very educational.  Spelling, he made it so much fun.  I mean, you wanted to learn.  It, it wasn't boring.  He didn't make it hard or complicated, and if he saw you had a problem, he actually sat down with you and--until you got it, and, and that was really good, a good way to make us feel comfortable in learning, where we have had teachers before demanding you learn.  And giving you little ways of understanding how to remember or learn these things.
Speaker 1: Did he live on the island?
Speaker 2: For a period, he did.  He actually used to sleep on a--on the floor of the school room (laughter).  Yes.  Yes, he did.  And then he--they had given him a boat when he went back and forth, but on colder days, he kind of stayed over 'cause the water was pretty rough to get back and forth in the morning, on, on winter days.
Story_ID: 660738
Speaker 1: Now you said he came in '68 [1968] or '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: It was '68 [1968], '69 [1969] school year (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nine [1969], school year.  And you were in what grade at that time?
Speaker 2: Sixth grade [at Mary Fields School, Daufuskie Island, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Sixth grade.  Okay.  So he's there.  Do you know why he left?
Speaker 2: Pat [Pat Conroy] left because he knock heads with the (laughter) superintendent [W.B. Southerlin], and he had a lot of requests for us, and they were like, "No, no, no."  And he was like, "Yes, yes, yes," (laughter).  He was determined we needed these things, and it was important for us to know these things, whereas, other teachers didn't request, before, things like taking up on a trip.  He said, "Well, other kids in school on the mainland go on trips.  Why can't they?"  "Oh, those folks don't need to go nowhere.  They fine the way they are."  And he thought, no they're not.  They deserve the right to learn as much as anyone else.  So he would push for things that he knew we should have, but they felt we didn't need to.  And bumping head with them is one of the reason that it was time to go.
Story_ID: 660739
Speaker 1: So, okay.  So the seventh grade, who was your next teacher?
Speaker 2: We had a teacher came in, another male white teacher, Mr. McGeichen [ph.].  I didn't have--to be honest with you, I don't remember that year much at all (laughter).  It wasn't important (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So and you go through the eighth grade in this school [Mary Fields School, Daufuskie Island, South Carolina].
Speaker 2: I--my mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford], at this point, because before Pat [Pat Conroy] left, he had also went to my mom and told her he needed to get me off the island [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina].  He saw that I was a fast learner, and I was hungry for learning.  I really was.  I mean, still today, I love learning.  So my mom didn't do it the very year, but the year after, which was my eighth grade period, she sent me to Savannah [Georgia] to live with one of her sister who had six kids, and, I mean, it was like home because we had a houseful at home before I left (laughter).  I went to a school called Bartlett Middle School [Savannah, Georgia].  It was the worst year, yes.  There were too many kids, and these kids just seemed to be cruel.  My dialect was much more Gullah.  I wasn't listening to myself.  I didn't realize or know that I was speaking so different from them.  To me, I was just as normal as they were.  Where they saw me as someone from a place that didn't exist (laughter).  And they made it very hard for me to be comfortable.  The kids seemed to've always been fighting.  It was always something going on that you had to be out the way or be careful, and, and that was something I weren't used to, and I cried and I begged my mom to get me out of there, but her not knowing that she could actually pull me out of one school and taken me to another.  She said, "Oh, you just have to stay until the end of the year, and then you can--I'll move you," and which she did.  And that's when I went to live with a stepsister on Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], and Hilton Head did not have a school, so they were busing us to Bluffton [South Carolina], and there I went to H.E. McCracken [H.E. McCracken High School], and that's where I also graduated from.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, okay.  McCracken and that's on Bluffton.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you went there in the, the ninth grade.
Speaker 2: I went there ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Ninth grade, okay.
Speaker 2: Tenth grade, skipped eleventh grade and twelfth grade, I graduated (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you're smart.
Speaker 2: (Gesture).
Story_ID: 660740
Speaker 1: Did you do a lot of reading growing up?  And what was your favorite subject?
Speaker 2: I took a multiple amount of subjects.  History was great because we had learned so much about the things that happened centuries ago.  Pat [Pat Conroy] had made that such an interest.  They also had home, home ec [home economics] which I enjoyed because I did those things at home, but they gave us the opportunity to do it at school and show it off, cooking, and, and making an outfit, one piece of outfit.  I was not into sports even though I was a tomboy at home.  Their kind of sport was not the kind of sports we did (laughter).
Speaker 1: What kind of sports did you do?
Speaker 2: We rode cows (laughter).  We climbed trees.  Fishing and hunting, that's what the kind of sport that we did that was fun and a part of our livelihood. So basketball and football, nah (laughter).
Story_ID: 660741
Speaker 1: Did you learn how to shoot a rifle, a gun (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you learned that?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, maybe about ten or eleven.  Pop had this double barrel shotgun (laughter).  And he actually treated girls like the boys.  They were no difference to him.  He felt that if you woke up, (laughter) you had strength in your body, you were able to do whatever, so he took us in the yard one day.  My mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] was hollering (laughter), "Thomas [Robinson's stepfather, Thomas Stafford]."  He gave us the gun.  He said, "Well, they got to learn how to shoot the gun.  If they want to go in that woods and find something to eat," (laughter). "they need to know how to handle the gun."  So he took us in the backyard and we lined up some cans, and, wow, it was tough, but I learned (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: And, and you also learned how to fish, right?
Speaker 2: Learned how to fish, crab, pick oyster, dig for clams.
Story_ID: 660742
Speaker 1: We have to revisit--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --the, the fun times and the recreation at home, and so y- I asked you about fishing, and you say crabbing.  Okay.  So tell me all about that (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  Like I said, a lot of our fun time was doing a lot of the work that help provided meals for our table as well, so besides riding a cow to take him out to graze, we went fishing.  Oh, that was just--neighbors and family members meeting at the dock, and everybody got their reel, fishing pole, I should say, and buckets to gather the crab and the fish when you catch all this to take home.  And we'd line up on the dock, and a lot of times during the season, fishing, the warmer weather, the gnats would just drive you crazy, but we had this thing called a smoke pot that you would take cow dung and old cloth, yes, (laughter), put in a bucket and you light it, and what it does is smoke, this real strong smelly smoke would run the gnat off.  It would run you off (laughter), too, but you had to deal with it.  And you got the fish.  Crabbing, pieces of chicken back or neck or old fish, we would drop on a line, tie on a line 'cause we didn't have crab nets and stuff.  You tie it on a line.  You drop it over in the water, and you could feel when the crab is biting, and you slowly pull it up, and we had a scoop net.  You grabbed it and you caught crabs.  You just had just a great day of activity, catching crabs, or you run to your fishing line when you're not catching a crab.  And when it came to oysters, you could go on the bank at low tide, the shore of the banks, and all of these oysters are just standing there waiting for you to gather.  You would go and you'd pick them, and, now you had to be very careful with oysters because they're sharp.  And there were days, I remember as a younger child, my mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] would take us with them in the wagon.  We'd all pack up and go to our little area where they pick oysters at low tide, and we would sit on the bank, and they would get these oysters in they would catch a fire.  Now, we ate a bellyful of oysters while they all down by the river picking and shucking these oysters, leaving the shell there.  It was also way of not bringing all this oysters home, then having to get rid of the shell because they always gave the shell back to the water.  Clam digging, we'd go on the beach.  We'd take little shovels, a rake, and you could see them peeking out of the dirt, and you would actually take the rake and pull them out of the mud 'cause there would be a muddy area.  That was fun.  Always had a knife with you to open one up and eat it (laughter).  Or build a fire and roast it.  These things were fun because we got to eat all of the time.  And even in the hunting--during the hunting season, the guys, boys got to get a gun at fourteen.  That was their Christmas.  Every Christmas, a young man who turned fourteen looked forward to a--what they call a fourteen, a fourteen gun.  That's what it was called.  And they go squirrel hunting.  There were times when my cousins, boy cousins, and me and my sister, we would all go hunting, too.  We would take our dog and go in the woods and hunt for rabbit.  They would shoot the squirrel.  We just had a fun day of gathering food (laughter).  And you brought them home.  You had to skin it, clean it, and then you could cook it or mom or pop would cook.  The gathering of food was a lot of fun.  We mixed a lot of play with work because it was a part of going through the day, getting something done.  We did not complain about what we had to do because it was what we--it was our chores, a part of our daily chores and gathering food.
Story_ID: 660743
Speaker 1: Did you learn how to swim?
Speaker 2: Later (laughter).  Living on a island [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina], swimming was not a top priority.  You would, you would think so, but, nope.  "Stay away from that water," (laughter).  My parents [Albertha Robinson Stafford and Robinson's stepfather, Thomas Stafford] rather we not swim (laughter).  But when Pat [Pat Conroy] came along, it was a priority.  That was another thing that was fun.  He thought we lived on a island and couldn't swim.  Now, mind you, the girls couldn't swim.  The boys could swim because they would go to the dock and jump off and swim.  Also lost a family member.  One day they were doing that.  I don't think boys swam since due to that, but it was great for them to jump off the dock and swim.  Me, personally, nah.  I like solid ground (laughter).
Speaker 1: That--yeah, it's always so amazing, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --that, you know, they say that most African Americans do not know how to swim.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Even though they live on an island--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --where you would think they would learn, learn to swim.
Story_ID: 660744
Speaker 1: Do you have recipes about squirrels?  Do you--
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Yes, I do (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So y'all ate squirrels.  What about--were there 'possums?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Squirrels, rabbit, raccoon, 'possum, deer, (laughter), birds, yes.  And in my cookbook ['Gullah Home Cooking the Daufuskie Way,' Sallie Ann Robinson], I do have those recipes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was--it wasn't a choice.  It was a part of our lifestyle, and like I said, my grandmother [Robinson's maternal grandmother, Louvenia Bentley Robinson] was a excellent cook.  My mother [Albertha Robinson Stafford] was an excellent--matter of fact, everybody on the island [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina] that I knew was a cook.  Mens, there wasn't--cooking wasn't just for women.  Mens had to cook, too.  My mom and pop [Robinson's stepfather, Thomas Stafford] would say to us, pop would say, "Yeah, if you want a good man, you need to learn how to cook, and, y'all girls, y'all got to clean."  And my mom said, "If you don't want to starve you better learn how to cook," (laughter).  So they were preparing us for our future that we didn't know had so much challenge in front of us.  We thought we were working hard and going through a lot then, but they really knew that they had to prepare us for the things ahead of us, so.
Story_ID: 660745
Speaker 1: Now you're living on Savannah [Georgia] going back to--I mean, Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], sorry, you're on--you're in Hilton Head, and going to high school, and you talk about having the, the Gullah dialect.  How did you transition to be able to, you know, speak the same?  I'm not going to say, you know--
Speaker 2: Better, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) diff- better, no, but different.  Okay.  How did that transition happen for you?
Speaker 2: Lots of tears (laughter).  It had saddened me that I was teased because of the way I talked when I didn't realize it was different, but I wanted to fit in.  As a child growing up, all you want to ever do is fit in no matter what it is because you can't see the difference, especially, when you were not brought up that way.  You were not brought up to hate.  You were not brought up to be judgmental.  We--our way of life was a way that we knew, and a change made it hard.  Many days I cried because I was teased by the kids, especially, when I was--during the Savannah period.  When I got to Hilton Head, it was much more comfortable because the kids were more like me from the countryside, and talking a certain way wasn't a big deal.  We under--as long as we understood each other.  We was not corrected.  Oh, you're not supposed to say it like this.  You say it like that.  My education year in Bluffton [South Carolina] at H.E. McCracken [H.E. McCracken High School] was with kids who was more in tuned to the way I grew up because it was an island as well, Hilton Head was, and even it was in early stage of growing and developing, the kids pretty much had the kind of life I had.
Speaker 1: Well, Gullah was also on Hilton.
Speaker 2: Gullah was but, again, it wasn't in our vocabulary (laughter).  Having been told that I was Gullah was like, you gotta be kidding me.  Basically, because I did not know what it was.
Speaker 1: What the culture was.
Speaker 2: I had no clue.  And it wasn't something our parents [Albertha Robinson Stafford and Robinson's stepfather, Thomas Stafford] knew that taught us that we were speaking different.
Speaker 1: Did you ever hear the term Geechee?
Speaker 2: I heard the word Geechee when I heard the word Gullah.
Speaker 1: Oh, same time?
Speaker 2: It was Gullah Geechee, being introduced, the lady was telling me that I was.  I'm like, no, I not be (laughter).
Story_ID: 660746
Speaker 1: Now, we're in six--seven--we're already in the '70s [1970s], so you already alluded to the fact that you didn't have any knowledge of what was, you know, considered discrimination, but what about the Civil Rights Movement?  Had you had knowledge of what was going on with Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], about Kennedy's assassination, all of the things that were going on in the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Heard very little of it.  My mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] battery  powered radio, a few people who had TV would speak about it.  We didn't really know a lot of what was going on.  We were in our own world.  They hear these things, and we could hear it in conversations, but it wasn't a sit down, you need to know this way of learning.  Also when Pat [Pat Conroy] came, he was teaching us things about our culture that we had no clue about, that had never been pointed out to us.  He thought that was interesting for us to know being that we were not taught some of it.  It was kind of like tippy toeing around things.  Having been put out there in it when I got the opportunity was like, whoa.  Why are these people acting like this?  Something wrong with them (laughter).  When all the time, they're saying the same thing about me.  But you, you kind of--you know, they used to say you take it with a grain of salt, folks used to say.  You live and you learn.  You, you can't say with--never say can't because there's so much different things that was going on that we had no clue about.  When folks were hitting switch, we were lighting our--
Speaker 1: Candles?
Speaker 2: --kerosene lamps.  When people were turning knobs for water, we were hand pumping.  When they were going to the store to pick out their vegetable and what chicken they're going to eat, we went to the yard and had to catch one and kill it, clean it, and go through the process.  And when I moved and I inquired to some folks when I was in the presence of some folks.  Say, "Oh, I'm going to the store to get some shrimp."  And I say, "Why you want to do that?"  And they say, "Well, that's what we do."  And I says, "No, no, no.  But the ocean [Atlantic Ocean] is right there.  You need to go get some," (laughter), "from the ocean 'cause that's where they get it from.  And you don't have to pay for it."  They were like, "Oh, no.  We don't have time."  Well, time was all we had.  Time was something that made us have more, and did--not the cost.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: We were living a world of not having to spend money because we didn't make it.  Where they had to work in order to eat.  The work was just different.  We worked for ourselves, where they work for others (laughter) to have, and that was like, no, something is wrong with this picture (laughter) for me.
Story_ID: 660747
Speaker 1: In high school [H.E. McCracken High School, Bluffton, South Carolina], so now you get through high school.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what are your aspirations?  What is it that you want to do after high school?
Speaker 2: During that time, the [U.S.] military was a big talk, but during my last year of school, I was also pregnant.  I was disappointed.  Had a boyfriend, Lord didn't know it was that, came to that.  I still had the opportunity to go, 'cause his parents was really wonderful to help out at the time, but I guess being a young mother, I did not want to leave my child [Charles Simmons IV], so I stayed and I worked.  Work was all we had to continue growing and learning more and living and catching up with the lifestyle that was happening 'cause things was happening and changing fast.  The speed--it was like the speed of light.  We didn't worry about getting in a car that had to have gas and oil and all this stuff to get to someplace.  I mean, you hitch up this cow with this wagon, say, "Giddy up," (laughter).  And then you put him on some grass and he ate.  The lifestyle kind of moves you real fast into an adult, that--every day was a new beginning, every day.  On the island [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina] growing up, it was just--it was a pace of knowing what you had to do and getting it done, and the challenge were just different.  The feeling was always questionable after I left the island.  It was so many questions, and not being able to go back home and say, "I don't want to do this," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you not have that option?
Speaker 2: You know, going home, back home, was more or less, you're grown now.  You gotta learn these things.  You gotta be on your own.  And, and they wanted us to know that one day they will not be around, and we had to face all these things that was happening.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you have a son, right?
Speaker 2: I have--
Speaker 1: I mean, you--at that time, back in high school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At that time, I had a--yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And not long, another [Jermaine Robinson] (laughter).
Speaker 1: What, what did you--well, let's talk about where you worked first and then we'll get into your children, okay (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  My first job was at a place called the William Hilton Head Inn [sic. William Hilton Inn, Hilton Head Island, South Carolina].  This inn was hiring everybody, seemed like, 'cause everybody you knew was there.  My first job was washing dishes.  I actually--and that was a beginner, for all beginners.  I actually stayed on that position for maybe a month.  I was too curious about everything else in that building that was going on.  You had the kitchen.  You had the dining room.  You had the office area, the front desk, and then you had the people who did all the cleaning and stuff, and then you, you also had the pot washer, so all these little positions, people running around, and you're stuck at a machine in the back was not gonna happen for me.  I needed more.  I needed the connection.  I needed to see more people 'cause all you got back there was the dishes coming at you.  So, immediately, I applied for another position.  I wanted to cook.  And they were always willing to let you try 'cause jobs turned over, so I got back there, and I cooked for a while, and then, you always had opportunity to go someplace else.  Then the pantry.  I fell in love with the pantry; salads and desserts, and just making things pretty, so I did that for a long period.  I would say a year.  And then I wanted to wait tables.  I needed to know how to do all this stuff, being curious really.  I went and applied to wait tables.  That way, I got to be in front of people, and I got to meet them and talk to them on occasion.
Story_ID: 660748
Speaker 1: Got to talk to them, and I liked that.  That was a lot of interest, meeting people.  Then I stayed with the hotel business for a while, had more kids (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in between.
Speaker 2: All right.  So what was your first son's name?
Speaker 1: Charles Edward Simmons IV [Charles Simmons IV].
Speaker 2: And what year was he born?
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you were at the hotel [William Hilton Inn, Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] from--when did you graduate from high school [H.E. McCracken High School, Bluffton, South Carolina], in seventy--
Speaker 1: It was in '75 [1975].  And that was my first son.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I was at this job also with my second son.
Speaker 2: And what was his name?
Speaker 1: My second son was Jermaine Adonuise Robinson [Jermaine Robinson, Sr.].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, same father [Charles Simmons III].  And during that period, about two years old, his father passed.
Speaker 2: Sorry.
Speaker 1: So I had the two boys.  And then about three, almost four years later, as I worked and cared for them, I met another gentleman.  Then I had my daughter.  Her name, Rakenya Niccole Robinson [Rakenya Robinson].  And I worked.  At this point, I was seeing what it was to be--I mean, the challenge of being a parent, the things that I used to question.  Why my mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] want us to do this?  Why--not out loud (laughter).  And so the challenges that they were facing raising us, but I had more modern stuff versus the way I grew up.  I had electricity, a switch to turn, the knob to turn, the water to run.  In the--in my work process, I got a place on Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] to raise my kids, and that's my daughter.  She came along.  I stayed on Hilton Head until she was born in '79 [1979], 1979, and then about two, maybe three years later, I met a gentleman whom I had my--I married.  It didn't last too long, but we had a son together.  His name is Isiah Lamar Coleman [Isiah Coleman].  And at the end of--
Speaker 2: Well, where were you working?  Did you work at the hotel from '75 [1975] to '79 [1979]?
Speaker 1: When I had my son Isiah and got married, I was--I'm sorry.  I went to Savannah [Georgia] where he was from.
Speaker 2: Oh, you moved to Savannah in--
Speaker 1: I moved to Savannah.
Speaker 2: --in '79 [1979]?  In what year?
Speaker 1: This was about '80 [1980], '83 [1983].
Speaker 2: Eighty-three [1983].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you moved to Savannah, and where were you working in Savannah?
Speaker 1: I worked at a place called Build-a-Rama [ph.].  It was a lumber company, and I was a cashier.  My first time ever being a cashier, and it was, again, communicating with people who came to the register to buy stuff, ask question and being helpful.  I worked there, oh, my goodness, for about three or--three years, and in between, I had my son, Isiah (laughter) Lamar Coleman.
Speaker 2: And what was your husband's name?
Speaker 1: Alfred Lamar Coleman [Alfred Coleman].
Speaker 2: And when you left the lumber company?
Speaker 1: I actually went to a store called Piggly Wiggly [Piggly Wiggly Corporation; Piggly Wiggly, LLC].  The scanner, the scanner was new, so I learned to scan groceries instead of ringing them up (laughter).  I stayed there for a couple of years.  It was a little iffy with that type job because they were having a lot of robberies.  People come in and steal, and that had really made me scared because you had to do, doub- different shift, and I didn't like night shift.  It just felt a little scary there.  So during this period after that job, that's when my ex-husband and I separated, and I moved back to Carolina [South Carolina] (laughter).
Story_ID: 660749
Speaker 1: Where in Carolina did you move to?
Speaker 2: I actually, at that point, moved in Bluffton [South Carolina] with a friend who was, at the time, helping me out make the transition and lo and behold, I had my last son (laughter).  All I can say is, it was tough trying to figure out so much in so little time, wondering how did my parents [Albertha Robinson Stafford and Robinson's stepfather, Thomas Stafford] do this with all those kids, and I only have a few?  Lots of questions of how this did it and seemed like you can't--made you more determined, though, basically, because they taught us to be strong, to hold our head up and to do the best you can.
Speaker 1: So what was your last son's name?
Speaker 2: My last son is Thomas Morris Bush [Thomas Bush].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So you're living in Bluffton, and is this--where, where do you work here in Bluffton?
Speaker 2: I was actually--this is where I actually started nursing.  I got into nursing because it was also part of who I was.  On Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina], you did it all.  You, you were a helper.  You were a helper.  You did everything you were told, but then when the need came to someone being sick, you find yourself being a nurse.  I loved people.  I do love people.  And--I mean, even today.  That's why I guess my profession is still with people, interacting.  I went into nursing and I loved it because I started meeting all these different people from different places, you know, who I--some of them had the same stories I had growing up, but knowing that I came from a family who did all this stuff, made me felt comfortable, too, so I actually went into nursing at that point.
Speaker 1: So where did you go school?
Speaker 2: I did not go to school for it at first.  In '88 [1988], as time went on, in '88 [1988], my stepfather passed.  It just seemed like a part of my world was missing.  I had a grandaunt who had visit some months before and talked about coming to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  "Oh, Sallie [HistoryMaker Sallie Ann Robinson], you need to come to Philadelphia, the big city.  You need to get away from this little island."  And when I guess that hardship or hard time fell where I felt, like it's time to move.  I packed my kids' bag, got on a bus and went up there, and about eleven o'clock that night in November, I'll never forget, in 1988, I called her up from the bus station in Philadelphia and say, "Guess where I am?"  And she said, "On Daufuskie, I hope, in this weather."  And I said, "No."  I said, "Me and my kids at the bus stop.  We need a ride," (laughter).  And she said, "What,"   (laughter)?
Story_ID: 660750
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your friend says--
Speaker 2: She goes, "What?"  (Laughter) And I say, "Yeah, we need a ride."  And she said, "What you mean we?"  Yeah.  I said, "Well, I got my kids."  (Laughter) Her and her daughter came and picked me up and my kids.  I was exhausted.  I had never been on a bus ride, and I had three kids with me at the time, so long.  I did not know I had a choice of the bus that didn't stop much versus a bus that stop everywhere, every little city.  But going up there, I just felt that I needed a break because I was going through a lot with raising my children.  Job was really low to none on the island [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina].  My stepfather [Thomas Stafford] died.  My mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] just was mourning very hard his death.  And I didn't want to go anyplace local.  I just felt that if I was going anyplace, it had to be far away, and after my grandaunt had put this in my head, that I needed to come to the big city, (laughter) I thought I'd take a chance.  And, and being a challenging per- I, I'm very curious about stuff so I always challenge myself.  And after going there, I actually stayed for three years, and this where I went to school, my nursing school.  I had the love for it, so I went there and instead of just settling for getting on welfare, I actually went and looked for nursing.  I went and--to city hall in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] because it was the one place I figured had all the answers, and, believe me, I found the answers.  I saw this lady that was in this desk through a door, and I wanted to know who she was 'cause she had the most beautiful view of Center City [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and they told me who she was.  And I said, "Can I meet her?"  And they say, "Yes, you can."  And I got to meet her, and when I told her where I was from, she says, "You're a long way from home."  And I say, "Yes, ma'am."  I say, "But I feel that I need to, you know, explore a little bit."  And that was all a part of when Pat [Pat Conroy] was teaching us about getting away, learning about new places.  And so I was telling her what I was looking for, and she actually helped me, connected me with some folks who--I got into the nursing.  The government, at that point, in the city was offering single mothers jobs, career jobs, and nursing was one of them.  But before I did that, I had actually tried fashion designing because I loved making clothes, too.  All these things from home was coming back at me, and I wanted to try.  Well, the fashion designing didn't work out because it was a little tougher than I thought it would be, so I got into the nursing and fell in love all over, and that's when I went to school and just loved it.  I worked for BAYADA nursing [BAYADA Home Health Care, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] up there, a nursing agency, one of the biggest up there.
Speaker 1: What is it called?
Speaker 2: BAYADA nursing.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: B-A-Y-A, yada, D-A, BAYADA nursing (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where did you go to school, name of the school?
Speaker 2: It was--it wasn't a actual school.  They had these group of nursing teachers came to this facility and taught us.  It was a LPN [licensed practical nurse] training.  I mean, I learned a lot.
Speaker 1: So they came to--what, what was the facility (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They had this facility.  I honestly--
Speaker 1: Can't remember.
Speaker 2: --can't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The faci- we all met up.  And in this program, all you had to do is show up.  They provided the bus fare.  They gave you five dollars a day for lunch.  All you had to do is go, and learn and return, and I took advantage of it.  And I'm today very proud of it 'cause I had a great education behind that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so what, what year did you finish that training?
Speaker 2: That was in '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: Ninety-one [1991], okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 660751
Speaker 1: And so where did you go to work after that?
Speaker 2: I went to nursing--the BAYADA nursing [BAYADA Home Health Care, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause they actually place you in a job as well.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: So I got to do that.  I stayed another year.  By this time, my kids was having home fever.  "We wanna go home.  We--this city just ain't doing it," and, I'm like, "Well, I can't go right now because I had just start the job."  So I called home to family members and Jermaine [Jermaine Robinson] grandparents took him.  A daughter [Rakenya Robinson] went to my mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] and a friend, and Isiah [Isiah Coleman], my other son, went to his father [Alfred Coleman].  My youngest son [Thomas Bush], who was already with his father, who had visit and went back, so they were all happy, and I wanted to complete what I was doing, and I stayed an extra year, and then it was time for me to go back south because I was missing the fresh fish, the crab, the fresh vegetables (laughter).  And I was like, oh, my gosh, it's time to go home.  I, I really got sick for home after a while.  I didn't think I was going to, but after buying some of the seafood, that was not the same.
Speaker 1: Were there any experiences as a nurse that you remember that sticks out in your mind of where you worked, or--
Speaker 2: In my nursing field and time, I have met some interesting people.  I have really met some interesting people.  I've met doctors, nurses, whom have been in it for years and got sick and needed help.  I've met people who were travelers.  And the one thing I enjoyed about being in the field was that we got to share stories.  We got to talk about our life, where we were from, or the ins and out of it, and a lot of folks that I cared for were very talkative and very interesting, and, and was really intrigued where I was from [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina], so it made caring for them or doing--meeting their needs a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: So did you work in a hospital, or did you work like in, in homes with--
Speaker 2: Private homes.
Speaker 1: Private homes.  Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: I had the opportunity to work in hospitals, but, no.  I wanted to work in homes to keep people where they were most comfortable and wanted to do things.  They wanted to go out.  I would take them out shopping or just for a ride.  And then they'd come back home, and, you know, do something around the house.  So that was my comfort zone in nursing, is home care (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.
Story_ID: 660752
Speaker 1: You leave Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and go where?
Speaker 2: Back to the Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina] (laughter).  And a company which had also just gotten there called International Paper [International Paper Company] was seeking on the island for native who wanted to come back home or wanted work.  This was when work was actually happening on Daufuskie for my generation.  So going back home was a good thing.  I could go to work now.  I don't have to move to Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] to be--you know, to work.  So I did that, and they offered me a job.  They wanted someone--instead of hiring people to come and clean, they actually built a company for me, so I had a cleaning company.  They also knew that other people said they would come back home if they had work.  Well, it started out that way (laughter).  And some folks, family members, friends, worked.  I had up to fourteen people employed.  At the same time, Haig Point was developing, International Paper at Haig Point [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina] on the island was developing, another company came in, which was Melrose [The Melrose Company, Hilton Head Island, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: What did--what kind of company was that?
Speaker 2: Development.  They were--they built villas, the houses and--a resort, pretty much a resort, golf courses.
Speaker 1: So this is when you see the island begin (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ah.
Speaker 1: --to change because before that like when you're coming up, when you're talking about how people--there was no work there, but there was always--well, not always, but there was a Daufuskie oyster company [L.P. Maggioni and Company] there.  Was that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not--
Speaker 1: --there when you were--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: When did that come?
Speaker 2: That was before--that was there before I was born.
Speaker 1: That's what I meant.  It was there--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) way, a long time.
Speaker 2: It was there but it had also closed, and the reason for it shutting down was it was contaminated.  The water was contaminated by the paper plant from Savannah [Georgia], contaminated the oysters, so people couldn't eat oysters anymore.  And back then, oysters, up to 80 percent or more of oysters was actually coming from Daufuskie around the world.
Speaker 1: Right.  'Cause Daufuskie is known for the deviled crabs.
Speaker 2: And the deviled crab which my understanding, it was actually invented there.  A lady name of Susie [ph.].  People during that time was creative.  Like I grew up.  We were creative.  They not only made do with what they had, but they saw things that was needed and they did it.  It wasn't a question of, you need to do this.  I'll do it.  They just jumped in and did it.  The deviled crab was also a source of family income on Daufuskie as I was growing up.  Remember, no jobs, but they made income based on their garden, pecans.  I remember picking up croker sacks and croker sacks with pecans that my grandmother [Robinson's maternal grandmother, Louvenia Bentley Robinson] would take to the market.  Now, myself and my cousins.  She had a lot of grandkids, so we had to get out there and pick up these pecans during the time it was ripe and falling, or thrashing the tree for her to take to the market.  She had all these vegetables she would also take to the market.  These were their income, that they didn't have jobs, per se, to make their money.
Speaker 1: Right.  So the market was on Daufuskie, right?
Speaker 2: The market was in Savannah.
Speaker 1: In Savannah, okay.
Speaker 2: Took it to Savannah market.  Remember these boats that went periodically, or they hired to go, the Captain Sam [Samuel Stevens, Jr.], and then the county came in and gave the island a couple of boats, different periods.  These were the boats that they hauled the stuff on, to the market in Savannah.
Story_ID: 660753
Speaker 1: Well, I also know that, that there were excursions because other people who were growing up in that era would come from Savannah [Georgia] and do excursions to Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And they always talk about all the music and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --all the different crafts that were being sold.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Creative, again, the folks was.  'Cause they didn't have jobs to depend on, so you had to make do and do things what they had.  The excursion, which was Captain Sam [Samuel Stevens, Jr.], had a boat called the Waving Girl, three hundred or more people would pack on this boat and come to Daufuskie, and folks on the island would be down at the waterfront, lined up with tables with their deviled crabs, boiled crabs, boiled shrimp.  We, as kids, we'd pick plum.  We had boiled peanuts.  Oh, man.  Some had fried fish.  Folks came and bought from each person or different people that got to knew through the years or family members and just devoured.  They had--Captain Sam had a block building, a concrete block building which was called the club.  In it, he had a piccolo, which is a jukebox.  We called it a piccolo.  And these music.  You put a quarter in, and you got three songs, and you danced, and you just had a great time.  These were the music we knew, we learned during my childhood.  Again, back to Pat [Pat Conroy] teaching us classical music and different things that we had not experienced.  The money that was made was met--was what our parents bought staples that we couldn't grow, salt, pepper, you know, certain meats that we didn't raise, certain tools that--feed for the hogs.  After--during the wintertime, we would feed them bought food.  During the summertime, you had all these fruit trees.  You had all this, what we called slop, that was generated from the house, scrappings of food.  Also, once the field was over, we turned them loose.  You could turn the hogs loose, and they would root up all the stuff in the field that was left.  You had walnut trees that they would eat the walnuts, the pecans, the berries.  So being loose, they would just roam the island, and during that time, it was also when the cows were turned loose.  We didn't have any problem with our animal being free and roaming.  And at night, believe it or not, they came home.  They knew where home was.  They knew where their, what, bed was (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: The island folks all had cows and pigs and stuff, but when the development came, that became a problem (laughter).  The hogs and the cows was in the way, so a lot of folks could no longer turn them loose, and keeping them in pens or captive on a rope became another issue.  The change started happening with the development and the things that the way of life the people lived.
Story_ID: 660754
Speaker 1: So you, you see the change.  And how long before you saw the development change?  Because I--we saw how Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] changed because people even having their own space for the beaches, and there, definitely, there was segregation--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --going on at--on Hilton Head, but here, this is a different type of island where you didn't have that.  So now do you start to see this coming to the island?
Speaker 2: The change come with, "Oh, this island is beautiful.  I got to be here."  But then you come, and you wanna bring everything with you.  Electricity didn't come until around the '50s [1950s] on Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina], and a few people, like I say, had it, including my grandmother [Robinson's maternal grandmother, Louvenia Bentley Robinson].  Telephone came in the '70s [1970s].  Before that, it was word of mouth.  It was yelling through the pond.  My stepfather [Thomas Stafford] had a way of recognizing when somebody came by the house and we were not there.  The, the ground was dirt.  And one of the things that he used to do the minute we return home, he'd stop us before we walked into the yard, was to check for footprints.  I always said, "What are we looking for?"  "Oh, I'm checking to see who came by."  "Well, how you gonna know that?"  He say, "Well, they footprint."  Very intelligent way of knowing who came by your house because grass didn't grow to your door.  He said, "Grass don't grow on a busy street," (laughter).  So he--that was his way of realizing who came because he knew how most people even walked, and we had this guy who was crippled.  He walked--he had a twist in his heel.  We had this guy who walk--he said, "Oh, you can tell Williams [James Williams] was here.  His foot go out."  And. "How you know that?"  "'Cause he walk like this." (laughter).  Being knowledg- knowledgeable was something they learned through what they call mother with, paying attention to the things being done.  You learn it.  You can do it.  He always say, "If you close your mouth and open your ear, you might learn something," 'cause all the time most people are yapping and can't hear.  So getting back to the development, they came--they brought jobs, and, like I said, even brought me a cleaning company because they was trying to find folks who wanted to come home and give them something to do.  Well, first for a minute, it was okay.  But it seemed like it got to the point where the more you gave, the less they did, or the more complaints.  And I understood all of it.  It was just hard to understand what to do about it because we weren't used to all this change so fast.  I even got involved and was president of the community.  I was the president of the community for six years because I wanted to help solve problem.  For some reason, I just thought--everybody problem had to come through me to help make it better.  Why?  I don't know.  It was my nature because my grandmother, my mother [Albertha Robinson Stafford], my great-grandmother [Robinson's maternal great-grandmother, Sallie Williams Bentley], they were all community leaders.  They were always involve.  And it wasn't nothing that they didn't challenge if they felt--well, it came through their front door as one would say.  They always felt that nothing gets done if you don't make the effort.  Pop had a saying, "Nothing gets done when you're lying in bed."  Actually, at a point when that was funny (laughter).  But I saw the changes happening.  Folks, my peers, my age, started seeing and feeling that it was best to leave home, go to work, and one day probably come back.  Well, that changed because no one seems to come back.  Like it's plain.  Not even myself moving, because things started happening.  After the work, even the nursing and raising the kids, time pass.  Then that's when I started writing because as I went back and forth from Hilton Head to Daufuskie because of work or to stay depending on whatever the need was or to be there with my parents.  It just seemed like you needed more.  And before, we didn't need much at all.  It was like so easy to just accept what you had; whereas, moving and being a part of the world that kept going seemed to make you want things you never even questioned before.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Things that never mattered.
Story_ID: 660755
Speaker 1: So what happened with the, the cleaning company?  And that, that cleaning company was there to, to clean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Clean their--
Speaker 1: --their build- (unclear).
Speaker 2: --buildings, and they had a lot of folks visiting 'cause they were selling properties, so--
Speaker 1: Well, that's a question I wanted to ask.  On Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], we know that a lot of people lost their homes because they--the developers were buying up properties where, you know, like, really just taking it from the folks who, you know, buying property just by paying taxes and things like that.  Did you see a lot of that happening on Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Now, the property in Haig Point and Melrose [Melrose Resort, Daufuskie Island, South Carolina], which was development area, was never black owned.  Those two areas were never black owned.  It's always been--it started out as a plantation [Haig Point Plantation, Daufuskie Island, South Carolina], and then it became property that just sat for many years; especially, when I was growing up 'cause we used to roam those places.  That was our playground and fishing areas.  Until Haig Point--or, well, International Paper [International Paper Realty Corporation] bought Haig Point, and then a group of guys bought Melrose.  Then the changes came from people buying this for their business, but the people that got there wanted to explore outside, which meant they came into our area and--wanting change.  And we're like, "No.  Stay behind there, your gates.  We're fine."  But the one thing I learned 'cause I've been questioned numerous time.  "Well, how do you feel about it?"  Some things you can't change because folks just say, "Money talks," (laughter).  As far as people and their land on the outside of those development, quite a few people, and I can't say how many, lost their land either to higher tax or just not paying their tax.  I know couple of people who lost their property, family members, that--we wish they had talked to us about, I guess, also asking for help from family wasn't a big thing or something they thought they could do because we only found out after the fact.  There have been property over there that I knew, once more folks came, had signs on their property for sale.  I would contact the people and ask them, "Is your land for sale?"  And they go, "No."  I said, "Well, a sign up on it."  You know, 'cause we kind of looked out for each other.  You, you don't know everything, or you can't keep up with everything, but those things you did, we did.  And folks lost property because a lot of them just plain right say, "I'm not coming back to that island unless it has a bridge."  I don't wish it ever get a bridge because it's small.  It's unique.  But then, again, the growth of it is already happening, and a bridge would totally take it out too much.  It's beautiful still.  It has things to iron out like everywhere, but it's still no place like home for me because there's still areas on that island still the same.
Story_ID: 660756
Speaker 1: So your parents, do you know how they acquired the property that they had and your grandparents [Robinson's maternal grandparents, Louvenia Bentley Robinson and Josephus Robinson]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Matter of fact, I went and--my great-great-great-grandfather owned this property.  How he became of it, I don't know.  Research, I'm still researching.
Speaker 1: Because I know a lot of the--when the Un- Confederate Army came to Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina], they left the land and the slaves there, and they never came back.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So, you know, and if you're going back that far, then we would assume that, not that we know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, they inquired.
Speaker 1: --that they were slaves--it was--they were slaves.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Property.  Another thing speaking on slave, that was one conversation never came up.  I honestly asked my mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] one day if she ever known any of our family members which have been slave, and she said, "No."  She said, "Gal, we don't talk about that."
Speaker 1: Well, maybe she didn't talk about it 'cause she didn't know.
Speaker 2: Well, they--she didn't.  I'm doing a lot of research now because I wanna know if anyone in my family generation was slave.  I haven't found one yet.  It was interesting that slave was everywhere, and these little island was also places that they ran to, to be freed.  And Daufuskie was one of them.  My mom recall sharecropping, but not slavery, and that's where you farm someone's land and they get half and you get half of the goods.  Interesting.  And I'm like, "Wow.  Okay.  Why they get half?"  Only because you used the property that they had.  The development brought new light, but not what the native wanted.  And through those years, people were dying.  The older were dying.  The new ones--the younger ones were moving, and it became less and less people to stay and fight for better or change that wouldn't affect them, but it didn't happen that way.  It would have been nice, but it didn't happen that way.
Story_ID: 660757
Speaker 1: We didn't talk about, about church [First Union African Baptist Church, Daufuskie Island, South Carolina].  So I know that's a very crucial part, so--I know--all right.  Let's start with coming up.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Growing up in the church.
Speaker 2: God, growing--that was mandatory.  Pop [Robinson's stepfather, Thomas Stafford] says, "You gotta," say, "God works six days and seven day he rest," but that was church for us.  We had to get up every Sunday morning, do our work, chores, get dressed and go to church.  We walked dirt roads to get to the church.  We wasn't far from it, but also last midwife, midwife that was there, Ms. Sarah Grant, she was also the church keeper.  She would go every Sunday, make sure--if it's wintertime, the fire was caught in the heater to warm up the church.  She'd make sure the books was laid out, the hum- hymn books was laid out, and she would ring the bell letting it know it was church time.  You went to church.  Folks would gather.  Oh, singing those old hymns.  I mean, you came home singing (laughter).  They--I mean, they would shout and sing to the top of their lungs these songs.  We had a lady there.  She was, I'm not kidding.  She sung like Mahalia Jackson.  Her name was Ms. Viola Bryant [ph.].  When this lady came to church, everybody wanted to be there (laughter).  And she was there regular.  It was also a day that people got together on the island, they met up on--at church as a community place.  They caught up with what was going on.  And dinner, my mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford], every Sunday fixed a big dinner.  That's when we had dessert.  Sunday was dessert.  Invite folks over, had big meals.  Church was not only mandatory on Sunday, but during summertime, we had summer school.  We had preachers and deacons, some folks would come over and do Sunday school with us.  Right after school, we learned about the Bible, things that we didn't get in church.  The church was a process period.  Bible school was to study the Bible and learn what it's about.  Going to church and Sunday school was mandatory.  It was a part of our life.
Speaker 1: Well, what, what type of religion was it--
Speaker 2: Baptist.
Speaker 1: --what denomination (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Baptist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Baptist.
Speaker 1: And y'all had a minister that came ever Sunday?
Speaker 2: Every Sunday?
Speaker 1: Did he live on the island?
Speaker 2: Nope (laughter).  Just recent maybe two or three years, the pastor that's there now live on the island, but before that, it was a visiting preacher, and every Sunday, they came, and we had a grand old gospel time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 660758
Speaker 1: Now, you talked about how your mother [Albertha Robinson Stafford] would cook these big, big meals.  So how much time did you spend learning to cook from your mother and your grandmother [Robinson's maternal grandmother, Louvenia Bentley Robinson]?
Speaker 2: I loved the kitchen (laughter).  I was one of the kid who when my mom said, "I need one of y'all in this kitchen," I ran.  I didn't, I didn't mind that outside work we had to do, but I liked that kitchen, plus I got to taste stuff (laughter).  My mom was a cook.  You didn't eat meals that were the same all the time.  You know, like some people mandatorily do fish on Friday or Wednesday spaghetti, whatever.  Oh, no, no, no, no.  A lot of her meals was like, "What are you cooking, mom?"  "You'll find out when you eat," (laughter)."  She loved to experience stuff with what she had.  We didn't just have fried fish, stew fish.  I mean, she would make it different.  And it was one of them things that when I left the island, I missed her food, and I would like--I thought everybody could cook like them and they couldn't, so it made me want to be a cook to remem- get those flavors and those tastes that--I mean, used to just make your mouth dance (laughter).  And Sundays because those were extra meals, we worked for those meals, but we couldn't wait to get back to it, and you could only eat once you get back home, so--
Speaker 1: So you would leave church and run home (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, run.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that church, by the way?
Speaker 2: First Union African Baptist Church [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Story_ID: 660759
Speaker 1: We were back at where you stop working for the cleaning company, and, and you said this is--and what year are we in?
Speaker 2: This was about '93 [1993], '94 [1994].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so this is when you begin to write, is that right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I started to--I was doing different things because work was slow.  At one point, there were no work and developers was there.  It was just men's work.  My stepfather [Thomas Stafford], we had moved from one end of the island to the other, and when the developers had came, even this--I got the cleaning service after the years of them being there, but at one point, it was just men's work, clearing the land and stuff.  And I told my stepfather, I said, "I'm going to need to find some work."  He said, "They don't have work for you."  He said, "Them, them men's work, not women work."  I said, "Well, they gonna have to tell me this."  And I went in the gate, and when I came back, I actually had a job because I had went to the office, and this guy was on the phone, paper was every way.  He was--everything was scrambled.  And he asked me what I wanted, and I said, "Well, I'm looking for work."  And he said, "Can you answer the phone?"  I say, "Yes, sir."  He says, "Can you file?"  I say, "Yes, sir."  He said, "Be back tomorrow."  So that job actually came before the cleaning job because this was the first stage of the development, and my father was surprised that I even went in and looked for something that he thought wasn't there, and he just shook his head and say, "Only you would go in there and find a job," being a woman and only men's work in there (laughter), so--but I had to try.  They taught me never to give up and to, you know, if you feel that it's something that you needed to do, go for it.  It doesn't hurt to ask.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So where is it that you get to the point that you begin to write, and what made you decide to write a cookbook?
Speaker 2: The time had passed, and I think I was-- well, I know I was back on Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina].  The cleaning business had folded.  And I went to Hilton Head, and I was back in nursing.  I was always back in nursing.  Nursing was my backup work even though I loved to cook and did other things.  I was working for this client, and we were talking, and I says--he said, "Sallie [HistoryMaker Sallie Ann Robinson], why don't you do a cookbook, a book on your food?"  And I says, "I don't wanna write.  Oh, no, not me.  That's a lot of work."  Really didn't know anything about writing.  And it was like a seed planted, and for a period after that, I kept hearing, honestly, a voice said, "Sallie, you need to--you need a cookbook.  You need a cookbook."  I'm like something wrong with me right now because I don't need anything, especially write a cookbook.  It seemed like the furthest thing from my mind.  And I could not get away from just hearing, "You need to do a cookbook," and I told my client, I said, "Mr. Tamplin [ph.]," is who they were at the time, the Tamplins, "I'm going to write a book, a cookbook."  He say, "Oh, good.  You can start here."  So I was caring for his wife at the time 'cause he used to like to play golf.  He says, "Take your time."  So I started to think about writing this cookbook ['Gullah Home Cooking the Daufuskie Way,' Sallie Ann Robinson].  What kind?  How do I start it?  How much recipe do I need?  All these questions came to me.  And I had this pencil and paper.  I wrote down a hundred recipe.  Where I was going to get them from, I had no clue, even though I knew much more, so I started--my first recipe I wrote was called fried chicken, and the reason I came to that because everybody seemed to love chicken.  I mean, we had numerous meals we ate, but leaving Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina], people were just eating chicken (laughter).  So I decided to write this chicken recipe and I did, and I did not like it because it was so plain.  It just was a recipe for fried chicken.  And, I said, "Oh, I can't do this."  I was trying to talk myself out of not writing again.  And something said, "Tell a story."  And I remembered the first time my mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] took me in the yard and had me kill, clean, and cook this chicken for dinner whiles her and pop went in the river.  I was home with my two younger sister [Linda Robinson Stafford and Lois Robinson Stafford], and I laughed 'cause that was one of the funniest days I ever experienced.  And I started to write the story of how that day went of me trying to kill this chicken.
Story_ID: 660760
Speaker 1: --And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tell us the story (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  That morning my mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford]--'cause we got up early, and she says, "Sallie Ann [HistoryMaker Sallie Ann Robinson]," she said, "come out, go in the yard with me."  She said, "I got this chicken I need you to kill, clean, and fix it the way I show you."  So I'm excited.  Okay.  I'm right on her heels going to the chicken yard.  She grab this chicken and she put it in another little coop.  She say, "Now, this one here gonna be big enough for dinner," and her and pop [Robinson's stepfather, Thomas Stafford], pop, you know, we had hitched up the wagon and got them ready and off they went.  Before leaving she told me not to immediately kill the chicken, wait a couple hours.  Well, being a kid, I had to get that chicken right away.  Good thing I did.  Now, I had seen my mom ring a chicken neck a thousand time.  It was my time.  I did not know when she was ringing it, she was breaking the neck, squeezing it tight.  So I actually grabbed this chicken by the neck having space for him to breathe, twirling him.  He's flopping and kicking, and my two younger sisters [Linda Robinson Stafford and Lois Robinson Stafford] saying, "Let it go.  Let it go."  Unbeknowing to me, I threw it down like my mom did, it hit the ground and took off to the woods (laughter).  Now, it took us hours to get this chicken back, and I just know my mom gonna kill me because I could not go in the coop and get another chicken 'cause she knew all of them pretty much, so I had to actually kill that very chicken, so after getting him back, I was too afraid to ring again.  My younger sister, who chops the neck like my pop say, "I'll kill it.  I'll kill it."  So I let her chop the neck, and I cleaned it.  I cooked it.  And I had dinner ready when mom get back.  Now, mind you, if I had not had dinner ready, I was gonna be in trouble, so dinner was ready, and my mom never knew that chicken ran away 'til the book came out, and I named the recipe Runaway Fried Chicken (laughter) instead of fried chicken.  So--and in my books I tell stories about events that actually happened in my cooking days of doing this, but it was so funny that this chicken ran away that day, so--
Speaker 2: So how many do you--how many recipes are in-- what's the name of your first book?
Speaker 1: My first book was 'Gullah Home Cooking the Daufuskie Way' [Sallie Ann Robinson].  I have a hundred recipes in there and lots of story to go with it about childhood growing up, things that happened doing these meals.
Story_ID: 660761
Speaker 1: I have a second book, 'Cooking the Gullah Way, Morning, Noon, and Night' [Sallie Ann Robinson] of seventy-five recipe, twenty-five home remedies.  I wrote that book when I had a second back surgery.  I had a slip and fall that caused me to have two back surgery, and instead of being depressed and upset and really mad at what was going on, I called my publisher and asked, "Can I do a second book?"  And I told him what I wanted to write because at that time, I was thinking medical.  "Oh, I got some home remedies I gotta put in here."
Speaker 2: Well, you only told us about the--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yes.
Speaker 2: --about the time you was in--the holly--
Speaker 1: The cold remedy.
Speaker 2: The cold remedy, yeah.
Speaker 1: And the nail (laughter).  But they said, "Keep it a cookbook.  Keep it a cookbook."  So I said, "Can I at least do twenty-five?"  And they said yes.
Speaker 2: What's one of the good, good home remedies that you have in the book?
Speaker 1: The cold remedy I told you about.  In there, I spoke of high blood pressure, which I never knew people had growing up, but one day I went to my mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] in writing this book, and I said, "Mom," I said, "did people have high blood pressure growing up?"  She say, "Okay.  Oh, yeah, they did."  So I said, "Well, what did they do?  Because folks couldn't run to the doctor."  And she took me outside and she say--it was an oak tree.  "You see that moss yonder up that tree?"  I say, "Yeah."  She said, "That what they be use."  And I say, "Moss?"  I say, "What, they boil it or eat it?"  And she said, "No, gal."  She say, "Not like that."  And I say, "Well, what did they do to bring that pressure down?"  And she said, "You take a little bit of moss, and you wear it in your shoes.  In the center of your sole of your feet, you place the moss, you put your socks on, and you wear it."  And I say, "Well, mom, how did they know their pressure came down without going to a doctor?"  She say, "Okay.  I'll do this, feel better," (laughter).  So a lot of stuff was mental.  So the herb, moss is an herb, Spanish moss, which they say is not Spanish, we learned later.  Oh, my gosh.  I also talked a few, about things you do if you burnt rice.  Most people throw it away because of the taste and the smell.  Well, we didn't.  You--and you, and you don't burn it.  You scorch it.  It's called scorching.  You took a piece of brown paper bag, brown bag, cut it enough that would top the--top of your pot and put the lid on it.  Turn it down real low, and the burnt taste and smell is actually caught into the brown bag, and you can eat it.  We could not throw away stuff, so we had to make do with things that happened, and that was also a method of doing that.  Wow, food then also didn't have all this preservative and additive in it, so it didn't spoil as bad or as quick, and we pretty much ate things as needed, but didn't have to rush because we didn't have the refrigeration also.
Story_ID: 660762
Speaker 1: I remember them having pans of cornbread every day.  Cornbread was a big part of our diet.  Rice, we ate it every day.  Grits (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What about grits?
Speaker 1: Every morning, smothered shrimp and grits, fried fish and grits.  Tomatoes with just ham.  Sweet peas and hamburger (laughter).
Speaker 2: Sweet peas and--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, hamburger (laughter).  We had always a belly filling meal.  Like I say, I've never--I never knew what hungry was living over there.  There were always nuts and berries and fruit, seasonal, but then my mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] preserved the stuff.
Speaker 2: Was there a special recipe for deviled crab since that was very--why was that so famous?  Because crabs was--were plentiful, or--
Speaker 1: No.  It, it--have you had the deviled crab off Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Just one time.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Just once, and, I mean, I can't get it out of my mind.
Speaker 1: Then that's why.  And on Daufuskie, as people made them, various--it, it would vary with tastes 'cause some people would put ingredients that others didn't.  I still make them today, and I hate to tell you, it's a secret, ancient secret (laughter).  So many people want to know.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: When I wrote my book, my publisher say, "Oh, Sallie [HistoryMaker Sallie Ann Robinson], you gotta put the deviled crab in there."  And I said, "No, I don't."  She said, "No, it'll make it sell more."  And I says, "It won't sell if that has to go in it," (laughter).  I said, "My mom would kill me."  So I make it for folks these days.  But it was also, like I said, part of the income.  It sold so well, it made money, and it still does today.  And so many people try imitating the Daufuskie deviled crab.  They can't get it.  They cannot do it.  And I always tell them, I said, "Well, you didn't hold your head right," or "You didn't smile right," (laughter).  And they say, "Well, how you hold your head?"  I say, "If I told you that, I, I couldn't tell you the recipe.  The recipe wouldn't--you would know."
Speaker 2: So are all your recipes, do they include desserts, or are they just entrees and appetizers, and--
Speaker 1: My first book ['Gullah Home Cooking the Daufuskie Way,' Sallie Ann Robinson] was more a recipe book, second ['Cooking the Gullah Way, Morning, Noon, and Night,' Sallie Ann Robinson] also, and desserts.  I have a dessert chapter.  There's some desserts people just don't make anymore.  I mean, have you had the old fashioned blackberry dumpling?  Oh, honey, you haven't had dessert.  We used to pick the wild blackberries, take it home.  We eat a lot of it before we get home 'cause our mouth be blue, but my mom would make this blackberry dumpling.  Then there were the sweet potato pone.
Speaker 2: Oh, I know what that is.
Speaker 1: A very old dessert people don't make anymore.  The bread pudding.  The bread pudding was made from day old bread.  My mom then would go over and used to could go to the bakery and fill up a brown paper bag all you can for one dollar, so she'd put all this bread in this bag and bring it home, a couple of bags for one dollar, and we'd eat as much as we can, but then she'd turn it into a bread pudding 'cause food was not--did not go to waste.  We were not allowed to waste food.  And, oh, my god, sweet potato pie, pumpkin pie, oh.  My mom even made key lime pie, lemon meringue pie.  She was a great cook (laughter).  And she didn't let not knowing stop her, and that's what I think I--was fascinating about the food we ate 'cause they were different, but made from the same stuff everybody else had.  She just didn't mind taking a chance trying something else, and we always had a bellyful.
Story_ID: 660763
Speaker 1: With meats like, like deer and raccoon and--what--how were those--I guess how would you translate?  Because I know that there's some--still some people that cook that.
Speaker 2: Oh, I do.  I do.
Speaker 1: Well, where do you get raccoon from?
Speaker 2: Oh, in the woods, honey, just--and (laughter) hunters.  People will hunt or trap, and I tell folks that I only eat country coon, not city coon (laughter).  The reason is city coon, their habitat has been destroyed.  The only thing they can find food is in garbage can.  In garbage can, folks put too much stuff in it that--throw away, not good.  In the country, they're--like the marsh, they eat the oysters and clams, the berries, and you only eat raccoon after the first frost which is wintertime because in the summertime they have something called a wolf in them.  It's big worm.  Because of their fur or hair, you know, these stuff are attached to them, and in the wintertime, it goes away, so when I hear folks say, "Oh, I don't eat this, and I don't eat that," I'm like, "You don't even know what half of you're eating when you go into these places," so always say, "I don't think I have," (laughter).  'Cause I've cooked it, and folks have come to my house, "Oh, Miss Sallie [HistoryMaker Sallie Ann Robinson], what are you cooking?  It smells so good."  And I'm like, "Well, why don't you taste it and tell me what you think?"  And they'll taste it and say, "Oh, this is good.  I like it.  What is?"  And I'm like, "Tell me what you think it is."  Raccoon, if you stew it or bake it, it tastes--very resemblance to beef.  It's a dark red meat.  'Possum, I'm not into 'possum.  My mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] used to love to cook it.  It's greasy when you cook it.  It has--kind of like duck.  Duck is very greasy.  It's good but it's greasy.  You know, 'possum, relates to greasiness like a duck.  Squirrel, fried squirrel, stewed squirrel, yes (laughter).  Rabbit.  We ate good.  We ate different, and we had those choices.  A lot of people did but they just didn't do--go hunting like we did.  And then most people, "Oh, I'm not gonna eat that.  That's squirrel, or coon."  Honey, I would today eat those wild game versus some of the other stuff that's processed and has all the chemicals to grow them versus that they are natural.  It never did anything harmful or wrong to us.  It was also a part of the family culture.  They ate what they had to, and pop [Robinson's stepfather, Thomas Stafford] would always say, "Well, they God creatures, so He put them out there for you to eat," (laughter).
Story_ID: 660764
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not talked about that you want to talk about up to this point?
Speaker 2: I'm writing a third cookbook telling more stories.  One of the things that I'm also writing is because, to tell the truth of the story, I grew up hearing a lot of stories that were told by people who did not know what they were talking about, and, and I say that--one day I was coming over on this boat when tourists had started, and the captain was telling the folks about the different areas of the island [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina], and when he got to where we were docking, about to dock, he was telling them about the Gullah people.  And, I mean, it was still new to me what the Gullah is, being a Gullah, and he was saying how we lived in tree hut, had bones in our nose, could not speak English, and here I'm standing on this boat like a blowfish out of the water, very angry as he was saying this, and I spoke out, and said, "Why the H he don't stop telling these lies?"  Because people were saying, "Ooh," and, "Ah," and they was expecting to come to this island and see this stuff.  (Shakes head), "You're not gonna see that.  He need to tell you all the truth."  So he said, "Uh-oh, I got myself in trouble," when he heard me over the intercom, and then the boat got quiet.  And I'm like, Lord, just get me off this boat.  I don't feel like swimming today (laughter).  And this lady wanted to know if I would talk to her, and I told her, "Go on your tour.  Come back.  I will be the one serving you lunch at the building up there."  And she did.  She loved the island.  She wanted to know, "Why weren't they telling the truth?"  And I said, "Well, truth don't always sell.  Sorry.  But what y'all looking for, you're not gonna find."  Because I wanted to know, do I sound or look like what he just described?  And that was really hard for me.  So a part of my writing was to share our life weren't perfect.  I don't think no perfect--no one's, has a perfect life, but I do feel there are things that we did that really made me stronger.  I don't take things for granted.  And I also love the fact that I grew up at a time with older folks who taught me rules and ways of their life that made me feel good and better about who I am today and where I'm from and my culture.
Story_ID: 660765
Speaker 1: With your third book, so that's next.  But what else, is there something that you have not done that you want to do?
Speaker 2: I would like to do a little more traveling.  I still say today that Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina] is one of the best place to be because it's not connected to all the speed of life.  Everything is rush, rush, rush.  Got to do this, got to do that.  The--here is just laid back.  Take your time.  A little more traveling to some places I would love to see.  I would definitely love to go to Hawaii.  I would love to go to Africa, and I would love to go to Paris [France].  Maybe a few other places, but I just have not had the interest or knowledge of whether it would be interesting to go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So.
Speaker 1: If you had to redo anything in your life, what would it be?
Speaker 2: Once I became a teenager, I have more of a career, a career that--more planned out.  I actually started cooking and things because it seemed like it had to be reminded the way it was, what made us the strong, determined people who work hard for what they had.  I never knew I was going to be a writer, but I fell in love with it because I realized the storytelling that I was being told, a lot of it need to be told as well.  And I'm finding it fascinating that people do listen (laughter).  I really am.  I'm like, "People don't want to hear my story."  Oh, well, yes, they do.  I'm going back to Daufuskie to relive some things that I'm being able to make my own legacy from, so--
Story_ID: 660766
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Never forgotten (laughter).  I say that because children today don't have a clue about their ancestors' trials and tribulation that made way for them to be where they are today.  My parents [Albertha Robinson Stafford and Robinson's stepfather, Thomas Stafford] was not educated because they didn't have the opportunity, and I push education on my grandkids.  I tell them the reason, the meaning, the cause, because college was never mentioned in our house.  Because they didn't have the education to know what college is and what it can do.  Pop always said, "Be the best you can."  He say, "I don't care if you're a ditch digger.  Be the best."  He always strived that to be the best at whatever you do.  (Background noise) And I do want kids to know that we're in this era where education, technology, is all a big part of where we're going, not where we're coming from, but never forget what brought us there.  The way of life of hard working people who had a love and respect for them self.  I don't see a lot of that anymore, no respect, no--the manners.  I have a story in my third cookbook, manners will take you where money won't because that's what I brought up on.  It is a factor you need money today, but I just see the lack of manners where people don't respect each other anymore, the young folks killing each other, all because they not in tuned to the love and the, the joy that life is all about.  It brings tears to my eye that they don't seem to feel the pain that is being caused because they not interested or they not--don't have enough care in their heart to, to realize that you don't hurt the person you kill or injure.  You got a family you're hurting.  This thing go way back.  We had respect for each other because we knew it didn't affect one person.  It affected everybody.  That made me want to preach and spread the word about love.  And pop--and grandfather [Robinson's maternal grandfather, Josephus Robinson], you know, he always used to say, "If you do make the money, let it be useful.  Don't let it use you.  You use it."  Me coming from a place that gave us so much to be proud of, I'm proud of it.  I'm proud of the hard work because I would never have written a book.  I would have never become famous, and show people that if I can do it, you can do it.  And I've heard those before, but not knowing what it meant until it happened, made me a very proud person.
Story_ID: 660767
Speaker 1: There are--and I understand fully what you're saying about growing up on Daufuskie, too, but also that children of today, the next generation moving off of the island even, you know, going back, is the, the lifestyle is no longer there, and so many other things that they have to learn because as you were growing up, there was nothing political at all--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --going on.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But now to be able to fight the changes because, see, a lot of the changes going on, on the islands have to do with the fact that the people had no power.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Basically.  So what do you see in the future as far as that's concerned on, on Daufuskie Island [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Well, this has been, like always, enough people don't speak up, and I find it to be because they're afraid to speak up.  When I was writing my book, my mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] said, "Ann, Sallie Ann [HistoryMaker Sallie Ann Robinson]," she said, "be careful 'cause them people, they'll get mad at you."  And I said, "For what?"  And she say, "'Cause you write them things."  And I say, "Well, mom, they are my stories of our life, the way it was, and they don't have no say over that."  And she say, "Okay.  Just be careful."  Because her knowledge of writing could be a problem, and she didn't understood that I had the freedom and the right to do this, so I wanted her to know that time not only changed, but this has always been you just didn't know.  And she was very proud of me getting the attention and telling the story, the correct story.  I, I get angry when I hear things changed to benefit somebody else story, and it's not right like talking about the Gullah people.  I didn't grow up knowing what the Gullah people was.  I didn't know I was one of them, but as I research and learn more about it, it makes me proud to know the struggle that gave me an opportunity, the knowledge of being able to go to school and having choices.  My great-great-grandparents may not have had the kind of choice that we're having today, but they didn't sit on their hand and think nothing of it.  They always made a way, always made do, and they never gave up.
Story_ID: 660768
Speaker 1: There is some, some controversy about Pat Conroy's book ['The Water is Wide'] that some of the information was not correct, and in reading that, which you have read, right?
Speaker 2: I'm in it (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I did find that some of the things--I mean, you were--since you were there, you lived it.  Can you set the record straight?  Are some things not quite right, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm going to speak for me.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The book is true.  Some people don't like the truth to be told.  Some--as one would say, "So the truth hurt."  But so does the wrong things hurt.  Yes, he said some things some folks didn't either want known or didn't like.  That happened all the time to us (laughter).  But they didn't understand how great he--I'm saying great--he was educating us.  He really was.  And he would even step on toes telling folks, "You know you're wrong," (laughter).  "Why y'all doing this?"  Because he had no shame.  And that's where the controversy came in.  "Well, he shouldn't have said that."  But he didn't feel he had to keep it a secret.  He told--we were in this bookstore one time, and this was maybe four or five years ago, and he walked up to the counter, and he said, "Didn't I tell y'all white people stop putting all the black people pictures in the back and the white people pictures up front?"  (Laughter) He was bold.  So some people don't like that.  But was it wrong?  (Laughter) He said, "Well, that's just the way I feel."  He never hid how he felt.  Do you know where he's buried?  In a black graveyard.
Speaker 1: Where, do you know where (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In a Gullah--in Beaufort [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: In Beaufort?
Speaker 2: Well, it's St. Helena [St. Helena Island, South Carolina].  Yeah.
Speaker 1: St. Helena the island?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I never knew he really loved black people that much (laughter).  I know his teaching gave me a lot to be proud of 'cause he didn't hold back, and he didn't think we needed to learn certain things.  He thought he--we needed, we needed to learn everything because he knew it was gonna be a reality check.  And he always said, "Get your education."  He said, "They can't take it from you once you got it."  It wasn't a secret that he loved black people.  Was that a problem for him?  No.  Like I say, he just never kept it a secret, and the book, I'm in the book.  I know for a fact.  There is no way he's telling the truth about what he said about me and my family 'cause I know this happened, and everything else wrong, so the truth hurt.  Again, I say.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But is it wrong?  No.  Because if that's the case, then, we know a lot of the truth that's out there that isn't--that's hurting people, but they still--you got to live with it.  Move on.
Story_ID: 660769
Speaker 1: Do you think that you will ever have a catering business or a restaurant with your name on it to have someone cook your recipes?
Speaker 2: I do not want a restaurant.  I love to--I'll be in the kitchen 24/7, but I do not want a restaurant.  I love to cater.  I love to mingle, intertwine with people.  I want people to ask me questions so I can answer it knowing that they're getting the fact and not something they're just assuming.  Catering, I do that.  I'm a private chef as well.  I go into people home and cook for them on a level of personal.  When I cook in people home, it just brings something out in them.  I've went to people home who don't cook, and they say, "Oh, I can do that," because they love the flavor of the food and they realize that you can make cooking fun.  You don't have to slave in a kitchen to have good food.  You can have all the fun you want in there.  I turn on my music, and I get so caught up in what I'm doing, I'm just dancing across the floor.  I remember my mom [Albertha Robinson Stafford] doing this.  And now I see the joy of why she used to love the kitchen.  It was her space, and she did what she wanted to and the flavor of the love that she put into it doing it came through from the taste.
Story_ID: 660770
Speaker 1: I know that you talked about that you went to Washington, D.C. with Pat Conroy, but recently was the national African American museum [National Museum of African American History and Culture] in D.C., the opening, you were there as well.  Tell us about why you were there.
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) I wasn't.
Speaker 1: You wasn't there.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I thought you were there.
Speaker 2: I want to be.  I wanted to be.  I did go to Washington in 2010.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] invited me there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That must have been--I--when I saw (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was it.
Speaker 1: --the Smithsonian--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I thought of--
Speaker 2: It was the Smithsonian.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: I have yet to--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --get there--
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I'm dying to--
Speaker 1: Okay, sorry.
Speaker 2: Yes, definitely want to get there.  I went in 2010.  The Smithsonian called me and wanted me to come up there and do a talk and a dinner.  I did for a hundred people.  Oh, it was awesome.  People from Africa, West Africa, and Ghana, Ghana.
Speaker 1: Ghana.
Speaker 2: Ghana.  (Unclear) (laughter) came.  Wonderful.  I got to talk.  I got to feed them, and I also got to--they got to ask me questions, as I got to ask them.  But, yes, that is a trip on my bucket list I should say, to the museum.  I can't wait to get to that one, yes.  And that was the second time I had went to Washington.  I called Pat up and say, "You won't believe it.  I am actually going back to Washington."  He was so proud because he had opened that door to say, "This is one of the greatest city you need to go to," and I find it very fascinating to go to where a lot of our history is and things that never heard before.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Never heard before.
Story_ID: 660771
Speaker 1: I know time bring on changes.  I've seen a lot of changes from Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina] and away from Daufuskie.  My need to and want to go back is to be a part of the changes, to have a voice, to have a say.  Something I'm hoping also to--my throat, dry.  I'm sorry (cough).
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: I want to go back and be a part of the history, the legacy of telling the story, cooking the food, and being remembered, because there's so much rich history there that has been untold.  Sorry.  (Cough) Excuse me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My throat is a little dry.
Speaker 2: All right.  We'll get some water.
Speaker 1: And stories that needs to be told, and I am sixth generation, so far to my knowledge, and the first born native to have ever written a book, so I'm honored by these things to be making history and letting folks know; especially, the younger generations, you can do anything no matter where you're from and what kind of life you've lived.  You just got to want it.  And I have lots of want with those things to come.
Speaker 2: All right.  Well, thank you so much--
Speaker 1: Thank you (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) for sharing your story.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 660772
Speaker 1: This picture is when Pat [Pat Conroy] took us to Washington, D.C., and we was walking away from the monument [Washington Monument, Washington, D.C.], and we're all in a group touring more of Washington.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of a group of us who had went on the trip.  We were--we're in the neighborhood where we stayed and was having a group picture, and I'm in the blue up front enjoying the picture as well as where we was.
Speaker 2: This is a picture on Daufuskie [Daufuskie Island, South Carolina] where the class is out for recess, and Pat is actually on the porch talking to us and about to actually get in the yard and play with us (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sort of like mutton chop sideburns.
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter), yes.
Speaker 1: This is a picture where we were at the Eternal Flame [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy Gravesite, Arlington National Cemetery] in Washington [sic. Arlington, Virginia], one of the place we visited when we were there really learning more about what was going on in Washington.
