Story_ID: 515
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, I'm the interviewer and Neculai Burghelea is the videographer and Adrienne Jones is the observer.  I'd like to start out by having you start your name and spelling it for us.  And I want to have your date of birth and today's date.
Speaker 2: My name is Barbara Ross Lee Beverly and my date of birth is June 1, 1942.
Speaker 1: And, today's date?
Speaker 2: --July 25th (is that right-off camera confirmation) -July 25th, 2007.
Speaker 1: And, can I have your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a physician by training, but I am currently an academic physician and my position is Vice President for Health Sciences and Medical Affairs, so I'm a medical administrator.
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask five "People Magazine"-ish questions, just-you know, short answers.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: (Pause-Laughs out loud) Catfish.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Las Vegas [Nevada].
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite--?
Speaker 1: Phrase or saying, if you have one.
Speaker 2: Mile wide, inch deep.
Speaker 1: Now, I want to start out by asking you about--.
Speaker 2: Can I remodify that?
Speaker 1: Okay, sure.
Speaker 2: --Bless your heart.
Speaker 1: --those are small and succinct phrases or sayings, I like those, okay.  I'd like to start out by asking you about your father.  Can you give his name--? (OFF CAMERA):  We need to take a moment--.
Speaker 2: (small scream)
Story_ID: 516
Speaker 1: Anyway, so I want to start off by asking about your father.  If you can give his name and what you know about his growing up.
Speaker 2: --His name is Fred Earl Ross and he grew up in West Virginia but--or he was born in West Virginia, but his mother died and he was sent to Detroit, Michigan to live with his aunt or with his other brothers and sisters --he and his younger sister--so I think he left West Virginia when he was five or six years old and came to Detroit [Michigan] and he was raised by, by his sisters, his older sisters.
Speaker 1: Did he--was he a talker?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did he tell--do you remember any stories he told you about growing up, either in West Virginia or in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: No, you know the events that he talked about number one, was the [Great] Depression and how difficult it was for he and his sister who were then separated and they were being--his younger sister was raised by one older sister and he was raised by another sister--and he talked about the years and World War II in the [United States] Army and that was probably the bulk of what was important to him, you know, in his growing up and maturing--he didn't remember much about West Virginia.
Speaker 1: What kind of person was he, though Dr. Ross-Lee?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I'm trying to figure out a way to describe him.  He's a very moral man, very willing and often involved in defending the rights of others, whom he felt were being mistreated--you know, I get my sense of doing the right thing, I think from him.
Speaker 1: Can you give an example of that that you, you know, you can sort of point to?
Speaker 2: --One story he tells, or my mother used to tell us, was about a party and you know, in the fifties [1950s]--certainly in the forties [1940s] and fifties [1950s], black people had these house parties and evidently, there was this party in which--there was, there wasn't a charge, there was a donation that you had to pay at the door.  And there was a lady who wanted to get in and she didn't have any money, and therefore she wasn't going to make a donation and they wouldn't let her in.  And my mother talks about what a big--um, I don't know--event it became because my father absolutely, positively insisted that they let this lady in because it wasn't a charge, it was a donation and if they wanted to charge it, they should have charged it, he was one of those, you know, he was one of those people--what is it...spite his nose...what's that saying?
Speaker 1: um...something to spite his nose--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously)--his nose to spite his face.  Cut of his nose to spite his face! So, he was adamant about doing the right thing, you know, it--her (Mother) recollection is it was such a little thing that got blown out of such proportion, so that they were never invited to a whole series of parties again (laughs) you know, but that was an example of the kind of thing that my father did.
Story_ID: 517
Speaker 1: Now your mother, give her name.
Speaker 2: Her name was Ernestine Moten Ross.
Speaker 1: And what do you about her, growing up?
Speaker 2: Now her family history is much more integrated with mine, she grew up in a small town in Alabama, I think Union Town.  But her father, my grandfather, was a Baptist Minister and had churches throughout many of the small communities in Alabama and so they moved or they had homes at different places at different times.  But she was the youngest of twelve children and so to a large extent her sisters and brothers became surrogate parents for us, and every summer we would go to Alabama to spend time with her sisters that were in Alabama and her, her next older sister, the eleventh of the twelve children, lived with us for my entire growing up years, so she was my second mother, her name was Beatrice, and so my Aunt Bea and my mother were together their entire lives--their entire lives.
Speaker 1: Now did your mother share any, any stories also of her growing up in Alabama, do you remember anything that she would talk about?
Speaker 2: (Pause) You know I'm sure that she did, it's like so much a part of you that, well she, she, she told stories about, you know her older sister who died suddenly, about one of her older sisters who had a bowel resection in the thirties [1930s] and lived and you know, and was not the worse for it and she lived to be ninety-five years old and so that was such a big event in their lives.  She talked about the church itself because they were very involved, the church was their social life and at the school, she loved school and she, she fancied herself a gymnast and so she could just even as we were growing, she would show us how she put her legs behind her head and do all kinds of flips and things of that sort.  So we got a feeling of her education, actually we had some of her textbooks from that period of time, in fact I still do have some of those text books that she used when she was a student, you know, she really loved, school and education and that also became very much a part of my family, you know, education was extremely important and that was based upon her experiences, you know.
Speaker 1: Now did your--what about your grandparents.  Do you remember any stories around with them, you know your, your grandfather was a minister, is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes. Well, my grandfather was born, during slavery and he was one of the few really ordained black ministers in the south, which is why--I mean in Alabama--which is why he was going--he had three or four different churches.  He was a wonderful preacher, so many of the stories I hear, and still today, people will talk about Reverend Moten was just a wonderful preacher, you know.  My grandmother was the, you know, the nurturer of the family and, for many, many years when we went south, we were--we would live with her.  She was born, after--right after slavery and so they actually--they didn't jump the--what is it, jump the broom?  They actually had a real marriage license and--but there were no--there are no records of that time and so my grandmother had a bible in which she had tracked her entire family.  And then I think in 1962, her house burned down and so--and we lost this bible, because she had generations, generations of her maiden name Collins and my, my grandfather.  My grandfather's parents died early and so he was raised by cousins and--who were Collins.  So the big joke in the family was that my grandmother and grandfather were cousins, but it wasn't really quite--but they did--but they had very close connections, I think to some extent because he wasn't really a Collins--he was raised by Collins--they weren't that directly related so-anyway--but those were the kinds of stories we knew about my grandparents.
Story_ID: 518
Speaker 1: Now how did your parent meet--do you know that story?
Speaker 2: My mother [Ernestine Moten Ross] came up from [Union Town] Alabama to teach at a community center at the time--she had had, maybe a little college education in Alabama and so she came up and she was teaching--that job didn't flourish--this community center-- St. Peter Claver I think is the name of it and--a lot of memories come back--and she so she started doing day work and that's when she met--when she was doing day work--she met--what's the relationship--my father's [Fred Earl Ross] brother-in-law, that's it and the brother-in-law kept saying he wanted her to meet his--what is it--son-in-law, I guess...(Off camera)
Speaker 1: Anyway, so they accidentally met and that's--and that was here--and that was here--that was in Detroit [Michigan] and so--and that flourished into a marriage and six kids.
Speaker 2: Now did you--tell me what your earliest memory was of early growing up.  Do you have an earliest memory?
Speaker 1: (Pause) Yeah, it's a funny one.  My--it's two--my, my earliest memory of both my parents was, younger sister [Diana Ross]--there were just two of us at the time, that's my earliest memory--used to wet the bed and so in the middle of the night, they would get her up, to put her on the pot--she'll die if she knows I'm telling this story--they would get her up and put her on the pot and one night it was my dad's job to get her up and put her on the pot and he made the mistake of getting me up and putting me on the pot and I can remember my mother and father standing there and my mother laughing at him that he couldn't tell the difference between his daughters, you know, and how--that, that's one of my earliest memories.  The second memory I have is my sister [Diana Ross] and I were taking photographs and, she was a very fidgety child and I can remember--I can remember sitting there to this day, trying to hold, grab her hand and keep it down so we could have the picture taken, cause she kept putting her finger in her mouth. So those are my earliest memories, they're, you know, family memories.
Story_ID: 519
Speaker 1: So let's talk about where you grew up in Detroit [Michigan] and the Detroit [Michigan]that you grew up in, you know who was in your, in the neighborhood, you know, who, you know--what were some family traditions--I'm just trying to sort of build a picture.
Speaker 2: You know, I grew up in a department building, actually, it's been described, you know, there were no trees, it was all concrete, and, and glass and tall buildings--they don't exist any more, they tore them down. It was only a block away from the school so we walked to the school everyday.  We lived on the third floor and each, each floor of this apartment building had lots of kids, so we grew up in a community and, you know, it's sort of like everybody took care of everybody's kids there, we all watched out for each other or the parents did. And all the parents were friends and socialized together, so it was a very, very happy time, a very happy time.  Actually--I just mentioned this morning--this morning in a discussion--in fact it was last night we were talking about, global health and we, were seeing a slide show about the health conditions in Nigeria, in this little village in Nigeria, and they were trying to explain how given the--how austere, the, the environment was--that these were happy people. And I just mentioned, you know, I, I didn't know I was poor, I just had a childhood.  In fact, I didn't know I was poor until I was fifteen years old because it was a community and everybody was poor.
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about that community, who were some of the--do you remember some of the neighbors or things like that, that you played with or some of the adults and I'm just--what was that, what was the community like there?
Speaker 2: I think about the children were in about the same age range, which is an interesting story.  Right below us, lived a family that--actually, I'm still very close to them, Pat Carter--actually there were a group of sisters who lived together and each one of them had one or two children, so there were three children there and we grew up with them.  And then on the first floor--that was second floor--on the first floor, there was a family that had ten children living in their apartment and so we went to school with them and that was just one--that was just one, entrance.  The second entrance--we had other families--everybody had kids and we all played together and, you know you didn't have the luxury of--and it was all outside play--you didn't have the luxury of all of the games we purchase for our kids today--we created games, you know, we, we made bow and arrows, we had the clothes pins that you could shoot matches, those kinds, so we made--we had, where you put pop bottles, caps on, a piece of wood, I mean we, we did, we made our games and it was wonderful and then of course we were right across the street from the school playground, and so we--it was just that one building was a whole community and to a large extent, we never had to venture out.  Now where we grew up, however, was--I tell my children funny stories about this--we grew up on St. Antoine, which was maybe about eight blocks from the Cultural Center in Detroit [Michigan].  The Detroit Art Museum, the main library, etc. and so our weekends were spent going to the library because that was an event.  We'd go to the library or we'd go to the Detroit Institute of Art and sometimes I laugh--every Saturday we did this--sometimes I laugh, I know these people used to probably just die--here come these little loud black kids again and we would go through the entire museum, I used to know that museum like the back of my hand.  And then when they built the Detroit Historical Museum--I mean we would go to Cowboy Town--that was just a part of our recreation and so the culture seeped in whether we wanted it to or not, you know, so it was really quite interesting.
Story_ID: 520
Speaker 1: Now when you--I'd like to just, if you bare with me--when you think about your time out there, can you talk about what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up in that building?
Speaker 2: (Long Pause) Yeah. The building itself, and later--we moved into the public housing, in the projects-- but it's this, it's this cramming of big families into small spaces, is what I'm reminded of the most, when, you know, when I go around the country or even, you know, outside of the country, particularly in Russia, when people don't own private houses--we didn't live, actually--one of the major, desires of mine, was to own a house--we lived in these big apartment buildings that were crammed with people and every time I see an apartment building of that kind, it reminds me of my childhood, you know.
Speaker 1: How about smells, any smells that come to mind?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head no) The smells that I'm reminded of is, are smells of the South when we would go there, that would remind me of my aunt and my cousins, etc.
Speaker 1: What kind of smells?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) and that was, two, two smells.  One is they used to use this old lye, mixture to shave and so every Sunday morning we would smell this as my uncle got ready for church, you know, so that smell. And the other one is there was a cream that all of my, my mother and all of her sisters used and it had a lemon base and to this day, when I smell--it's, it's lemon odor--but when I smell it, immediately it reminds me of my family and the South, but those two smells.
Speaker 1: How about sounds?
Speaker 2: You know, music, it was, the radio was always on, it was the music, you know?
Speaker 1: What kind of music?
Speaker 2: Gospel, you know? Gospel music, always on, the radio was always--and then, you know, later as, my mother was more interested in, you know the Nat King Coles and what the Dinah Washington, so but, by and large it was always spiritual music and then when, you know, my mother had records, that we would play over and over again.  My youngest daughter, who's an attorney says all the time that in college, she was the only--she was the only person that knew every song, it didn't matter when it was written, whether it was 1940 or 1950, she knew 'em all, because we sang and listened to music all the time so those are the sounds that remind me and they're very much a part of me.
Speaker 1: Now is there any particular gospel song that you can think of that, you know, resonates with you from your childhood if you hear? Well, my mother's favorite was 'Keep Your Eye On', 'The Eye on The Sparrow' and my favorite is 'Amazing Grace', so those two, but you know, my grandfather led this church, that was, you know--we were humming the whole time--it didn't, you know, it just very much--so music was a very much a part of our lives, you know.
Story_ID: 521
Speaker 1: Now give me your sibling's names and the birth order.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm the number one child.  The number two child is Diana Ross and she was born March of '44 [1944] and then my next sister is Marguerita (?), she was born in '47 [1947], my next sibling is Fred Ross Jr., he was born in February of '48 [1948]--my mother [Ernestine Moten Ross]  was very busy--and then my next brother was born in January of '49 [1949], his name was Arthur, we called him T-Boy, we called Marguerita Rita, I'm called Bobbie, Diana is called Dian(ph), Dian and Fred was called Baby Boy, he was the first boy in the family, so Fred was number four, he was Baby Boy and Marguerita was Rita, the number five or the, the number three child and Arthur was the number--the fifth child and we called him T-Boy and then, years later, my younger brother was born and his name is Wilbert and we called him Chico.
Speaker 1: All the nicknames.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, when you--tell me your position in the family as the oldest, what was expected of you?
Speaker 2: You know, I tell this joke when I give presentations that Diana Ross is my younger sister and if you've ever had younger sisters and brothers, you know that I'm responsible for her success, because without me, she couldn't have been successful at anything, you know, I had to watch her, she had to go, I had to take her everywhere that I went.  As the older sister, you know you have greater responsibilities for caring for your younger brothers and sisters, and so I'm, I'm sort of like a, their second mother.  I can remember my mother calling me on the phone telling me what my son had done and I had to remind her, no Mom, those are your kids, that's my brother, you know (laughs), so, but kind of, I think the oldest child automatically takes on that role.  It's not an easy role often, particularly it wasn't easy for, for Diane, for Diana, because I was good in school and so everybody expected her to excel in exactly the same way that I did and so what you find yourself doing in large families are carving out areas in which you can concentrate, so you're not competing against one another, so, you know, I like to dance so, I was the dancer in the family and so, and Diane sang, so she was the singer in the family and it's not that she can't dance or that I can't sing, but we just carved those areas out for, so, you know, we weren't competing with each other so.
Speaker 1: Now when you, as a young person--so you're two years older than she is?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then there was...
Speaker 2: And then Rita is two years younger.
Speaker 1: Two years, okay, so sort of like step stairs, but there, was one where, I heard there was one year apart.
Speaker 2: There's two years between myself and Diane and then there's three years between Diane and Rita and then after that, that every year, Rita and then Fred the next year, then T-Boy the following year, you know so, they're right together, actually, that was during the period of time when my father [Fred Earl Ross]  was in the military and so the joke in the family is thank God, he went to the Army, you know, we'd be over run with kids here, you know.
Speaker 1: So now, let's just establish some chronology, so, you, you remember her being born and her name was actually Diane and it became Diana right?
Speaker 2: No, her name was Diana.
Speaker 1: It's Diana, oh, see I wasn't, okay.
Speaker 2: Her name was Diana, we always called her Diane.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) or Dian (?)
Story_ID: 522
Speaker 1: So, let's, so she, she comes--you're the, really the two of you--you talked about some of that--and so what happens, like do you remember going to kindergarten and where were you, where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: I went to Balch Elementary School, which was the school that was a block away, yes I remember going to school, I remember all of my elementary school teachers, it was a time in the history of education where teachers were assigned to a building and they stayed there, you know, so some of the students--some of the teachers--had taught my father [Fred Earl Ross]  for a period of time, you know, it's just, it's amazing and the same, those teachers at Balch Elementary School, taught all of my brothers and sisters, at least in the elementary phases, except for my youngest brother--we'd moved away by that period of time.
Speaker 1: Now, did you start out always being a good student?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) From the moment you...now what did you like about school, what was it that resonated with you?
Speaker 2: Reading, I loved it, I loved reading.  I just, I can't explain it other than that, I really enjoyed school. Balch happened to be the only elementary school in the city that had a swimming pool and so, that was another attraction of school, and after school, we, we swam everyday and you know I had long, very thick hair, my hair never got dry cause we didn't have the luxury of dryers at the time, my hair never got dry, but I swam everyday--now that's a smell that I remember, that wet hair smell because I lived with that probably for five years, my mother would be so angry with me because I swam all the time and you know those rubber caps, they don't keep the water out at all, so.  But, school was our--church and school--were our social lives, that's what we did socially and so it was a big part of it and it--and it's not like the student, the teachers, stayed there after school, they really didn't, but it was just so much of our days were spent in school our evenings were spent, swimming and our weekends were spent or Sundays in church, Saturdays going to the Art Museum [Detroit Art Museum] and you know, and the Historical Museum [Detroit Historical Museum], so that was, and it was, it was a small group, it was this one apartment complex that did all this, all together.
Speaker 1: Now who were your, who were some of your teachers, you say you remember some of their names.  Can you give some of your, you know, favorite teachers.
Speaker 2: Miss Bissanet (ph), Miss Fashionelli (ph), Miss Bass, Miss Sass--Miss Sass, for years, stayed in touch with us--there were, there were two black female teachers in that school, as when we went to school, the rest of the teachers were--Miss Villers was the music teacher--it's just, it's amazing.  And when I was in the sixth grade they had a black male student teacher, who ultimately became an administrator in the Detroit Public School System, but it was the first time, number one, we'd ever seen a male teacher in the elementary school and the fact that he was a, he was a black teacher at the same time, so I remember all those teachers, each grade.
Speaker 1: Now, were, was the, was the school mixed or were the teachers--are you saying teachers were primarily white with a few black ones.
Speaker 2: Teachers were primarily white.  The, the school was not mixed, it was all black--it was all black.
Speaker 1: And did you find that the teachers treated the black students fairly, was there any of that, you know.
Speaker 2: (Contemplatively) Oh yeah. Growing up, teachers weren't people, they were teachers, so it wasn't a matter of how we were treated, because we were so isolated, it's one of the challenges of being segregated, we didn't have any tension, because there was nobody to have tension with and really the only white people that we had any exposure to were the owners of the grocery store on the corner and they were Jewish and I grew up thinking that if you were white, you were Jewish, because that's what they were.  Teachers weren't people, they were teachers, I have no idea, you know, I never even applied that Jewish label to the teachers because they were different.  Teachers had a special class all their own, so there was no tension. I can remember, however, we were very skinny, we grew up very skinny and it's genetic, but we were perceived as being malnourished and I can remember them and at that time in the schools--they had open air rooms and I can remember at least putting one of my siblings in that open air room because they served snacks during the day and it was on the corner of the building and it got a lot of sun and they felt--that's how they handled what they thought was malnourishment on the part of the kids, but we were just skinny, I mean we were, we're skinny people, you know, that's all I can say.  I used to walk around saying at least I am not as skinny as my sister, who was even more skinny, you know, but we were skinny people so this is the way they managed a lot of that.
Story_ID: 523
Speaker 1: So, I want to go--I want to go to, so you were telling me your teachers, now in school, do you feel that you got a good education in school? Oh very, absolutely did.
Speaker 2: Can you talk about the--do you know who those teachers were, you know that were, who taught you, do you know any of that, except that they were the teachers?
Speaker 1: They were the teachers, I know their names, I can tell you the strengths of each, I can tell you how proud they were, they really, I have no complaints.  Actually, I taught school for a while and my role models were those teachers, they cared about those kids.  They didn't bring the social lives of the kids into the school, which is what education is forced to do now, to deal with the social and the economic issues, they focused on education and they taught those--they taught the kids, I mean it was one of the soundest foundations you could ever expect and I have subsequently learned being in academics now that, it's that--it's that educational foundation, between the first and the fifth grade, particularly the third grade, that makes all the difference in the success of our students, and they, they were wonderful, they were excellent, there is absolutely no complaints about the quality of the education coming out of Balch [Elementary School] if you came out of Balch, you were--you were able to go on, you know.
Speaker 2: And Balch is spelled is it, B-A-L-C?
Speaker 1: B-A-L-C-H, yes.
Speaker 2: Now, what, what kind, what subjects did you gravitate to?
Speaker 1: Science and math I loved, especially math. Science and math I absolutely loved--?
Speaker 2: And why did you--why did you like--?
Speaker 1: I loved math and science and I loved biology and I can't even tell you why.  I think the math foundation came from the Elementary School and then once you go to Junior High at the time, middle school as it is today, but in junior high, I was able to get much more exposure to Science, you know, when and I think part of it is a product of growing up in you know, concrete without, without trees, so you're interested in and you're intrigued by things like, you know, plants and insects and things of that sort, because they just weren't things that--other than the kinds of rodents we had to deal with--they weren't the kinds of things that, you saw on an everyday basis.  It's different than if you're growing up, you know in the country, where you were used to this, so it became kind of something that was intriguing to learn something about, it was the biology side, you know, beside the fact that my mother's [Ernestine Moten Ross] old text books were old biology books-and actually, I still have all those books, I've got to find all those books.  I loved reading those books because they had such interesting pictures, for instance they had pictures of a family, all of whom clearly had genetic defects, which weren't understood at the time, it was just like, you know, the old circus shows, where you had these bizarre looking anomalies that you're watching and, you know, I, I loved that book, I would just go through and look at the pictures and that was part of my interest in, in the science.  But mostly, it was the math, I loved math, I was good in math.
Speaker 2: So who were your math teachers, who was good at teaching you math of those teachers that you spoke of?
Speaker 1: Well we were--we were taught math by grade. Miss Sass, who was my fifth grade teacher and Miss Bass, who was my--isn't that amazing in the same school, and they were all on the same floor, by the way--and Miss Bass was my third grade teacher, they were the ones that got me into the--Miss Fashionetti (ph) was, our poetry teacher and, I mean, I can recite poems, you know, it's the sign of the times, like you couldn't believe, even to this day I remember some of these old poems--and Miss--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Can you give me one of your favorite poems?
Speaker 1: "On cloudy days, when the wind is high, tall trees are brooms, sweeping the sky, they swish the branches like buckets of rain and they wash and sweep the sky blue again".  That was the first poem I ever learned you know.  And then of course, in church we learned all the psalms, but--but, she just, it was just wonderful, Miss--she taught a lot of things, that we were not exposed to as part of, you know, in our--in our homes, and then, Miss Villers, was, gave a basic foundation to music, like we don't teach anymore.  I don't even know how that happened.  We learned the scales, I learned to read music, everything in elementary school--can you imagine that, in elementary school.  We had, we didn't get any instrumental training at all because they didn't have that resource, but everybody that graduated from Balch could read music, you know, we knew the difference between the quarter note and the--we could read music and what an interesting skill to have, I haven't been put, able to put it to any use, but I can read it, you know.
Story_ID: 524
Speaker 1: Now, church, what church were you going to?  What was the--what was the minister--you were raised Baptist right?
Speaker 2: My, my, we went to my father's [Fred Earl Ross] church and he was Methodist, my mother [Ernestine Moten Ross], Baptist.  So we went to Scott Methodist Church.  Can't remember--and his, all of his sisters and sisters and nieces and nephews were members of that church, that was the church that we attended.  Occasionally, we went to the AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion--African, what is it? AME Methodist Church, that's where my mother would attend--.
Speaker 1: African Methodist?
Speaker 2: Yeah, African Methodist, but by and large, our church was Scott Methodist Church and it's still there in Detroit [Michigan], that, that's interesting and, you know, my father's family still attends.
Speaker 1: Now (Unclear) was that also, was Aunt Bea going to the Methodist Church, or was she going to a Baptist?
Speaker 2: She was going to AME [African Methodist Episcopal].
Speaker 1: She was going to (Unclear)?
Speaker 2: She had, because, you know, we walked everywhere, and so that was the closest church so she and my mother went there, but we went to my father's church.
Speaker 1: So, now do you remember any of the relig--, I mean, how were you taught religious, in terms of religious training and do you remember any discussions, with that occurred with your, you know, your grandfather, who was a Baptist minister and now he had, you know.
Speaker 2: My grandfather and his oldest son, Uncle Mike--Uncle Mike was kind of a street preacher--and every Sunday morning, I can remember when my grandfather was in Bessemer [Alabama], when we were in Alabama for that year, there would these, be these huge arguments on the back porch between my grandfather and my uncle about the appropriate interpretation of scripture and so we learned a lot of scripture based on that, and you know, when I hear it I can plug right into it and we spent a lot of time in the Baptist church with my Aunt, who was an avid church member and the Secretary of the Church, etc., and you know when we were in Alabama for that year, our entire social life was around the church, I mean, Monday afternoons for BTU and then Tuesday was choir practice and the Wednesday was this; everyday and all weekend was tied up with the church, so it was during that process that I think I learned more about the Bible, than I did attending Scott Methodist [Church], in Detroit [Michigan].
Story_ID: 525
Speaker 1: So can you tell, so are you saying that every summer you were in [Bessemer] Alabama, was that--?
Speaker 2: Every summer, we went.
Speaker 1: Every summer, okay.  And how long would you typically, you know, when you went, how long would you go for?
Speaker 2: We would say stay for about a month. The most memorable part about being, going to Alabama every summer was, number one, they were still cooking meals on these black stoves, where they, you know, put in kindling and coal.  To this day, I am so impressed with that because they were some excellent cooks.  Part of the reason for going down there was so that we could try and gain weight because we were always so skinny.  And the other important part of that, that sticks with me to the today and every time I hear it, till this day and every time I hear the name, it immediately takes me back to going to Alabama, and that is, we had to take the Greyhound Bus to Alabama.  We got on the bus in Detroit [Michigan], when you got to Cincinnati [Ohio], you had to get up and move to the back of the bus, because once you left Cincinnati [Ohio], you were crossing the Mason-Dixon Line and you were in the South, and the South was segregated, I and from that point on, I can remember my mother [Ernestine Moten Ross] trying hard not to have us get off of the bus to go to the bathroom because the facilities were segregated, they were just absolutely horrendous.  It was one of the most--you learn to live with demeaning experiences, I will never forget our travels to the South every summer on the Greyhound Bus, never, never.  To me, that to me, was what segregation, meant.  Now, as I said, when I was in Detroit [Michigan] at Balch, one of the intriguing parts of the Elementary School was reading, I loved to read, they loaned me books, I had old books of my mother's, I just, I was challenged to read.  When I got to Alabama--and we went to school there for a year and in Detroit [Michigan], I would go to public library [Detroit Public Library] every Saturday and, you know, look, and get books.  But in Alabama, if you were Black or Negro, you didn't have access to the Public Library, we couldn't go to the Public Library, so for that whole year, I didn't have the reading experiences; had really good teachers though, who were really committed to teaching, and it was an obvious commitment, unlike the just casual competence, that we, that I had in Detroit [Michigan], there was a significant commitment to pushing every child as much as they could be pushed, but the disciplinary strategies, were all together different, I mean, you got whipped, you know, you got spanked, you got your hand slapped, this, this, I saw in Alabama, I had never seen this in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Now did you, were you happy, did you look forward to going south, or were you, was it something that you had to do and you didn't like doing?
Speaker 2: I looked forward to being there, I did not look forward to getting there.  But I looked forward to being there.  It was fun, it was wonderful, it was space, it was open, my aunt had a large yard, my grandfather was next door, there were pecan trees, I mean it was, you know, it was open space, yes so, I enjoyed it, I really enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 526
Speaker 1: Now your mother [Ernestine Moten Ross], when you were ten, developed tuberculosis?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so, do you remember the circumstances around that and, and how you felt and you know, actually, what were the events that transpired?
Speaker 2: We were not aware of what was going on because every summer, we went to the South, what we did--what we did recognize, was that this was an unusual trip to the South that we were going to take, because my cousins came up from the South, to take us to Bessemer [Alabama] and my mother wasn't going, that's all we knew, so it was unusual, but not enough to raise our anxiety levels, so, so my cousin and, came up from the South and my father [Fred Earl Ross], and they drove south this time, and my father drove, I don't even know where he got the car, but anyway, he drove, and, and, my, my oldest cousin came up, to, to go with him to take the kids to Alabama, which was an unusual circumstance, but, you know, we were looking forward to going down south, so, it didn't quite hit us.  It was only when we got to Alabama, that my aunt, my mother's sister told us that, my mother was going into the hospital and then we were going to stay with her until she got out, and I, I don't think--I was the oldest, I was ten years old--I don't think we really even understood at that time, what it meant, because we didn't take our toys with us, that things that we prized the most, we were just, going to Alabama, and we were coming back. I did, I used to shoot marbles, so I had a collection of marbles that I took with me everywhere--I was a little tomboy--and so I had that, those marbles, but other than that, there were no toys that we took, just a few clothes, and my mother's sister [Beatrice], who lived in Detroit [Michigan], sent the rest of our clothes, you know once we got there, but so, we didn't know we were going to stay there until after we got there and my, my brothers, were, were young, I think my, my oldest brother must have been about three and my youngest was two, and my, my youngest sister was maybe four or five, somewhere in that range.  So, Diane and I were the only ones who really went to school and the other three kids stayed at home, and to a large extent, that was a time that really, molded me into being, maybe the surrogate mother, because I was their connection, I was the one that tried to look out for them, because it was really difficult, for my--for my brothers and my younger sister, you know, it was very difficult.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Say, say what was difficult about it.
Speaker 1: The transition, we, it, number one - Mama wasn't there.  My aunt, who was an unbelievable woman, who took in five kids, and, and she had five of her own, I just, I can't imagine that but it's, it's the kind of family structure, in my mother's side, that we always lived with.  We need something, or they needed something, they would call each other and we would sacrifice to make sure they got it, with the stipulation or maybe with the, the unconscious understanding you never asked for something that you didn't need or you could do without.  But if you need it, you got it, and that's kinda of how the, you know, relationship has always been on my mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Now you were there two years, was it?
Speaker 1: One year.
Speaker 2: One year, okay one year, and then when you came back, what was, was your mother out of the hospital?
Speaker 1: My mother was in the hospital for two years, but we were there for a year, and, you know, subsequently I find, she didn't--she didn't want us to have to go there, she wanted to figure out a way to keep us here.  My father's family would have split us up.  My aunt in Alabama, was, would take us all.  My, her sister who was here was working and couldn't take care of us because the kids, the babies, were so young, and so what happened is after a year, my Aunt Bea, quit her job, to move in with us, so we could come back home, so we came back home.  And, and to come back home meant that, at least it was possible for my older sister and I Diane, to, to go and at least see my mother at the hospital, we stood out on the lawn waving at her in the window, we couldn't go into--it's when they had sanitoriums [sic, sanitariums] for tuberculosis--but we, but she could see us and so my, her sister quit her job, and you know--she was doing day work--and she quit her job, so that we could come back home and from that point on, she was always with us, and almost all the time, in one shape or form or another.
Speaker 2: Aunt Bea?
Speaker 1: Aunt Bea, Aunt Bea.
Speaker 2: Okay, now how is your father handling all of this, 'cause that's tremendous, you know, how is he handling it all?
Speaker 1: You know, my father doesn't share his feelings, and, and you know, it, he's got, a personality that came out of the depression.  And if I supply, you know, if I go to work everyday, that's my job as a father, he's, he's, he's not particularly nurturing, and so, his contribution was to go to work everyday and to make sure that, you know, we had food on the table, interesting.
Story_ID: 527
Speaker 1: Now, you, tell me about your relationship with your younger sister, how is it, you said, you know, you were always the good student, what was she like, you know, and then, you know, the, the, there's three years (Unclear), there's a gap of three years.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well we always treated my youngest sister, Rita, like the baby.  Everybody had to protect Rita, you know.  And I can't tell you the fights I've gotten into because of Rita and my younger brothers, but, Diane was independent, Diane was, I don't know, adventuresome, brave, the girl would do anything, which was always scary for everybody, you know, I can remember, my mother writing us, me letters when I was in [Bessemer] Alabama saying watch out for Diane, you know, keep your eye on Diane, she was just, you know, she was just adventuresome and very, would do anything, very daring.  So that was my job, to watch out for Diane (laughs), for Diane.  You know, she, and she, she (Unclear), she got in a whole bunch of fights, I was always trying to protect Diane, cause she would pick fights, you know and she tells a story about one time she picked this fight, followed the girl all the way home and when the girl got home, she beat her up really good and that was the last time she picked a fight, you know (smiles).  But the, that's Diane was that way, I was, you know, I was tomboyish, but not as daring, you know, as, or as brave as Diane (Unclear), nothing, nothing, scared her, you know.
Story_ID: 528
Speaker 1: Now, what, as a young person then, are you sort of living inside your head, I mean is that, cause your reading, so I'm just wondering, what were you dreaming of, you know, what did you think about, what were thoughts that were going on?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) One of the people that I'd read everything I could find on in the school libraries and in the public library, was Joan of Arc.  And you know, I didn't have a way to define why that became interesting to me, but she was just an unlikely hero.  Who would think--and I read everything I could on Joan--it was this issue of, of value and I think a lot of what I read was you perceive, now research says, that by the age of three, you know how you're valued by, the, the people around you and the society in which you live.  And I think I was struggling to identify that value, how, where was my value, and, so I can remember, you know, in hindsight now, times when I struggled with that, you know, who cares about what happens to, to, me, this little girl, in this raggedy backyard of this three story apartment building, in the middle of the ghetto in the City of Detroit [Michigan], I mean, is that how my value is defined, and I will tell you who, who gave me a sense of value, those elementary school teachers at Balch [Elementary School].  We were valuable to them. It wasn't an issue of a black child, or, we were just students, and their mission was to teach and, you know, I felt valuable at school--valuable at school
Speaker 1: Now Balch, lasted--did you end Balch in the sixth grade or the eighth grade, cause you went.. sixth grade?
Speaker 2: Sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay so, when you came back from [Bessemer] Alabama, then you were then headed to middle school right?
Speaker 2: No, I spent my fifth grade in Alabama.  When I came back, I did my sixth grade at Balch and graduated from Balch and went on then to McMichael[Junior High School]
Speaker 1: Okay, and so McMichael was a two or three year, was it a--?
Speaker 2: It was (Unclear) it was three, actually, it was three years when I started but, yeah it was seventh, eighth and ninth year, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was it located?
Speaker 2: It was located on the west side of Detroit [Michigan], it was not the school that I was supposed to go to, you know.
Speaker 1: Now how did that happen?
Speaker 2: My mother [Ernestine Moten Ross] wanted me to go to a school, there were lots of gangs at that time in Detroit [Michigan], so she wanted me to go to a middle school, that was not in that district with the, with the gangs, and, so that was, so I had to take two, sometimes three buses to get to McMichael every single day.  And McMichael was mixed, and so we, you know, we made up this address and gave them on McGraw--oh, I remember that today--3317 McGraw, oh, don't put that on tape (laughs), but we made up this address on McGraw--.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) So you could--so you could--.
Speaker 2: --so that I could go to McMichael.  And, I won the American Legion Award when I graduated from McMichael, Diane [Diana Ross] also went to McMichael, but when they notified us that I had won the award, they sent the letter to 3317 McGraw and they found out I didn't live there.  They gave me the award, but it clearly showed that Diane did not live in the district and so she wound up going to another, middle school, you know, yeah, I graduated from Balch in sixth grade and then I went to middle, middle school, and my mother wanted me to go so much that, I had to walk to the bus everyday and she wouldn't let me walk alone because I had to leave at seven o'clock in the morning to get there, so every morning, she would get up, get dressed and walk me to the corner and watch me as I walked the two blocks, to, to get to the bus stop so that somebody would be out there watching me.  Every single day she did that for the full length of time, even when--even when Diane started going, she would walk us every single morning she'd get up and walk to the corner, it didn't matter how cold it was in Detroit [Michigan] and that can be, so that so would watch us get to school, yeah.
Story_ID: 529
Speaker 1: Do you remember holidays at the--at the, at home too, were there any special traditions around holidays? DR. We were a poor family, not knowing we were poor, but there were--there were only two times of the year that we got new clothes, one was for Christmas and the other was for Easter and those were big days for us, my father [Fred Earl Ross]--Christmas is his favorite holiday and so that was the time of year that we got toys, we didn't get toys any other time except Christmas and so, what usually happened is that, my family went into heavy debt at Christmas time to give us toys and spend the whole next year paying it off so that they could have another good Christmas, so Christmas was really the holiday--the holiday for the family.  Thanksgiving was great because it was a cooking holiday, but it was Christmas for the--and Easter, cause Easter we got new clothes.  My mother [Ernestine Moten Ross] sewed and she made all of our clothes--all of our clothes, but then when she day work, sometimes they didn't, the families didn't pay her and they would give her clothes, so she would remake some of those clothes.  But my mother sewed, she, she made all of our clothes, and, and, even into high school and, she made our clothes - couldn't afford to buy clothes, and now that I think, you know everyday I used to have these (Unclear) it take a yard of material, one yard of material could make me an outfit, cause that's how skinny we were, and so I had all of this 'lil cheap cotton outfits that my mother would make and I thought I was absolutely beautiful and it wasn't until--I think I was a Senior in high school--that I realized, that the kids had been laughing at these outfits that I was wearing, that I was so proud of, for the full length of time that I'd been going to school, you know, that's life, I, I was proud of it, I thought I looked good at the time, so what difference did it make, you know?
Speaker 2: Now this is really, we're in like the mid-nineteen-fifties really in Detroit [Michigan], but you know, the period that we're taking about.  And you, were, was there a Christmas that you sort of remember that sort of stood out more, you know or a holiday that stood out more than others?
Speaker 1: (Long Pause)
Speaker 2: You know, especially if it's around, you know toys or gifts or you know, I mean as you get older, you know toys are sort of (Unclear), you know, just, because it would be a great deal of anticipation, you know, no nothing that stands out?
Speaker 1: Not in the fifties.
Speaker 2: Okay, in the early, what about--?
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) (Unclear)  When we--let me give you a sequence and I gonna try and remember the dates to go along with it. When the recession hit, in the fifties [1950s], my father was always an elected official, representative in the Union for the company he worked for, American Brass and the Union Shop was a UAW 714 and so he was Union steward and when the recession hit, they laid off everybody, but if anybody in the plant worked, the Union steward, had to be on site.  And because of that, he was able to work at least one day a week, and so it reached a point where we couldn't, we really couldn't afford to stay in the apartment building and so we moved away, moved into a two-family, further, further north--further north on Belmont.  And that was at a time--I was in high school--and, those are, those were really hard time for us, I can remember times, we, we didn't have heat, you know, we didn't have electricity, my Aunt Bea, was doing day work, and she would bring us food, I can remember he made twenty-four dollars a day, and he only worked that one day a week, and the rent was seventy-five dollars a month for this place on, this two family, and so this, this was really tough times for us.  That's when I knew, we're poor!  I hadn't really appreciated how, how, close we were to the (Unclear).  My father is a very proud man and my mother's position and she had just had a new baby, Chico [Wilbert Ross], and, often didn't have heat, we could barely eat, my aunt was bringing us food, we you know, we didn't have electricity often and, her thing was, we've got to get some public assistance and my father refused.  He didn't want my mother to work, she went back doing day work trying to do something, cause, you know, black female at that time in Detroit [Michigan], that's the only kind of job without education you could get was day work, so she did day work and, almost from that point on, I had little jobs, my brother had a paper route, we're trying to help out and she applied to, for public housing, I can't tell you the arguments in my house over that public housing.  My father said he was going to refuse, we were not leaving, my mother said, we had to go to public housing, she couldn't raise these six kids in this environment, so she made arrangements to move and my father came along.  Hated it, never, never, adjusted to living in the projects.  Never.
Speaker 2: For him, what did that represent?
Speaker 1: Failure.
Speaker 2: Failure.
Speaker 1: Failure.  Never.  And, you know, everyday he got up and went to work.  In the projects he was one of the few people that had a car, he had a old jeep that he drove everyday, everybody said Fred Ross is going to work cause we hear this (makes car noise) the jeep is starting up to go to work.  Hated it.  And you know, almost to this day, well you know my father's still alive and he's eighty-eight, he's almost wiped it out of his memory, if you ask him real quick, he'll say he never lived in the projects.  He hated it, it was, to, to him, it was totally demeaning, and, he didn't want to do it, we didn't have a choice and so we moved to the projects.
Speaker 2: So how did, how was that move, how did it affect you guys at all, the kids?  Cause sometimes kids are oblivious, or was it, you know were you conscious of the move, you know did it represent, were there a different group of kids over living in the projects?
Speaker 1: Well about, when we moved from St. Antoine to Belmont, we'd left a group of kids.  When we moved to Belmont, we didn't have that same kind of neighborhood, we didn't have a lot of kids, although. (Someone in background speaking)
Speaker 2: Something rang.
Speaker 1: No something rang. (Someone in background speaking) DR. You know, let me make sure that my telephone is off, my cell phone, okay can I do that?
Story_ID: 530
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So on Belmont, we didn't have the collection, it wasn't the same kind of neighborhoods that we had on St. Antoine, so there weren't a whole bunch of kids to play with, it was a much more isolated environment and, and, you know our living circumstance was dire, it was not good at all.  Kids, we were happy to move into the projects, we looked forward to it, I mean we were going to have a real house, and (unclear) heat and you know, we, we loved it, it was going to be something we could afford, you know, so we loved it.  My mother [Ernestine Moten Ross] did it out of desperation, you know and it was like, it became a conflict, she didn't care what my father [Fred Earl Ross] wanted, she, she had to do this for the kids and so, so we were okay, we were--we were fine and there were plenty of children all over the place and people have, talk about the projects like you lived in this dangerous place.  Let me tell ya, I loved it.  The projects was located in, in a, in a part of the city in which it was kind of isolated--.
Speaker 2: Can we stop a second, hold on one second, please.
Speaker 1: (Laughing) so my line going down the nose, okay go on.
Speaker 2: Anyway, so we looked forward to the projects, we loved it and it was located in a part of the city where you had to walk two blocks from any kind of, public transportation to get into the projects.  And let me tell you, those two blocks were dangerous, cause it was ghetto there and there were lots of prostitutes and you know, lots of crime, but once you got to the projects, you were safe, you knew you were and everybody knew everybody, it was, at least in part of the projects where we lived, cause were the row houses for the larger families and so, it was very similar, to growing up on St.--the other part of St. Antoine that we grew up on be--because, you know, we had this community of people, the, and they were, the parents, they usually, they were by and large single parents, we were one of the few families that had a mother and a father there at home, but you know, my mother made fast friends for life there, we made, you know, we grew up with these kids, although I was, I was in high school, as you remember, had kinda just graduated from McMichael [Junior High School], when I started, so I was in high school, when we moved into the projects, so I didn't live there for very long.
Speaker 1: So that was about, what year are we talking about, nineteen--(adding numbers), 1958?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Maybe 1958, yeah.  You know, I'm gonna put that down, like a chronology.  I know we moved around and how long we stayed, about 1958.
Story_ID: 531
Speaker 1: So, '58 [1958], so, so, tell--now what high school are you going to?
Speaker 2: Cass Technical High School.
Speaker 1: Oh Cass, right.  Cass is a school right, it's okay?
Speaker 2: It was the school and it still is a wonderful school for preparing students you know.  At the time, it was mostly white, there were just a few, black students, and next door to Cass Tech, was the sister school, Commerce High School that was a business school, it trained, mostly women, for the business world, typing and filing and you know, a little bit of counting etc., so those were the two, in what we call today, like magnet schools, people came from all over the city to go to those schools, they weren't community schools.
Speaker 1: So mostly kids from the projects, where were they, were they, they weren't going to--?
Speaker 2: They went to (pause) I've forgotten the name of the school, it's on the east side.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Actually, it recently--.
Speaker 1: It's all black right--?
Speaker 2: It's all black.
Speaker 1: Right, I, I know the name, I'm sorry--.
Speaker 2: Well, I do too, why do I not, I didn't go to that school, but it was very much (pause), boy it's very close, it was very much where everybody else in the projects went there, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, because of your grades?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I went to Cass Tech, Diane [Diana Ross] went to Cass Tech and then there was, then two people across the street from us, went to Commerce, the girl went to Commerce and then the brother went to Cass Tech, so it just happened that Cass Tech was very close to the projects, so we walked to school everyday, it was about a ten block walk, but it was a straight, a walk straight, west, and so we went to Cass Tech.
Speaker 1: Now during that, if we're talking I think it's probably the next year that you have a, a, tonsillectomy?
Speaker 2: Yes, you're very good.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you, and you almost bled to death so, what was, what were the circumstances around that, so that would have been your, not your sophomore, but your junior year.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and actually, when you--when you say that, (pause), I had just thought about that when I said we walked to school, because when I experienced the tonsillitis, I had to go to the hospital, to get penicillin shots, pen--you could only get penicillin in injections, and so every morning, I would have to catch the bus to Detroit General Hospital [Michigan] and to get on a bus from Detroit General Hospital [Michigan] to go to school.  We liked school, it would never dawn on me not to go to school, I mean, you know, as long as I could get there, I was going to school, and so, never dawned on me that during this ten days, I could, you know, not go to school, I went to school and so, I would catch the bus from the projects, go downtown Detroit [Michigan], to, to the hospital and then catch that bus, and go back, and catch bus downtown, and go to Cass Tech, every single day after I got this penicillin injection.  And then, and I was still swimming. I had just tried out for the swimming team, my hair was wet all the time and that's, that was part of the problem and so I had to quit the swimming team and they told me that the only thing, after getting the penicillin shots, I need to get those tonsils out.  So, I went into, the hospital.
Speaker 1: What hospital?
Speaker 2: It was (pause) Children's [Children's Hospital of Michigan], I think.  Yeah, Children's [Children's Hospital of Michigan], to, to get my tonsils out.  To this day, the memory of the occasion is vivid, vivid.  I can, I remember waking up in the recovery room, being strapped on the table, they put straps on these carts, to keep you from falling off, because, you know, I'd had an anesthetic.  And I was choking, and I could feel the blood coming, but I couldn't turn my head because they had me tied down, I couldn't get up.  And I could remember, struggling and choking and I could see two people standing in front of the window down there and I couldn't say anything, I just, you know and I couldn't get their attention, I passed out.  Next thing I know, my whole family is standing around me at the bed because, they essentially said I lost a lot of blood, they wanted to transfuse me, I mean I lost a lot of blood there.  But whoever was at the window, finally recognized that, that I was hemorrhaging from, from, the surgery.  And I do, kinda remember somebody grabbing me on that table, but I was gone, I didn't wake up again until, you know, wake up and the whole family's standing around me, I thought I was dead (laughs), but, yeah, that was one of those terrible events.
Story_ID: 532
Speaker 1: Now, are you in high school, what are you, are you still focused on, you know math, and you know science, what are, you know, cause and that point were, you know, becoming aware, very aware of the world around us, you know we have our friends and things like that.  Are there teachers that are mentoring you at that point, what are your interest, you know, I read that you like to dance, you know, you were, so you weren't a cheerleader I take it?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head no)
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Cass Tech, at the time, number one, it was called a college prep school and it had a series of curriculum so you, you just weren't a student at Cass, you had to be in one particular curriculum or another.  Diane [Diana Ross] was in dress design.  I was in the chemical/biological curriculum, so I still had this interest in science and math, and, it was a time, there were very few blacks in school, and there was a time when I, I understood how you were treated differently.  It was that first time, first education, if you were black, compared to if you were white.  I can remember a teacher that I had for English by the name of, (smiles) Mrs. Hamburger and, and I, the first thing I learned there, was it didn't matter how bright I had been, what my grades had been in elementary or middle school.  I was now competing with students who had been to plays, who had traveled, who had in their course work studied Shakespeare, they'd studied people I'd never even heard of.  Anybody I'd heard of, I happened to find on my own, you know, and so I was--and it was through no fault of my own--It just had to do with the system that I was in and I didn't have those experiences.  But, having said that, I can remember being in Mrs. Hamburger's class and a new student came in a little bit late, white male, actually, white male Jewish, and he and I got this--he had lots of experiences I, you know, he'd written papers, he'd done pro--lots, I just remember being so impressed with him.  But when it came to test scores, he and I scored exactly the same.  He got an A- from her and I got a B+.  What does that say?  It was just amazing to me.  But Cass Tech was that way.  It was by and large a white school and we were there.  Most of the black students who started with me did not graduate, they didn't make it through the curriculum, and so there were just a few of us left by the time--by the time we graduated.  And that's the first time I started to feel it, it had, that there's a bias here that's, that's, that's significant, that you have to recognize and not be defeated by, you know, so I got a B+, an A- would have been better, but I learned a lesson in that, that you know, nobody promised me fair, I was going to have to, you know, be my own judge, of what of the good effort was, and not, not be defeated by it, you know.
Speaker 1: And we're seeing, you know, we're at Detroit [Michigan], you know before the, you know, frankly in the time that we're talking about, there's a large influx of blacks from the, in Detroit [Michigan], you know from the South, so you know, that, that's a community, you know, a lot of people from Alabama.
Speaker 2: This was 19, what '58 [1958], '59 [1959], '60 [1960], years before the riots.
Story_ID: 533
Speaker 1: So are you thinking, that you want, okay, first, let me ask, Diane [Diana Ross], she is not as academic as you, and she's in dress design, was that common of college prep though?
Speaker 2: It was--it was all college prep, but the, it was, yeah it was dress design, there's something else that goes along with that.
Speaker 1: Now what was she thinking she wanted to do?
Speaker 2: She really wanted to design, to be a, a clothes designer, you know, and then while she was, when she was a junior in high school, she went to, cosmetology school outside of school, just to learn how to do hair and makeup, etc., you know.  So she went to cosmetology school after school and she was in this, it was one of the home ec curriculums, which was dress design, so she made her suits, you know, so she was following in my mother's [Ernestine Moten Ross] foot steps to a large extent, she was just refining her skills.  But it was college prep, so she had to take the same college cour--I mean the same basic courses.  My courses, the extra courses, were all in biology and chemistry so I got a chance to take higher level math in high school--today we it AP [Advanced Placement]--and I got a chance to take a, like genetics and organic chemistry and bio-chemistry, things that you don't usually get in high school because I was concentrating in chem-bio, you know.
Speaker 1: Now were you--were you, were either of you involved in the chorus or choir there?
Speaker 2: That's, again, we're talking about this white school that children, young black children are trying to compete and we were coming from the projects, think about that.  Diane has started to sing as a junior I think, about a junior in high school I guess, and they were very popular, in the city [Detroit, Michigan], as far as this group, this girl group that was getting bookings to sing, and so some of the teachers heard about it and asked Mrs. Hamburger, my English teacher who was in charge of the Performing Arts Department, to, to give her a try-out for one of the plays, you know.  I was dancing in high school, so I was in plays as one of the dancers and I can remember when she tried out for the singing part in one of the plays she was told that she didn't have a voice and that she couldn't be a part of the play, isn't that amazing, you know?  And meanwhile then she went on so she could, she was never part of the performing arts.  I did dance a lot, I had stopped swimming or, and played basketball.  I had to stop that stuff and so I danced a lot in high school.
Speaker 1: So what kind of dance was it, were you taking or doing or--?
Speaker 2: I was doing modern dance in high school and part of that was, I, I loved to dance but, you know, it seems like I've always had a job, I used to teach dance as a high school student at the comm--rec center in the projects.  And then, as a college student, I taught dance at the YWCA, so that was, to me it was like another way to make some money, just to, to have some pocket money.  We were so poor, even in the pro--we were so poor.  It was--and we're going to Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School] where all of these bright students from these affluent families are coming to go to Cass Tech because, you know, private schools didn't have quite the panache at the time and there weren't a whole lot of them.  And here I was, we qualified for free lunch, never ate lunch at school.  I, you know, I never even went into the cafeteria, if, you know, because, I didn't have any money to buy lunch.  Milk cost two cent a bottle.  I couldn't buy a bottle of milk.  I went through high school unable to afford two cent for milk.  At that time the City of Detroit [Michigan], or in all of public education, students had to buy their books.  It couldn't, I couldn't afford books.  And so, I would borrow class mate books when, when they weren't using them, I, I would buy the old editions, I can remember I had the old edition of the trigonometry book so, my, my homework wasn't always that accurate because, I didn't have the same questions everybody else had to answer, and so, but I survived.  I needed glasses and we couldn't afford glasses and so I had a friend named Donna Bryant and you know some things people do for you that they don't understand how significant it is for you.  Had a friend in, at Cass Tech named Donna Bryant.  She and I were in chem-bio together and--we're taking essentially the same classes, started together and graduated together--and, so for exams--at that time, you know they wrote questions and stuff on the blackboard, so I always sat in the front seat so I could see the board, I you know, couldn't sit any further back so I was always in the front seat, so I could see the board.  But for exams, because they would assign seats for exams, I'd ask the teacher if I could sit next to Donna and in all honesty she thought that was so that I could cheat.  But the reality was Donna would read the board and take her glasses off and put them on the desk so I could pick up her glasses to see the board.  Geez, I'm getting choked up talking bout this.  (Grabs tissue) Such a little thing, but (wipes nose) she didn't realize--years later I ran into her--she didn't even realize how important that was to me (wipes nose and face while shaking head).  Gotcha, I'm gonna be okay, but it's how you survive.
Story_ID: 534
Speaker 1: That's right.  So this is a difficult time for the family in some respects and you're aware now of haves and have nots--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know because you're living in, your actually living between two worlds--.
Speaker 2: And bias, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And bias--and bias that's coming out.  So let me ask, in this whole thing because you went to, you, you start, you were definitely going to college, right?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head yes)
Speaker 1: There was no time, were there a break between--.
Speaker 2: (Shakes head no)
Speaker 1: You went right into--right into Wayne State [University], [Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head yes) Yeah well, you know but, I was definitely going to college, but it was with the, the unreality of not knowing what that required.  I had no money, you know and my father [Fred Earl Ross] told me, and to this day, it's a bone of contention between us, he told me that, you know, "I'll get the money, I'll get the money, you're going."  So I had a scholarship to Albion College [Albion, Michigan], an academic scholarship, but it didn't pay for room and board, so I needed the money.  I mean I had the academic scholarship, but I couldn't live there.  And you know, when you live in that kind of envir--I was very naive about finances, my dad said he'd get the money and I know my mother tried to get the money and they couldn't get the money.  And they didn't tell me until like July and school started in September, after I'd graduated, they didn't tell me.  Cause I really, when you apply to school you gotta pay for the application, so once I got the scholarship to Albion [Albion College, Michigan], I wasn't applying to any other schools, cause I had no money.  And so my father didn't tell me and I think mid-July that, "Bobbi, I can't get the money, I don't have the money."  So, I went to Wayne State to their counseling department and begged them to let me apply, the application period was over.  So the lady said but you know, if you will take--they had given a final admissions exam for people who had applied in July--she said if you'll take that and pass that, I can get you in.  So I took the admissions exam and passed it and I got admitted to Wayne State [University] mid-August [1960].  And then, as soon as I got admitted I went down to--they had a placement bureau to find a job, cause I was gonna have to pay for my own education, and from that point on, I worked.  I can remember--I can remember working for a series of different places that their placement office sent me, when you got paid a dollar an hour, that was the wage and, I would work twenty hours a week.  Ten dollars was to pay my tuition.  Five dollars for, was for transportation back and forth to school and, to work.  The other five dollars was to, to put, try and put together to save to buy my books, you know.  I can remember that to this day.  And actually my father said something bout who financed my education, my baby sister Rita [Marguerita Ross], who was a little girl at the time, she, she corrected him, she said "No, Bobbi worked", I worked my way through school, the whole way, every single degree, I worked.
Speaker 1: Now that's why I--what was motivating you so much, you know, why this, you know, why, why this drive, it doesn't, you know, why, why this drive? Were there others, you know like you said you went to school, what, Dennis Archer, are you talking about high school with him, are you talking about?
Speaker 2: Wayne State [University].
Speaker 1: Wayne State [University], that's where you met Dennis?
Speaker 2: Wayne State [University], that's where I met Dennis.  You know, he and I came in as freshmen together, you know.  He was as wild as he could be.  To think that Dennis Archer became the mayor of Detroit [Michigan] or the President of the ABA [American Bar Association] is just to me amazing, but I'm sure he looks at me the same way.  Very savvy, he was--he was an outreach person at the time, I, you know, so yeah, and there are a whole bunch of people that went to Wayne State [University] at that time who have taken significant leadership positions, cause that was, you know that was during the Civil Rights Movement that's, we're moving into the Civil Rights Movement at that time.
Story_ID: 535
Speaker 1: That's right cause we have, you know we're talking to you began, you were eighteen, so this, this is an interesting time because you say your sister [Diana Ross] is performing, you know at this time, she was, you said around sixteen, she was started performing around town and she, had she formed the group, The Primes?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's really when she, you know, in the projects and two of the girls lived in the projects and they needed somebody else to sing with them and you know, I used to hang around with them, as a senior in high school and my first year in college, you know.
Speaker 1: Now did you think they had possibility, were you?
Speaker 2: No, let me tell you, you know, after they had, after they started traveling out of state and they did the Dick Clark Tour and then they came back to The Rooster Tail, which was the big, you know, restaurant, theater in Detroit [Michigan], they came back and I hadn't seen them perform for a couple years, I was in college and they were on the road.  And when I saw them perform, it was like nice, night and day.  I couldn't believe how sophisticated and mature they had become, it was just wonderful.  Couldn't believe it.  I can remember today, I still have that picture on that album, it just amazing to me, you know.  They had matured into the role.  Before that, I mean, they were good, they were very popular as far as they used to do Ray Charles' song and I mean, it would bring down the house of all of these, you know, teenaged dances, and the college fraternity dances that they used to do, but when I saw them at The Rooster Tail, and I hadn't really seen them perform, because they hadn't performed in Detroit [Michigan] for about two years, it was amazing, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Now what is your father [Fred Earl Ross] thinking of this and what is your mother [Ernestine Moten Ross] thinking of the performance?
Speaker 2: Oh my father refused to let her sing--refused to let her sing.  He's forgotten that conveniently today.  My mother signed that contract without him knowing and Diane fought the battle, yeah.
Speaker 1: And did they, did, was there, was the--was the, your father's concern about the lifestyle and who the manager was at the time or things like--?
Speaker 2: (Laughs) No, my father's concern was the type music.  His thing was if she wanted to sing, she needed to go and get voice training to sing opera. (slaps hand)  That, I can remember that to this day.  It was, it wasn't, I think he even knew what the crowd was, it was the type of music that she was choosing to do, he didn't want her to do that.
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember when she mentioned that she had met--cause wasn't it Smokey Robinson that was, do you remember, are you in different circles, I mean she's two years younger--I'm just trying to understand.
Speaker 2: Okay, Smokey [Robinson] and his family lived down the street from us on Belmont, and if you, and Belmont was that interim step between, you know, where we grew up and the projects and, and there weren't many kids, on that block and so they lived down the street and that's how we met them.  Now at that time, and so, they were singing.  Smokey had a group, and so they were singing and that's how Diane met Berry Gordy and stuff of that sort.  But it wasn't that, so once she started singing, is when, we parted, we started to go separate ways cause I was in college and I, I couldn't--I couldn't run with the gang anymore, you know.  But now when she started with The Primes, I used to, I was with, you know, we used to do The Emancipation Program in [Ontario] Canada every year.  They would sing and I was, the Mistress of Ceremony, you know, or I would find, a, a, an act in which I could dance there, so for a while, I would run with them, but ultimately once I got, I didn't have that kind of time anymore.  I was working to pay for college and so we kind of, you know, went separate ways, she went off to follow her dream and here I was following mine, going to school.
Story_ID: 536
Speaker 1: Now so what, what were you, so you, you wanted to be, be a doctor, right at the beginning, did you go in wanting to be a doctor?
Speaker 2: I got, I hit the wall when--I thought I was really, really, really smart.  So that's why to a large extent why, for me, my perspective, college was the next step, I just, because I'd been, you know, very smart in each of the levels of education I'd gone to.  Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School] was a little challenging for me, but I had no books and so I explain the fact that I wasn't a four point student at Cass Tech because I, you know, it was more difficult for me, but I really thought I was smart.  But one thing I didn't recognize is each level that you go up, the competition, the people you're with, your colleagues, your peers are just as smart as you are.  So I hit the wall at Wayne State [University].  After my first year, I had to make some decision, what are my real strengths and what is it I want to do.  And then I was confronted with the reality, now I'm starting to be objective about what I want to do, not just say I wanna do it and roll ahead like everything is going to fall in and be in place when I need it to be.  Now I have to be objective.  Number one, if you were black and you were female, your chances of getting into medical school anywhere in this country, including Michigan, was extremely slim.  So, I needed to carry a four point average in order to, to even have a chance to be admitted into medical school. I needed to carry an average that high.  And my first year at Wayne State [University], I hit the wall.  I tested out of lower level science and math courses because I'd been at Cass, and then I went into higher courses and I wasn't prepared to be successful.  So I had to back up and say okay, I'm not going to run through this with a four point, so what else can I do.  So at some point I had to shift and I finally shift out of pre-med, into getting a degree in biology and chemistry, okay?
Speaker 1: Now who are the other black student, I mean, can I understand, now, just Detroit [Michigan] is brimming full of activity, lots of people are being employed by the car industry in some respects, now who is going to Wayne State [University], you know, is it a, it's a mixed, you know, I mean, I know it was all (unclear), but who are the black students that you find there and how large a black population was there?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it wasn't a very large black population, but it was a population that naturally gravitated together and, you know, I think these were probably, because you know most blacks couldn't afford to go away to school, there were a few, but most, and those that went away, tended to go to Historically Black Colleges.  So usually for the schools that were represented--I almost thought of the name of that high school--you're talking about maybe two or three brightest students from those schools were going to, to Wayne State [University], because that's all they could afford and they tend to be the students, who--it was commuter school, so it was possible to go, you know, there was no, I mean, no nobody lived in a dorm, there was no dorm in fact, so you commuted from home, so it made it possible for those bright students to go to school.  And so that's where we're getting the cream of the African American, Negro, Black crop, who, who couldn't afford to go anywhere else and came to Wayne State [University], but it was still a very small percentage of the Wayne State [University] population, but it was a group that hung together.
Speaker 1: Now what's keeping you motivated though because, I'd also read, you know, you had an advisor and they were discouraging you--.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --from going, which it seems to be an occupation for advisors. (Laughing)
Speaker 2: Wasn't it amazing.  Actually this woman, you know, it was at a time to where women in medicine was kind of an exception, and this woman, who was the pre-med advisor, discouraged all women from trying to go into medicine and maybe to some extent, she was trying to save them the effort because the chances for getting admitted as a female, but in order to complete the pre-med curriculum, you had to take human anatomy.  And she was--she was the gate keeper of that course, so you had to get her approval to register for human anatomy and she refused to, to approve it because I was a female.  You know, she just didn't think my chances were--and maybe the seats were limited, I don't know--but she certainly wouldn't let, and that was another wall that I hit, so, you know--.
Story_ID: 537
Speaker 1: I just want to make sure, now were you exposed to an osteopathic hospital back then, no not back then--.
Speaker 2: (Shakes head no) No, no that's interesting.  When I graduated from Wayne State [University] with a Bachelor's of Science in Biology and Chemistry--another lesson I learned, there's almost nothing you can do with a Bachelor's degree in biology and chemistry, so I'm running around trying to find a job now, you know.  And this hospital was looking for the--medicine was advancing at the time and they had this automated chemistry systems and most of the med-techs [medical technicians] at that time didn't have degrees, they were just either trained in the--in the laboratories or trained in the military. So they were looking for somebody with a bachelor's degree that would be able to troubleshoot these new procedures, that knew enough science that they, and so they advertised for somebody with a bachelor's degree in science.  It happened to be an osteopathic hospital--I don't want you to think I---all I knew it was a hospital, you know, but it was only after I got the job, that it, I started to understand that this was a different hospital, you know, different kind of hospital and that, although, I mean it functioned like you would expect a normal hospital to function, but to some extent, it was kind of isolated from the, the big boys, the bigger hospitals, and that was my first experience in osteopathic medicine.
Speaker 1: Okay, I wanna go back, just, and this may not be a relevant question, but do you remember your graduation day?
Speaker 2: From?
Speaker 1: From Wayne State [University]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Was there a special ceremony around it or anything?
Speaker 2: I was pregnant, I didn't, you know the only graduation--I have a bachelor's and a master's, but the only graduation I ever attended was my graduation from medical school  At every other graduation, I was terminally pregnant at the time, so I never walked across the stage for my bachelor' or my master's at Wayne State [University].
Speaker 1: Now were you, so did you get married in the--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got married, (pauses to think) in '63 [1963], two days before, the president [President John F. Kennedy] [1963] was assassinated, by the way, no wait, no two days after, nobody showed up, at the, at the wedding, I mean the whole country was in shock, but, but we got married anyway, but, yeah.
Speaker 1: And that was to Lee?
Speaker 2: That was to James Lee, yeah.
Speaker 1: James Lee, now how had you met him, was he a student?
Speaker 2: He was a student at Wayne State [University].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He had been in the Marines [United States Marine Corps], and his thing was, cause he didn't wanna go to college, so he joined the Marines right out of high school, and he said the first thing he learned in the Marines was, he's gotta go to college, cause, he couldn't do this kind of stuff.  So, when he did his turn in the Marines, he, he started going to school, so I met him a Wayne State [University].  He was an Alpha Phi Alpha [Fraternity, Inc.], (smiles) you know how you get caught up in that kind of crazy stuff when you're in school as well.
Speaker 1: So did you join, were you a Kappa--?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head no.) Okay.
Speaker 1: Couldn't, number one--.
Speaker 2: No time--.
Speaker 1: No time and well (pauses), I was the poor kid, I wasn't the kid everybody wanted to socialize with, I couldn't afford the dues for the AKeyA, AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], you know, I'm, I'm trying to get through, so no, I never did.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, so you, so let's talk, let's go, I just wanted to sort of understand, so really graduation, you were just graduating?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just got my diploma in the mail (laughs).
Story_ID: 538
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and, so now, your sister's career is, no, it hasn't--well no, it's, oh no, is just, it's '63 [1963].  They have their first song, right, so it's sort of taking off, but--.
Speaker 2: (Nodding head).
Speaker 1: Let me ask you though about some people in Detroit [Michigan] like, C.L. Franklin [Reverend Clarence LaVaughn Franklin], you weren't, see, but you know, were, there was people like, you know, C.L. Franklin [Reverend Clarence LaVaughn Franklin], or, do you, well that was a little later that Pearl Cleage's father [Reverend Albert B. Cleage Jr.] became very, you know, active, do, none of those, okay.
Speaker 2: (Shakes head no). Aretha's father [Reverend Clarence LaVaughn Franklin] is that the Franklin you're referring to?  Well, you know, when we lived on Belmont, Aretha [Franklin] lived, maybe two blocks away, and so, I mean we knew Aretha [Franklin] as kids, you know, growing up down there, so that, you know, it's really kind of a small community that has grown over time, but you know, it was a small community, everybody kinda knew everybody, so yeah, Aretha Franklin, at that time, she hadn't, she was singing, but she hadn't really started to make records, she was, she was probably developing, you know in a parallel track with what was happening in Motown [Records], I think, you know, so, yeah, so we knew her, but, Diane [Diana Ross] knew her better than I.
Speaker 1: Right, I understand, so now when you, when you, this osteopathic hospital, can we talk about that, because, I, I had read that there are, let's see, did I read that there, how many osteopathic hospitals, like nineteen--I can't remember.
Speaker 2: Schools.
Speaker 1: But no, there that many schools, but how many hospitals?
Speaker 2: Let me just give you some history that will put it into context.
Speaker 1: Can you?  Right.
Speaker 2: Osteopathic medicine is a minority profession and to a large extent it was not accepted as a medical profession.  It's amazing the progress that's been made today. So, when osteopathic medicine, well, first of all, the person who founded the medicine [Andrew Taylor Still, M.D., D.O.], osteopathic medicine, D.O. [Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine], was an M.D., and he did it out of reaction to what was going on in medicine at the time.  Often the cures were more dangerous than the disease, these diseases that were being treated, including bleeding people, leaches, all of that crazy stuff and he was rejecting that, and he was kicked out of the profession, so he said "okay, I'll start my own school", and he incorporated some other therapeutics, which are the manual medicine pieces.  Unfortunately, he named it osteopathic medicine which confuses the heck out of the public, but, so it is, it is, it's the medical profession, parallel to the M.D. profession, so we have M.D.s and D.O.s, all of them are physicians.  But for a large time, just like Negroes and African Americans in this country, they were isolated.  If you were a D.O., you couldn't get a privilege to practice in a hospital.  If you, you couldn't deliver quality continuum of care if you, unless you had hospital privileges.  So the D.O.s built their own hospitals.  So you had in this country D.O. hospitals and M.D. hospitals and that's what Martin Place Hospital [Detroit, Michigan] was.  And part of the reason that we were able to open osteopathic hospitals in Michigan was during the, Korea [The Korean War], during Korea [The Korean War] in the '50s [1950], they were recruiting physicians, you know, right out of practice to go into the military.  In the Second World War and in Korea [The Korean War].  And so they had depleted the supply of physicians, in, in, in many states and D.O.s were the only physicians that were left, beside the fact, in Michigan, the auto industry, through the war effort was booming, you know so populations were moving to Michigan for jobs and the only physicians were D.O.s, and so in Michigan was the strongest osteopathic state for a long time.  And they built hospitals, they, you know, there's a joke in the profession: if you have one D.O., you have an osteopathic practice, if you have two D.O.s, you'll get an osteopathic school, and if you have three D.O.s, you will get a hospital, you know, we had to build our own hospitals.  And so, I mean there were hospitals all over the place, now the world of healthcare has changed so there's no such thing as D.O. hospitals anymore, they've all merged together into hospital systems, but that's how Martin Place Hospital got started.  Actually, it started in Detroit [Michigan] in a house on Martin Place Street that wasn't far from where I lived on St. Antoine, okay, and then they, they build a hospital in the suburbs and I didn't know any of that, I just thought it was interesting that the name of the hospital was Martin Place and I knew a street Martin Place, you know.
Story_ID: 539
Speaker 1: Now, the, the, founder, I mean the founding of the practice, his name, was it Andrew Taylor Still?
Speaker 2: Still, right.
Speaker 1: And he founded it I read in 1874, you know, the profession, so that was.
Speaker 2: (Nodding head) Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, at the time that you come into, even knowledge of it, you know, through Martins Place, what is this, what's different about this hospital, you said, you know, I recognized something was different about it.
Speaker 2: The name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Other than that, you would not, you were in a hospital, you had everything that you expect a hospital to have.  I think part of the difference was, you know, it was sort of like being a minority student at Wayne State [University], you kind of gravitate together, all the minority gravitate together, and the same thing is true, actually I tell the profession this all the time, that they have a minority mentality, and I understand that cause I've lived it, you know.  So you had this spirit of all these doctors being together and they worked together to make that hospital the best that it could be, so you get a different kind of spirit, it's not that we just practice here, you know, this is a part of who we are this hospital and you feel that spirit immediately when, you know, when you were in an osteopathic institution at that time, that they were struggling together to make it the best that it could be, the doctors that were there, that, but other than that, the practice of medicine, the procedures, the scope of what you get in a hospital, it's exactly the same, exactly the same.
Speaker 1: But was the treatment, the treatment was different though.
Speaker 2: No, not for a hospital.  Most of the treatment that you would, associate with osteopathic medicine, has to do with manual medicine and that's kind of what you might find in, in an office, but you know, and, and at the time that's where you saw most of any manipulation that was being done, you would see in an office.  But a heart attack is a heart attack and that goes to the hospital, so the osteopathic hospitals had to be structured exactly the same way to treat, treat a heart attack.  Now, it didn't mean that if you had a patient who was in bed in the hospital, cause people stayed in the hospital a long time, if they had to be bedridden in the hospital for seven days, you know, if you laid down for a couple of days, things start to hurt, you're back hurts, you can't get quite comfortable in the bed, and the beds weren't all these, you know wonderful things that we have today.  Then, the fact that we could do some musculoskeletal things, only made the patients feel better in the hospital, but it was not used as a primary treatment for things that people would be hospitalized for, you see.
Speaker 1: I, the thing is that, so, chiropractic is not part of osteopathic?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head no).
Speaker 1: But it's still, that is something that uses manipulations too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: See, I think it's confusing to people, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, it is very.  To me, lived osteopathic medicine, it's kind of surprising that there's still confusion.  And here, from, from historical roots, Andrew Taylor Still was a physician, but what he, when he made, when he broke off to start his own school, he needed to come up with some new therapies, and his theory was, his philosophy was, the body will try to heal itself and that part of your job as a physician is to help the body heal itself, which in all honesty, although he was describing it at the macro level, that is the macro- microscopic basis of how most diseases are treated.  Immunizations work, you, the body fights off the infection, you give them the antigen to build up the immunity.  Your body does that on its own.  And that was his philosophy, well before his time.  Quite frankly, historically, you may or may not want to hear this, but his family, his children died because he refused to have them immunized, he didn't appreciate that that was very consistent with his philosophy.  He was so against most of the treatments that were being used for patients.  He strongly believed in the body's ability to heal.  And so when he started this new school, he adopted some of those external therapies, including the manual medicine, the manipulation, he, he incorporated some of those into his treat- his training of physicians, but it was never all that we were, it was just, he was picking up the things that he felt worked better than leeches and cyanide and bleeding stuff of that sort.  But that's, that was his philosophy, so that's kind of, you know, that's how manual medicine got started.  Chiropractic is nothing but manual medicine and the techniques in all honesty, are different from ours, and not as, not as varied in the kinds of strategies because most of what they do is, and you hear this, they crack bones etc.  Now, we are taught how to do that kind of thrusting technique, but most of what we use are muscle energy, we do, we use the muscles as opposed to cracking bones, or we use the fascia, or we use the tendons, you know, so we're taught all of those techniques, but by and large, they're, they're complimentary techniques, you know, now for severe muscle strain they may be the primary, but in many instances they're complimentary, we help the body to feel better because, you hurt, you hurt one leg, you're going to compensate by using the other leg and so we help the body to, to counter the results of compensations, you know.
Story_ID: 540
Speaker 1: So now how long did you work at Martin, Martin Hospital?
Speaker 2: (Thinks) I worked there, let's see, I graduated '65 [1965]--.
Speaker 1: '65 [1965] right.
Speaker 2: About two years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I went back-- (pauses).
Speaker 1: To teach--.
Speaker 2: To earn a Masters in, in, in '67 [1967] and teaching yeah.  About two years.
Speaker 1: So was that because you, now you, you became a single mother, your marriage didn't last long.
Speaker 2: No, I was still married then.
Speaker 1: You were married then, okay, but, how many children, you have one child, is it one?
Speaker 2: I got married in '63 [1963].  In 1965 I had my first child, who died from German Measles.  It's real folks, died from German- I actually, I had German Measles and didn't even know I had it, they were only able to diagnosis it after the fact cause my blood titers were up.  And the baby was born with a heart condition that's not compatible with survival as a result of the German Measles.  So I lost my first child and then in 1967, I had my second child, my oldest son, and then in 1969, I had my third child, my oldest daughter and it was after my oldest daughter was born that I got divorced.  But during that time, in '67 [1967], I also went, my son was born in March and I went back for a master's degree I think in the fall of that year and then, and received that degree, I think in '69 [1969] or something like that.
Speaker 1: So '67 [1967], now your, your son's name and your daughter name?
Speaker 2: My son's name is Steven and my oldest daughter's name is Monica, so that's Steven Lee and Monica Lee.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, you're continuing to pursue your education, you're thinking that, you're not thinking about being a doctor at this point, you're looking at how to, how to take care of yourself, in the meantime, your marriage ends and you move back in with your mother, is that it.
Speaker 2: Oh, it's, well it's a little bit--.
Speaker 1: That's wrong, okay.
Speaker 2: The sequencing is kinda right.  I went back to get my master's in education, my husband, James Lee, was a teacher.  He got the summers off, and you know now, you know, we're starting to build a family, so I went back to get the master's through the National Teachers Corp, so, because, number one, I could earn money, and number two, I could get a master's degree and I could get the summers off and you know, it would help to give me time to, to start to raise a family.  And what I realized was, I couldn't, number one, I had a bachelor's degree in science, I loved science, it did not take a lot of science to work in the laboratory.  I used to say my teenage brother, at the time, it was cookbook, you know, and as much as it was exciting early on to try and troubleshoot the, the new biochemical and automated techniques, the companies were responsible for that, and you know, so, you know, talk about a glass ceiling, that wasn't a glass ceiling, that was just a ceiling and would, I could not spend the rest of my life in that one room laboratory, so that's why the master's degree and teaching became an option, you know, because you know, that was a good option to medicine was going into teaching, so that's when I got the master's degree and then I had, I think my husband and I separated when my daughter was maybe three months old, my youngest, we separated then, yeah, and when we did, the marriage failed.  Here I was, now I've gotta decide, what am I going to do with the rest of my life.  I was living in a house that I couldn't afford on just my salary alone, and so, we had, he and I had to sell that house.  Meanwhile, I had to decide what is it I want to do and I can remember my sister, my little sister calling me, Diane [Diana Ross], saying, "You know Bobby, why don't you go back to medical school?" you know?  Right.  Not two weeks later, a man that I worked with in the laboratory at Martin Place--now I've been out of the lab for a couple of years--called to tell me, 'Barbara, they're opening an osteopathic school in Michigan, you oughta apply.' He had been accepted into the class that was starting that year, so he told me to apply.  So I went down and I talked to the school.  When I dropped out of pre-med, there were some courses that I should have completed like physics requirement, I was short one physics credit, so they, the dean told me if you get the physics, get the physics credit, we will consider you for admission and I had to take the MCAT [Medical College Admission Test] exam.  So I took the MCAT [Medical College Admission Test], I was, I was teaching at the time, my husband and I were separated and I'm back in school trying to get a physics credit, now physics is not one of those areas that I'm good at and wasn't good when I was a full time student and so I went to the department and I said you know, I promise you, I will never be a physicist, could you give me a directed study to earn one credit, it wasn't even a course, I promise you, I will never embarrass you, I just need one hour in physics and so this department chair said write me a paper on the Kinesio - no, the, what, biomechanics of osteopathic medicine, okay, so that was, that was my assignment to get this one credit, one credit in physics and so I started doing the research and I realized there was nothing written down, nothing at all, but in usual, my usual fashion, because they hadn't written any books on osteopathic medicine doesn't mean I'm not gon get my hour's credit, so I did a paper on Kinesiology of motion, and he gave me credit, and he, till this day, he laughed, number one, I didn't do what I said I was going to do, but I gave him what I could get and he gave me my one hour of physics so that I could qualify to be admitted.  I took the MCAT [Medical College Admission Test] exams and the dean of this brand new school, who was, who had come through the sixties [1960s], this was 1970 now, wanted to integrate his new school, and but trying to find, for a new school opening up, minority students, was a, who had been discouraged from coming through this system, was very difficult for him.  So he said hey, you know, I can (unclear) saying, you let me in, I'll graduate, but I gotta, you know, I gotta get in, and so, he let me in, and I graduated and it was a three year program which I thought was wonderful cause I had babies at home that I had to take care of, so.
Story_ID: 541
Speaker 1: Well three years is still a lot--it's shorter than, it's shorter than regular, by one year?
Speaker 2: Well, it's only shorter, (shakes head no) the three year curriculum, we only had, we had a week off at Christmas and four days off for Easter, we were, we were in class forty-five weeks out of year or more, for three years, which is so, we put in the same amount of time, we just had no breaks, so it was grueling, it was grueling, I can remember telling my partner, you know, if the second year is as hard as this first year, I'm not sure I can make it, I'm not sure I have the stamina to be able to do it, cause I had two babies at home and of course, you know at that time I was living in the two family with my mom, you know, but I didn't, I didn't know whether I could make it, it was just that grueling, and I still had to work, cause I had no money (laughs) shoot, I still had to work.
Speaker 1: So what is, what are you learning though, I mean you, you entered this, this, the, the class that you enter is it the first class or what, cause it's a new program at Michigan State [University] so, how long had the program been in existence?
Speaker 2: The program started as a private college called The Michigan College of Osteopathic Medicine and they admitted their first class.  I was in the second class, the first class was a four year class, for the second class, they had received approval from the accreditors to establish a three year program, so I was in the first three year class, and then, in my first year, they, the profession had appealed to the state of Michigan for a public osteopathic school, so in the middle of my first year, they decided to make it a part of Michigan State University, which was, you know, think about this, I had two babies, I had no money, I was living with my mother, there were no scholarships out there, and at the time, they didn't even give military scholarships to, to women.  If they moved the school up to East Lansing [Michigan], I would have to quit, I had no way of being able to make that commute everyday and still have two babies at home, and I certainly didn't want my ex-husband to think that he could come in and take charge of my kids.  So, but as it turned out, what they decided to do, although we became, we, I was a student of Michigan State [University], they sent the registrar down to, actually, it was in Madison Heights [Michigan], down to Madison Heights [Michigan] to, to register us.  I never went to that campus, not as a student, because I only had to finish a year and a half, before I had clinicals and I wouldn't need to be at campus anyway, so they let us stay, actually in Pontiac [Michigan], they let us stay in Pontiac [Michigan], so I didn't have to go up to the campus, because if they had, if I had to go up to the campus, I'm not sure I could have finished it, I had no one way of taking care of my kids.
Speaker 1: I understand cause I was going to ask you, about Dr. Clifton Morton because he was President of Michigan State [University] at the time, but you weren't, you weren't --.
Speaker 2: But, actually he's a role model of me, as, for me, as the dean of medical schools, okay, and let me tell you why, I never met the man, I knew that he was the president, the only time I him was my graduation from medical school and he was the one who shook my hand as I walked across the stage.  His presence and the way in which he embraced each and every individual student was something I attempt to emulate when my students walk across the stage, it is their moment and they have my full attention.  It was like this man knew me and I'd never met him before, that's how, and so time I have a graduation, I think about how he made me feel when I graduated from Michigan State [University] and that's how I try to make my students feel as they walk across the campus, this is their moment and I try to give it all to them (unclear).
Story_ID: 542
Speaker 1: I'm sure he would like to hear that, now when you're in medical school, what is this like versus what you think it was going to be like and what courses do you gravitate to and what do you find challenging, you know, who are the other students there, do you feel encouraged, I mean, these, I'm just trying to get a sense of what the whole experience was.
Speaker 2: Well you know, I described elementary school where there was really no bias, and then middle school, which, you know, was no bias, but competing now for where you go for high school, high school where you started to feel some of that bias and college where your really isolated and there's lots of bias, you know, particularly as I was in pre-med.  Now I get to medical school and that is the most, every bias you can think of is hitting me in the face.  First of all, in my profession, in the clinical years, they never had a female medical student, they had no facilities for females.  Many of the lectures on psych [psychology] and they're printed, you know, so you're standing there with the doctor and he's giving you a lecture, many of the lectures occurred in the doctor's dressing room.  I couldn't go in the doctor's dressing room, it was full of all the men.  I could only change clothes and only had scrubs for nurses, so, let me tell you, nurses are wonderful, nurses have saved my life, saved my life through my entire education, because, you know, they were all women, and they understood that, you know, and they helped, I can't tell you how much nurses did to protect my back as I went through the system.  It is not a user friendly system for anybody at the time, you know, but it's certainly was even worse for being a minority or and a woman.  The issues are so many assumptions are made, by these very people who treat minorities everyday, about how you think, what your capabilities are, the fir - one lesson I learned in medicine is, I can not trust the external environment to evaluate how good I am.  Because their expectations are so low, that if I only tried to achieve their expectations, I'll be mediocre at best.  So, I can't use them as a yardstick, I have to make myself better, and I have to push all the time to know that I'm good enough because otherwise, I could remember an experience where I passed a urinary catheter.  Ward clerks pass urinary catheters, and my supervising physician, gave me such rave, accolades, I couldn't figure--for passing a urinary catheter.  In that instance, because I worked in a hospital before, I knew this was a (unclear) but can you image if I took that to heart to think what a wonderful job I did, you know it's like I wouldn't have to push anymore, couldn't trust the environment.  The environment had no, did not give me any creditability as a female, a black female student, not even my students, I mean not even my classmates, I mean we'd have an exam and they'd say what was the answer to number two and I'd say the answer to number two was such and such.  They'd turn right around and say "what was the answer to number two", it's like, I had no creditability in that process.  Amazing. It was the absolute, most challenging environment to learn and achieve excellence you can ever imagine, cause it was all over the place.
Speaker 1: So now how many, how many black students?
Speaker 2: There were two of us.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the other person.
Speaker 2: Joe Pitts, Joe Pitts.  Joe and I survived together, studied together.
Speaker 1: How many other women?
Speaker 2: There was one other woman in my class and she was, she was a pistol. Sylvanna Martino.  She's an oncologist.  And Sylvanna, Sylvanna was treated, we hung together.  Sylvanna fought the battles, she didn't mind, you know, I was a little, my thing is, you know, I want to get through school, I'll fight battles later, her thing was she's gon get through school and she's gon fight the battles at the same time.
Speaker 1: So what are you, so you graduate, I wanna, a couple --. (Off camera voice stops her)
Speaker 2: Darn it. Off camera voice: Sorry.
Story_ID: 543
Speaker 1: I don't- what I'm saying that is that here you are, you know, you, your--it was such a dramatic, okay, I mean, rise quickly and, and you're following another sort of path, your brothers also are involved, well one of them--.
Speaker 2: Both of them actually for a while.
Speaker 1: Right, were involved in the music industry, so you have this strong music bend.  Do you, is it affecting you at all in terms of, you know, you were Diana Ross's sister, I mean--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, in very interesting ways.  Absolutely.  First of all, the businesses are so different that people don't connect 'em.  That was okay.  And I was doing stuff I loved, I mean, I was doing stuff I loved, so I wasn't envious of what she was doing.  Now, there were times when I was envious of the money coming in cause you know, it woulda been really kinda nice to, to make that kind of money, never make that in medicine, but, oh, so proud of her, I can't, you know, I can't (short pause), it was never, just so proud of her.  It's always interesting to me, that people think somehow or another they can't mention it because, you know, there's some comp--we live in two different worlds, I mean we really do and in my world I, this is the world I chose and I love it, I, truly I think I have the best of all worlds, I mean I can teach, I can practice, you know, and then I can make things better, you know, in the big sense, and it's so funny because Diane [Diana Ross] tells me that her kids and certainly my kids, they think I work harder then she does, you know, and I told her, that's okay, let them think that, cause I do work harder than you, but she reminds me, she has a night job.  Most of the big performances are at night, she has a night job, so that ain't easy, you know, and, and she raised her kids, while she was traveling all over the country, at least as my kids grew, they were with me all the time.  Anyway, so no, it has however been an advantage for me in a very interesting way.  People equate, money or celebrity, with power 'kay?  Now think about it, I'm in an environment where there're very few women, certainly very few blacks, and before she became a big name, you know, I was treated unfairly in a lot of different environments.  But Diana Ross is my sister now, and, people are a little bit more hesitant to step on you or to take advantage of you or to try and demean you when they think you have power behind you.  And in that respect, or connections, you know, and surprising when you think about it, particularly in that community, I've got connections, I grew up with people who've done things, you know?  So, it has been an advantage for me in that respect.  People don't try to take advantage of me because they don't see me as powerless.  Isn't that interesting?  So, it, that, it's always been an advantage in that respect, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, I, know, and I under, yeah, that has a factor in a lot of things, but that's what I hear was that there was a point in your life that there was a sort of a powerless feel to it in some respects.  What I'm taking about, going to school, you know, in the school itself, not, you know, being, you know, there was one other black person, one other, you know, minority person.  I wanna ask, about, you know, once you graduate, you know, cause you were saying that that was your graduation, was your only, you know, graduation from medical school was the only graduation, that you were like, you know, had--you want to address that, you're saying not an issue of powerless.  You wanna, you wanna--.
Speaker 2: I wouldn't call that time as a time of not being powerful, because to some extent, I was, I was powerful, but it's not something that the system that was supposed to nurture me recognized.  For instance, I had instructors that were really racially biased and were not fair to me at all, but, the way I rationalized it was, it must kill 'em to know they hate me because I'm black and female, but they have to teach me cause that's what their getting paid to do.  So, I'm the one with the power in that situation.  I don't have to fight their bias.  I just have to learn everything they know.  What a powerful position to be in.  And that's how I looked at it.  What poetic justice.  You may not like me, but I get a chance to learn everything that person knows because they can't avoid giving it to me.  That's what their job is.  So I never felt powerless.  I just felt (pauses) that I had to choose my battles.  And some of the, and not to get into those power struggles, you know, I had to choose my battles and choose them wisely.  And, I also needed an advocate, and interesting people have come up as advocates all along, our protectors or guard--the nurses, in all honesty, the nurses, were wonderful.  They protected me.  Often things are happening or occurring, your not even there to witness this or defend yourself.  They were there, they protected me.
Story_ID: 544
Speaker 1: Now when you, so when you graduate, what, where do you go to practice at this point?  And the reason I'm asking this because, I know you have a, went to the, you had a, you went into the Navy at some point.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I, is this around this time or--?
Speaker 2: It's a little bit later.
Speaker 1: It's a little bit later, okay.
Speaker 2: When I graduated, I did a one year internship and guess where I did it?  At Martin Place Hospital [Madison Heights, Michigan].  Because Martin Place allowed me to work part-time while I was in medical school.  The owner of the hospital, Al Feel (ph.), would give me as many hours as I wanted 'cause I needed to earn some money, so, I went to Martin Place Hospital, for my internship.  And while I was there, because I liked procedures so much, and I had been procedural as a laboratory tech when I was there, they, they gave me a scholarship to go to Cleveland [Ohio] to get my license in neuromuscl- in neuro--(thinks) neuroscanning.  So that I could, I can do, I mean I'm certified to do scanning.  Since that time, the science has become so sophisticated that a family practitioner like me wouldn't be allowed to do that, but at that time, I got that.  So I spent that year or so at Martin Place Hospital and got training, then I went into private practice all by myself in the City of Detroit [Michigan], and I loved it, I loved it, I loved it, and the reason, and, and, I could, I had students from Michigan State [University] who would come and do some of their training in my office and, they asked me at Michigan State [University] if I would sit on the admissions committee to, you know, be a witness at the table and make sure that the minority applicants had a fair review at the time they were applying to get to medical school.  And based upon that, they asked me if I would, if I would join, Michigan State [University] as a faculty member, I mean full time, as department chair. While I was in practice in Detroit [Michigan], so I was in practice for--.
Speaker 1: 1974 is when you went into practice.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously)--went into practice.  I was in practice for almost ten years 'cause I went to Michigan State [University] in '83 [1983].  What happened was the [United States] Navy now, all at once, wants to--more women were going into medicine, they wanted to get, and more women were in the military--they needed female physicians, okay?  And so they recruited me to go in.  But the only reason I even considered it was because my brother T-Boy, Arthur, was considering going into the Navy to get training as a nucleartech, and The Navy in the black community was always perceived as the most bigoted branch of the--, so I'm investigating for him and I get right back into this recruiting for medicine--by the way, he never went, he never went into the Navy--but I was recruited to go into the Navy, and I was seduced by their educational programs.  It was wonderful. I never went full time.  I was always reserve, so I didn't have to leave home.  I just had to do a couple weeks every year in active duty and I had to do, you know, weekend duty, for the--for the military in Detroit [Michigan], so I never had to leave, I was always reserve.
Story_ID: 545
Speaker 1: So you were reserve while you had your private practice essentially--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, the private practice, let's talk about that because, you didn't inherit a practice, you started your own practice, so that's like starting a business, for all intents and purposes.  So where are your clients coming from--?
Speaker 2: I was, well fortunate, I was fortunate, my practice was timely, because it was at a time--this was remember the riots in '67 [1967], slowly but surely, the city is turning black because people are moving out.  All of the physicians on Seven Mile where I put my practice, were moving to the suburbs.  At the same time, blacks were moving into those homes, into that community more and more and so there was, there was an absence.  So when I opened the practice, it was a growing black community and there were no other physicians there, so my practice grew.  And I learned the business of medicine the hard way, one step at a time, you know, because it was just me and one nurse who became my business manager.
Speaker 1: So, what were--what were some of those lessons you learned one step at a time?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, actually, the logic of billing, all of the, regulations around practice, which I, you know, you don't learn that stuff in medical school, you learn that--and the importance, actually, what I learned was that the system did not serve the population of patients that I had very well. I had battles with the Medicaid program.  I mean, I wasn't trying to get more money for them, I was trying to get better coverage for patients.  I had a patient who would go to the emergency room for a cold because Medicaid would not pay for cough syrup. So when she had a cold, she went to the emergency room, so it would cost them a couple thousand dollars.  My thing was, isn't there some way we could look at some of this stuff a little bit more logically?  And better serve the patients, you know?  So, you know, I learned the business of medicine one step at a time, I learned the impact of the policies, both state and federal on that very population that I'm trying to treat, you know, and I learned--I learned medicine in practice, because it was all textbook before then and it was, I learned how to take care of a patient from the primary care perspective, you know, before they had to be hospitalized.  So prevention and wellness, that was all a part of my practice, I learned that because I was trying to serve a community that needed me, you know?
Speaker 1: Now was there any education that you had to do on the community, you know, D.O. verses M.D. or that didn't really matter, people didn't have an understanding, the manipulations, there wasn't any, any education you had to do about--?
Speaker 2: No, you know, cause, at least in the black communities I come from, we divide the world into categories that don't include D.O., M.D.. You're either a doctor, a nurse, a lawyer, etc.  I was a doctor, that's what they were looking for.  And then when they would go there, they would say, "Oh, what does that mean you can do if you, if you're osteopathic, what does--"?  So, in that respect, I educated them, but I never had to solicit them with osteopathic medicine.  My people were looking for a physician, that's what they wanted and that's what I gave them, you know?
Story_ID: 546
Speaker 1: Now, just before we leave this, cause we're, I wanna go back cause I--
Speaker 2: (Laughs) We'll be here for five hours, right, is this a good story?
Speaker 1: Just, just real quickly, on the riots, because you were talking about the riots off, camera.  Talk about the effects of the riots on the Detroit [Michigan] that you came to know and, you know, where were you, you said you were living on the, what, you said the West--?
Speaker 2: I was living in Northwest, Detroit [Michigan] at the time, where as my family, my mother [Ernestine Moten Ross] and my aunt and my younger brothers and sister, and my youngest sister, were living in, right in the middle, right in area, right in the riot area.  And so, to a large extent, that was--and we were watching T.V. like everybody, everybody else--it was a terrible time.  I got a wonderful experience after the riot.  'The Detroit News' wanted to do a survey of all of the communities as to their perception of the riot, whether or not they were involved in the riot, etc.  And so, I just don't, I just think this (unclear)--.  So they hired me, you know, they hired me to go, had a whole community on the east side of Detroit [Michigan], a side of Detroit [Michigan] I was not that familiar with, and I went from house to house completing surveys for the 'Detroit News', Detroit Newspaper.  And it was amazing, it was absolutely amazing, they were trying to get to attitudes, finally, you know, typical, after the riot, now we want to know how you feel.  And it was, it was impressive, it was impressive, so I got a view of the impact of the riot.  You know, the minority community, did not, would not, did not react negatively to the riot, many people did not participate, but, but they thought it was necessary, it was, amazing.  It was the burning, I think, it was the burning that had the most negative impact, it was the burning that drove the businesses out, you know.  The riot could have occurred, even the looting would have been okay, but it was the actual burning of businesses, that, that drove the businesses out and they never came back--they never came back.  And they, part of the reason, they probably could have come back, but at that time the elections started to change, we, in Detroit [Michigan], we elected, the city council was almost all black and the mayor was black and Coleman [Coleman Alexander Young], in all this honesty, he pulled a black community together, but he did it at the expense of keeping the businesses out and it, it's finally caught up with Detroit [Michigan], you know.
Story_ID: 547
Speaker 1: Now, so this, you're in private practice, you say you kept your private practice for how long?
Speaker 2: Um, for, I was in practice there until 1983 when I joined Michigan State [University] as the Chair of the Department of Family Practice.
Speaker 1: I see, okay, so how--.
Speaker 2: I tried to keep the practice open for a while, you know--.
Speaker 1: How did that come about though, how did the offer to do that come about?
Speaker 2: Well you, I was working really hard in, in the practice, I was a solo practice and I was primary care.  And I, and I wasn't able to afford to bring a partner in to help me out, so you know, it, it, becomes, you know, I was always on call, I, I, you know, it was very, it was very difficult. I was remarried.  I gained two stepchildren and I had a, a, baby, so I now had five kids, so it's sort of like, I, I needed to maybe do something different.
Speaker 1: And your husband was Ed, Edmond [Edmond Beverly]?
Speaker 2: Edmond [Edmond Beverly], right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what did he do?
Speaker 2: He was, he, at the time, he was, he was the principal of the high, of a high school at the time, he subsequently became a superintendent of a couple of school districts, but, so, you know, it's so like, I needed more time for family, I had five kids, you know, a relatively new marriage and, so I'd been teaching students in my practice forever and so, and I'd been serving on committees for Michigan State [University] and so when the position came open, the chair of the search committee called me and asked me if I would be interested in applying, so, you know, I took a shot.
Speaker 1: So tell me what this was experience was, did you move up then, you moved, everyone--?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head yes) This set the pace for the rest of my professional life because I moved to, my oldest two sons, my oldest son and my stepson, were like juniors and seniors in high school, okay?  They didn't want to move, okay, so, I moved up to East Lansing [Michigan] took my daughters, I took my daughters with me, the girls came with me and the boys stayed in, in Southville [Michigan], so my husband, so we kept two houses, cause my oldest boys wouldn't, didn't want to go.  And my, to me that was an interesting, it never dawned on me that my kids had a say in whether or not I took a job, but it turned out that way.  So from that time since, as he's moved for job positions and I've moved, we've always had two homes, always had two homes.  I had a home in Athens [Michigan] and he had a condo in Muskegon [Michigan], you know, and, then we had the house in Bloomfield [Michigan] and I had this condo here in New York, you know.  Always had two homes, you know, so, we, we're, we're, property rich (smiles).
Speaker 1: Now when you, when you, at Michigan State [University], tell me what your charge was there and what you were attempting to, because you were returning, were you--, well, you had never been there, that's right, that's right.  You hadn't been there.
Speaker 2: Yeah so, I'd never been on the campus--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Never been on the campus--.
Speaker 2: --but you know, not as a student, I'd been back and forth to the campus, so I knew the facilities but I had never been there as a student.
Speaker 1: I was going to say you returned but you didn't return, right okay.
Speaker 2: Right, so I went there as the Chair of the Department of Family Practice, in the College of Osteopathic Medicine there.  And, as a primary school, the family practice department was the largest clinical department they had and in, in all candor, I had no real idea what a department chair did, so when I went up there, my first question to the dean, who was the same, he was my dean, same dean that I had as a medical student was "what do department chairs do"?  And, so I went through that whole process and became department chair.  I was in charge of, evaluating faculty, establishing academic programs, evaluating academic programs, I mean as far as, you know, courses and, and, students, building a curriculum for, in primary care as well as for basic skills of interviewing and taking a physical and historical examination, our department did that.  And I was responsible for building clin- practices in the community, so that's what I did as department chair.
Story_ID: 548
Speaker 1: But it's a different thing to run your own practice than to be an administrator, I suppose so--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --what was your learning curve is what I am trying to understand and what was, I mean, how large was the, what was your learning curve, how large was the student body--?
Speaker 2: The student body, there were 125 students.  My department, there were I think about 25 faculty and staff.  The learning curve, what I brought to them was, I had the business experience from the ten years of being in practice alone, and, what I, so I brought that to them, what I learned there, I had the educational background, cause I had the Masters in Education, so I understood curriculum development and evaluation, etc.  It was the management of a faculty and the arena of research that was, was something all together different, I had not been actively involved or engaged in clinical research and so I had to, that was part, and writing grants and stuff of that sort.  That's part of what I learned while I was there, you know?
Speaker 1: Did you find you had a facility for it, did you enjoy it?
Speaker 2: Oh absol- I loved it, absolutely, I do a lot consulting with the federal government around grants and grants writing and, grant writings and new program initiatives that they will fund, I, I love it, it was great.
Speaker 1: Now where, just in terms of osteopathic hospitals and medicine, was this a growth period at this point, I mean, at Michigan State [University] had you said the, no, did it have the largest at that point, it had the a--.
Speaker 2: No, New York has the largest, okay--.
Speaker 1: --has the largest.
Speaker 2: Michigan State [University]--.
Speaker 1: --had the most though, you said it the most number of osteopathic hospitals--.
Speaker 2: It had the largest number of osteopathic physicians for a state, so it was the state that had the most osteopathic physicians in that state, okay, so, Michigan has a very strong osteopathic association with strong political linkages, that's what turned that school into a public school and they still remain very strong with, which is not quite the same in other states, New York, here in New York, our state's society, but the Michigan State school was built, was paid for by the practicing physicians in Michigan.  Each physician was asked to give, you know, five hundred dollars to the fund that was used to launch the school, so the, and that has happened in almost, you know that joke, two, two, you get a school?  They put their money together to build a fund, that would allow the school to open and then once it opened, they used their political influence to get the state's support to make it a public school.  It was the first public osteopathic school ever in the history of the profession or in the country, you know, so.
Speaker 1: So you were there ten years, is that--.
Speaker 2: (Shakes head yes)
Speaker 1: --you stayed ten years, and in that time period, where there challenges at all financially to the school or anything like that, no?
Speaker 2: Well you know, during the time, there were, there were budget cuts from the state every year, but they weren't something--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Because you are in the Reagan years [United States President Ronald Reagan 1981-1989].
Speaker 2: Yes, there were budget cuts but, you know, that was part of that learning curve, but I had learned how to write grants, so I was able to secure external funding to keep our programs growing, not just maintaining them, keep them growing, and so that was a really good time for me, as far as the learning curve and networking and my personal interest at the time though, and because I needed to have an academic focus, but my personal interest was minority health and, the uninsured access to care and I thought that by going to the Michigan State [University] to the academic center, that I would have a way of impacting that, so while I was there, I did a lot of consulting with the state on their commissions about Medicaid and access to care and children's health issues and women's health issues.  But then I realized, that the state has minimal influence as it relates to the funding that comes from the federal government and so while I was there, one of my colleagues told me about the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, and so, you know, every time I move--that was part of my motivation by the way, from going out of practice, I thought I could have a bigger impact on that population that was so important to me.  So I applied for the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and, I was lucky, I was the first osteopathic physician that they had ever selected for that program and the interesting thing is, that's, you have advocates that sometime you don't know they're there, there was an advocate at the table who, who was responsible for them accepting me as an osteopathic physician, cause he'd never done it before and he was a vice president at the University of Florida.  Hadn't, didn't know him, never met him, and it was only after the fact that he and I became acquainted and friends.
Speaker 1: Now what was he, what is his name?
Speaker 2: Gerry Schreiber [Gerald L. Schreiber], was his name, I think he's, he's retired a long time now, but he was their vice president and he was also the University of Florida's liaison with their state legislature.
Story_ID: 549
Speaker 1: Now during that fellowship, you go to know Bill Bradley [Senator William Warren Bradley]?
Speaker 2: During the fellowship, we have to work with a senator, or with an elected member and we have to go through decide who we want to work with, usually based upon their political--their, legislative agenda, and so, so I interviewed, actually, I wanted to work with the Senate- Riegle, Carl--, you know, Riegle [Donald Wayne Riegle Jr.] from, from Michigan, but that was the year of the savings and loans scandal [Lincoln Savings and the Keating Five scandal] and his office was consumed with dealing with these issues.  So I tried to pick a state that had similar issues to Michigan and New Jersey had some similar issues and so I interviewed in their office, they selected me and I selected them which was wonderful.
Speaker 1: What, what did you learn from that experience, you know, from the federal level, you know that supplemented what you knew 'cause you said you had become very proficient in writing grants?
Speaker 2: That year spent, was a pivotal year.  That year, (unclear) changed my whole view of the system, how it's built, how it works--how it works, and how you can change it.  It, it was an experience that everybody who's taken it, do a complete turnaround because the system does not work the way we think it works, even as practitioners in the field, and in fact, because of that experience, I developed health policy fellowship programs for my profession, so they can understand how health policy works, how it's formulated at who the policy is addressed at or for.  It's, it's not targeted at doctors, it's, it's, it's about money, you know, and once you understand that then you have to figure out if it's about money how do I make it--how do I make it positive for patient population, you know. So, it was a pivotal, year for me and, I've never seen, quite seen the world the same again, so I can tackle the bigger issues, not the little problems that and most of those things tend to be with the workforce issues, the shortages that are coming up, how do we turn that around, there's also big policy issues, so it was--it was an interesting time.  It also helped that I was the only health person in Bill Bradley's [Senator William Warren Bradley] office and health was on the agenda, it was right before Clinton [United States President William Jefferson Clinton 1993-2001] was elected and he tried healthcare reform.  There were many Senators, Republican and Democratic, who were together trying to push an initiative for health and so I got to--I got to see how to build those kinds of networks and consensus in order to make something happen so.
Speaker 1: So who were, who were some of the key people doing, you know, involved in issues on The Hill  [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.], during your time?
Speaker 2: Oh, many of them, because Senators changed, they're no longer there, but Chafee [Senator John Lester Hubbard Chafee]and Durenburger [Senator  David Ferdinand Durenberger], and Mitchell [Senator George John Mitchell], Rockefeller [Senator John Davison Rockefeller IV], Kennedy [Senator Edward Moore "Ted" Kennedy], who are still there--Rockefeller [Senator John Davison Rockefeller IV]and Kennedy [Senator Edward Moore "Ted" Kennedy], all of the people who sat on the Finance Committee, which is where the health care issues were managed, were a part of the network I was with and I had to work with their staffs and I had to do that for, to support the, the legislative agenda of Senator Bradley [Senator William Warren Bradley], and he's a wonderful man.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's turn, cause I want to go to the--.
Story_ID: 550
Speaker 1: We teach them to use their hands, to diagnosis problems--.
Speaker 2: You know what, let's just go, let's start, you know what--. (Off Camera Voice Speaking)
Speaker 1: Oh, you are?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, oh I'm sorry.  We teach D.O.s [doctors of osteopathic medicine] to use their hands to diagnosis problems, to treat muscular-skeletal issues and to communicate caring.  So from a patient's perspective, when you have a D.O. physician, you, your, you perceive that physician as being more caring and the reason is we touch our patients.  Not just to do manipulation, but you know, we're hands-on people.  Actually, Michigan State's [University], slogan is 'High Tech, High Touch', we touch patients and there's nothing that communicates caring more, than to be touched, you know, and so, that's the only difference now, the other, that's not the other, the final difference is, we still focus on primary care.  We train more family physicians in osteopathic medicine than M.D.s do.  And when our students graduate, about sixty percent of our students go into primary care, either internal medicine, pediatrics, ob/gyn [obstetrics and gynecology], or family practice.  In the M.D. world, only thirty percent go into those specialties, the rest go into sub-specialties, you know, so we still are supplying a lot of the primary care and that's the, it's the outcome that's different in the process.  Does it make sense, does it--?
Speaker 1: No that explanation is very, very helpful now, so in the whole thing about them operating within the same structure now, okay--.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah you can't, can't you, any hospital you go into will have D.O.s, you just won't know it unless you read it on their sign.  Actually, the 'Newsweek' Magazine did a big blurb on 'M.D. Hero' ['Hero M.D.'], did you, do you all remember that?  It's because of the, the war, he had done some, you know, I can't remember, where was he, Fallujah [Iraq] or whatever it was, anyway, but they did a cover story, it said 'MD Hero' ['Hero M.D.'], okay or 'Hero MD'.  He was a D.O. and on his, in the picture, you see the D.O., in fact we had him come here to speak to the (unclear), that's this issue with not knowing the difference between M.D.s and D.O.s, and it was the military that did a lot to bring the professions together cause they started accepting D.O.s, into, into the medical corps, at the time, remember when I went in as a D.O. and as a female.
Story_ID: 551
Speaker 1: Okay, so now how, how does, how do you become Dean of the College of Osteopathic Medicine Ohio University--.
Speaker 2: (Smiling) That's interesting.
Speaker 1: How does that come about, are you recruited, or are you looking for a change, are you--?
Speaker 2: When I went to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], I had a leave from Michigan State [University] as Chair of the Department of Family Medicine, so after I did that  year and a half there, I came back to Michigan State [University] and the new dean wanted a stronger focus on health policy so he created this position as Associate Dean for Health Policy.  Meanwhile, the students when I was in D.C., the students from Ohio and from all over the country had come to The Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] and they were so surprised to know there was a D.O. [doctor of osteopathic medicine] working up there.  And so I'd met some of the students from Ohio [University], while I was working in Senator Bradley's [Senator William Warren Bradley] office.  Okay, so then, while I was Associate Dean, they, they started to re- to search for a new dean of Ohio University.  The students, the students recruited me.  The students came to the campus at Michigan State [University] to try and talk me into applying, I have never--being a dean was not an aspiration of mine--I mean it never crossed my mind.  Students recruited me, they found, they, they found jobs for my husband in case he wanted, they, the students were just amazing, they wanted me to, so I said okay, well, I'll apply.  And then I went down there and in the application process and I realized, some of the things that I wanted to accomplish as it related to health policy and, and some of the demographic issues in healthcare including healthcare reform, you know, being a dean was a bully pulpit and that was a better place to be and that's why I went on and pursued it, you know and that's how I became dean.  I was recruited by the students at Ohio University.
Speaker 1: So what shape was the school when you got there?
Speaker 2: It had challenges (smiles).
Speaker 1: What were they?
Speaker 2: (Laughs out loud) Healthcare.  It's been changing rapidly and the infrastructure that supports our delivery systems is changing rapidly, so when I got to Ohio a couple of things were happening.  The D.O. hospitals that we depended upon to train our students were closing.  I had to find new alliances, new hospital systems, I had to start, you know, being much broader than this segregated only D.O. kinds of things.  And not only were D.O. hospitals closing and merging, hospitals were closing because they, and I had to, I had an obligation to have clinical network to be able to train my students.  We were, the school was located in Appalachia [Ohio], there's a critical need for healthcare in Appalachia.  So one of my challenge was we gotta build up our clinical base, because if every hospital in this state closes, I still have to train my students in, get them clinical training.  So we can build a clinical base, the class was only a hundred and twenty-five students, so we, we could, we could do that, so we had to build a clinical base and then you have do all the infrastructure necessary to build that clinical base, we had to secure external dollars to do it because there were no, internal dollars, so we had to do a lot of grant writing to make that happen and at the same time, the hospitals we still had, we had to build a different kind of relationship with them to keep them in the fold, for them to see the benefit of being linked with us.  And so we formed a state wide consortium of, of hospitals--couple M.D., most the remaining, D.O. hospitals--and we built them both to improve the educational quality of, of the clinical training, both for the undergraduate medical students as well as for our interns and residents, so we pulled them all together.  But we had, what, thirty hospitals?  We had more hospitals in our consortium than any other medical school in Ohio, we had political clout at the state level, so those were the things that I did in Ohio, you know, and had a good time doing it as well, completely revised the curriculum, did some innovative things based on learning principles that had been ignored in medical education--.
Story_ID: 552
Speaker 1: Can you talk about those just for a little bit, the, the innovative things you did?
Speaker 2: Problem-based learning, take the, the, to change the learning process so that it's not a one-way transaction, to engage the students more in their education and re-establish a pilot project where the students, in all honesty, established their own learning objectives in medicine and then went about learning them and they were just guided by faculty, in kind of a problem, small group format.  We also linked-up with, at that time, with all of the hospitals in our system through inter-active video, so that our students and the, who were in the hospitals, could also remain actively engaged and involved in the curriculum that was on campus and we were able to send, you know, lectures and new research and do collaborative research by using resources that weren't on the campus because we were linked, you know, so those were some of the innovative things that we did, and it, you know--.
Speaker 1: How did you raise the money, what, and how did you, as an outsider, get so politically involved that you were able to bring resources?  Cause you were there eight years, right?
Speaker 2: (Nods yes).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Thinking) I was health policy savvy.  Because of the time I spent in D.C., so I knew how to get, cut through the system and get - one of the things we did, which was one of the hardest things and we did that immediately when I got there, we got a, a health van, because much of Appalachia [Ohio] people can't even get to healthcare and there's no, we had whole counties in this region of the state that had, whole counties without a physician.  So we got a health van so we could drive around to these counties and at least give immunizations and we have big Amish communities that we have to take whatever services we have to them, so I got a health van.  That was the hardest political bite - fight I had, but it was won and I just, I hadn't been there long, I'd only been there about six months, but it's one I won, I got the money for the state - from the State Department of Health for those, for the health van and it was that win that gave me a presence at the state that allowed me to then continue to be able to impact policies.
Speaker 1: 'Kay, and now, you, now, the administration in, in Ohio, would it been more Republican based at that time?
Speaker 2: The Governor was Gov- Republican.
Speaker 1: It was Republican, okay, okay.  You had come out of a Democratic, okay--.
Speaker 2: But you know?  I wouldn't put Republican or Democrat label on me, but it was at a time when healthcare was on the agenda looking for strategies and so the fact, the parties made little difference around healthcare at that time, people were looking for solutions and it was also at a time when the national effort had failed so much of what was going to happen, was going to happen at the state level and I had the health policy experience, so I, you know, I was lucky enough to be there at that time so that I could be at the table as they tried to craft solutions to some of the state's challenges, you know, and it didn't hurt that I had thirty hospitals in my system, you know, so I had a power base.
Story_ID: 553
Speaker 1: Right, so you had built that up in eight years, now, what--let's see, that's 1993, so you were there 19- so you left in 2000--.
Speaker 2: One.
Speaker 1: One.  Okay now, how, I mean, during that time, I know one of the things, you know, you had participated in that fellowship, you'd yourself developed your own, Heritage Fellowship, was that along the li--, I mean, were you trying to do for others what you had, had, had been done to you, is that what--?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, I was trying to give my profession the exposure because one of things, one of the very early things I learned when I was in D.C. was nobody knew what an osteopathic physician was and osteopathic medicine never came to The Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.].  The D.O. [doctor of osteopathic medicine] profession didn't know how to engage the policy makers and while I was there, the Executive Branch of the government was making regulations that negatively impacted osteopathic medicine because they didn't know and osteopathic medicine was so disconnected they didn't see it coming and we got squeezed in some really bad ways, it took years to get a legislative fix at that time, but I happen to be sitting in that - timing is often everything, so my thing was, you know, we're a growing profession and our profession is almost doubled in the last ten years, doubled, I mean we are growing, we're the fastest growing health profession in the country.  We have opened new schools like you can't believe. Michigan State [University] was the eighth osteopathic school to open in '73 [1973] and right now we have (thinks) I think twenty--.
Speaker 1: Twenty, there are twenty-five, twenty are accredited I--.
Speaker 2: There, yeah, but, yeah, twenty accredited, but of the twenty accredited, several of those have branch campuses that also opened so, we have, as it relates to enrollment, we are, we're growing so fast, that it's scaring the allopathic profession by the way, and that's part of the motivation, beside the fact that we're looking at a shortage. Part of the motivation, you're seeing M.D. schools start to open up - they hadn't opened a new M.D. school in fifty years until they opened the new school in Florida a couple years ago and now they're trying to open new - but in that same, in the last ten years, the profession has gone from what, twelve, thirteen schools?  To twenty schools with now five more in the process of becoming accredited and of the twenty schools, at least five of them have branch campuses in other part of the country, we, we're growing fast.
Speaker 1: That's fast oh, okay, that's interesting--.
Speaker 2: I was telling you that growth to tell you something else and I've forgotten what it is.
Speaker 1: Well, I, I'm trying to think to but--.
Speaker 2: We were talking--.
Story_ID: 554
Speaker 1: I was talking about the fellowships--. (Off camera voice)
Speaker 2: Fellowships, the fellowships.
Speaker 1: Yes, oh, so what happened was, it's funny cause it wasn't easy to do. I wanted to start this pres-fellowship and I started it when I was Associate Dean for Health Policy at Michigan State [University] when I got back and so I got the support of the state organization and the AOA [American Osteopathic Association] political leadership and Michigan State [University] itself but I couldn't make it happen at the AOA [American Osteopathic Association], 'cause they wanted to control it.  And so, plus, I had no money, you know, so when I became dean of, at Ohio [University], the interesting thing is when you're the dean, you control the budget, so I had a budget and I could make it happen, so I made it happen.  And then I went out and got--once I made it happen, once I started the program--then I was able to get funding from the AOA [American Osteopathic Association] and from the Osteopathic Heritage Foundation to keep it going, but initially, I had no money, couldn't get it going, I couldn't get the--so I started it, and then the money started to come in, you know.  But I did it to, to establish a presence for osteopathic medicine in the policy arenas and it has been more successful than anybody could have anticipated, you know?
Speaker 2: Now how the move here and the reason I say that is that, well, on average the time that you spent as dean that was, first of all, that's the first time that there's been an African-American female president of a medical school--.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Which, you know, I read that you had felt was, you know, you were somewhat sort of saddened that it took, it was the nineties [1990s], you know.
Speaker 1: Well it was surprise, I didn't know it, it hit the media, somebody in the media did the, the research, and they asked me, they said "Did, did you know you're the first?", you know.  I mean, I'm dealing with struggles to get here, but it never dawned on me I was the first and then you step back and say "boy, how sad can that be?  We're in the nineties [1990s] and I'm the first female African-American dean of a medical school?" you know.  Progress is slow, let's hope it's steady and part of my job is to get some more in here, you know?
Speaker 2: The pipeline.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: Okay, so is the fellowship program still the Heritage Fellowship, is that still in, in place in--?
Speaker 1: We're still running the program, it's, it's, it's, it's the AOA Health Policy Fellowship Program, but it's not funded by the Heritage Foundation right now.  By the Osteopathic Heritage Foundation, but, but it is still going and, actually we're accepting a new class and many of the former fellows are now deans of most, deans of most of the brand new medical schools, they're all on the board of trustees of the American Osteopathic Association, I mean these people have secured positions.  The fellowship has become a credential, if you have a certificate in the fellowship, it opens doors for you and I'm really pleased with that.  Although it's fashioned after the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation that I had took, it is, it doesn't require the time commitment that RWJ [Robert Wood Johnson Foundation] does, that was a year and a half I gave up of my life moved to Washington [D.C.] to do that. The fellowship program I have, the fellows meet ten times-maybe ten times a year, they spend, one week in concentrated orientation to what the fellowship is about, get everybody on the same page.  And then they spend a weekend a month, a month somewhere in this country looking at the issues of healthcare, so it's just ten meetings and that's made it possible.  It's still grueling for that year.  The fellows love it, it does change their way of looking at the world and so, we've been very, very proud of that program. We also run a program for residents too as they go through the system as a first step program before the fellowship program.
Speaker 2: But it, it appears that it's had the effect, I mean really it's changing sort of the nature of the whole, the growth of osteopathic medicine looks to have a direct correlation with a--.
Speaker 1: Oh, it's that great, I hadn't quite tied those together, but you're absolutely right because part of the, effort, in order to grow, you've got to have people to provide the leadership for these new schools and the fellowship has become, you know, the, the pool in which people look at to try and get leadership.  The interesting thing about it is that being a dean of a medical school has less to do with the practice of medicine than all of those other things I talked about, you gotta know the policies, you gotta know the regulations, you gotta be able to negotiate, you gotta be able to communicate and you've got to understand where the system is going because, we don't train students for today, we train students for seven years from now, so you got to have a view of what's happening in the world and that's what the fellowship program does.
Story_ID: 555
Speaker 1: So now how did you come to, here, you know, here at New, New York, Institute of Technology?  And I was just, you know, while we were waiting for you, I, this, is this, this is the top one - is this the top one or it's the oldest one, no--?
Speaker 2: It's the largest.
Speaker 1: It's the largest okay. It's the largest of Osteopathic trainings, I mean, medical schools.  So how, I saw that you'd gotten an honorary degree from this institution before you, you know, have come here--.
Speaker 2: Well you, once, you put those pieces together, most people don't see that and I keep saying, boy that looks a little suspicious.
Speaker 1: (Laughs)
Speaker 2: The, president of this institution and I worked together at the ACOM, the Association of Colleges of Osteopathic Medicine.  And, you know, I had such respect for him, he was, he's one of the most articulate men I've ever met.
Speaker 1: His name?
Speaker 2: Schure, Matthew Schure.
Speaker 1: Matthew Schure.
Speaker 2: And--but he's not a D.O. [doctor of osteopathic medicine], he's a PhD--and they had a dean of the medical school here who was approaching, past approaching retirement age and that dean of the medical school was also serving as the dean of the Allied Health Program, the Allied Health School and so Matt [Matthew Schure] wanted me--and the Allied Heath School was relatively new--so he tried to recruit me to come here to address the issues of interdisciplinary, to bring these silos a little bit more together to help in the growth of the Allied Health School and to be here at the time when the changing of the guard occurred with the, the former dean, he didn't really want me to be dean, he just wanted to have a stable force in place when we started to look for the dean, okay?  And so, this discussion was going on for a year or so.  For me, I was at a point where I wanted to get my family back together so at the same time, he was offering a really good position for my husband here as part of the College of Education, so it made it worth looking in now, the third, compliment of the decision was, I do not believe that deans should stay in position forever.  They need to move.  They need to move for their professional growth, but they certainly need to move for the welfare of the school itself, because after a while, it becomes redundant.  You're not bringing in any new ideas.  My limit has always been ten years and so usually about the time I've reached five, six years I start looking around so, and Matt had been talking to me for a couple of years.  He finally came up with the kind of position that I was interested in holding and so, and, and he had a position for my husband so it looked like we were going to live in the same house together for a while and stop all this running right back and forth cross country and so I accepted the position.  At the time that I accepted it--I accepted it and then just a few I guess weeks after that, he accepted a position in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] so he was leaving here so now I'm back to, I'm about to balk on this, so the new president, Dr. Giuliano [Dr. John M. Giuliano, D.O.], I mean, you know, he called me and he said, yes it's still here, you'll love it, we're growing, and this and this was and, you know, I finally had to accept this fact that, I'm able to, I have the skills that can take a, an institution with "challenges" and get them back on their feet and propel them into leadership positions.  You know, I would love to be a manager dean or a manager vice-president where you just come and just keep the thing going, but to a large extent, because of the experience and the training I've had, particularly in the area of regulations and health policy, it's a waste of the skills if I don't use it to make, and so, this school had some challenges and so, that was finally what appealed to me, that I could come here and do some different things, some new things and so that's what I've been doing.
Speaker 1: So the challenges it had, was it because it had been under one leadership for so long, or was it, what, you know, was this, the, the state system here much different then the state system that you found in Ohio, I mean clearly, you know healthcare probably, you know, it's continued to go through a lot of changes but--.
Speaker 2: Well the challenges here were, number one, the class size was huge in a time in which the clinical training was starting to shrink.  Beside the fact that it's shrinking, New York happens to be the place at which, your offshore medical schools, send their students into New York to be trained.  So the competition for training slots is very, I mean it's very high and, at the same time the offshore schools are tending to negotiate different kinds of affiliations that generate more dollars for the hospitals.  Hospitals are in trouble, so they're looking for dollars, so I come at a time when the on the ground changes have the potential to impact our programs when you consider I have a lot--there are a lot of hospitals in New York, but I have a lot of students, and so to a large--that was, that was one of the immediate--and that will continue to be a chall-, challenge for all of medical education, not just osteopathic for the next few years because the system is revamping itself, and so that was one of the challenges.  In addition to that, the institution had, this institution had had significant financial challenges that had eroded the ability of the institution to grow and so I came in at a time when, the debt issues were settled, now it's time to grow and my challenge was to put in an infrastructure that would allow the school to grow rapidly based upon where we were at the time.  And because of the financial challenges, there had not been a curriculum review in twenty years, twenty-five, since--the curriculum was old and stale and it needed to be changed quickly so that our students received the most benefit from a curriculum considering the fact as a private school, unlike Ohio University which was a public school, their paying dearly for this opportunity and we need to deliver the best to them, and the most timely.  And so, those were the challenges: curriculum, as well as affiliation and facilities, you know, and establishing a research base, so.
Story_ID: 556
Speaker 1: So those were the things that you put in place?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, was it more difficult here than in, in, at Ohio University?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, was it because of the, you know, the (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Let me tell you why it was more difficult. First of all, Michigan has the most osteopathic physicians, but Ohio is right up there in the top two or three, there are a lot of osteopathic physicians in Ohio, they have a strong state association, I had professional support.  New York, however, because of the culture in New York, New York is a sub-specialty sate- state.  Everybody's a specialist here, I mean you know, or a sub-specialist.  There not a lot a whole lot of primary care physicians and they're, based on population, there not a whole of lot of osteopathic physicians in fact, ninety-five percent of the osteopathic physicians in the state are graduates of this school, this school is populating New York.  So I didn't have that power resource that I had in Ohio.  Didn't have it.  Nor, quite frankly, when I got here, except (counts), all the osteopathic hospitals were closed.  I am now dealing with hospital systems that may have osteopathic representation, but there are no osteopathic hospitals that I'm starting with here, so I'm starting with a different--and the other part of it is, of course, is the culture in New York is all together different, you know, I've learned to appreciate that, I used to scoff at it, but it is true.  New York culture is different from Ohio culture and Ohio is a little bit different from Michigan, but mid-west and New York are different and that's, it's a cultural issue as to how you negotiate and partner with people that's a little bit different than, than Ohio and Michigan.
Story_ID: 557
Speaker 1: Okay, so but you've made this, you've changed the curriculum, you've got that changed.  Now a new dean has been brought in right? And you're back as Vice President--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 1: Which is how you were, so now, from this point on, what are you looking, you know, your thinking about what you want to do, you know sort of going forward, I mean, you've had like, you know, when you look at the fact, you know, you were a good student, you found this profession not directly but, sort of indirectly through exposure.  You went from private practice into sort of a major, you know, not a lot of people can make that leap or lots of people maybe will make the leap!  (laughs) To, you know, very strong administrator, so what are you looking to, you know, do--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Do now?
Speaker 1: --you're sixty-five right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, isn't that something?  I don't, my, my children let me know that I must be sixty-five, cause they treat me like I'm sixty-five all at (unclear), isn't it funny?  Other than that, you know, except for the fact, two years ago, I decided to let my hair go white, I just got tired of trying to worry about when I could get it done (smiles), you know, I just decided to let it go, and you'll see some pictures and it's half and half--I had to let it grow out and the cut it off--so you know, so I, so yeah, I have to think about, I don't I'll ever be able to sit and do nothing.  But there's some things that I can do as vice president here that I would like to see done for healthcare, you know, and certainly for the osteopathic profession and in that regard we have the health policy fellowship program, my, my move at this point is to get that program endowed, so when I move back, it can continue, it doesn't need me to be able to figure out a way to fund it, it'll, you know, it has a way of continuing without my active engaged effort.  So we developed a center for health policy and part of what I'm going to do for the next couple years is to try and you know, get it endowed.  And health policy, and leadership was what the center is called because that's what we have supplied for the profession and it's been good for us and it's been good for the profession.  Another issue, some of the challenges in healthcare, the issues of cultural competency, the issue of humanism as it relates to the delivery of healthcare, particularly if you want to talk about prevention and health promotion, and so, we have established a center for culture and humanism, so we're going to build programs and, and, part of our strategy is to deliver these programs either as single seminars or certificate programs, or even masters level degrees, to our hospital affiliates because their staffs need to know how to treat people, this New York is unbelievably diverse and part of the issue of the poor health status of minorities in this country in particularly here in New York, is that fact that, you know, the system is not user friendly if you don't look like the system, you know?  And so that's, so we have that, so it's culture and humanism, health policy and leadership, global health, within five years.
Story_ID: 558
Speaker 1: Advisors around the world, pre-med advisors, know D.O. [doctor of osteopathic medicine] now and you know, we, our, our applicant pool is more than we can handle.  We're growing so fast, I mean it really is more than we can handle, so we're real competition for the M.D. world, you know and slowly by surely the profession over time as our, as they accepted our D.O. students into their residency, they found out that our students are just as good as their students and so, which has become a challenge for the profession because they recruit our students into their residency training programs, which means we're having a difficult time, filling our residency training programs you see, cause everybody wants that stamp, because that's where, that's how the coun- country relates to that M.D., so if you say, if I said I did my residency training at NYU [New York University], you under-that's a good thing as opposed to I did my residency training at NYIT [New York Institute of Technology], people--so it's not just they don't recognize the, the D.O. and the M.D., the don't recognize the institutions, for instance, Kirksville [Kirksville College of Osteopathic Medicine], have you ever heard, no.  But that is the first and preeminent osteopathic medical school, you know, so it's, it's a comedy of errors, but you know our students are changing the tide because they're performing so well as physicians.  Many of the practices here on Long Island [New York] have M.D.s and D.O.s who are in practice together, there's just no difference, the difference is in the early education and teaching them how to use their hands.  Other than that, there's no difference.
Story_ID: 559
Speaker 1: Now, what, if you were to choose another career would you choose another, what career would you choose?
Speaker 2: (Thinks) I can't think of--I'm blessed.  I get to teach and I love teaching, I hated leaving my students when I went back to medical school.  I get to practice, although I don't practice anymore, I can if I want to, if I ever carve out the time to be able to do that, and I get a chance to make a difference, make it better than it's always been, with a perspective that has been absent in medical administration, so I do bring something to this and, and I love it, you know, I can see the differences that get made, in all honesty, it doesn't, I don't need the--I don't need the credit for any of this, because I can see it and I know it's better--I know it's better, so.
Speaker 1: When you look at African-Americans and the, the medical profession, what would you say your hopes and concerns and I want to go back to your saying, you know, even the percentages, fifteen, did you say the-.
Speaker 2: In the osteopathic profession, osteopathic physicians, oh, as far as practitioners in medicine?  Oh, maybe ten percent, fifteen percent are minorities, that's growing, women are rapidly becoming fifty percent, right now they're about thirty-four percent of all practitioners are women, isn't that interesting, so about fifteen percent maybe minorities, under represented minorities.
Speaker 1: So what hopes and concerns do you have for, you know, African-Americans in this, you know in this profession?
Speaker 2: A disappointment for me and it extends as much as it includes our minority physicians who are out there, it extends to all physicians and that is, the, the health status of the population in this country is shameful and the health status of minorities and health disparities are scandal, but we build a healthcare delivery system that has forced physicians to be protecting their turf, their poc- their pockets, their--and not protecting the patients.  My feeling is if it's good for the patient, it's got to be good for the physicians, that's what we do, we're a service profession, that's what - we're service, that's what we do and I have disappointed and I've written a couple of articles and trying to be subtle and politic about the issue, the minority physicians should be leading the charge on this issue of health disparities and they're not and I understand why they're not to a large extent minorities physicians never have quite the potential of practice in medicine as majority physicians do, they don't.  But, you take the power, you know, you take what you have, we are much more powerful than we think we are and I think if the minority physicians would get together, do you know we could push this country to do what it has not wanted to do, which is to have a healthcare delivery system where everybody has a chance to be healthy, you know?  But they're being forced in a position where they don't make as much money for the same specialty area, they're forced in this whole concept of "let's recruit more minority physicians so that they can treat the minority patients", that's Jim Crow folks.  That, that won't work, that'll give you, everybody will feel a little bit better for a little bit period of time, but as a minority phy- physician, if I only practice in the minority community, I'm never going to make the kind of money that this other guy makes down the street and that's, that hampers our ability to be successful as a group, even the minority physicians.  More than that, we don't have enough minority physicians either in practice, in the pipeline or potential pipeline, to be able to serve the number of minorities that we have in this country in a- in a way in which will be adequate or effective for their health status, just not enough.  So we can't--we can't be recruiting minorities to treat minorities.  We've got to recruit people who are culturally sensitive and the minority physicians have to stand tall and make sure that happens and as they do that, then the numbers, their numbers will increase, you know?  So I'm a little bit disappointed, you know I get on my bully pit, that's what I speak about all, I'm a little bit disappointed that they haven't found a way to do that--they haven't found a way to do that, but you know, because I think, you know, there are no bodies in the street and we don't have another Martin Luther King [Jr.], so we gotta, we gotta find a way to do it and if, if we don't do it for ourselves, nobody's going to do it for us, so.
Speaker 1: Now, you, just two more--.
Speaker 2: I do preach, my grandfather was a Baptist minister remember (laughs).
Speaker 1: But, two more, questions: one, I want to ask what you want to be remembered for and then I want to ask a legacy question, but I want you to answer those questions, they can, I wanna ask what you want to be remembered for first.
Speaker 2: (Thinks) For, I want to be remembered for making, for, facilitating the success of people who had reservations about their ability to be successful, you know?  I, and to, and to make a difference as it relates to, to the community that I grew up in.  That's it. I wanna, I wanna make it better and in order to make it better for my community, I've got to make it better for everybody and, you know, so, you know, I'm even-handled in this, the system is not good and if I make the system better for everybody, we all benefit from it, you know?  But, you know, I wanna faci- and I've tried to do that, build, build a pipeline?  The major issue is (unclear) facilitate success.  They've got to get some people and to keep people in pipeline, other wise, you know, when I leave it's over, you know?  Gotta keep the pipeline and I do a lot of that, a lot of that, so that's what I want to be remembered for in this profession.
Speaker 1: And legacy?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head that she is not sure).
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: You know I have, dozen, it's not a part of how I see the world, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, but think about that question in light of, your childhood, (thinks)--.
Speaker 2: You know--.
Speaker 1: Your parents.
Speaker 2: In that respect, it seems to me when you, looking at a legative- legacy is such a personal thing as it relates to, your personal ambitions and, you know, I don't need my name on anything.  My, my legacy is for my kids to understand that, well, be free, to try and to do anything they want to do, you know, and, you know my kids, I'm so proud of my kids, my kids are fine, they're doing okay, now my next thing I have to worry about are my grandkids, so that's what I'm looking at now.  My kids are, are black Americans that I can be proud of and they're not tunnel vision, actually my youngest daughter is, a political--what is it?  Leader, pres-, for South Carolina for Barack Obama [Senator Barack Obama].  She, she's into the politics and she's a voting rights attorney. I'm, I'm proud of my kids, they've got what they need, they'll be able to make a difference and if there's anything that has a legacy, you know, I started from, from nothing.  They don't have to start there and they can make an even bigger difference than I'm making, you know?  And, and be happy and have families at the same time, you know?  So, I guess public service is part of our blood, so that's what my legacy is that, if at least for my family, for my children, and for my brothers and sisters and in recognizing where I came from, that, it can be done, you gotta work hard, but you can do it and my kids have benefited from that.
Speaker 1: That's it. Thank you very, very much. Thank you.
Speaker 2: That was a really short legacy answer.
