Story_ID: 54705
Speaker 1: That's my maternal grandmother, Thercia LaForest, and she was born in Haiti.  And she came here in the early '60's [1960s], and she lived with me most of my life.
Speaker 2: And how do you spell her name?
Speaker 1: T-H-E-R-C-I-A, LaForest, L-A-F-O-R-E-S-T.
Speaker 2: I received my second--sorry.  I received my first communion in the 2nd grade at St. Vincent's Church in Akron, Ohio.
Speaker 1: That's a photo of my grandmother, Ida May Rice, in the center.  My father, William Rice, is on the right side, and my--one of my favorite aunts, his sister, Marian Anderson, is on the left.
Speaker 2: That's my father, William Rice, when he graduated from Kent State University.  He became a teacher there and also later at Albany State University.  And I also followed him into higher education.
Speaker 1: That's my brother, Patrick, and I at my sister Michelle's wedding at St. Sebastian's Church in Akron, Ohio, which is across the street from our house.
Speaker 2: That's the naturalization certificate for when my grandmother became a citizen.  That's a naturalization certificate when my grandmother became a citizen of the United States. Was she from Haiti?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: This is an article that ran in the "Akron Beacon Journal" when my grandmother, Thercia LaForest, became a citizen of the United States.  My sister, Michelle, is on the far left, and my mother is next to her, and I'm standing next to my grandmother.  I was 10 years old at the time.
Speaker 1: I'm looking at the document, and I don't see a date.  Do we have a date on that?
Speaker 2: There's a date in the upper cor--corner.  I think it's--I can't--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1968, June 12th.  June 12th, 1968.
Speaker 2: This is my paternal grandmother, Ida May Rice, who grew up in Georgia and later came to Akron, Ohio, in the '50's [1950s], then she late returned to Georgia.
Speaker 1: This is "Born to Win: The Authorized Biography of Althea Gibson."  It was a great honor to write this book about her.  I also play tennis, but not as well.
Speaker 2: This is an anthology called "Bet on Black, African-American Wom--Women Celebrate Fatherhood in the Age of Obama."  Let me say that again.  This is an anthology, "Bet on Black: African-American Women Celebrate Obama."  This is an anthology, "Bet on Black: African-American Women Celebrate Fatherhood in the Age of Barack Obama."  I wrote an essay in there about my father called "Daddy, Barack, and Me."
Story_ID: 54706
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yanick Rice-Lamb, Y-A-N-I-C-K, R-I-C-E, L-A-M-B.
Speaker 1: All right, and is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother is from Haiti.  She was born in Dominican Republic.  And she always wanted to name her first child Yanick, and I happen to be that person.
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: Rice is my maiden name.  Lamb is my married name.  I'm now divorced, but everyone says it reminds them of food.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 27, 1957, in Akron, Ohio.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an associate professor of journalism, and I'm interim assistant chair of the Department of Media, Journalism and Film at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: And an author and--
Speaker 2: And an author and independent journalist.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is October 23, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're on the campus of Howard University in the School of Communications.
Story_ID: 54707
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we get into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask and only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is shrimp.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is fall.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Lamu, Kenyu--Kenya.
Speaker 1: Okay and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Dream big.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 54708
Speaker 1: All right, now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's [Carmelie LaForest] Jordan side of the family and your father's [William Radford Rice] side, but separately, and you know, try to keep 'em, you know, straight, and then we'll put 'em together.  So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Carmelie LaForest Jordan, C-A-R-M-E-L-I-E, L-A-F-O-R-E-S-T, Jordan, J-O-R-D-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her birth--date of birth is July 16th, 1932.
Speaker 1: Okay and what--was she born in the States or?
Speaker 2: She was born in Santo Domingo in the Dominican Republic.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then she later moved back to Port-au-Prince, Haiti and grew up there.
Speaker 1: All right, now what can you--how far back can you trace your mother's side of the family, and what are the stories on that side?
Speaker 2: We can trace back my mother's side of the family to my great grandparents.  My grandfather, Marcell Hubert (ph.) LaForest, was a writer in Haiti.  He wrote about politics.  I'm not sure of his other occupations, but they lived in Haiti most of the time.  That's where he was born, and they lived in Dominican Republic during my mother's early childhood, and then moved back to Haiti.  My grandmother is Thercia LaForest--Thercia Pierre LaForest.  That's my maternal grandmother, and she came to the United States shortly after my mother.  My mother came here in 1956, the year before I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so your mother actually started the migration to the United States then?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on her side.
Speaker 1: All right, now they--any stories that your family tell that go all the back to the Haitian Revolution [1791-1804] or any--or the American Occupation [1915-1934] or any of the--
Speaker 2: My mother just always talked a lot about what she called real black history, and she talked about Toussaint L'Ouverture.  And she would talk about some of the different things that people did in Haiti about politicians, and bankers, and educators, and doctors, and things like that.  And she always encouraged us to reach for the stars basically.  And we always felt that we could do and be anything.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now did your--when your mother came here I think pop--Papa Doc was--Jean-Claude Duvalier [President of Haiti, 1971-1986], was the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, president, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did she--did she like his regime or did she--was she trying to get out of there or what?
Speaker 2: I think she was happy to get out of there.  She seemed resigned to some of the things that happened there, but she wasn't a, a fan of his.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She'd, she'd talk a little bit about some of the, you know, various presidents over the years.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well, what, what did she say about them?  I mean, what was there--what, what--what's her critique of it--of that?
Speaker 2: She'd talk about, you know, corruption.  She'd also talk about, you know, leadership, and she'd always say that everything isn't always as bad as people make it out to be.  And she, she talked about like, some of the pageantry sometimes when there were special ceremonies and how she participated in them as a child, and how they would, you know, march in different parades, and how they had to dress a certain way and be meticulous.  And she and my grandmother did a lot of embroidery, so they showed me a lot of the handmade things that they made.
Speaker 1: Okay, in Haiti do they have like a Carnival season like they have on some of the other islands around--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, early at the beginning of the year.  So she'd talk about that too.  She'd talk about going to the beach.  She'd talk about going in the mountains.
Story_ID: 54709
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and--now did your mother go to college in, in Haiti or did she--or did she--
Speaker 2: She started--she was gonna go to nursing school in Canada, and then she met my father.  My father was in the Air Force, and he was teaching--studying foreign languages and teaching foreign languages, so he was visiting French and Spanish speaking countries.  And he met my mother in Port-au-Prince, so she ended up coming to Akron, Ohio.  Then she went to nursing school in Ohio and in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, and you said your, your grandfather, Marcell LaForest, was a, a writer.
Speaker 2: He was a writer.  I'm not sure of his other occupations, but I know that he did write.  And I think hearing stories about him writing about politics kind of stuck with me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he wrote about politics then?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, that could be a dangerous occupation in some coun--countries, you know so.
Speaker 2: It could be.  I don't know if that contributed to them living in the Dominican Republic for a little while.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know the names of any of the papers or, or--
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, I never had the opportunity to see anything that he wrote.  I would have loved to have seen that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, 'cause I don't know if he wrote any books or--
Speaker 2: No, I don't think he wrote any books.  I think it was just local--you know, local writing there.
Speaker 1: Newspa--news writing maybe?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: An opinion probably.
Speaker 1: Now you come from a tra--tra--tradition of being--of, of writers and, and--
Speaker 2: Some--a little bit.  My mother's a nurse, so there's medical on one side, and I think that contributed to my interest in health journalism.  And as it turned out, my father did do a little bit of writing for a small paper in Ohio called "The Umpire."  So--I found out about that later, but he was all--he also always had an interest in my writing, and he also joined the National Association of Black Journalists with me.  And then I used to read the newspaper with my grandfather, his father, when I was young, so that kind of stimulated my interest in the newspapers early on.
Story_ID: 54710
Speaker 1: Okay, well, well, let's go to his side.  Can, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: William Radford Rice, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Radford, R-A-D-F-O-R-D, Rice, R-I-C-E.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 29th, 1929, in Fort Valley, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's the home of Fort Valley State College [Fort Valley State University].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And was he associated with the college or was his family associated with it?
Speaker 2: No, his family wasn't associated with the college.  He later taught at Albany State [Albany State University] in Albany, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, what are the stories about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing in, in Georgia?
Speaker 2: We can trace back to someone who's just listed in the census as Granny.  And my father always thought that we may have come from the Sierra Leone area in Africa.  One of--we also traced back to different parts of South Carolina, and there was some connection to Sam Nunn's family, the politician.  But most of that side of the family lived in South Carolina and Georgia.  And my father, he was always interested in adj--in education.  He studied at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana].  He was the first on that side of the family to go to college.
Speaker 1: So he went to Xavier?
Speaker 2: He went to Xavier for a little while then he transferred--
Speaker 1: In, in New Orleans?
Speaker 2: --to the University of Ak-Akron [Ohio].  Yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in New Orleans [Louisianna].
Speaker 1: All right, so, so was he--so he went to Xavier.  What, what did he major in at Xavier?
Speaker 2: He was studying English and foreign languages, and then he transferred to the University of Akron, and then he received his master's at Kent State University [Kent, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my Uncle Jake Willis, who was originally J. K. Willis, he moved to Akron, Ohio, to work in the rubber factories.  And that started the migration to Akron on the--for my family.  He came first, and then my father came, and then he sent for my moth--grandmother and my grandfather, and then they moved to Akron, Ohio.  They were living in Jacksonville, Florida, at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, you said your father--your father was the first person in his family to go to college?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 54711
Speaker 1: And your par--your parents met then in--
Speaker 2: In Port-au-Prince, Haiti.
Speaker 1: Oh, they met in Hait--your parents met in Haiti?
Speaker 2: My--yeah, my parents [William Radford Rice and Carmelie LaForest Jordan]--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --met in Haiti.  My mother came here to get married.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what's the story and how did you--your--what, what was your father doing in Port-au-Prince and, and how did they meet?  Is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: My father was visiting French and Spanish speaking countries, and he met my mother at the airport.  I think she was working on some promotion there or something. And he thought she was beautiful, and he continued to think she was beautiful all his life.  And they met, and he came--he came back and then he sent for her, and she moved here.  And she--when she came to the country, she came in December.  She didn't have a coat, and it was cold in Ohio at that time.  And they were married with just a small ceremony with my grandparents and a couple who later became my godparents.  They were also from Haiti.  So there were just two Haitian families in Akron, Ohio, at the time that we knew of.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 54712
Speaker 1: Your father [William Radford Rice] was working on his degree at Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] at the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --his master's degree, okay.  And his master's was in?
Speaker 2: His--foreign languages and English.
Speaker 1: Okay, foreign--okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Spanish and French.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But he spoke several languages.  He spoke French, Spanish, Russian, German, and Portuguese.
Speaker 1: He sounds heavy.  He sounds like (unclear)-community.  He sounds like somebody--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes he was.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He definitely was.  He, he continued to teach up until he died.  He died at set--when he was seventy-nine.  In fact, I turned in his grades while we were making, you know, his arrangements and things.  He was allegedly retired, but he continued to teach.
Speaker 1: Oh, he was teaching then at--
Speaker 2: At Albany State [Albany State University, Albany, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Albany State, okay.  Did he--did he teach there because it was close to where he grew up?
Speaker 2: That may have contributed to that.  He returned to Georgia and I think they were just looking for someone to teach foreign languages in English.  And at one time he was over the department.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And once he went down to Albany State he stayed there.
Speaker 1: Now your, your parents [William Radford Rice and Carmelie LaForest Jordan] separately shortly after you--I mean, you said they, they weren't married ver--very long.
Speaker 2: Yes, they divorced when I was about five years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so when you think about--did, did you stay in touch with our father?  I mean, or did--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --did he stay in touch with you rather?
Speaker 2: Yes, we stayed in touch.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't--we didn't see him all the time.  We saw him maybe once a year or twice a year because of the distance, and you know, we wrote letters and talked by phone.  And his parents, my ma--paternal grandparents, lived in Akron, Ohio so, and a lot of the family had migrated to Akron since then, so we were very close to the Rice side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 54713
Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walked, talked, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I'm a blend of both.  My father [William Radford Rice] and my mother [Carmelie LaForest Jordan] are both very ta--talkative.  They're both--both are very compassionate, both big on education, so I think that influenced me to go into education too.  And we never considered whether or not to go to college.  It was just kind of a given that we would, so we just pursued that track and they always instilled that in us.  So we were always reading books, and they always encouraged that.  They always encouraged whatever we were interested in, in terms of a career.  And my father always had a sense of humor.  He liked to laugh and smile.  My mother did too.  My mother is an only child, so she always says that she's spoiled.  And--but she has--she has a warm, big heart.  And she influenced my sister to go into nursing, but my sister [Michelle Trotter] was in Neonatal Intensive Care; my mother was in Geriatrics.
Story_ID: 54714
Speaker 1: I have a sister--I grew up with a sister and brother.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I--and I have some stepbrothers and sisters from my father's [William Radford Rice] later marriage and my stepfather's previous marriage.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, can, can, can you name your siblings for us, and tell us what they're doing?
Speaker 1: Okay, the ones I grew up with?
Speaker 2: Well, all the ones that you consider, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, my sister is a nurse, and she's a Lieutenant Colonel in the U.S. Army.  She's in the Army Reserves, and she's doing case management now at hospitals in Maryland.  She lives in--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Columbia, Maryland.  She's a year under me.
Speaker 2: What's her name?
Speaker 1: Her name is Michelle Trotter.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you need me to spell her name?
Speaker 2: No, it doesn't sound unusual--unless it's unusual, Trotter--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: My brother's name is Patrick Jordon.  He lives in Akron, Ohio, and he has three sons.  He's currently--he's dis--he's dis--he is disabled.  I can't say that.  Probably doesn't want me to put that in there, but.  So, and then I have two older stepsisters, Gail Jordan and Tanya Jordan, and they live in Los Angeles, California, in that area.  And I have another brother, Jeffrey Jordan, who lives in Akron, Ohio, and he has his own carpet company; he's an entrepreneur.  And I have a younger brother from my father's second marriage, and he lives in Jacks--I mean--sorry--Fort Lauderdale, Florida, and two younger sisters who live in Miami, Florida, as well.
Story_ID: 54715
Speaker 1: So you were raised basically in Akron [Ohio], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, and--okay.  So do, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory is living on Grant Street in Akron, Ohio.  And I remember we moved from that house because of urban renewal came through.  I just remember a company coming by.  Some of my earlier memories ha--deal with my [maternal] grandparents also, visiting them, and my grandmother [Thercia Pierre LaForest], who lived with us, and my mother [Carmelie Jordan].  I don't think there's a specific--a specific memory.  I just remember being with the family and being in our living room.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now how long did you live on Grant Street?
Speaker 2: We lived there just a few years.  I think probably until I was about five there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were a little--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was very small.
Speaker 1: So you would probably consider--now, where did you move next to?
Speaker 2: We moved to Noble Avenue and then we ended up on Edgewood.  That's the home I remember the most.  It was across the street from the Akron Zoo.
Speaker 1: Okay, Edgewood Avenue in Akron.  Now, was there a name for that neighborhood?
Speaker 2: There was not a name.  It's probably the Maple Valley area.  And we used to walk around--down Maple Street to go to St. Vincent's [St. Vincent Catholic Church].  We went to Grace Elementary and then we'd walk past the cemetery--Glendale Cemetery--going to St. Vincent's, past where they sold candy apples and donuts and candy we shouldn't have.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, that's memorable all right.   So the name of the neighborhood was like Maple Valley-what was it?
Story_ID: 54716
Speaker 1: Kind, kind of give us a Democratic--demographic, you know, look at it.  What, what--who was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was predominantly--our neighborhood on Edgewood Avenue [Akron, Ohio] was predominantly African American, but it was diverse.  We had neighbors from different parts of the world.  There were Polish neighbors, some other Caucasian neighbors who were around us.  As far as we could tell, we were the only foreign African American family there in that neighborhood.  There were a lot of children there, so we played basically in our--in our yard or on the sidewalk in front of the house, and we couldn't go off the block.  We had to be within my mother's [Carmelie LaForest Jordan] line of vision or my [maternal] grandmother's [Thercia Pierre LaForest] line of vision, or there would be consequences to pay.
Speaker 1: You said you were the only foreign black family there.  Was that significant?  I mean, did you feel like, like, like, your family was foreign, I mean, in terms of the--
Speaker 2: Yes, because people made a big deal out of it and we were aware.  My mother [Carmelia LaForest Jordan] and my grandmother were still learning to speak English when I was growing up, so my sister and I were always helping them with their English.  And we would answer them in English a lot, but we would help them.  You know, they were speaking either French or Creole.  So I remember either people treated us very well, or sometimes they treated us very poorly.  So our house did get vandalized a couple of times growing up.  But then sometimes people set us apart.  But, most of the time I think our position and our parents' positions were that we were just like everybody else, so we didn't make a big deal of it ourselves.  But we--you know, we noticed that people would single us out sometimes, whether it was teachers or principals or, you know, people in the community as we were moving about, you know, with, you know, stores and banks with mar--our parents.
Speaker 1: So you could understand the Pat-Patois or Haiti, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes, I understood it much--
Speaker 1: Yes, okay.
Speaker 2: --better than than I do now, but I'm--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I'm working on it.
Speaker 1: Can you speak any of it now?
Speaker 2: I'm too rusty (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, but you--but, but your mother was able to pursue a career without any problems (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I understand it better than I speak it.
Speaker 1: But your grandmother coming, I supposed it was a big support for your mother to have--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --someone from, from Haiti there.
Speaker 2: Yes, she was a big support for my mother, and it was, you know, good having her in the house too with my mother.  My mother was a nurse, so sometimes she worked double shifts occasionally, so my grandmother was always there.  And then we--our other grandparents were there too, so we spent a lot of time with them and a lot of times with our godparents as well.
Story_ID: 54717
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so na--I take it the family's Catholic then, right?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side.  My father [William Radford Rice] became Catholic to marry my mother [Carmelie LaForest Jordan], and he's still Catholic.  He was still Catholic until he died.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: What, what was he before?
Speaker 2: He was Baptist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So my--we went to a lot of different churches growing up.  'Cause my paternal grandparents were Baptist and then they became Seventh Day Adventists.  And then my maternal grandmother [Thercia Pierre LaForest] was Episcopalian, so we went to Catholic churches, Episcopalian churches, Baptist, and Seventh Day Adventist.  So we had a lot of church on the weekends.  And we went to Catholic schools from second through tenth grade.
Story_ID: 54718
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and what, what was the name of your, your, your--did you go to the same school all the way through grade school?
Speaker 2: No, I--we--because we moved and changed schools, I started off in Grace Elementary [Akron, Ohio] in public school and stayed there until my sister [Michelle Trotter] was ready to go with me to St. Vincent [St. Vincent Elementary School, Akron, Ohio].  And then we moved, so I went to St. Peter's.  Then my mother [Carmelie LaForest Jordan] wanted us to have a--go to a stronger school so I went to Our Lady the Elms [Our Lady of the Elms High School, Akron, Ohio] and my sister went to St. Vincent's.  And then I wanted to join her, so I went to St. Vincent-St. Mary at the high school, which is probably better known for LeBron James at this point.
Speaker 1: Right, St. Vincent-St. Mary, right.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And then we wanted to go to our neighborhood school where our friends went and our neighbors were, so we transferred to John R. Buchtel High School [Akron, Ohio], and that's where we graduated from.
Story_ID: 54719
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, okay. so what was it like growing up in that neighborhood in--so you were across the street from the zoo [Akron Zoo, Akron, Ohio], so this is a--I guess a lot of people--a lot of traffic, people going to the zoo back and forth in, in the summertime.
Speaker 2: Yes, we were--we were near the acro--we lived across the street from the zoo, closer to where it was more of a wooded area, a little farther down from the entrance.  The street above us, because a lot of people were going to the zoo there, they didn't have a guardrail, so occasionally some cars would lose control and tumble down the hill.  So one was coming straight at our house once and hit the tree.  And my mother was rushing us to the back of the house.  The tree stopped the car from coming up on our front porch so.  I've driven past the house, and you could still see the mark where the car hit the tree there.
Speaker 1: Now are there any stories related to the zoo being there.  I mean, could you hear the animals and--
Speaker 2: We couldn't hear the animals, but we always had a fondness for, for the--for that zoo and for zoos in--zoos in general, so we liked to go there and, and visit, visit it so.
Speaker 1: Wa--was it free?
Speaker 2: I don't think it was free.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had class trips there, and then my mother would take us as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 54720
Speaker 1: So now in school did you have--did you always write?
Speaker 2: Yes, I always read.  I, I started out writing poetry and writing short stories.  And I always liked to read books, so I was always going to the library.  And on the little list that they have where you could order books and check them off, my mother [Carmelie LaForest Jordan] would let me order books from there.  So I was interested--my favorite subjects growing up were English and art.  So one time I also considered becoming an artist.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you drew as--you draw?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I drew and I did paintings then.  I did watercolors and acrylics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And some charcoals and some pastels.
Speaker 1: Now are either par-parents [Carmelie LaForest Jordan and William Radford Rice] artists?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nope, neither one of them are artists.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so what did you like to draw and paint?
Speaker 2: People and landscapes and sometimes different objects.  And then as I got older, I was also a little interested in graphic design.  So I used to like to do albums when there--when albums were popular and you know, create a design for something like that.
Speaker 1: Album covers--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Album covers, yes.
Speaker 1: You know they were big when--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, they were big back then.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So sometimes we'd have a project of--to do things like that and then--like sculpting classes and things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now you went to a lot of schools, but were there any teachers in grade school that you considered like mentors or role models for you that--or, or they--or who encouraged you--
Speaker 2: Let me see.
Speaker 1: --specifically you know?
Speaker 2: Dr. Lee in high school.  He was my counselor.  I'd probably say he was the most encouraging, and, and he--I think our--in my high school my class probably had the highest percentage of that era who went to college.  'Cause he took us on visits to the University of Akron [Ohio] and the Kent State [Kent State University, Ohio] and had a number of us fill out applications for college.  And he would always push us to take, you know, harder--harder classes to challenge ourselves.
Speaker 1: Okay, that was--
Speaker 2: And Mrs. Kea.
Speaker 1: Oh, Mrs. Kea.
Speaker 2: Yes, K-E-A, Marian Kea.  Uh-hum, she was the principal for my grade.
Speaker 1: All right, now this is--was she African American?
Speaker 2: She was African American.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were both African Americans.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've, I've just--last week for the first time I saw that spelling of Kea, K-E-A.  There's a Keas A and E Church in Mt. Sterling, Kentucky.  Was she from Kentucky, do, do you know?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, but her, her son is in the area.  He works for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's an engineer at NASA.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: He--we graduated together, and we actually celebrated our 50th birthdays together 'cause our birthdays are close to each other.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's an interesting spelling of it, 'cause I didn't know how to pronounce it at first when I saw it.  It was Kea, yep.  All right, and doctor--now that was, was bu--Booktell, is it?
Speaker 2: Buchtel, B-U-C--
Speaker 1: Buchtel?
Speaker 2: Bu--B-U-C-H-T-E-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's Climon Lee, III.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Climon Lee, III.  I think that's how you spell his name, C-L-I-M-O-N.
Speaker 1: Oh, Lee, oh--with that, okay.  Climon Lee, III, okay, all right.  Was Bu--Buchtel pra--pra--pra--predominantly a black school or?
Speaker 2: Yes, we were about eighty percent black during the time that I was there.  And it was one of the most popular schools in Akron [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had that intense rivalry with, with South High School.
Speaker 1: Okay, was it--it was a big football school?
Speaker 2: Yes, big football school--football and basketball.  And my sister [Michelle Trotter] and I were cheerleaders, so we were always at all the games.
Speaker 1: Okay
Story_ID: 54721
Speaker 1: Were you influenced as a writer or were you influenced by movies, and TV, and radio, and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I think so.  Ironically, the comic strip "Brenda Starr"--she was a reporter--so I remember that sticking out in my head.  As I grew older, I was aware that Al Fitzpatrick was editor of the 'Akron Beacon Journal.'  So there was a black editor there, and there were only a few in the country at the time, so--
Speaker 1: So he was the editor when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, since I was in high school.  So I would see his picture in the paper, and it just game me a frame of reference too, and then I think hearing stories about my maternal grandfather [Marcell Hubert LaForest] and reading the paper with my grand--my other [paternal] grandfather, Rudolph Rice.  So--and then the paper had a children's corner section, so I submitted an essay, and they published it in the paper.  So, that kind of encouraged me too.  And then I got mad about something in high school.  I don't remember what it was, but I wrote an editorial in our high school paper, and I worked for our year book.  So, as I started learning more about journalism, I was looking for majors--college majors and careers related to English or art.  So when I decided to go to Ohio State [Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], 'cause I heard they had an accredited journalism program, initially my major was journalism and graphic design, but the classes kind of collided with each other, so I ended up staying on the journalism path.
Speaker 1: So you said Dr. Lee encouraged you to.  Did, did, did he counsel you about Ohio State?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did counsel me about Ohio State.  And there were some other--we had some neighbors who, who were going to Ohio State too, and I just knew that Ohio State and Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] had two of the best programs in Ohio.
Story_ID: 54722
Speaker 1: Okay, so now you're in Buchtel [John R. Buchtel High School, Akron, Ohio] from '74 [1974] to '76 [1976] or '72 [1972] to '76 [1976]?
Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974] to seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you start--did you start high school in another--
Speaker 2: At Our Lady of the Elms [Our Lady of the Elms High School, Akron, Ohio], I started there for 9th grade.  I was there for 7th, 8th, and 9th, and then I did 10th, just one year at St. Vincent-St. Mary [St. Vincent-St. Mary High School, Akron, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right, so that accounts for--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so then I did 11th and 12th at Buchtel.
Speaker 1: Okay, at Buchtel, okay, all right.  So--let's see--so, so you, you worked--so you, you were on the year book staff?
Speaker 2: In high school.
Speaker 1: In high school.  And you, you were on the editorial for the high school paper?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I was--I wanted to work for the paper, but it met at the same time as the year book.  And the year book advisor was also one of my art teachers, and I was doing some designs for the year book, so I ended up choosing that over the paper at the time.  But I still had some involvement in it.
Speaker 1: Okay, (unclear)--yeah, your right.  Like Brenda Starr in the comic book--there were a lot of women re--reporters in, in movies, and it seemed like that was a role--if a woman's gonna have a professional role, she'd be a reporter.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Lois Lane and you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that probably was in the back of my mind too, Lois Lane and things like that.  But, but I was--I was aware of some of the, the local black weeklies in the area, and I was aware of the 'Akron Beacon Journal.'  I read the paper all the time and then I would see, as I mentioned, Al Fitzpatrick's photo in the newspaper, so it helped seeing people like--who looked like me was help--helpful.  And then on TV [television] some of the Cleveland [Ohio] affiliates I would see African Americans, you know, doing the news on the air.
Speaker 1: Right, now Cleveland was a pioneer in that with Carl Stokes back in the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --back in the day.  He was one of the first--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --and then later becomes the mayor--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so Carl Stokes and Jonathan Rodgers and Royal Kennedy, so I would see different faces on the news--Leon Bibb.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, these are pe--names that are well known too.  I mean, they're not just known in Northern Ohio.  So--
Speaker 2: And then in, in--probably in college too, seeing Max Robinson on the news.
Speaker 1: He was the first black anchor--
Speaker 2: Carol Simpson.
Speaker 1: --you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Lee Thornton, so some of all those faces stood out to me.
Speaker 1: Now this is the time period when there, there were a lot of black faces on the--on the news--(unclear)--for the first time.  Did, did, did you have a sense growing up that, that they hadn't been on before--I mean, your mother's generation wouldn't have seen 'em necessarily until--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I absolutely had a sense of that.  Because I remember I started, you know, reading more about journalism to learn more about it.  And, and, and I would--I could see sta--statistics and know who they were talking about because the numbers were so few, but it was more than it had been in the past.  But--so I could count.  You know, I could look at statistics and count who the editors were or--and in a lar--a lot of cases who the broadcasters were.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so this was--you were in high school during one of the more exciting times for black journalists.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The formation of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] happened when you were in high school.
Speaker 2: And then 'Essence' ['Essence Magazine'] too, so that was another thing that stood out for me.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, so--
Speaker 2: And Gordon Parks.  I was familiar with Gordon Parks' name as a photographer.
Speaker 1: Now did you shoot?
Speaker 2: I--yes, I did have a camera.  I shot, shot in college.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I thought that would be a natural extension of reporting and art, you know, too.  But--so when you were growing up, you, you said your [paternal] grandfather [Rudolph Rice] read the paper?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --a lot?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Everybody around me read the paper religiously, but I would read it with my grandfather specifically.  We'd--you know, we'd sit together in his rocking chair and read the paper when I was visiting.
Speaker 1: Now that's really something.  I don't think a lot of pe--people have that kind of experience where they, they--you know.
Speaker 2: It, it really stuck with me.  I think--I think all of that made a big difference.  I, I attribute a lot of it to him too.
Story_ID: 54723
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so you had some role models in front of you as you go to Ohio State.  Now tell us about Ohio State [Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].  Now this is--you, you--was there anything special about graduation [from high school] in '76' [1976]?  Did you graduate with any honors or any special recognition or?
Speaker 2: I was in the National Honor Society when I graduated.  We had--I had a very--a lot of the friends that I hung around with in school were, were high achievers so.  There were a lot of bright students in my class.  I think I won a service award and some things like that.  I think I was voted mo--most artistic, that kind of thing.  But--and I used to sew a lot, so I won some competitions for that.
Speaker 1: Did you know how to--know how to embroider as a result of--
Speaker 2: Just a little bit, not like my mother [Carmelie LaForest Jordan] and grandmother [Thercia Pierre LaForest].  I wish I had learned how to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so what, what, what did you do--did, did you do anything related to journalism in the summer before you went to Ohio State?
Speaker 2: Not that I recall.
Speaker 1: What--
Speaker 2: No, I had to--I had a scholarship from East Ohio Gas that came with a summer job, so I worked there the summer before I went to Ohio State [Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I then fa--and then the summer after my freshman year--after that I started getting internships.  So after my sophomore year, I worked at a newspaper, 'The Times Union' in Rochester, New York.
Speaker 1: All right, now let's see.  Now where was the local pa--paper?  Was there a local black pa--paper in Akron [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: 'The Reporter.'
Speaker 1: 'The "Reporter.'
Speaker 2: And then there was 'The Call and Post' in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 1: All right, this is--now Akron in those days would have been a town of, of at least 250,000 people--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --or more.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was about 250,000 then.
Speaker 1: Right, right, 'cause I know it's about the same size as Dayton [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Where the economy is rubber and you know, Firestone [Firestone Tire and Rubber Company]--
Speaker 2: Yep, all the rubber factories there.
Story_ID: 54724
Speaker 1: So, so what was Ohi--the Ohio State Uni-University [Columbus, Ohio] like in 1976?
Speaker 2: It was a lot of fun.  When we had orientation, I remember them telling us that it was so large and there were so many things to do that, you know, you had a lot of rope and you had to watch so you didn't get tangled up in it.  It was exciting meeting students from all over the place, and Woody Hayes was there, Archie Griffin was playing football at, at Ohio State, and Ray Griffin, his brother.  So it was an exciting time to be there.  In my first dorm I was in overlooked the football stadium.  So it was-it was a huge school.  I mean, you know, for--to go to the west campus where I had some of the classes as a freshman, we had to take a bus to go there.  And so the way you had to organize your classes to try to cluster them together so you wouldn't have to walk so far to--so you can make it to class on time.  But I, I liked going there.  And the upperclassmen were really supportive too I think in kind of, you know, showing us the ropes and telling us, you know, go to this conference, take this class, or do that.  And I met a lot of--some of the people from other cities in Ohio we've had little friendly rivalries, particularly some of the students from Cleveland [Ohio].  But--and one of my roommates was voted class clown in class in Cleveland, so she was always--just there was a lot of laughter in our room all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We wouldn't eat her cooking for the first few years.  And we finally did, she tricked us.
Speaker 1: I know they criticized LeBron James for leaving the Cavaliers [Cleveland Cavaliers, Ohio].  He said--they said you've betrayed Cleveland.  He said, I'm from Akron [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: So in the sense of that rivalry is something that, you know, people from that area have.  It's not just cause if you're close to Cleveland you're in Akron--you think--you, you consider yourself a Clevelander.  It's not--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  I never--I never, ever, ever said I was Cleveland.  You know, if people--I made people figure out where Akron was so, that, that wasn't happening at all.  And Akron was a good place to grow up in, so I was proud to be from Akron.  I'm still proud to be from Akron.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I have very fond memories of it.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And, and I had--when I moved to Toledo for my first job, I had debates with people there.  People would look at me like a crazy.  They're saying like they're both (unclear)--to the same side, and I said no, Akron is better, so (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, a lot Akron people feel like that; they do.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we do.
Speaker 1: So.
Speaker 2: We're proud of Akron.
Speaker 1: So, now, now did you--were you involved with the, the Frank Hale Center or was that operating in the--
Speaker 2: He was there then.  I don't think they called it the Frank--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Hale Center yet.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He was--I think he was over the Office of Minority Affairs in the Provost office, but he was very supportive of, of students.  And I remember him trying to talk me into going to graduate school then, but I wanted to go out and work and be a journalist so.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you get involved in a black student organization there or?
Speaker 2: I worked for 'Our Choking Times,' which is a black newspaper there.  And then they had a name from the '60s [1960s] (laughter).
Speaker 1: 'Our Choking Times.
Speaker 2: 'Our Choking Times.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I also was a reporter for our daily newspaper, 'The Lantern,' which had a circulation of fifty thousand.  I was president of the Black Communicators Association, which was kind of our NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] chapter.  So, one of the women from the local chapter was our advisor, so I was involved with, with that.  Those were the main organizations I was--it was involved with.  We had some informal interests groups that we started with some of the Cleveland people, but.
Story_ID: 54725
Speaker 1: Were there any--so, were there any special teachers or mentors on, on--that you can name from Ohio State [Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yes, Dr. Osborn Smallwood was--he one of my favorite professors.  He was very encouraging, and I still keep in touch with his son.  He's no longer living, but he was a very distinguished professor and you know, just a real scholar, and he just had such a presence in the classroom.
Speaker 1: What, what did he teach?
Speaker 2: He taught a lot of communications courses, you know, rhetoric and speech and things like that.  And I remember--I think I wrote a paper on Marcus Garvey [founder, Universal Negro Improvement Association] in his class.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we stayed in touch after I graduated.
Speaker 1: Now was he from the islands?
Speaker 2: I think--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) name sounds--
Speaker 2: --he was.
Speaker 1: --Caribbean to me
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think he was.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure about that.
Speaker 1: Osborn Smallwood.  You know, you just don't--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's another one and I can't--I don't why I can't think of his name right now.  I can see his face, but he was a journalism professor.  Oh, I can't believe I can't think of his name right now, but he was instrumental in me getting into 'The Toledo Blade.'  That's why I can't believe I can't remember his name.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, now this is--as you were mentioning earlier, this is a time when there was a lot of--I don't think there's ever been as, as much black media as during the mid '70s [1970s] or early '80s [1980s].  You had like so many magazines starting up and you know, radio stations, all kinds of things were happening for the first time.  So, so did you--did you feel you had a bright future in journalism--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  I remember Les Brown was on the radio there in Columbus [Ohio], and I remember that Tony Brown [Dean of the Howard University School of Communications, Washington, D.C.] came on campus.  He was working on some project called Cube, which was some cable project.  And I remember hearing about some of the national things going on in, in the cable industry because it was just being formed then pretty much.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: And then 'The Call and Post,' I worked for the Columbus 'Call and Post' for the editor, Amos Lynch, there.  And I wrote for--there was another black paper call 'The Columbus Onyx.'  I wrote for that.  And someone started a magazine in Columbus.  I wrote for that.  And then someone started--there was a chain of magazines called 'Mahogany.'  I think they were based in Texas.  I wrote for that.  I wrote for anything I could write for at the time that was in there.  Then I learned a little bit about--I took a couple of broadcasting courses too, but I was primarily a print major.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know--
Speaker 2: 'Cause I liked to write and edit.
Speaker 1: Tony Brown, his act--tivities with--Ton--Tony Brown's journal was emanating from Columbus.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Quite a--quite a bit.  And there was a--he had a--and I don't know if Cube as the name of the interactive system--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --through cable TV--
Speaker 2: That was the interactive--
Speaker 1: --being developed--
Speaker 2: --system, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause he could--he would--he would ask a question on his show and call his--I mean, viewers from around the country could respond by dialing the phone number through--and their, their opinion would be, you know, shown via the cable--via ca--cable TV.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--
Speaker 1: The first--
Speaker 2: --we were doing some volunteer work with that or we were an audience occasionally when he was doing things like that on campus.
Story_ID: 54726
Speaker 1: Ohio was way ahead technologically and you know, in terms of AV [audio visual] and that sort of thing.  So did, did you have a sense of that, that Ohio was on the cuttin' edge of that?
Speaker 2: I had a little sense of it, because there was--there was another--I can't think of his name now, but there was another man who was working in cable who was getting some attention then.  And I remember an upperclassman telling me about him, and I remember reading about him in magazines.  And then we would come--we would hav--we had a--we would organize a bus trip to come to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] for their communications fair during black history month every February.  So that's how I got my first internship.  And they would have a lot of national speakers here too, so when we came, I met--I met Max Robinson.  I remember meeting Robert Maynard, who became the publisher of 'The Oakland Tribune' [Oakland, California]. So we were able to meet some of the pioneers in journalism at the time, so it was really inspiring.  And then we were all also able to meet a lot of other young, black journalists who were trying to break into the industry.  We were all students then and talked to a lot of recruiters and you know, try to compete for internships.  So I just felt like it was wide open at that time.  So I did end up getting an internship after my sophomore year.  And at the time they had been trying--focusing primarily on juniors and seniors when I was at Ohio State [Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], but then I was debating some of our professors and saying I have--I've taken as many courses as the juniors and seniors.  Why should I have to wait until I'm a junior?  So they said okay, you have a point.  So then they started letting me talk to some of the recruiters when they came on campus.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you, you had a pretty rich, you know, environment to draw from.
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I did.
Speaker 1: --Ohio State.
Speaker 2: And then I was learning what the meaning of the word internship was when I was like a freshman or sophomore.  I had heard it associated with doctors, and I didn't realize that that's something you needed to do as a journalist.  So then when I found it's something I needed to do, then I was bugging everyone about getting internships, so--and getting experience.  So that's why I was trying to get experience everywhere I could.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you really focused.  You were at Ohio State and you were worrying about being distracted, but it sounds like you were really focused on writing.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was focused and, and I was aware too that a lot of the students on campus were very competitive.  And there weren't that many African Americans in our program either, so that was another thing I think that was in the back of my mind.  And I knew that, while it was growing, we were still--our numbers were still low in the industry, so I knew that I--I knew I needed to be good.  And that's what everybody always told us every--anyway, that you needed to be, you know, twice as good and work twice as hard to get ahead.  So I was--I was reading trade publications.  I was learning who owned what and who was where and what I needed to--you know, and whenever I'd meet someone I would ask them about how they got where they were, what I needed to do.  So I was very focused, so I, I knew I wanted to go into journalism, you know, while I was--the whole time I was there.
Story_ID: 54727
Speaker 1: As you're approaching your senior year at Ohio State [Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], did you--now, you ended up going to 'The Toledo Blade' and, and there's a store--there must be a story about how--
Speaker 2: One of my professors used to work at 'The Toledo Blade' [Toledo, Ohio].  And we had a panel discussion on how to get an internship.  So at that point I had had a couple of internships, 'cause I was--went to 'The Times Union' in Rochester, New York, and then I worked at 'Reader's Digest' in New York City [New York].  So I was a student representative on the panel.  And then there was an editor from 'The Toledo Blade' on the panel, and he asked me to look him up after--when I graduated.  So before--well, one of the jobs (unclear) I had an offer from Time, Inc. to work for their books division, and I ended up taking the job at 'The Toledo Blade' to start out with.
Speaker 1: Now, we need to backtrack and talk, talk about the internship with--you were in New, New York working with the--
Speaker 2: I was--well, I was always interested in magazines, but I knew that magazines were harder to break into, and that's--and that's an area where I didn't know a lot of people.  So there was a program called the American Society of Magazine Editors Internship Program, so I applied for it and I was selected to represent Ohio State.  So I spent a summer in New York City and I worked--
Speaker 1: In, in--for, for--I'm sorry.  For, for what publication was it?
Speaker 2: I worked at the 'Reader's Digest.'
Speaker 1: 'Reader's Digest,' 'okay, all right.
Speaker 2: For that summer.  So that was a good experience, and it gave me an ott--an, an option to kind of compare the differences between newspapers and magazines, and it was something I was very interested in.  And we were exposed to a lot of the editors at other magazines in the city at that time too, so when I graduated, I was applying for jobs in, in both areas.  And I had done that in Columbus [Ohio] too, working at local newspapers and local magazines as well as our campus newspapers while I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay and the other place you mentioned.  You mentioned New, New York City with 'Reader's Digest' and then there was another place.
Speaker 2: Oh, 'The Times Union.'
Speaker 1: 'The Times Union' in--
Speaker 2: In, in Rochester, New York.
Speaker 1: Ro-Rochester, New York.
Speaker 2: And that was owned by Gannett, which owns 'U.S.A. Today.'
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And this is before they started 'U.S.A,' and Gannett was headquartered there at the time.  So I was also meeting some of the executives at Gannett.  And there was--he may have been a professor at the time--Jay Harris, who--he was a top editor in the newspaper industry, but he also was an academia too.  So I was making different contacts particularly and also coming to Howard.  So meeting some of the editors here, I was making con--building my network of, of mentors, of people who were able to give me advice and, and peers as well too.
Speaker 1: Was Richard Prince in, in Rochester then?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.  So I met--and ironically, they were going through some kind of dispute between some of the African-American journalists and management at the time.  So they brought me into the meeting.  I don't think the management wanted me to be in the meeting so.  So it kind of gave me a window of the reality of what people had to push for on the inside too.
Speaker 1: These are the black employees having--
Speaker 2: The black employees--
Speaker 1: --a meeting--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the black reporters--
Speaker 1: --a caucus about gripes with--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Exactly, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So I met--I met a num--a number of people who were there that I later ended up working with in some capacity in New York City, after I graduated years later.  And, and then--even here.  'Cause Phillip Dixon, who's a former chair of the journalism department, he was an assistant city editor when I was in Rochester that summer. So, so I always use him as an example with students.  We didn't always tell people, but sometimes I, I told--would tell students if I had been a knucklehead then he might not have kept me (laughter), or made sure I disappeared some kind of way once, you know, he started teaching here.
Speaker 1: Now Rochester was the home of Frederick Douglass when he published--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, 'The North Star.'
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a lot of history in Rochester.
Speaker 1: So do people talk about that and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did talk about it, and I did some research on it to learn more about it.  I was aware of it before I got there, but it was interesting to know that while I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so all these--this is a--it seems cosmic now really 'cause all--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --coming together.
Speaker 2: So it seems like, you know, this is--you're destined to go into this--into this area.
Story_ID: 54728
Speaker 1: So you're in Toledo [Ohio] and, and you're a re--reporter and a copy et--a copy editor, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, so, so you reported local news then?
Speaker 2: Yes, local news.  I was a general assignment reporter, so I did things around Toledo and also in Southeastern Michigan.
Speaker 1: You had a--you started fairly high, so I guess all the experiences you, you had, because a lot of people who I've interviewed they start off writing obituaries and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I did my share of obituaries.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I definitely did my share of obituaries while I was--I did a little bit of everything from stories about the mayor to crime stories to police to education to entertainment, so whatever, whatever was needed--floods.
Speaker 1: Na, na, now I, I--I'll be remiss if I didn't ask you if you ever met any students from Ohio uni-University [Athens, Ohio], 'cause they consider themselves the journalism school in the country.  That's what they consider themselves.
Speaker 2: Yes, they--I, I did, particularly back then, and, and we considered ourselves the journalism school at the time, so we had a little, little rivalry.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so Toledo--
Speaker 2: And wa, we, wa, we, we ja--we went with them to the job fair here.  We coordinated--you know, I think we invited them the second year or third year that we went.
Speaker 1: What they come to, to, to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] for the job?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they came up to Columbus and rode with us to Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then we charted a bus.
Speaker 1: All right, so, all right, so 'The Toledo Blade,' what was the some, some of the stories you reported on in Toledo?
Speaker 2: I covered a--I remember covering a big flood in Southeast Michigan, and that was interesting 'cause I'd never anything like that before.  And I would--I would keep different things in my trunk, like shovels, boots, jeans, jackets, you know, raincoats, so that I could be prepared to cover different things, particularly after I--you know, I'd get sent to cover all kinds of things.  I covered something in the educational system on rich schools and poor schools.  There were--it was around the David Bec--Davis-Besse Nuclear Plant, so one of the schools had the nuclear plant in its--it was part of its tax district.  So they had a lot of money, swimming pools, the best of everything.  And the other school was not that far away, but it had far fewer resources.  So I was looking at per pupil in--expenditures and the differences between these schools, based on their tax basis.
Story_ID: 54729
Speaker 1: And I think one of--my first, my very first day as a reporter I was paired with an older reporter who gave me the leftovers basically.  'Cause we were checking both--you know, budgets in the local townships.  So I was calling a place called Spencer Township, and I was trying to make sure I had the numbers right since it was my first day.  And I kept asking questions about the fire budget so the secretary or person on the other end she just broke down and she just said, okay, okay, I'll tell you.  And then she told me that the fire department burned down the wrong house in a training drill.  So these little briefs that we were working on, so I ended up with a much bigger story than the other reporter.  And she was a little mad and annoyed, but she had given me the leftovers and so it turned into a bigger story, so, so I was glad about that for my first day.
Speaker 2: So you, you, you continued with this cosmic (laughter)--this is, is, is--it's good to be lucky sometimes, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and then different things in the community, so--which I like to do, and talking to different people in the community.  Sometimes people would be surprised to--you know, that I was a reporter coming there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what--what's the black pop--population of Toledo like?
Speaker 1: I think it was probably twenty, thirty percent at the time, something like that.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay and--so--but, but did you--did you feel that if you hadn't of dug a little bit more in that first story you were talking about you wouldn't have discovered that the--
Speaker 1: Oh, no.  If I didn't--if I didn't listen to her and just kind of sit back and, and pay attention to what she was saying and be quiet for a moment, I would have never gotten that story.  So I would have just had a little brief about they allocated this much money for the fire department or whatever they did for the police department and other things we were checking on.  So, cause we were just checking the little taunt--towns by phone.  So I ended up talking to the family, and they were really upset and they were suing them.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: So--I mean, it was a good lesson for me, in ter--in terms of observation and listening to people, but, but I really liked getting out in the community and talking to people and--as well.
Story_ID: 54730
Speaker 1: Now were you the only black at, at the--at, at the "Blade?"
Speaker 2: No, I was probably about one of a half dozen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) there were--I was the only copy editor when I was a copy editor.  And then, in terms of re--news reporters, I was a--I was one of two and one of four--three or four total.
Speaker 1: And what did the others do?
Speaker 2: One was also a general assignment reporter and one was in features, and then there was someone else on the sports desk and that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There, there was a columnist who was--he was our elder statesman, William Brower.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he was kind of the mentor in the room and--
Speaker 1: William Brower--
Speaker 2: --would chew you out if you--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --out if you misspell something.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, na--so, so you were at the, the 'Blade' from '80 [1980] to '83 [1983]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And was there big experience we need to talk about before we move--
Speaker 2: In Toledo?
Speaker 1: --to the next one?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Not that I could think of.  I just had great friends there.  I still keep in touch with them and I'm--I still go back periodically to visit or to speak.
Speaker 1: Was any--you men--mentioned William Brower.  Is there any other people that you consider like a role model (unclear)?
Speaker 2: He was the primarily one--primary one as a journalist at the "Blade" I would say.  There was a woman who worked in the publisher's office, Lanita Goings.  She was kind of an overall general mentor, and I call her my Toledo mother.  She was always, you know--she always was a connector 'cause she introduced me to different people in the community as well, and just kind of looked out for me and still does to this day.
Speaker 1: Okay
Story_ID: 54731
Speaker 1: All right, so, now in '83 [1983], you went to 'The Atlanta [Journal] Constitution'?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How, how did that take place?  What happened?
Speaker 2: I'd applied before and got a form letter saying thanks but no thanks, and I was going down for a wedding with another friend I grew up with--I went to high school with.  And she went on an interview with Spelman, and I went on an interview at the paper, and they end up offering me a job.  They invited me back for a tryout.  And ironically, when I came back for the tryout I had laryngitis and I couldn't talk at all.  So fortunately, I still got the job.
Story_ID: 54732
Speaker 1: Okay, 'The Atlanta Constitution' [Atlanta Journal Constitution]  So 1983--now Atlanta [Georgia] is like--really they call it Hotlanta, but it's really hot, in terms of migration and black people moving to Atlanta.  They saw it as a land of opportunity.  Did you kind of feel that way about Atlanta when you--
Speaker 2: Yes, I went there for spring break while I was in college [Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] and fell in love with Atlanta and decided I had to live there at least once before I died.  And then also my father [William Radford Rice] was in Albany, and my [maternal] grandmother [Thercia LaForest] had moved from Akron [Ohio] down to Fort Valley [Georgia].  And my godmother had moved from Akron to Atlanta, so I wanted to be closer to them as well, and it gave me an opportunity to get to know my family better.  And it was exciting to see so many African Americans in different positions in, in Atlanta, so that was kind of an allure as well too.  I remember even when I went down for spring break and wedding, my friend and I were spending a lot of time in, in like, black book stores, which was probably a little unusual for--you know, for some people on vacation or whatever on spring break.  But we were just excited for some--to see some things that we didn't necessarily have back in Columbus [Ohio] and Akron [Ohio].  So I was there for only a year, but it was a fun year.  I was in my twenties and it was an exciting time to be at the paper.  And also I was--I wasn't the only one or one of a few at the paper too.  And, and it was interesting learning about the history.  Alexis Scott Reeves, who was--her family owns the 'Atlanta Daily World,' and she's--she returned--later returned the 'Atlanta Daily World.'  So seeing her in a management position but then also learning more about her paper and other, other members of the black press while I was in Atlanta was interesting to me as well.  'Cause I was just interested from back--you know, the work I had with the 'Call and Post' [Cleveland, Ohio] and the 'Reporter' [Akron, Ohio]. And I've always been interested in history too.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so I did do some work with the 'Atlanta Voice,' one of the local black papers there, while I was in town.
Speaker 1: Yeah, how many--
Speaker 2: I helped them with--I helped them with layout and things like that.
Speaker 1: There at the 'Daily World' and the 'Voice,' were, were those the only two black pa--papers or?
Speaker 2: Those were the main two.  It seems like there was another one, but tho--those were the main two.
Speaker 1: Oh, the 'World' is an old paper established a long time ago.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, now you were there--the Atlanta child murders were going on, right, when you were there?  Was that, that about the same time?
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm trying to remember if they were over then or did they pick up after I left.
Speaker 1: I think seem like it was in the early '80s [1980s] or going on with--
Speaker 2: They were in the early '80s [1980s].  I, I need to check the years on that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just watched a--I watched a special on that not long ago.  I think it did happen before I got that 'cause I think there was still some talk about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it--
Speaker 2: I think he was--
Speaker 1: --so it was over--
Speaker 2: --arrested by then.
Speaker 1: --ba--basically?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was over with.  It wasn't going on while I was there.
Story_ID: 54733
Speaker 1: All right, okay, so, so, now how--you went to 'The New York Times' next, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So how did that come, come about?
Speaker 2: A copy editor that I worked with in Toledo [Ohio] was on the foreign desk at the 'New York Times,' and he recommended me to one of the assistant managing editors.  So they sent a blank envelope to me at work in--inviting me to come up for a tryout.  And my boss didn't know that's what he was handing me, so he said later, if he had known he would have torn it up.  So, so I was traveling--I was actually on a trip to the Bahamas, and then I went from there to New York and did a tryout for a week, and then they offered me a job there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--well, this is--this is like--this is the--this is the big one, you know, of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wasn't ready to leave Atlanta, but that's--you know, when I got the offer from the 'New York Times' I couldn't pass it up at the time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think--I would think that most young journalists who envisioned themselves at some time working the 'New York Times,' right?
Speaker 2: A lot--a lot do.  I didn't have an--you know, it wasn't like a hard dream or aspiration at the time, but it jus--it just kind of fell into my lap at the time, the opportunity, so I took advantage of it.  So I was--I was excited about the, the opportunity.
Speaker 1: So okay, wa, wa, what, what was that experience like working the new-'New York Times?'  Was it what you expected or was it, you know?
Speaker 2: It was kind of what--yes, it was what I expected and more.  It was great working for an organization that had a lot of resources and where people respond immediately, you know, whether it was the President of the United States of president of another country.  So the standards were really, really high, and it kind of pulled together everything I had done to that point.  So it took all the, the editing to a new level, the reporting to a new level, and there was--you know, more was expected of us.  So it was really good training ground of me too, and it--and it prepared me for things that I've done since then.  But it, it was a wonderful experience.  I mean, it had its ups and downs, but I really learned a lot, and some of the people I worked with were remarkable.
Speaker 1: Okay, now who were some of the ones?
Speaker 2: Isabel Wilkerson, who went here [Howard University].  Paul Delaney--
Speaker 1: That's the au--au--author of--
Speaker 2: Isabel Wilkerson, she's the author of The Warmth of Other Suns [2010], and she was the first African American to win an individual Pulitzer Prize for journalism.  Some, some had won some for teams before, but not individually.
Speaker 1: You said Paul Delaney.
Speaker 2: Paul Delaney, yes, I worked with him--C. Gerald Fraser.  Charlayne Hunter-Gault had just left I think before I came, but I met her there--Lena Williams, Bill Roden.  It's a number of people, and I'm leaving out some people--Angela Dodson, Rosemary Bray.  There, there were a number of people there.
Speaker 1: It sounds like a lot of pe--people, but when compared to the overall staff of the 'New York Times'--
Speaker 2: Yes, we--
Speaker 1: --what percentage--
Speaker 2: --still in the minority.  I mean, I think we were ten percent maybe, which was higher than some papers but not as high as others.  But--
Speaker 1: That's almost the, the percentage of the af--af-- af--African-American politic--population to the U.S. population.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I think we're, we're only 11.5.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yep, so it was a very supportive group of people, people of other--all backgrounds actually.  They were fa--fairly supportive too--Gerald Boyd and Robin Stone.  It was a number of people that I could think of.
Speaker 1: Now, now do you--what position did you start at?
Speaker 2: I started doing, doing layout on the news desk.  They called it a makeup editor at the time, so--or a layout editor.  So I was working, doing pages for metro, national, and the foreign desk and the business desk, and then working in the composing room with the printers to you know, update the paper, get the pages laid out, 'cause at the time they were still cutting and stripping it on the page.  We couldn't touch it, and then we'd have to do it several other times that night.  And so sometimes I'd work like--work the late shift to kind of close--help close the issue.
Speaker 1: So they were like, using wax in those days or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --or--okay.
Speaker 2: Yep, wax and knives and all those things.
Speaker 1: Yeah, those are all gone now.  They're all scrap--I mean, at least in most places.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So that was a good experience to learn how to do that.  And then after doing that, I switched over to copy editing--back to copy editing which I'd done earlier, so I did that on the Metro desk.  And then I moved to the Connecticut section.  I was the assistant editor/copy editor, so I was helping to run that section.  And then I moved to style, working for--I was deputy editor of the home section and deputy editor of the living section there.
Story_ID: 54734
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's the pa--pa--position you had when you left 'New York Times,' right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was an assistant style editor before I left, so I was doing some editing and also doing some layout there working in production too.  But I still--I transferred.  I was still with the New York Times Company, but I transferred over to 'Child' magazine.  The 'New York Times,' at the time, they owned a will--a women's magazine division and a sports magazine division.  So I had an offer from 'Child' magazine and 'McCall's,' and I decided to go with 'Child.'  My son was young at the time, and I, I liked 'Child' magazine a lot.  And I had been watching the, the magazine acquisitions and--that the 'Times' engaged in during that time so.
Speaker 1: So you were eager to move to a magazine?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had always been interested in magazines, 'cause when I was in college I did a magazine internship, and I did a newspaper internship, and I had done some work with magazines, so I had always had a passion for magazines since the time I was young.  But since I also had so much newspaper experience, I wanted to see where that took me and then later at some point move over to magazine.  So that became the time for me to do it--it was a good time for me to do it, and then some other opportunities opened up as well after I made that move.
Story_ID: 54735
Speaker 1: What are the, I guess, the most memorable projects you worked on at the 'New York Times' when you were there?
Speaker 2: I think one of them would have to be the Challenger disaster.  And I was doing layout then, and I remember it was--everybody finished early, and that was always kind of an eerie sign, if you--we were done and we were kind of talking.  And then that hit and we have to rip the paper apart and you know get that in.  So things like that I remember as one of the big stories during that time.  That's one of the ones that stood out to me.
Speaker 1: What do they do on a newspaper when you already have the front page laid out and you gotta put another story there.  Where, where does that story--other story--I mean, go--it's just--
Speaker 2: It gets bumped inside or bumped--or it's--it is a ripple effect.  So either things start shrinking--moving, shrinking or dying.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, so--I mean, we try to contain it so that--you know, like, maybe there'd be certain pages that if something happened this is where we would move things so you're not ripping the entire section or the entire paper.  Sometimes it's unavoidable if something big like that happens, but usually there's like a back-up plan so that you can have a, you know, minimal interruption.  Because you're always gonna have changes on the front page and sometimes on the section fronts, like the Metro front or the--you know, the main page of the foreign section or something like that.  So in responding to news you're expecting to update it with each addition, and so you'll move some things off, off of the page.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now New York--now this is the--is this the time that [David] Dinkins was the mayor around, around there?
Speaker 2: He was--I wasn't at the newspaper while he was mayor, but I was in New York.
Story_ID: 54736
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  Were there any major mentors at the 'Times' or people that showed you the ropes?
Speaker 2: Paul Delaney was one, Gerald Fraser, Angela Dodson, Shawn Kennedy, Lena Williams.  There were another--a number of people--Sheila Rule, who, you know, would show me the ropes there or give me advice about different things.  And then--and then also Al Fitzpatrick continued to do that.  Ironically, I met him at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] even though he was from--we were both from Akron [Ohio].  And his, his daughters were at--when I was at Our Lady of the Elms [Our Lady of the Elms High School, Akron, Ohio] they were there too.  So, you know, and then going to the job fairs, I just kept building a network, so I had a network of people I could call if I had questions.  And then Pam Johnson was the first African American publisher of a daily newspaper.  She was at the 'Ithaca Journal,' and I met her through some other peers, and she would give me advice.  So I had a network of people around the country that I could talk to, whether it was about a job offer or, or how do I handle this situation at work?  Or, should I take this opportunity?  So they would--you know, and then I would just kind of weigh the different advice I would receive from different people.
Speaker 1: And, and did you ever have any difficult situations at the 'New York Times' that you can remember?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sometimes you would.  I mean, things--overall, I think things went--it went very smoothly, but, you know, it was a competitive place so.  Sometimes people wanted the position you were in or, or they wanted somebody else differently in that--different in that position so.  There were, you know, a number of people of different backgrounds who were supportive and mentors.  I mean, Allan Siegal, who hired me, he was always very supportive, and Gerald Boyd too.  But--I mean, I would try to work around them, you know, or--you know, just deal with them head on or talk to people if I wasn't happy about something or I wanted to do this instead of that.  And then sometimes it was dictated by, you know, what was going on with budgets and the economy so if they were gonna consolidate positions and things like that.
Story_ID: 54737
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, so you left the 'Times' in '92 [1992] to go to 'Child' magazine?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: So that was a transfer within the company.
Speaker 1: All right, so it was within--New York Times published 'Child?'  Is that--
Speaker 2: Yes, the New York Times Company, the corporate company, 'cause the 'New York Times' owned TV stations and magazines and smaller newspapers as well as the flagship paper.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're still living in New York?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And around the same--I guess--so you were with--so you were a senior editor with 'Child' magazine?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You eventually, right?  But did, did you--how--what--
Speaker 2: I transferred in as a senior editor.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, all right, so tell us about 'Child' magazine.
Speaker 2: 'Child' magazine was interesting because that was my first time working full time for a magazine.  I had been doing some freelancing for 'Essence' and 'Black Enterprise' and some other publications while I was at the 'New York Times'--while I was at newspapers period because I wanted to make that transition eventually.  So, so I was learning how that differed from magazines.  I call the stories boomerangs because they kinda lived with us a little longer.  Within--in newspapers, you know, once you're over that edition or that day, you moved on to something else unless it wa--there was a second-day story or reason to continue it.  But with magazines you might work on a story for several weeks or months, so--and dealing more with color and dealing more with photo shoots and things like that.  So it was just a different type of journalism, but I, I really liked it a lot.  And it was--and it was kind of more of a niche because we were targeting parents who mostly had children under six.  And then from there I went to 'Essence.'  I was supposed to go for six weeks.  I ended up there for a year.  And then at the time Black Entertainment Television was entering in a partnership with the 'New York Daily News' to create a Sunday magazine targeted to African Americans, which became 'BET Weekend.'  And they were looking for someone to work on the prototype, to develop that.
Speaker 1: Now in, in '94 [1994], you started Miyan Communications Group?
Speaker 2: Miyan?  Oh--
Speaker 1: Yeah, (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes, Miyan.
Speaker 1: Miyan.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm right (laughter), all right.
Speaker 2: Mi--Michelle and Yanick.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My sister's name.
Speaker 1: Okay, Miyan Communications.  And--so this was the organization that used as a--as a consult--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --used for--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --for consulting.  Yes for consulting and freelancing.
Story_ID: 54738
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so any memorable stories about 'Child' magazine before we move you into 'Essence'?
Speaker 2: Let me see.  I, I worked on a piece looking at--there was a piece on diversity, and it was kind of looking at how much we really interact with people of other backgrounds.  So we had a study to go with it and where we ask people specific questions, you know, not just about do you have friends of other races and ethnicities, but do you go to church with them?  Do you travel with them?  Do you go to dinner with them?  Do you your children play--to look at what we really do as opposed to what we say we do.  And then I also helped to bring in some people for the--our advisory board so--Dr. Alvin Poussaint from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Dr. James Comer from Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]--and just helping to diversify the, the magazine a little bit.  We also did the series that was a finalist for national magazines awards on disabilities in children.  So we did a three-part series on that, so I enjoyed--I enjoyed working on that as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So those are some of the things that stand out.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I'm glad I asked you that question-went back to it, 'cause--yeah.  James Comer and Alvin Poussaint, seem like that--they would be a good addition to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They were, and they--and that--they were.  They were good advisors to the magazine.  I did a profile--I did a profile of both of them 'cause they did a book together at the time, so I wa--you know, went to Yale.  I went to Harvard to interview both of them and then also they would give us advice on different stories we were working on as well.  Afterwards they came on our, our advisory board.
Story_ID: 54739
Speaker 1: Now how did your transition to 'Essence' take place.  And, and this is '94 [1994], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I'd been freelancing for 'Essence' all along, so I--you know, I met Susan Taylor.  I'd done some stories that were cover stories--different, different types of stories throughout the magazine.  So the executive editor, who was one of my editors, she was going to China, I think it was at the time, for six weeks and she needed someone to fill in for her.  And so I came in and filled in for six weeks, and then I ended up staying for a year.  I, I ended up becoming an editor-at-large so.  And then during that time is when BE--the only reason I left 'Essence' is because the project with BET [Black Entertainment Television] was going to launch.  So I helped to develop the prototype for that.  And when they were ready to launch it, then I ended up going there full time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so all right, okay, so BET--this is 1995.  So you moved to D.C. from New York, right?
Speaker 2: Not, not immediately.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I moved to D.C. I think in '98 [1998].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you were commuting back and forth or?
Speaker 2: No, we were--it, it was a partnership with the 'New York Daily News' so we were working in the 'New York Daily News' newsroom.  We, we had--we had a few--an area there we were working in, and then BET had an office there, which was primarily for advertising, so I worked out of that office as well.  But they had just built a headquarters here--a new headquarters here, so then they transferred us down eventually when they took sole ownership of the magazine.
Story_ID: 54740
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about BET's [Black Entertainment Television] magazine.  (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: That was fun.  That was probably one of my most enjoyable jobs.  I, I like starting things, and I had always wanted to start a magazine since I was in college, so it gave me the opportunity to start a magazine with someone else's money (laughter).  But I figured whoever did the prototype, if they liked it, that, that person would get the job, so I wasn't gonna let go of the prototype, you know, developed it--you know, the different ideas I had--  Bob Johnson in, in particular, and I've worked with Debra Lee.  They were particularly interested in my Style background at the 'New York Times' and some of the things I did there, and just kind of the diversity of doing news and Style and Entertainment and bringing that together.  So I kind of help develop the concept for the magazine, and it was--it took off; it was a hit.  Readers really loved it. The papers liked carrying it.  We traveled around the different newspapers to negotiate them picking up the newspaper and inserting it in their magazine.  We had to pay--I mean their newspaper--we had to pay for that of course, but just like building something from the ground up, coming up with a concept, hiring a staff, finding the writers, setting up, you know, photo shoots, and thinking about paper and--you know, just all the different things that go into it.  And it was kind of a way of pulling in everything I had done, you know, from the copy editing, reporting, from the design and layout, and all of that in, in one place, and then reacting to news or thinking long term about how we were gonna do things too so.  And we--our circulation grew in three years from eight--800,000 to 1.3 million, so we were the second largest publication behind 'Ebony.'
Speaker 1: What, what's your philosophy in, in terms of layout of a magazine, you know, in terms of what, what, what should the--should be the--what, what the cover should be like and what the--
Speaker 2: One, one of the things--because we were working with the newspaper initially, they were kind of content with doing something on news print.  But we felt that--you know, thinking about how African Americans do things, we like top shelf this and that.  We wanted to have magazine quality publication, so we wanted to make sure that we went after some of the people who were popular or pioneering at the time, whether it was Toni Morrison or Dr. Ben Carson, or whether it was Denzel Washington or you know, an Olympian at the time.  So we wanted to be topical, we wanted to try to be as fresh as--you know, first if possible with the information.  We wanted to use some of the best photographers, the best writers, have a really nice design for the time--you know, make it interesting, telling people something they didn't already know.  And that was my criteria when people pitched stories to me.  It's like I read a lot of things.  I keep up with things.  Tell me something I don't already know.  You know, tell me a new angle on this, a new twist on this.  So we wanted to--we wanted to give the audience something they hadn't been getting so.  And I think that's why people were receptive to it, because they were seeing stories that they weren't seeing in other places, that they weren't seeing in their newspapers so.  Some people said it was a breath of fresh air when they picked up their newspaper and they pulled out 'BET Weekend.'
Story_ID: 54741
Speaker 1: Okay. So what you're describing is almost a contradiction to BET [Black Entertainment Television] TV stations (laughter). A lot of people--you know, they've had like, withering crit--criticism about content over the years going even from back in those days up through now--through here today and what the content is and what you see when you turn on BET, so--
Speaker 2: Well, that, that, that was true.  I mean, BET [Black Entertainment Television] had a--BET has tried a lot of different things over the years.  I worked on their history when they hit the 20th year mark, and they actually had tried a lot of different things.  They got a lot of hits for some of the--a lot of knocks for some of the videos and things like that, but they did do some family oriented programming for children and a book show, movies, a bunch of different things.  Some of them didn't take off.  One of the things we kind of discovered too is that sometimes people ask for certain things, but they didn't support certain things.  So sometimes where if there was a new show, it didn't really have the numbers that it had.  Maybe it wasn't marketed the way it needed to have been at the time too, but a lot of times people weren't putting their money where their mouth was sometimes, in terms of supporting things that they said they really wanted to support.  So it was kind of a mix bag too where, you know, some people weren't happy with content or some people loved certain shows, but some things that people ask for weren't getting the numbers that it did.  And some of those things disappeared so.  I mean, I went into the archives and I saw--looked at a lot of tapes, and I saw the history of the things that they've offered to the community.  So that's what people remember the most, but if when you look at BET in its totality, it really did offer a lot of different things.  And the magazine group was an example of that too.  So at that time we had 'BET Weekend,' and we had 'Emerge' and we had 'Heart and Soul' magazine, and all of those were, were, were considered positive publications, you know, for news, for health and fitness, for lifestyles, arts and entertainment.  And, and we all considered--you know, we all tried to do the best job we could do, in terms of making sure that we were having fair and balanced portrayals of African Americans, stories of interest to them, things that are--you need to know, things that are nice to know, in that we were, you know, using the, like I said, the best photographers, and designers, and writers, and editors, and illustrators that we could find at the time, while also providing opportunities to people too to help break into the business.  So that was one of the things I was most proud of in my time running different publications, as well as teaching too, was giving opportunities to a lot of people in a lot of different areas.
Speaker 1: You thinking like--just looking at the magazines--I mean, the magazines seem to almost mirror what some of the TV stations do--well, you know--you know, we're, we're in an age of digital television now.  We got like a channel, say, 5.1, 5.2, 5.--you know.  So, so you were able to do this is in a--in a magazine form.  You could have different magazines to feature different aspects of black life that I think BET was trying to portray on TV, but what, what you're saying is that they tried a lot of things, but it's really the popular cul--cultural stuff that sticks, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, some things--
Speaker 1: --and just the--
Speaker 2: --stuck more, more than others so.
Story_ID: 54742
Speaker 1: Now do you think, think that BET [Black Entertainment Television] could have benefited from like a, a series of digital BETs, you know, like, you know, you'd have a BET Health, B--la--like the magazines, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, on--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: --on, on the TV show?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean--
Speaker 2: They did do some of that--
Speaker 1: the, the channel-(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --I know-(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --a health channel or--you know, a channel that's devoted to celebrities, a channel devoted to something--you know, to--
Speaker 2: They have something-(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --news-(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --now with Centric, where--which does a lot of different types of programming.  And even--and even then we had a--we had a Heart and Soul TV show, which was a companion show for the, the magazine, so that was popular.  So that was giving some health information--health and fitness information on the air in addition to what was going in print.  And then a lot of the--a lot of the stories that we did--they had a show called 'Real Business,' so sometimes we'd talk about some of the business stories that were in 'BET Weekend.'  So we did try to do that in--and even in live events.  'Cause we, we would do--we did something called Pass the Word, which was looking at poetry, and we were--it was--it was a literacy campaign that we started with 'BET Weekend.'  So we would do that at a--at a public venue or, or even working with a, you know, jazz artist like Diane Reeves or something like that.  So we tried to--and we did a tribute to Walter Mosely.  So we tried to do some things that would bring the pages to life too in some of the issues or some of the people that people don't hear about all the time, whether it was on radio, television, live event, or just some oth-or online too, 'cause we were doing a lot online at that time.  And that was kind of at the beginning of that taking off in that period too.  So we were getting--we were getting a lot of hits with our--we had a calendar called Around the Way at that time.  And that was a partnership we were doing with Microsoft.  It was called MSBET.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so it was an exciting time to be launching a magazine and re-launching another one--the acquisition that we had too--and, and just testing different things to, you know, try to compete with some of my peers in other places, you know, whether it was general market or whether it was 'Essence' or 'Ebony' or 'Black Enterprise.'
Story_ID: 54743
Speaker 1: Now you started--I guess while, while you're still working at BET [Black Entertainment Television], you started teaching here at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] or start--started going to school here or?
Speaker 2: There was--we went through--before BET sold the company to Viacom, they started splitting off some of the parts, so we were acquired by Vanguard Media.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was working for them before I came to Howard, but I didn't go back to "Heart and Soul."  I was already teaching.  There was a time when I left entirely and started teaching here.  Howard, fortunately, was looking for someone with a newspaper and magazine background, and I had been doing some work with Howard already as a consultant, and I had a lot of interns from Howard, and I had worked around so many Howard people at the time, they thought I went here, but--they're everywhere.  So when they had that opening, I was always interested in teaching.  I hadn't planned to do it quite that early, but I always been interested in teaching, and they were looking for someone with a magazine and newspaper background.  I was trying to decide whether to go back to New York or stay here, so I ended up applying for that position.  So it was kind of one of those divinely inspired situations too.
Story_ID: 54744
Speaker 1: I think I somehow got past 'Heart and Soul.'  On my outline it was later, but be--'Heart and Soul' start--started when?
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: When did 'Heart and Soul' start?
Speaker 2: Oh, it--we--it was existing---we bought it.  And so we bought it in 1998.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was promoted to editorial director, and I was running 'BET [Black Entertainment Television] Weekend' and 'Heart and Soul' at the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I had two, two separate staffs.
Speaker 1: And what, what, what is Heart and Soul'?  'Cause you, you really identify with 'Heart and Soul' so.
Speaker 2: It's a national health and fitness magazine.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and so what--I know, know you had a lot of success with it, so what, what was the formula that you brought to 'Heart and Soul' too?
Speaker 2: Basically to try to have--to, to have like a conversation with other women and to kind of let them know that we're, we're all going through the same things, in terms of trying to, you know, have health lives in every aspect, whether it's physically, emotionally, mentally, financially, and all of that.  So we, we did a lot of things in the community.  We traveled around the country.  We'd do workouts with people.  We went on walks with people.  We had a reader cover model contest, so we were--it was very in--interactive so that we were listening to what they were saying.  They were seeing what we were doing.  If we fell back down on our diets or back--blacks--backslid, we would let them know about it.  So, you know, then in my letters I would talk about my family or talk about--try to be upbeat and encouraging, which is kind of my personality.  I consider myself a realistic optimist, which I get from my parents [William Radford Rice and Carmelie LaForest Rice] as well, especially my father.  And so we just tried to have that voice in the magazine, and tried to let people know about how--the things that they could do without preachy and without hitting them over the head with some information but, you know, letting them know the realities too, you know, but trying to present health in a fun way or look--or in a proactive way, you know, so whether they were trying to stay healthy and they didn't have problems, or whether they had diabetes or whether they had financial problems, or whether they had cancer.  So, so that's what we were trying to do and, and, and trying to also look at interesting ways to address some of the health disparities that we face as African Americans.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you were basically dealing with 'Heart and Soul' and the other BET [Black Entertainment Television] mag--
Speaker 2: 'BET Weekend.'
Speaker 1: --magazine, 'BET Weekend' at the same time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was a challenge, but it was a fun challenge, but I had some great people working with me and--so that, that helped make it possible to kind of run both of those.  'Cause it was--one was--you know, they were still pretty--'cause one was a re-launch and one was a startup, so they were still fairly young with the company so they required a lot of work.  But we had a lot of people.  We always said that we worked hard and played hard.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And it was--it was a passion for everyone too so.  And I think we kind of fed off of the feedback that we got from readers.
Story_ID: 54745
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, are--it--are there any--what are the most memorable, I guess, stories about 'BET Weekend' and, and 'Heart and Soul' I guess?
Speaker 2: Oh, goodness--let's see 'BET [Black Entertainment Television] Weekend.'  There, there were so many that were--remem--I'm trying to think what stands out the most.  Sometimes it was even something, something little, but different things would resonate, resonate with people and we had, you know, profiles.  We tried to mix it up a little bit so it wasn't all entertainment, like I said, lifestyles, arts and entertainment, so we had a, a cover story on Toni Morrison.  The Denzel Washington one we got a lot of feedback on.  We decided not to put any cover lines on it, so--'cause we--it was a great photo, and everybody kept stopping to look at it when they would walk down the hall.  And as it turned out, it worked because readers were putting it up in their bulletin boards at work and different things like that.  And a lot of people were doing things like that with some of the pieces.  And we would do a lot of roundup stories too, where we'd feature several cities, and we'd try to do interactive things like, for black music month we did something called One Nation Under a Grove.  And so--for one time we did it, we had--we had people interview DJ's [disc jockey] in different cities.  So we were trying to mirror what people do, so when people would drive around the country and they would get close to a city and they try and turn the dial on the car to where the station was, so we were telling you if you're in Atlanta [Georgia], listen to this station and that DJ would tell you where to go in that city.  So we were trying to make it interactive, and so we'd--you know, we'd have a bunch of writers doing that, but they're only writing something really short.  But they're interviewing the DJ's to get information there.  And so you got a little history, you got a little tourism advice, you got a little personality from, you know, a local person there.  And, and, and we do that for other topics too.  'Cause we do prostate cancer, and then some of the men would say that other men, you know, they--who had it weren't sharing information with them.  So, you know, and they would talk about how it was important to share that information with other men, or parenting stories, or business things; personal finance, or science, or environmental pieces; we did environmental racism.  So it, it ran the gamut--spirituality pieces.  So it was--it was--it was really enjoyable to do that.  And I guess one of the most personally fun one was one we did on amusement parks, and then I rode all the roller coasters at Cedar Point [Sandusky, Ohio], and retired after that from roller coasters (laughter).  And then for 'Heart and Soul' I would say some of the health pieces, some of the breast cancer pieces that we did, pieces on fibroids, and some--and profiles of, of people that hadn't--that people were interested in, in hearing from, where just like heartwarming stories of how someone either turned their life around or overcame some obstacle.  It really resonated with a lot of our readers.
Speaker 1: Is there, there a particular story that you remember that--from, from that time that--
Speaker 2: Trying to think if there a specific one.  There were so many of those.  'Cause we had one called 'My Body.'  So a lot of times it would be people who either gained--they needed to gain weight or they needed to lose weight or they, you know, were battling some life or death situation and things like that--some of the care giving pieces where people would talk about what they were going through and some of the challenges they had and, and, and encouraging them to take care of themselves in the process too.
Story_ID: 54746
Speaker 1: Okay, so are, are you still involved with, with 'Heart and Soul' at all?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --working with that anymore.
Speaker 1: All right, that's--that--that's still operated by--is it operated by Viacom now or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, that's under new ownership.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's, it's a private company that has that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and, and, and 2--2012--so, so, so you were at 'Heart and Soul' from twent--2005 to 2012, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Two--two thousand five [2005] to twenty eleven [2011].
Speaker 1: Twenty eleven [2011]-- twenty eleven [2011], okay.  And then--
Speaker 2: And before that I was, I think, '98 [1998] to 2001 I think it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '98 [1998] to 2001.
Speaker 1: Now in 2005, you wrote a book.  I think it's your first book, right?
Speaker 2: The--
Speaker 1: Rise and Fly?
Speaker 2: No, there as one before that, born--
Speaker 1: One, okay.
Speaker 2: Born to Win, the biography--actually there was a--there were a couple before then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That--some of them--that was the biggest one, the Althea Gibson one.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry; yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: That was in 2004.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us how this project, you know, was developed and, and--
Story_ID: 54747
Speaker 1: Okay, my agent at the time, Manie Barron [Emanuel Joseph Barron], who's no longer living, he told me that the--Fran Gray, who was running the Althea Gibson Foundation, she was looking for someone to work on a biography of Althea Gibson with her.  And I had always followed the history of things that happened during the year I was born, so I knew she won the U.S. Open, or what's now called the U.S. Open, in, in 1957.  And I play tennis but not as well as she does, so I was familiar with her background, and I was surprised that there wasn't a complete biography on her.  So when he mentioned that, I leapt at the chance to do that.  And she was reclusive at the time, so no one had really interviewed her for, for quite some time.  So I was able to--you know, to meet her and talk to a lot of her contemporaries in tennis and in golf, and to learn a lot about her background.  And when I was working on the proposal, I just happened to mention it for some reason to one of the professors here [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  And she said--it was Dr. Judy Moore Latta, and she said, "Oh, Althea was my babysitter at Fam U [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]."  And, and I usually don't always talk about proposals 'cause they're proposals, you know, they're--you don't know which way they're gonna go--whatever.  And so she put me in touch with her golf coach when she was at Fam U.  And that was a part--a lot of people didn't know that she was a golfer, but she--when she was at Florida A and M College at the time she also played golf in addition to playing tennis.  So I wrote that as one of the sample chapters for the proposal, and Wiley ended up publishing it.  And then--and then as part of the book I talked about how she integrated the LPGA [Ladies Professional Golf Association] too.  She was the first African American woman.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And if--I think there've only been three who have had the LPGA card--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--a lot pe--people don't know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of people didn't know that.
Story_ID: 54748
Speaker 1: She [Althea Gibson] did so many things, from singing--she did an album to, she was an athletic commissioner, you know.  Her, her father even wanted her to be a boxer when she was younger.  So she had a really fascinating story, so it was--it was interesting to, to do that and--
Speaker 2: So she was actually the first black tennis champion.  There had been no other at all.  I mean, no, no men had won it.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: 'Cause some people thought Arthur Ashe was first, but he--she inspired him, and she had won a lot of--I think ten straight American Tennis Association tournaments, so she had kind of gone to the top of--that was the Black Tennis Association.  So she needed other additional challenges, and then doing Wimbledon and U.S. Open, the French Open, and a number of, you know, tournaments around the ca--around the world.  And then she also played for the State Department as kind of an ambassador in different places too.
Speaker 2: She may be one of the few women to, to star in both, you know, tennis and golf.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I think Babe Didrikson, a white--a white woman, er--early--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --in the '30s [1930s] did that, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, she, she was a multisport, but yeah, she's one of the first ones since her to do that.
Speaker 2: Now why did she kind of become reclusive?  Is there a story about that?
Speaker 1: She primarily became reclusive--part of it is I think she never felt that she got her just due and that people were forgetting about her.  She came--you know, she had most of her triumphs during before the period of U.S.--of Open tennis.  So she didn't really get the endorsements and acclaim that a lot--that would normally go to athletes who accomplish what she had accomplished.  So after a period of time she became reclusive, and she was also--she went through a period where she had financial problems also, and so she just kind of went to her own.  And then she had some health issues as well for a little while.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so did, did, did she ever teach at, at a university or anything like that or?
Speaker 1: She didn't teach at a university.  She had an honorary degree.  She was a tennis coach for a while.  She coached some players, but she did a lot of--she did a lot of different things.  One of--one of my goals--I was hoping that once the book was published that we, you know, bring her out so she could get some tributes.  And there were some tributes to her at the U.S. Open, but she, she--unfortunately she passed before the book was published and so--but she, she was very supportive of the project, and it was great that she kept so many things too.  She even had like a lot of letters, you know, receipts for--like, for the sax that Sugar Ray Robinson bought her years ago.  So she had a lot of memorabilia in her home.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, so she was like, really forthcoming, in terms of wanting her story to be told--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, she wanted her story to be told.
Speaker 2: I mean, by--you know, by as a reporter might tell it or was she kind of like, oh, don't tell that part.  Tell this part.
Speaker 1: No, she was--she was--she was supportive.  She, she died before the project was completed, so she wasn't as involved as we would have liked her to have been.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I know when I--when I--when we see a book that says the authorized--you know, you kind of think well, the person cut out the good parts (laughter) or the--you know, or the parts they didn't want.
Speaker 1: I included everything I can get people to tell me (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: People were very protective of her, thought, too.  Because sometimes they--you know, I think because they knew she was re--was private and reclusive, they also tried to protect her privacy, so some people wa--had to become comfortable with me before they opened up and things like that.
Story_ID: 54749
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about Born to Win, a bid whist book, which I, I, I, I can't imagine you playing a lot of bid whist in college--
Speaker 2: Oh, Rise and Fly?
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--doing--yeah, but--
Speaker 2: I, I played some.  I didn't--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: It wasn't like a distraction where I was missing class or anything like that that some people--which are some of the stories in there.  My agent at that time--one of the stories--'cause I said at 'BET [Black Entertainment Television] Weekend' we assigned a lot of different things and tried to tap into the culture, so I'd assign someone to write a story about bid whist, and my agent also played bid whist, so he kept the story.  It was a tattered article that he had, and he asked me--he said, do you know anyone--'cause sometimes he would bounce ideas off me or look for writers, 'cause I was active in the National Association of Black Journalists.  So asked--he said, do you know anyone who'd be interested in writing a book on bid whist?  And I said, I, I am.  And so, so then he told me he had the article and things like that, so then I said, well, since it's a card game, maybe I should get the writer who I assigned that article to.  We should do the book together.  So I talked to him about do--so we could play together when we were promoting the book too.  And--'cause I had played with him, and it became a really loud game.  I remember one time I was traveling with my son and they got so loud they woke and startled my son.  We were at a conference.  So, so we split up the chapters.  We did the book together and we played with people.  People put me in touch with people.  I remember going to Chicago [Illinois] and this family, they, they said I could come over and play with them 'cause they were diehard players.  And they said, well, you, you, you better spend the night, so, so I was thinking they didn't know me from Adam.  We're talking on the phone, but they invited me to spend the night.  And I really did need to because they played--we played all night long, and part of doing the book was people would challenge you.  Like, oh, you think--you know.  You, you, you wrote the book or you think you're writin' a book on bid whist.  Let me show you something.  So they were--so, for--fortunately I had a winning streak that night, so I kept playing.  'Cause people would keep playing you until you lose or you just can't keep your eyes open anymore.  So, so it was fun working on that--on that project.  So that still happens now sometimes.  And my sister and I won our bid whist tournament at our family reunion this year, so we're the reigning champs of the Peter Rice Family Reunion.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a consuming card game.
Speaker 2: It really is.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's something that--and this is published by Random House, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: This is--you know, so you got a big-time publisher to--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --do this.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we did--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --a number of tournaments.  People invited us to either run tournaments or play in tournaments or read passages of the books at tournaments.
Speaker 1: Okay, so have the sales been, been good?
Speaker 2: They've been modest.  They've been--they've been okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--I mean, people still ask me for it, and I still sold it to people recently.
Speaker 1: And it's the only book about it that I know of right now.  I mean, I just found out about, but it's--but, but bid whist is so popular.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of people give it as gifts, so we're gonna donate some to our runners-up next year.
Story_ID: 54750
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now you wrote a text book, I guess in 2008, 'Teaching Converged Media'--no, it's very--
Speaker 2: That's a journal article.
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, that's an art--article in the journal, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a journal article.  I, I worked on a book called The Spirit of African Design, which is a coffee table book.  I did that before and contributed to some ant--anthologies.  One on aunties.  I wrote about my Aunt Rose, who was--she died when she was about 100 [years old].
Speaker 1: Wa--wa--what was sig--significant about Aunt Rose?
Speaker 2: Aunt Rose was just--she was a character.  She was feisty.  She lived in New York [New York City, New York], and we used to travel to Atlantic City [New Jersey] and then go to New York City to live--stay with her in Harlem.  And the last time--I remember when I was a child.  The last time I went as a child, I had--I had surgery 'cause I stepped on a needle, and I didn't say anything right way, so I almost missed the trip.  'Cause I was--I had just got out the hospital and I was on crutches, so we stayed with her.  And then when I moved to New York, she was still living there, and she would give my cousin and I advice about navigating.  And she said, "Don't ask anybody for directions, not even the police.  You know how to read.  Get a map and read it."  And you know, she just would--she had her little sherry all the time.  And we were always trying to guess her age, and she would just always say, "I'm older than my teeth but younger than my gums."  And she was on a--she was on 'To Tell the Truth' with Althea Hunter, the jazz singer, years ago.  And she almost had him stumped, but she said--she ended up tellin' her.  She said, "Althea, you talk too much."  'Cause she said that she told--she told too many details, and I think somebody figured out that she was really the singer.  But I remember--I thought--we were always trying to figure out her age, and I went to the doctor with her once.  And she told the doctor she was in her eighties, and I think she said she was eighty-four or something like that.  So I called all my cousins and my sister.  I said, Aunt Rose is eighty-four.  And--but I didn't realize she was lying, and I didn't discover that until her funeral.  'Cause I was--you know, I was at wake.  I was a little said.  I was walking up to the casket, and I saw this plaque on there that, when I looked at the math, it was like a hundred-year span.  So I was talking to my aunt, and I said I didn't know Aunt Rose was 100, you know.  And she said--and so she was telling me they had given her a little party and stuff.  Cause this was in Akron [Ohio] and I was in New York at the time.  And I said--so I was like, but she told me she was eighty-four, you know, and so the year--the math didn't add up, so she said she was probably lying about her age.  So she did that to make sure she got the medical attention so that, you know, doctors and nurses wouldn't blow her off basically.  So that's why she cut--shaved some years--time off her, her age, but we were running around, window shopping, and getting on and off of buses and stuff like that in Manhattan.  I remember we were in Midtown doing that when--you know, and I was thinking that I was doing this with a woman in her eighties, but it was actually a woman in her late nineties when she was doing, doing this.  And she was--she was just always very vibrant, and she liked to joke around, and she was funny.  She--you know.  She was just--she was very interesting.  I really loved her a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 54751
Speaker 1: Now the coffee table book about African art, did you consult--now are you an expert on African art, or do, do you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well it was on design--when I worked for the home section, we were dealing with design to--you know, with interior design and architectural and things like that.  So we had a--and we had a section called currents, and I would write that sometime.  So it's part of a--we, we had a lot of people in it, but I would also look for information about different designers too and different furniture designers, architects like Paul--Paul Williams--Paul Revere Williams--think that's his name.  I know, I'm blanking right there.  They're making a documentary about him right now.  So, just learning the, the history about Madame C. J. Walker's place.  We featured that in the 'New York Times' when I was there.  So two interior designers were working on this book, but because they needed a writer to pull--united their two voices, so someone recommended me 'cause they knew I worked in the home section.  I had been dealing with design then.  So it was fun working with them on there too, 'cause it was bringing in history, art history, the history of furniture, some anthropology, furniture design, a lot of different things together, textiles in one place.  So it was an interesting project to work on.
Story_ID: 54752
Speaker 1: Okay, now the, the book 'Teaching Converged Media through News Coverage of the 2--2--2008 Presidential Election.'  Now this is--I think it's the first election that was won where--
Speaker 2: Obama [President Barack Obama].
Speaker 1: --where the media was used in the campaign, social media.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: This--so this was a--this was a journal article that we did.  We had one of the largest news teams covering the election, with students.  'Cause we had almost the entire department.  We--there were students who were excused from their classes for the 2008 election, and, and then again for the inauguration.  And we had them at precincts all over the region also--all over Washington, D.C., all over northern Virginia, all over Maryland, the out--the surrounding counties of, of Maryland, and so they were there.  We had 'em in shifts all day long, from the--from when the polls opened til the time that they closed.  So they were doing that, and they were, you know, monitoring like the traffic and how often people are voting, any problems, special stories, taking pictures, shooting video, all of that.  So they, they did a really wonderful job with that, so we kind of documented some of that in that article--
Speaker 1: Now (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --then we did it again for the inauguration.
Speaker 1: Was this like a priority for the School of Communications at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] to make sure that we document the history of this first inauguration of (unclear)--
Speaker 2: It was--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --it was a priority.  I mean, it was--the, the university was very engaged, I mean political science obviously.  It was a--it was a major story, and one of the things that we--we encourage our students to get off campus.  And being here right here in Washington, it was--you know, we couldn't pass up the opportunity to have them, you know, cover history, and they were excited about doing it.  And then we had a lot of professionals, and some of our adjuncts had come in too, so we commandeered all of the computer labs on this floor, and we had, you know, just a big operation all day long.  And, and so the student who wrote the lead story declaring him the winner, she was actually--she had it online actually ahead of some major news organizations too.  But they, they were everywhere.  They were at, like I said, all over the precincts, at the White House, on U Street.  And, and also, the ones who went home to vote, they were sending back stories and pictures from there.  So we had one, when he gave his victory speech--his acceptance speech, we had a student there who sent a picture of--through her cell phone, and we put it online immediately.  And she was sending information from there.  We had students who were where Biden [Vice President Joe Biden] went to vote in, in Delaware, so they were all over the country and as `well as a big team here.  So it was a lot of work, but it was a lot of fun, and the students got a lot out of it.  Then we did it again for when he ran for re-election.
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And we've done it for a lot of--a lot of different elections, not just those, for local elections as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, students have credentials and stuff when they go out?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had credentials and, and they've, they've covered things.  They've gone out of the country.  They've gone to Haiti.  They've gone to--they've done, you know, the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina.  So wherever it's a story--anniversary of the sit-in movements in Greensboro, North Carolina.  Some of them go abroad and do different things, so wherever there's a--you know, and the hurricanes that were on the East Coast, they were doing--some of them went up to New York and New Jersey to do stories there.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is an art--article too I guess, 'Supplementing the news, an Industry Based De--Description of Magazine Supplements.'
Speaker 2: Yes, that's a journal article.  I was always--when I started doing 'BET [Black Entertainment Television] Weekend,' people kept telling me about 'Tuesday,' which was basically doing what we were doing except much earlier.  And so I was always fascinated by that history, so I was looking--and then as a result of 'BET Weekend,' a number of other supplements started.  People started local ones as well as national ones, so I was looking--I was interested in looking at the history of that.  So that's what that article was.
Speaker 1: And what, what are the other memorable ones other than 'Tuesday.'
Speaker 2: There was one called 'Suburban Styles' that was--I think Annette was doing as a partnership.  And there was--I'm trying to remember the names of all of them.  Oh, the 'Atlanta Daily World' started one of the first ones that they were doing--they were circulating.  They owned a number of--they owned a number of other smaller papers, and they were in partnership with a num--they had a distribution arrangement with a number of papers in the South where they were printing their papers for them and distributing them.  So they had kind of a sepia tone insert that they were putting in some of the newspapers there.  So that was kind of the first one that I discovered, and--so that's, that's one that stood out too.
Story_ID: 54753
Speaker 1: Now, now you covered health reform in the Supreme Court--I mean, a discussion--deliberations in March of 2012, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Oh, that was--I, I really wanted to do that.   That was exciting to go to the Supreme Court, and I hadn't covered anything in Supreme Court at that point.  But the Affordable Care Act [2010], particularly since I, I cover health, I thought was very important.  I had been attending some webinars that related to that and just different things.  To learn more information, I'd gone to some White House briefings about the Affordable Care Act before and during and you know, since that time.  So I got credentials to go to the Supreme Court, so I was there all three days to cover the arguments for that.  And, and it was interesting because I had a different take than some people had 'cause I thought it could go either way.  Some people kind of felt that it was gonna die, but I, I thought it was--you know, I thought it was gonna be close, but I didn't think it was conclusive one way or the other so.  And then when, when they did announce when they--when they made a decision a couple of months later, some news organizations did have it wrong initially, because they didn't finish reading everything, and they said that it had failed.  But they were talking about the caveats before they got to saying what their decision was.
Speaker 1: Right, I remember that.
Speaker 2: So they had--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --so they had to correct themselves so--which was a teachable moment for our students too.
Speaker 1: Right, right, your right, 'cause I, I think Fox [Fox News Channel] got it wrong on the air.
Speaker 2: And CNN [Cable News Network] had it wrong on the air, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now what did you think about the--what did you think about the Affordable cake--Care Act?  It's still a--you know.
Speaker 2: I've, I've done a lot of writing about the uninsured and long-term care and things like that, and I just--I've attended a conference looking at the Affordable Care Act, even as it relates to inmates and you know, recently recard--I'm stopping.
Speaker 1: Keep, keep going.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  Looking at the Affordable Care Act as it relates to the incarcerated and the newly incarcerated, I think that, you know, it's not a perfect bill, but I think for--there's so many people uninsured that it will have some benefits for a lot of people.  And then also a lot of students that I've come in contact with here and at other campuses are happy to have the provision that they were able to stay on their parents insurance until they were twenty-six [years old].  So--and our people forget that President Clinton [President William Jefferson Clinton] was trying to push through health reform years ago too.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So it's not the first time that this has come up.
Story_ID: 54754
Speaker 1: What are some of the significant associations that you're a part of?  I know you received awards from the National Association of Black Journalists and (unclear)--you're a member of a lot of organizations, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I would--probably the most significant one for me is the National Association of Black Journalists.  The National Association of Black Journalists has had a lot of people who were very supportive.  I think we, we have a network of people who were supportive of each other.  I was also president of the New York chapter, which is one of the largest chapters--three times actually.  And we won chapter of the year during the last term and kind of brought it back from death.  But I grew up in the organization, and as I said, it's provided a lot of opportunities, a lot of feedback, and it's kind of a reunion whenever I go to the conferences.  And we keep up with each other all the time through other venues, as friends, as--things like that.  I'm also involved in some other journalism organizations--most of the organizations I guess were professional that I'm involved with--Association of Health Care Journalists, American Society of Magazine Editors, and AEJMC, Association for Education and Mass Communications in Journalism, which is affiliate with the accrediting arm for our program.  So--and one of the reasons I'm also involved in them is to bring that information back to the classroom.  So one of my colleagues, Paula Matabane, likes to say that we teach what we do, and we do what we teach.  So I try to make sure that I keep my hand in journalism and social media and the digital changes so that I can help, you know, bring fresh new information to the students to help challenge them, and help them grow, and help prepare them for their dreams.
Story_ID: 54755
Speaker 1: Okay, I know you said that earlier that you're a realistic optimist basically.  How has that influenced your teaching and your journalistic philosophy?
Speaker 2: I think it infl--well, I think, in terms of the realistic part, is to not be a Pollyanna about different things and to kind of, you know, be prepared for the good, the bad, and the ugly in, in any given situation.  In, in terms of optimism, I think, you know, that's just one of the things that I've had in my life, and I kind of see the cup as half full rather than half empty.  And I, I kind of see, like, everything kind of like a race where the person who's in third place, if they just really believe that they can win, that they'll get that extra push to push them over the finish line, but if you think that you, you--if you think you can't make it, you won't make it.  So that's kind of the way I operate my life, and that's kind of what I try to convey to my son and my grandson when able he's--whenever he's able to understand that, my nephews, and to my students as well too.  And I think particularly it's important now because the media's changing so much, and it's--you know, I tell them that I think this is an exciting time to be a journalist and that this is a revolution; it's just as important as when radio made its debut or TV made its debut; that everything is changing with the technology; and to kind of, you know, embrace it, learn as much as they can, remain flexible.  You know, also think about where they really wanna be, experiment with different things, because that's part of what college is, is learning about yourself, learning about different options, and learning what you wanna do and what you don't wanna do.  So I think that a lot of people are looking for things like--you know, looking for people like them, and a lot of the people who have made a lot of advances are in their twenties, you know, in terms of creating new things and new ways of doing things.  So I tell them there's no reason that they can't be one of them.
Speaker 1: Now you're--you teach on, on--what you teach is on the cuttin' edge of what's going on in the media business.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, are you--are, are you the only one here at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] teaching that stuff?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, we have a lot of--every--I think everybody is trying to bring--you know, embrace the technology in, in a balanced way in their own way in, in--whether they're in film, or whether they're in public relations, or whether they're in, you know, broadcast journalism, or magazines, or Internet.  So we're all incorporating social media or looking at how the technology is affecting our various disciplines in trying to keep up with it.  I think we have--I mean, one of the things I love about being at Howard is we have some many talented people here inside the School of Communications and also on the rest of the campus as well.  And we have some very talented students too.  Our students go on to do great things, and we have some wonderful alumni.  So I always position myself as learning with my students, that we're gonna learn some things together, so that I'll--you know, I'll learn some things from them as, as well as them learning from me.
Story_ID: 54756
Speaker 1: So when you look back on everything you've done to this point, now is there is anything major that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, because I think one of the--one of the things is that if you change one thing, it kind of shifts the outcome.  So when I got transferred to Washington [D.C.], I wasn't really prepared to leave New York [New York City] at the time.  I really didn't wanna leave New York.  I found alternate office space, and--but if I didn't--if I didn't do that, then I wouldn't be here at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] probably.  So, you know, everything--if I didn't go to Atlanta [Georgia]--if I didn't go to Toledo [Ohio], which when I first heard about in college I didn't have any intention of going to Toledo.  I was heading to New York.  If I didn't go to Toledo, I wouldn't have ended up in New York, because the person who recommended me was someone I worked with there.  So all the pieces kind of, you know, connect in a way.  So I don't think I would change--I might have done some foreign reporting or done a little more--I might have been a reporter longer, so I might have done that 'cause--but I'm--again, I'm making up for it now 'cause I do more writing now than I did in the past, but all the pieces fit.  The copy editing helped me as a magazine editor, as an editor-in-chief, 'cause I had to be the last eye on thing and sign off on, on pages so, you know, I'd catch something.  Being a--you know, doing layout helped me work with designers.  Being--having my family background and being from the Midwest gave me more of a national/international perspective for working for national publications, whether it was the 'New York Times' or magazines.  So all of those things, you know, shape who I am, you know, and, and what I do and what I bring to the table, whether it's in academia or whether it's in journalism.
Speaker 1: Okay, and on that note, like, when you look back at everything you've done again, what today would you consider to be your pra--pra--professional legacy?
Speaker 2: My professional legacy--I think one of the most fulfilling things is teaching.  And I think my legacy will probably be a combination of the teaching and you know, changes that I've brought here and, and maybe inspiring students as well as the contributions I've made, you know, with magazines and newspapers that I've worked at, in terms of helping to take them to the next level, or trying new things, or just being about excellence and being about having, you know, fair and ba--balance and solid journalism.
Story_ID: 54757
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us a little bit about your family.
Speaker 2: My personal family now?  I have a son [Brandon Lamb] who's twenty-five, and I have a grandson who's 15 months old now, Santana Elijah Lamb.  So he's big and active and getting tall, so he's a joy--both of them are joys.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now is there anything that we haven't talked about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Not that I could think of--see, you, you--you're very thorough (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, well, thank you.  The last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as someone who cared about people and tried to make a difference and tried to treat people the way she wanted to be treated.
