Story_ID: 639137
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Hi, my name is James C. Rosser Jr. [HistoryMaker Dr. James Rosser, Jr.].  I'm a M.D. by trade.  My last name is R-O-S, as in Sam, S, as in Sam, E-R.  Frequently people call me Butch.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's your, that's your name from childhood, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a name from childhood.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is 9/14/54 [September 14, 1954], and I was born in Rome, Rome, Mississippi (laughter).  And so, 1954 to Marjorie [Marjorie Mitchell Rosser] and James C. Rosser Sr. [James Rosser, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Now, is Rome, I know, I know, pe- people in Carthage, Mississippi (laughter)?
Speaker 2: That, that's a lot more north.
Speaker 1: Is it, is it, okay (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Rome is on the blues trail going from Memphis [Tennessee] to New Orleans [Louisiana].  You just go down, you know, 61 [Georgia State Route 61], 49 [Georgia State Route 49] and you know, so Rome is at the, almost the extreme north of Sunflower County, Mississippi, which is the largest county in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Right and so many blues musicians go (unclear), right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: So, and sir what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Well, my occupation is difficult sometimes because I do so many things.  But, if you look at the alphabets behind my name, I'm a surgeon and a doctor, an M.D.  But, you know, an author and actor and a playwright and several other things.  Inventor, but if you look at the alphabets behind my name, I'm a, I'm a M.D. and a surgeon.
Speaker 1: Okay and, and your title here at the hospital?
Speaker 2: My title here at the hospital is that I am the consultant to the Nicholson Center for Surgical Advancement here, the research arm of Celebration Health hospital [Florida Hospital Celebration Health].  And, I'm one of the staff general surgeons here.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is 6/03/13 [sic. June 4, 2013].
Speaker 1: All right.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Right now, we're in my office which is part of my global command center in a month, here in my office at Celebration hospital in Orlando, Florida.
Story_ID: 639138
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we ask as sort of warm up.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: A favorite food is probably all food, but if you put a gun to my head one of the favorite, my favorite meals is spaghetti and catfish.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, those two together (laughter), are my favorite food.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue is my favorite color, absolute blue is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: The most favorite time of the year is the springtime when you're coming out of winter and the birds come back.  So, I, I think I like spring most of all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Oh! Vacation destination?  Vacation destination, would be anywhere by water and I'd have to qualify Hawaii and Maui.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have several now, I gotta pick, pick through them. I guess my favorite phrase or saying would be you don't know what you don't know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You don't know that kee- that keeps me humble, always seeking answers, 'cause you don't know what you don't know.
Story_ID: 639139
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [James Rosser, Sr.] side.  But separately and then we'll try to put 'em together.  So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Marjorie M-A-R-J-O-R-I-E, Ann, Mitchell M-I-T-C-H-E-L-L, Rosser, her maiden name's Mitchell [Marjorie Mitchell Rosser].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my dad's name--you want to start with my mom's side of the family first?
Speaker 1: Yeah, just, just first yeah.  And what's your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, my god, I'm, I'm, I'm struggling, Oh man I have to get that, to, to you (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Kind of of give us--
Speaker 2: 'Cause she's been gone now for a while, but it, it was, oh. It's in August, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm blocking.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) was it in the 1920s?
Speaker 2: No, yeah, my mom was born in 1929.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My dad 1925.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was your mother born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Rome, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family in terms of their ancestors?  How far back can you trace them and, and are there any stories about what they were doing?
Speaker 2: Well, my, my mother's side of the family were, they grew up in the Mississippi Delta.  They were not land owners, they were actually they lived on a plantation, okay.  First in, in, in Rome, there was a large plantation there in Rome.
Speaker 1: Do you know the name of it?
Speaker 2: I'm blocking on the name of that plantation, but subsequently my grandfather moved to Delta Pine Land plantation, one of the largest ones in the South that specializing growing rice, in, in, Scott, Mississippi.  So, he made a transition from Rome to Scott, Mississippi, Delta pine, pine land and company [Delta and Pine Land Company].  Now, my grandfather Ludie Mitchell, L-U-D-I-E, Mitchell [Ludie Mitchell], he had a fifth grade education, but he became a butcher.  So, he had a skilled trade.  So, he didn't actually do farm work per se, he actually had, that was considered a skill, so, he actually worked in the, the company store.  And this is a classic company store on the plantation where everybody came to get their food and meats and everything.  My grandmother, Pearl Mitchell, she finished fifth grade but was an avid reader.  And she was a house- a housewife. Now that was very rare coming up in that time.  I mean if you look at the plantation families then coming up through the Depression [Great Depression], like they came up through that time, they had a lot of children and you had to have what?  A lot of children to actually work on the farm.  Frequently you would have thirteen pregnancies, nine kids, that's a typical family, and they all worked on the farm.  But, my grandparents on my mother's side, because of my grandmother having to have a hysterectomy, which was rare at that time for a black person to even get surgery, she only had two kids.  So, there was, there was two children.  Now let me tell you how that impacted my family.  It impacted my family because there was not nine mouths to feed, there was two mouths to feed, and that's a big difference.  In addition, my grandfather was skilled labor.  And so, he was able to have amenities and opportunities that other people didn't.  My grandmother never worked outside the home, which is rare.  She never worked in the fields.  She never worked outside of the home.  And I can tell you right now that fact was a, a strong fact that weighed on me throughout my life.  Where I, I grew up around my grandparents, where my grandmother took care of the house, my granddaddy came home for lunch every day.  And there was a consistency in their life that was absolutely refreshing.  And I, and, and I'm blessed to have that in my life today.  The, now, speaking about, now I stop there as far as having intimate knowledge of, of, you know, their parents, their grandparents.  Because, stories weren't passed down.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We didn't, we didn't talk much. I never saw them--
Speaker 1: But your grand- your, your grandparents' parents were more than likely sharecroppers on (unclear)?
Speaker 2: They were sharecrop- croppers, they were, they were not skilled labor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My great-grandmother on my mo- mo- on, on my maternal side, they worked in the kitchens of the landowners, you know, and that sort of thing.  I think that impacted my grandfather 'cause he didn't want his wife to actually have to do that (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 639140
Speaker 1: Did he learn how to become a butcher because of a relative that was in the kitchen of a (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, as you know on plantations, on farms every year, you had to kill your own meat.  Really during the Depression [Great Depression], my [maternal] grandfather and grandmother would say, "Oh, we ate good," because they grew everything.  So, he became, everybody would bring him their meat to dress, that was, that was, that's what they call it, he, he, you know.  Let Big Mitch, you know, dress your meat.  So, if you were gonna do a killing of animals for food, they would have Big Mitch do it.  Well, then he became known for that.  And just like me as a surgeon, you know, you have a signature of your work, and he had a very good signature, and, and all of a sudden he was brought into the, the, the store to be able to do that all the time.  Now, let me tell you what happened when he went to Delta Pine Land Company [Delta and Pine Land Company, Scott, Mississippi].  They had a meat processing factory.  So, then all of a sudden, now he's into the industrialized, you know, dressing of meats.  And, and he was really good at this.  And I'll never forget the story that everybody talked about my father--could we hold one moment while I just wipe my brow? About my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay (unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay, ready to go?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  One, there's one story about my grandfather that stands out about he and his, his meat processing prowess.  They said that, you know, he had to slaughter the animals and they have a process to do this with, with, with a, a small caliber weapon.  And you have to put the animal down with a, with a well placed shot, you know.  And well, he couldn't put this animal down, so the story is my grandfather, who was built like fire plug with big arms like Popeye, he punched the animal into unconsciousness and took the animal that way.  And that is a story that I had to hear from everybody in that community.  And who's well respected in the community, churchgoing people.  And my grandmother, let me tell you.  She was great because she taught me how to gre- dream, excuse me.  My grandmother was great because she taught me how to dream.  And she taught me the power of reading.  Now, both of these people were the most educated formally uneducated people I know, 'cause they could read.  My grandmother could read better than my, my grandfather, because my grandfather would sometimes get his words, you know, twisted.  Famous story with my grandfather, he's in church and he was reading from the scripture and he said, "And, and, and from the crowd they said rabbit," for rabbi (laughter). Everybody told that story to the day he died.  Of him mispronouncing, you know, rabbi and saying rabbit.  So, but my grandmother taught me how to read, she taught me how to love sports with baseball.  My grandmother was the one that really, you know, really nurtured my interest in sports.  Because we'd listen to the St. Louis Cardinals games all the time on radio.  Just like it was like a television, we'd look at the radio just like it was a television.  So, I, I was it was, it was really interesting growing up with two sets of parents, on my mother's side with Ludie Mitchell and Pearl Mitchell.  Now, interesting enough, because they didn't have as many kids, my uncle and my mom [Marjorie Mitchell Rosser], 'cause it was my mother and Uncle Dick, who is Ludie Mitchell II [Ludie Mitchell], they, they came up different than other kids.  They weren't scri- no they had plenty to eat, plenty clothing.  My grandfather could get credit from the store okay.  So, he made a little more.  We had a car, they, they had a car.  That was very rare, for them to have a car.  And so, with my grandmother being an avid reader, she always stressed education.  So, both my mom, mother and my uncle they had to actually go away for high school, to Drew, Mississippi.  Drew is just south of, of a, of Rome [Mississippi].  So, they went away to get their high school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How, how do you spell I'm, I'm sorry how do you spell Drew (unclear)?
Speaker 2: D, D-R-E-W, Drew, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 639141
Speaker 1: So, they actually went away to school. Do you realize how forward thinking that was at that time?  You know, where blacks, they did not want you to read, after elementary school, you did not go to get anything higher.  And they had to go to another town [Drew, Mississippi].  So, that's the thing that they did.  And my [maternal] grandparents [Pearl Mitchell and Ludie Mitchell] supported that.  The support of my grandparents continued with my mother [Marjorie Mitchell Rosser] and my uncle, you know, even beyond that.  My mother went to Jackson State University [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] and she went down there on a scholarship, and then she had to, she made extra money playing in the juke joints.  She is an unbelievable scho- pianist, that loved playing the piano.  And that's one of the shining memories of her, sitting down and just playing the piano.  She then got her two year degree, came back to Rome, Mississippi, to actually teach in the, in the town she grew up in, and my uncle, Ludie Mitchell, Jr. [Ludie Mitchell] he subsequently became a Pullman and lived in Chicago [Illinois].  A Pullman on the, on the railroad, and got a chance of course to travel and that sort of thing.  So, my grandparents supported their children.  And both of them were able to, to have a better, a better life.  So, that's really I, I guess, when you, when I think of my grandparents the, one of the most defining things in my life was that when my mother had come back from getting her two year degree, she could teach.  But, then they changed that you had to have a four year degree to teach.  So, then she had to go to Mississippi Valley State [Mississippi Valley State University], which was Mississippi Vocational College, in Itta Bena [Mississippi], at the time.  Well, that posed the issue because my mother didn't have child care with my brother and I.  I'm the oldest, my brother Chuck [Charles Rosser] was right behind me.  So, we had to stay in Scott, Mississippi with my grandparents.  They had moved from, moved from Rome [Mississippi] to Scott to Delta Pine Land [Delta and Pine Land Company].
Story_ID: 639142
Speaker 1: So, I grew up with my grandparents, you know.  And my nickname Butch [HistoryMaker Dr. James Rosser, Jr.] came from me being with my [maternal] grandparents [Pearl Mitchell and Ludie Mitchell], and my grandda- father, would have his tools and there's these, these three old gentlemen with nothing else to do, retired, always would be sitting up there at the store.  And bring the, bring grandfather's tools, three years of age and I'm pulling these tools, I was a big kid.  So, one day they said, "Well here comes the butcher and the little butch."  Well, that name stuck.  So, my mother [Marjorie Mitchell Rosser] came to pick me up after, you know, on, on Fridays after she got out of school.  She came to pick me up so, she started hollering, "James come here. Mommy's here James," and I wouldn't come.  So, my grandmother whispered to her, "Why don't you call him Butch?"  And I heard my grandmother say Butch, and I said, "Yes," and I answered to Butch and that's how I got the nickname Butch.  And it stuck throughout all these years.  And, you know, with a southerner if you keep, it's an endearing thing when you keep your nickname until adulthood.  It's unlike northerners where they run away from their nickname once they get past twelve or thirteen, you know.  You hear senators called Skeeter White and this sort of thing.  It's an endearing thing, when people feel comfortable enough to you, and feel close enough to you, where they prefer to call you by your nickname.  So, that's how the Butch thing came, that was one of the big turning points of my life.  So, and I became Butch and, and I, I'm still Butch today.
Story_ID: 639143
Speaker 1: Any stories from your mother's growing up time that kind of stand out or?
Speaker 2: Stories are, it, it was, the big thing is when she had to go and do, you know she would play the piano in these juke joints and stuff like that.  And she was always brought up in church and this sort of thing.  But, she was trying to get through school.  I always found that real interesting, how she navigated those borders and this sort of thing.
Speaker 1: That seems like that'd be a, you know, so she's a young college student, she's in a juke joint playing the piano?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and she's a great pianist and she could sing too.  So, that those stories come up all the time.  The other stories my mother [Marjorie Mitchell Rosser] was always very mischievous, mischievous, she would get in all kind of trouble.  She was always stirring up mess.  And I remember all the, the stories of the practical jokes that she used to play, and the trouble that she would get into.  So, she, she, she was a hellion then, and she was hellion 'til the day she died.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the practical jokes?
Speaker 2: Yes, she would hit my brother and--my, my uncle rather, her brother and then you know run up and start crying as if he had done something to her.  That was a reoccurring thing, reoccurring thing.  And so, some of the, a lot of the practical jokes around which she would do, to basically plant the, the blame on my uncle those are the big things that, that, that, that stand out to me.  And they all had a variation of the same theme.
Speaker 1: Okay, poor Uncle Ludie [Ludie Mitchell] (laugher).
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Story_ID: 639144
Speaker 1: Well, let's go to your father's side.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what, what can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: It's James C. Rosser Sr. [James Rosser, Sr.].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: That's the interesting side, you know, that's the interesting side.  Because they were not, it's, it's a interesting contrast between my mom [Marjorie Mitchell Rosser] and my dad.  My mom was born on the forty acres and a mule sharecropping situation.  My dad they had their own land.  My dad's family, Rosser is a very rare name for black people.  But, it goes to back to three German brothers who came over in 17th cen- century.  I think the name re- it, it meant keeper of horses.  And we found that out from some of the other white Rossers, you know, who actually used my grandmother, who lived to be a hundred four and stayed by herself to the day she died, as a reference point, you know, for the family book, the Rosser family book.  My, my dad's, my dad's dad, I, you know, I never saw him.  He died, he was supposedly in World War I [WWI], was gassed in World War I, had respiratory illnesses--
Speaker 1: So, that's when they were using mustard gas?
Speaker 2: Mustard gas, right.
Speaker 1: So, so your grandfather what, what was his name?
Speaker 2: I, I, I can't even remember my granddaddy's name 'cause he was not brought up that much, except he died, you know.  And he died very early and my grandmother never remarried.  And--
Speaker 1: What, what was her name?
Speaker 2: Hattie, Hattie Rosser.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, she was she came from a sharecropper's background where my father's father he came from a, "Once we got liberated we're gonna own our own land."  And we still own land right now, the family does, out near Jackson, Tennessee.  My g- my dad came from Tennessee.  And my grandfather died I think in the 1944, while my dad was fighting in the Pacific.  And from a respiratory illness.
Speaker 1: So--?
Speaker 2: And it may have even been T.B.
Speaker 1: Okay, so all right so, he, your grandfather suffered from being gassed?  And (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yes, but then that probably set up and opened him up for tuberculosis, also.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, he had respiratory illnesses ever since he came back from the war, and so, he died very early, so.  I, I have no remembrance of him.  And, and they didn't talk about him a lot, at all.
Speaker 1: So, your, your father was born in, in 1925, you said?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: And was he born in, on the family land near Jackson?
Speaker 2: Yeah, near Jackson, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, the courthouse burnt down with my daddy's birth records and they had no official birth record.  My dad's birthday is October 31st, but, I think he made that up (laughter).  Because the records were burnt down.  They had to get, the records were burnt up. They had to actually guess.  I mean the record keeping back then was not that good.  And in, fact, when my dad retired, there was some issue with getting documentation, of his birth certification and that sort of thing, for his benefits.  So, that was very interesting.  But, they were interesting because they had, they owned their own land, they were proud of it.  And the other family members owned their own land and they were proud of it.  A tradition of, of clashing with the whites, who wanted to take the land, or disrespect their ownership of the land.  And so, my dad, he would always say, "See I ain't, I'm not like you plantation niggas" (laughter).  It's interesting that he, he felt the lack of the desire of ownership, by people who were on plantations still.  He, he kind of, he kind of looked at them as somehow not taking advantage of, of opportunity, or not having the, the drive for opportunity.  And he would bring that up at family arguments and this sort of thing.  You know, have 'em all, every time everybody gets together.  Somebody's gonna say something out of place and somebody's gonna be drinking.  And somebody's gonna be, you know, it was a frequent argument of you plantation niggas on one hand with the Mitchells, and the Rossers who actually owned land on the other hand.  So, that was a interesting dynamic that, that, that I had to live with.
Story_ID: 639145
Speaker 1: There's a theory that Mississippi was the toughest place to be raised for black folks in this country.  I mean, or, to live.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, it's tough because the oppression was everywhere and you being in your place was everywhere.  And see, my, my [maternal] grandparents [Pearl Mitchell and Ludie Mitchell] didn't, didn't vote.  But, but my dad [James Rosser, Sr.] and my mom [Marjorie Mitchell Rosser] they were, I'll never forget going to the courthouse in, in '64 [1964], with shotguns, with white people lacing the courthouse when they repealed that you had to go through these tests and everything, the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965], they were one of the first people to go there and vote.  And then subsequently my dad and mom served on the election board.  But, they had to go vote under the threat of their lives.  I don't think people understand that now.  You talk to a youngster now and they can't even fathom that.  But here I am, a little kid, my parents gave me front row seats, we, we faced that danger as a family.  And, my, my dad and my mom, they were absolute leaders during the Civil Rights Movement.  But, a leader of a different kind.  The black people called them Uncle Toms, the white people called them agitators, so they were right in the middle.  And like my dad said, that's about where we need to be.  Where black people didn't, didn't necessarily agree with everything they did.  White people didn't necessarily agree with everything they did, now I'll giv- they did.  Now, I'll give you an example, this is a burning memory.  In Moorhead, Mississippi, where I grew up is in the Delta in Mississippi [Mississippi Delta], the Civil Rights Movement was in full swing, it was probably '64 [1964] or '65 [1965].  Freedom Riders were big.  And, they boycotted the town, the, the business district of Moorhead, because we had to go into a drugstore, we couldn't have a malt, a milkshake, we had to get it in the back, this sort of thing.  So, they locked down the town, boycotted the whole town.  Well, one of the people in one of the stores they boycotted was a Mr. Harry Diamond, Diamond's Department Store.  At the time Mr. Diamond was just, you know, as far as I'm concerned, white.  But, he was really Jewish, all right.  So, they boycotted Mr. Diamond's store, well my dad took offense to that.  Because, he just said, "Two wrongs don't make a right."  Harry Diamond really all his life had, you know, embraced black people.  So, I'll never forget at the height of this boycott, where people are down there with pitchforks and everything like that, signs, my daddy came home on a Saturday.  My dad never gets home on a Saturday, because he, my dad was a school principal.  But, that was his part-time job.  He was, he was, doing crops, selling produce, he was an entrepreneur really.  I think that's where I get that from, being an entrepreneur.  And he said, "You know what? We're going in town." That was rare.  And he did something else rare, he gave us a dollar apiece.  My dad doesn't give money for you to go into town like that, that's just, he's an ex-Marine [U.S. Marine Corps] and that was just frivolous.  But, on this occasion he said, "I'm giving you a dollar and we're gonna go downtown and we're gonna buy something we don't even need from Harry Diamond."  I'll never forget us, get, forget what we did, forget what we did.  We all got in our Sunday best.  My dad went in and I saw his Marine uniform and his .45, he put the holster on.  And we get in the car we all go down.  I'll never forget how the people parted as my dad's car came up.  And the people, there was a big crowd of people blocking all the, the, the highway, the, the, the street.  And so, it parted and we came in and parked.  And then my dad got out and it was the first time I ever seen him open the door for my mama (laughter). He was that kind of guy.  And we got out and he, he started walking and people just naturally parted, not a word being said.  Then all of sudden he stopped right at the back of the car.  And I'm saying, "Why is my daddy stopping with these people crazy out here, right now. Let's keep moving." That's me saying as a little child.  And he stopped and turned around to address the crowd.  And he said, "I'm getting ready to go into Mr. Harry Diamond's department store, and I'm gonna buy something I don't even need.  And I'm gonna buy something I don't even need because, let me tell you, two wrongs don't make a right."  And he then pointed out, "The shoes on your baby's feet, where'd you get 'em from?"  "Mr. Diamond."  "Did you pay for it in cash or credit?"  "He gave me credit."  And he went around and pointed people out in the crowd and basically reviewed everything this man had done.  And he said, "Look, I want you to know two wrongs don't make a right.  And I'm gonna tell ya right now and I'm going over here and I'm gonna buy this and nobody's gonna stop me."  Everybody opened up, my dad walked in, we bought something, came back.  And then next day, every merchant was boycotted except Mr. Harry Diamond.
Story_ID: 639146
Speaker 1: Now your father [James Rosser, Sr.] went to, to school right, he, he had a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father graduated from Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi].  It was an interesting way how he got there. My, my dad actually in, in, had to go off to school.  He actually had to go to boarding school.  And this was a frequent theme at this time, you couldn't, there was no school necessarily for you to go to as a person of color, after elementary school.  So, at this particular point in time my, the World War II [WWII] was coming up.  So, my dad actually became one of the first black Marines [U.S. Marine Corps].  That--
Speaker 1: Now, now did he become a Marine before he, he gra- he finished Rust?
Speaker 2: No, no he finished high school first.
Speaker 1: Okay. Then--
Speaker 2: And he went to high school, in, Jackson, Tennessee (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, he, yeah he, actually also in Mississippi, 'cause I think from tenth to twelfth grade, he went to an away school in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Okay, was it a school associated with Rust?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yes eventually, yeah, it was kind of in that network.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That network.
Speaker 2: 'Cause Holly Springs [Mississippi] is right next to Tennessee (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Exactly, it's right there.
Speaker 2: --it's part, part of Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Exactly and it, and that's what happened.  So, he was, it, it was interrupted a little bit for the war.  And then he came back, finished up school--
Story_ID: 639147
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps], now, wait a minute we don't want to jump too far (unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the Marine thing is a big thing.
Speaker 1: Being a Marine in those days, this is World War II [WWII], we're talking about.
Speaker 2: Yes, and, and--
Speaker 1: And the Marines were just integrated in World War II (unclear)?
Speaker 2: And listen to me, they, they hadn't integrated then.  They weren't they, they, but the Marines had kept black people out.  They were very elitist.
Speaker 1: Well, was your father [James Rosser, Sr.] one of the Montford Point Marines [at Camp Gilbert H. Johnson, Jacksonville, North Carolina], or, or?
Speaker 2: No, he, he actually went to California.  He was out of California.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, he, I can't, Pemble- I'm, I'm, I'm blocking which one. There's two major, there's Lejeune [Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune, Jacksonville, North Carolina], and Pembleton [sic. Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, San Diego County, California] I believe.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, and I, I think he was Pembleton, yeah.
Speaker 1: But, okay so, just to be straight on the time table here, 'cause I know that, if you joined near World War II you were, you had to be at Montford Point. You, you had to be.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause there was no other place that you could be trained.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: So, was he World War--was he after World War II?
Speaker 2: No, World War II.
Speaker 1: World War II, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, okay I know they train 'em at Montford Point, but he may have been stationed someplace else.
Speaker 2: Right, yes afterwards maybe that was one of the stops in his training, maybe.
Speaker 1: Did he have any stories about his Marine training?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was a, he was, he was in an all-black regiment of course.  And he remembered how hard it was but it also taught him about determination and achieving.  So, basic training was a really big opener.  And it wasn't a lot of black Marines.  If you go up to the Buffalo Soldier museum, in fact, in Houston [Buffalo Soldiers National Museum, Houston, Texas], I was there at Buffalo Soldier, they, they want my dad's picture and his other things to be put in the museum, because, there were so few of them.  And subsequently after he got through all that, didn't wash out, you know, and he went to the South Pacific, was actually wounded in the South Pacific, in the leg.  And came back and had osteomyelitis in the bone and had to convalesce for a long, long time.  So, he was in the first group of those folk who saw combat early.  Most po- people of color in the Marines, you know, served in the, service side of things or resupply type of things.  And, but, he was actually hurt in a fire fight, you know, so.  He, he looks upon that with pride. In fact my wife [Dana Rosser] has a audio interview of my dad going over all of his Marine days.
Story_ID: 639148
Speaker 1: Do you know exactly where his served in the South Pacific?
Speaker 2: He was, which campaign?
Speaker 1: Well, no what, well what island was it?  You know meaning there's so many places over there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I, I, I'm not sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan], Marshall Islands?
Speaker 2: No, he was not in Okinawa.
Speaker 1: Guam, you know.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, of which area.  'Cause you know, they were island hopping at that time.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, they were, and it's like you said there just so many different areas.  I, I, I can't recall now, but I know he injured.  Had to go to Hawaii then San Diego [California], then finally made it back home.  So, so he didn't talk much about the war, ever.  Like a lot people in that generation, they never talk much about it.  It's only lately and I'd have to refer back to the audio tape that we did of him, where he, he talked about it, and he didn't talk to me about it, he talked to my wife [Dana Rosser] about it.  So, that's very interesting.  But, let me tell ya, that was a defining moment for him, 'cause he came back finished up the little high school he had left, there in Mississippi, and then he went to college on a G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].  Now, my dad [James Rosser, Sr.] is a living example of what so many other Americans did, they came back and they embraced an opportunity with the G.I. Bill.  And that's why he went to college.  And I asked him, I said, "Dad it was, it would be so easy for you to do something else, you know, why, why did you want to further your education?"  The, the, the common thing between both he and my mom [Marjorie Mitchell Rosser], is, is they always, they believed that people of color that, that was the only way, to advance, with education.  You know, we had heard that so many years but it had not been really a something that, you know, everybody could call upon.  But, after World War II [WWII], the, the G.I. Bill with my father and a different mindset, of, of people of color after that war, it set them on a much more aggressive path to manifest the destiny of our forefathers, even though they were all white and slave own- owners, we still identified that this also meant us.  Now, that's what was nurtured in my family and that's what was nurtured within me.  And it never went away, that, that I belonged.  That I believe in this country and I believe it meant for, for us, and that impacted my life 'cause I never came up with hatred in my heart.  But it, but it, just the desire to compete and have the opportunity to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now your father majored in education I assume?
Speaker 2: Business administration.
Speaker 1: Oh, business administration.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, and my mother elementary education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your father ended up being the, the--?
Speaker 2: School principal.
Speaker 1: --school principal, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 639149
Speaker 1: He actually ended up being the school principal, my mother [Marjorie Mitchell Rosser] was a teacher.  My dad [James Rosser, Sr.] the only, after he got out of Rust [Rust College, Holly Springs, Mississippi], the only opening for a principalship was in Rome, Mississippi.  My mom had come back to Rome, Mississippi where she grew up to be a teacher.  So, my mother worked under my dad at this new school that they had built in Rome.  And that's how they met and I think they dated for about three years, and then subsequently got married.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So, is, is there a story about what how they were first attracted to each other or did they talk, talk about that?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, and, and I must admit he is a handsome, spiffy dressing guy that, that comes in and he's about six feet tall and gr- had, had a big, big smile.  It's kind of like that's where I get my smile from.  And a Chesh- I call it a Cheshire cat smile.  And he was a, was a educated guy.  He was one of the few people with a bachelor's degree, you know at that time.  You know, you didn't see those folk every day.  Most people had two years of, of college and that was thought to be, you know, great.
Speaker 2: So, your mother too I guess would be one of the few in her community that (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Well, yeah 'cause she was one of the first to go back.  Remember she came there with a two year degree [from Jackson State College], 'cause that's all you needed.  But, she went back, so many other people didn't go back.  But, she went back and they both all eventually got their advanced degrees.  My dad got his advanced degree, his master's [degree], from Jackson State University [Jackson, Mississippi].  And my mom got--was at Mississippi Valley [Mississippi Vocational College; Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi].
Story_ID: 639150
Speaker 1: This is a question I always like to ask.  Now, when you think about them, your parents' personalities, their dispositions, sense of humor, how they walk, talk, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, well my mother [Marjorie Mitchell Rosser] says I, I take after my dad [James Rosser, Sr.].  And she always talked about my brother Chuck [Charles Rosser] taking after her and the Mitchell side of the family.  I'm more of a Rosser side of the family.  I, and, and maybe that's true I, you know, my dad was a really, he was a hard ass. He really, to be honest with you, you know.  I'll never forget he just, I just hear- heard him say he loved me about three years ago, the first time in my entire life.  And he was that kind of hardnosed Marine [U.S. Marine Corps] guy that came up.  So, I think I probably, even though I didn't want to be like him, I wound up being like him.  You know, because he had about eight different jobs, you know, he could almost qualify as a Jamaican, with eight different jobs.  He did everything it was, sold World Book encyclopedias, he helped personally educate probably 90 percent of the black people in the Delta [Mississippi Delta], by making encyclopedias cost effective for them to buy.  'Cause we couldn't go to the library.  I remember that's probably why I, I, I how I got my big head start.  I, I read, number one, comic books, that's how I learned how to read (laughter), and, number two, I read the encyclopedia backwards and forwards.  So, you could look at that encyclopedia and see me making notes and reading and everything.  But, my dad did a lot of folk like that, you know, with him selling different things.  And he was known all over the Delta and beyond, for that.  My mom was just a, a forty-five year first grade teacher and that says it all.  She loved kids.  I used to get upset because I thought she paid more attention to the kids in school then she paid to us.  I mean I was jealous.  And then we had all these folk that basically were part of our family.  So, every year you get thirty new kids.  That's the kind of teacher she is, she was.  And so, the, the school that I went to, the elementary school [East Moorhead School], and the one that he started bears his name today.  You know, James C. Rosser Sr. elementary school [James C. Rosser Elementary School, Moorhead, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, was it named for him while he was a principal or, or after (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, it was right after, right afterwards, but it was like, it was tough, you know, going to school there.  I went to school there.  So, it was tough being his son and going to sch- to the same school, it really was.
Speaker 1: I guess so. When you walk in you're James C. Rosser's junior (unclear)?
Speaker 2: It's hard, it's hard, it's hard and then he's still alive, you got, you know, now you got to, you know, he having the school named after him and he's still alive, you know, that was a really unbelievable tribute to him.  But it also tells you what the community thought about him as an educator and a leader in that community.  So, so he spent his life being, among other things, a school principal.
Story_ID: 639151
Speaker 1: Can you name your brothers and sisters and where you fit in the?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm, I'm the oldest, James C. Rosser Jr. [HistoryMaker Dr. James Rosser, Jr.], and then Charles Albert Rosser [Charles Rosser], is my brother, a year and half, unfortunately he died tragically about three years ago in a traffic accident. My sister Hattie Pearl Rosser, named after both my grandmothers, Hattie [Hattie Rosser] and Pearl [Pearl Mitchell].  And then and we're, by the way, it's like eight years between the, the, the initial set and then these last two cabooses.  It's, it's a eight year separation, like my mom [Marjorie Mitchell Rosser] had one, had me, year and half later had Chuck.  Then there's a eight year gap and she had Hattie Pearl and then a year and half lady, later it was Ludie Eugene Rosser [Ludie Rosser].  And he's exactly ten years younger than me.  So, my little brother was born on the same birthday that I was born on, ten years apart.  And all of them went on to graduate college.  And my brother actually worked with me at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], the young brother, the baby brother.  When I was at Yale.  My, my, my younger brother that died in the car accident was a educator and football coach.  So, when he died and was killed was unbelievable, this was in Jackson, Mississippi.  Unbelievable turn out from the community and they named a street after him, in Jackson.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) well was he the coach at a, at a high, high school there?
Speaker 2: At one of the high school, yeah.  So, it's amazing, how many lives he wound up touching.  You'd never think he would have wound up being a teacher growing up and that sort of thing.  And he just wound up being a consummate educator in science and also a teacher, coaching football, girls track.  And, you know, it's, it's amazing how many lives he touched.  So, my, my sister is a musician and--
Speaker 1: And this is--
Speaker 2: Hattie Pearl Rosser.
Speaker 1: Hattie Pearl, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah and--
Speaker 1: So, she took that after your mother and?
Speaker 2: Yes, and she plays, her whole thing, her whole life is playing for churches around community and so she's the pianist for several churches.  My younger brother actually followed in my footsteps a little bit, where he went to the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi].  Subsequently, he went to medical school and decided he wanted, didn't want to do, dropped out of medical school.  And is a master's level researcher and wound up being a science teacher (laughter).  And he also worked with me at Yale, as one of our research, research personnel, there at Yale.
Speaker 1: Is he a microbiologist, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah he was in micro- in microbiology and a really several, I'm really happy about, there are several papers in my almost sixty papers that I've authored.  His name on three of them, so that's, that's the thing that I smile about.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right that's something, that's, so, he's a coauthor with you of papers, all right.  So, so when you grew up then the household consisted of you and your brother Charles and then later Hattie Pearl and--
Speaker 2: And Ludie came along, but for the most part it was--
Speaker 1: Is you and your brother?
Speaker 2: Myself and my brother Chuck.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, inseparable, fighting all the time (laughter), always getting into you know, mischief all the time.  So, it was just us and it was an interesting childhood coming up because when it's kind of like twins are coming up together almost.  But we, we just never got along (laughter).
Speaker 1: Are, are you all similar size?
Speaker 2: No, he was a little runt.  Yeah, I was always, I was a big kid and he was a runt.  And so, I think that, that ticked him off.  We were always clashing, he was always trying to prove to someone he's better than me.  And, and he's dissing me and rougher or tougher or it's a, it's amazing how we came up.  And I'm not sure how we got into that type of thing, but we did.  But, the big thing was education was the key.  We were expected to do well, never was said, but you, you look at your parents who, we were incredibly proud of our parents 'cause we knew our parents had done something special.  And, and it's kind of like it wasn't said, but it was absolutely implied all the time.  And you never forgot that you were expected to do well.  You wanted to do well, you didn't want to be average.  I remember coming up as my, my worst nightmare is being average.
Story_ID: 639152
Speaker 1: Coming up I always felt, and this was from my [maternal] grandmother [Pearl Mitchell] saying, she said, "Butchie baby [HistoryMaker Dr. James Rosser, Jr.], God has something special for you to do," and I believed her.  And when you add that to her teaching me how to dream, ah, and that's the one thing my parents, my mother [Marjorie Mitchell Rosser] and my grandmother helped me with.  Dream your dream, that's a good thing.
Speaker 2: I want to explore that a little bit.  What do you mean by that, that she helped you, she, she taught you how to dream (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Well, well here's the thing, you know, coming up, when I came up in the segregated South.  If you looked around you had no reference points for achieving (laughter).  You know, (unclear), through reading I was dreaming that one day I could go to Rome [Italy], one day I could go to go London [England].  I was dreaming about being a Robeson [Paul Robeson], you know what I mean.  'Cause from my vantage point you would think that all of that was absolute impossibility and was a fairy tale.  But, when you're encouraged to read and because they told stories about that, they never held us back.  I, I here's a great example, I, I had my, and Mrs. Johnson [ph.] my first grade teacher helped with this, I had this vivid imagination that was fueled by me reading.  So, I actually drew a pirate's map and I used a topography of our actual location with reference points, this is a first grader now.  With reference points that basically emulated the actual topography in our backyard and the back of the school [East Moorhead School; James C. Rosser Elementary School, Moorhead, Mississippi].  But, it was the bayou in the back of the school and I had that.  And then I was actually learning about longitude and lati- latitudes and topography and how to reproduce, you know, landscape and then you know I put that in the terms of a hidden treasure.  So, when I brought the map to my first grade teacher and my mother, they could have easily snuffed that and said, "That's--what are you doing," but they saw what I was doing they said, "This kid is aware of his surroundings.  He's able to reproduce and survey and reproduce on a piece of paper his surroundings."  That was like a, I was being a map maker.  Well they picked up on that, so when it came time to say hey I it's all around this buried treasure, they took the whole group of kids on a treasure hunt, hunt with my map.  That was allowing me to dream, I'd read about pirates, I'd read about the Caribbean, I'd read about maps.  And how Lewis and Clark [Meriwether Lewis and William Clark] mapped this, this is first grade now I'm reading.  So, then I'm dreaming, I, I'm one of those guys, those cats.  And, so they could have snuffed my dream by saying, "Oh, what are you talking about, get away from here, there's no treasure."  But they allowed me to dream by humoring me, they saw the initiative and then they tried to spread the initiative to others.  Pretty soon then all kinds of maps started popping up.  So, my grandmother, see, she would tell these stories about Robeson, which she didn't know about, she heard about, from people word of mouth, she'd read a little bit.  And she'd say, "That could be you."  And I started dreaming about this and dreaming about that.  And she, she never said that, "Oh that's crazy, it's a wa- waste of time."  So, that's what I mean by allowing me to dream.
Story_ID: 639153
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: A earliest childhood what?
Speaker 1: Earliest childhood memory (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Memory? The earliest childhood memory I have was mainly at my [maternal] grandparents' house on Christmas where my grandfather [Ludie Mitchell] bought me a John Deere tractor and my brother [Charles Rosser] got a red fire engine.  And going round and round in that house, we'd always have to stop, stop at the step up, 'cause we couldn't just go around in a, a racetrack circle.  'Cause we'd always have to go in the step up in the house, that's, that's one.  And how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And now what, what were these the kind of little toy cars you sit in and pedal, with pedal--
Speaker 2: No you sit in 'em, yes you sit in--see this is old school toys.  Where you had a, this thing I believe you could put a stick of dynamite under it and it'll still work.  Remember how they used to make toys back in the day, durable.  And this was a metal John Deere tractor.  I mean really forwards, and this fire engine.  So, the, the big thing was me, you know, I'm on the tractor.  The other big time memory I have first memories is being scared of the moon.  I was afraid of the moon.  And these big, when the moon was at its brightest I was afraid.  Now, it's interesting how that played upon my life later on, being afraid of the moon.  'Cause from that fear I read everything there was about the planets, and I actually wanted to be an astronaut.  But at age ten I was bigger than the Mercury space capsule, so I had to figure out something else to do.  But, the moon and afraid of it made me want to read more about it.  And once again reading, it was part of my dreaming, that was the fuel for my dreaming, reading, reading, reading.  So, so that was key to me.  Because the surroundings we had around us, you know, it was, "What you doing talking about thinking about space and"--
Story_ID: 639154
Speaker 1: Well, speaking of surroundings, I mean where did you grow up?  Now, I, we, we have on the outline that you grew up in Indianola [Mississippi] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I, I, I grew up in Moorhead.  Indianola is the big town--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I grew up in Moorhead, Mississippi.  I went to high school in Indianola [Gentry High School, Indianola, Mississippi], because Moorhead did not have a high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Moorhead?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Moorhead, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Moorhead, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: And the most important thing about Moorhead, Mississippi is that it is the home of a, where the Southern crosses the Dog railroad [Yazoo Delta Railroad].  And, you know, the significance of that?
Speaker 1: The is, it's called the what now?
Speaker 2: The Southern railroad [Southern Railway] crosses the Dog railroad.
Speaker 1: Oh, (unclear).
Speaker 2: And the significance of that is this is the place where W.C. Handy and all the, the blues and jazz artists would stop on the train going from Memphis [Tennessee] to New Orleans [Louisiana].  And that's our town's claim to fame.  And every year we have the Yellow Dog Festival, you know, in, in Moorhead.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Yellow Dog features prominently in August Wilson's play 'The Piano' ['The Piano Lesson']?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Ghosts of the Yellow Dog.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) exactly, exactly, right.  So, and also my town, you know it, it was heavily influenced with music in the blues, you know.  The first woman's thigh I ever saw was in the Dew Drop Inn [ph.], sneaking out after, after church.  Looking up in the window, through the window on these boxes of milk crates, and you know who that thigh belong to Tina Turner.
Speaker 1: Oh, really.  So, she was actually performing there--
Speaker 2: The Chitlin' Circuit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Chitlin' Circuit.
Speaker 1: And was she performing in a, in a--?
Speaker 2: A, a juke joint.
Speaker 1: A juke joint, okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's what they used to do.  And, you know, it's, so it was rich, [HistoryMaker] B. B. King lived five miles from me, you know.  Knew all the King boys growing up, you know.  We knew of them, they were older of course.  Their whole family there.  And, you know, it's, it's really rich in heritage of jazz and the blues.  So, that's where I, that's where I grew up Moorhead, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pri- proud of it.
Story_ID: 639155
Speaker 1: Just for the sake of history, since it's history we have to ask these types of questions but, Moorhead [Mississippi] is, is it, is it mostly black?
Speaker 2: Moorhead really was, it was heavily black, I don't know the exact percentage.  But, it, it's the home of a junior college, Mississippi Delta Junior College [Mississippi Delta Community College].  And so depending on, you know, the transient population verses the bl- black population, it probably was an edge of, of black people.  But it may have been even closer to 50/50 with a slight edge of people of color.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Mississippi is one of the two states that at one time there were, had a large, had a larger black pop- population than white?
Speaker 2: Absolutely that's right.
Speaker 1: And especially out in the rural areas you see a lot of black people--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --which is not true in the northern states.
Speaker 2: And that's, that's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's right.  So, that's, that was a interesting town, where classically though, everybody helped raise everybody else, and was absolutely true.  You just, unlike these kids now a days, you know, were nobody would say anything to your kid, oh boy, you would get a whooping by Ms. Jones [ph.] and then come home and get another whooping.  If you were doing anything crazy.  And that, that was a good thing.  I, I, I really, it was a town you just walk to and, but you it's amazing how you stayed on your side of town.
Speaker 1: Well, was there a name for the black side of town?
Speaker 2: No, well they used to call it the quarters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If there was a name, but we didn't call it that, you know.  Maybe--
Speaker 1: Oh the whites.
Speaker 2: --somebody else did.
Speaker 1: Okay, the whites referred to the black side of town as the quarters?
Speaker 2: Quarters yeah, but that's, that's the only time I've heard of another name.
Speaker 1: Like slave quarters or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Exactly right, exactly.  So, it was a, it was a great town, everybody knew everybody.  It was kind of tough on me because, because of my parents [Marjorie Mitchell Rosser and James Rosser, Sr.] and there was, there was jealousy, the one thing about people of color we have to come a long way.  We don't, we don't embrace our, our brothers and sisters doing well, well at all.  And I've seen this even today.  We don't work well with each other, you know.  We've got a crab in the barrel mentality.  And I'm sad in 2013 that's still true.  I mean in, in so we, we took a lot of ridicule, we, we did talk a certain way, 'cause we tried to speak with good English.  We were very respectful of folk, we always tried to have our homework.  But, then that kind of got us, that kind of really had us be the target of really some bru- brutal bullying.  I mean really, I, I'll never forget having bricks thrown at me, just for walking home, you know.  So, this bullying thing I can tell you right now, didn't just start.  I, I had to face that growing up, and I'll never forget I was, outside of our house and they were having a baseball game.  Remember how, I don't know if you know about these but, you'd have these semi-pro teams that would go community to community playing baseball, that was the hot thing, baseball.  And I'll never forget, a high school senior, and I was like a fourth grader, came up and just punched me in the stomach in front on my house, just because my dad had spanked him back in the seventh grade.  It's that kind of stuff that, that really drove me to say one day I'm gonna be bigger and stronger and smarter and, you know, and, and this guy will never be able to say anything or do anything to me.  So, I think that drove me.
Story_ID: 639156
Speaker 1: You were describing some of the jealousy and the bullying that would go on.  And this is a, now this is a struggle.  I guess it's the internal struggle of the black community, if you're after education and you're trying to increase your vocabulary, increase the things that you have learned.  You're gonna come into conflict on some level with those who don't have access to that.  Who, you know, are fearful about that, that rise (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, I and I think it's the old crab in the barrel situation that we hear so much about on our side of the fence, I mean people of color.  We, we really we don't, we don't relish seeing other people of color doing well.  We, we will shoot down other people who are trying to be different.  And, and there's an element of that on the other side of the fence.  But, but it's really, it's really strong on our side.  And we don't have the same amount of wiggle room, as our, our Caucasian counterparts.
Speaker 1: But, it's not as many doing well.
Speaker 2: Exactly see and so where I, you know, our bandwidth for that is much narrower.  And so, that's a struggle, that's a struggle when you have to fight through that.  And then you have to fight through that more than maybe you even do now, as we become more pluralistic.  But, but, but, but that's something you really have to, really consciously struggle through.  And, and, and your struggle was to not be average and not be every, like everybody else.  And that and I, I the thing that helped me is I was aware of that.  I faced it as a young person.  I knew it wa- existed and I had to be determined that I wasn't gonna let it hamper me.
Speaker 1: So, the educated community say in Moorhead [Mississippi] would have been like school teachers.
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: That's it, okay.
Speaker 2: School teachers, that's it.
Speaker 1: So, there was no black doctors or lawyer or--?
Speaker 2: Oh, no I didn't, I didn't even know that I, I you know, I wanted to be a doctor and this the true story someone's asked me before, "Why did you want to be a doctor?"  Well, I loved my grandmother, my maternal grandmother [Pearl Mitchell] and grandfather [Ludie Mitchell] so much I say really I want them to stay alive forever.   You know, how from a child's vantage point you loved them so much, and your parents.  So, I say if I'm a doctor I can actively help that dream come true.  That, that was the driving force.  And then I'll never forget the night that Dr. Phillips [ph.] came to my house when I thought my mother [Marjorie Mitchell Rosser] was dying from abdominal pain and everything like that.  And white doctors didn't come to see black people at night.  You make a house call on a black person?  But they, that man came to our house and I'll never forget him for it.  As it turned out later my mother was having a gallbladder attack.  But, I thought she was dying from, a young kid's vantage point.  And he came there and gave her some medicine and got her better.  And I said "I really wanna do that" (laughter).  So the combination of the two things drove me, and not wanting to be average.
Speaker 1: And you specialize now in gallbladder operations?
Speaker 2: Yes, interesting enough.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, interesting enough.  I--
Speaker 1: One, one of the things that you specialize in--
Speaker 2: Yeah that's exactly right.
Speaker 1: So, so the country doctor was white.  The so, the professionals that you had any examples of other than teachers would have been white people?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 639157
Speaker 1: And television. Probably the biggest driving thing for me I was, I loved television and we were one of the few people early on to have a television in the town [Moorhead, Mississippi].  And that was a big, for me, I am what I am because of everything I told you, plus a heavy dose of television and comic books.  I learned how to read 'cause I wanted to know what Superman was saying.  So, I wanted to read so I could understand.  So, that pushed me and, you know, those comic books have sophisticated dialogue.  So, that's what put me ahead.  I had a understanding of the world through comic books, that really always amazed my teachers.  "How you aware of that?"  Plus I used being able to read and I read encyclopedias.  And what happened with the comic books, they put you in adult situations that had worldly implications.  So, you combine that with knowing stuff about the world encyclopedia, I was pretty far ahead as far as thinking and what the world was doing.  Goes way beyond my station, you know coming from you know, rural Mississippi town.  Being able to dream, I just took it all further.  So, the--that television played a very important role, in who I am today.  You know--
Speaker 2: This, this is interesting 'cause it's been said in common parlance or general discussion that somehow comic books dumb down kids or something but--
Speaker 1: Oh no but for me it was liberating (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but, yeah.
Speaker 1: If you look at dialogue with comic books and I look, and I read comic books now on my iPad, and get thoughts that make me dream to help me invent.  You can, it is unbelievable the power of that, my, and my dad [James Rosser, Sr.] they, they thought it was a waste of money.  So, I had to, had to slip to buy comic books.  My [maternal] grandmother [Pearl Mitchell] thought that was a waste of money, it wasn't a real book.  But, for me, it, it not only help me to call out the worl- words, comic books expand your horizon.  You look at Marvel comic books, the 'Fantastic Four,' you know, 'Spiderman' and all.  Spiderman came from a nuclear accident and then all of a sudden you're thinking about fission and all.  You're thinking about all these other things.  Comic books are the source of science.  They really are the foundation of them all, and the future.
Speaker 2: Well, they're stories about scientists primarily.
Speaker 1: Primarily.
Speaker 2: Almost everybody in the co- comic books are scientists.
Speaker 1: Are scientists, or somehow or some scientific event (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lex Luthor, Spiderman--
Speaker 1: Right, some scientific event actually led to who they were.  And they always invented all this stuff, they were inventing stuff all the time.  So, my favorite I look-Marvel, I started off DC [DC Comics] with 'Superman,' 'Batman,' 'Green Lantern.'  But, then when Marvel came out and they showed black people, oh my god.  Marvel Comics [Marvel Entertainment Group, Inc.; Marvel Entertainment, LLC] are the first comic book, the first comic book company that recognized black people were alive.  And then they had some just really, really--
Story_ID: 639158
Speaker 1: Who was the first black character you saw on television(unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, what's this ca- guy, cat's name, you know, oh god, it was in the 'G.I. Joe' series, I think his name was Robby [ph.], they actually were, Sergeant Fury and all like that.  That, that they showed a actual combat black person in combat, doing that.  That was one of the first ones and, oh the 'Black Panther' (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think, it, it.  Yes, right and the--
Speaker 2: I have a tee shirt with the Black Panther on it, Ecco tee shirt with the Black Panther on.  And that was unbelievable to see that cat.  And, and then you know they just kept coming.  And I kept reading and, and that was a strong source of inspiration for me.  'Cause we were recognized (laughter) you know the other, the other TV show that did it.  There were three shows and you probably remember these, you remember 'Ben Casey'?  'Ben Casey' in fact in, when I was five year old, years old I was the valedictorian of my preschool class.  My wife [Dana Rosser] said, "What you, what did you, do you majored in, you could do the building blocks better than everybody else, how they'd judge that?"  But, anyway I was the valedictorian I had to give a little speech and they asked me what I wanted to do and it's on tape.  I said, I said I wanted to be a hospital doctor like Ben Casey.  So, Ben Casey influenced me.  The other two shows: 'The Jetsons' and 'Star Trek.'  And, and 'The Jetsons' if you look at that show it's about what science in the future.  About dreaming what the future would look like and Elroy Jetson was like ten.  And he had the intellect of a Ph.D. in, in physics.  I'm saying, "How'd this kid get so smart," right?  So, that was the thing in driving me, and I always look at this thing on his desk in his room, which was a PC [personal computer], 1965, that was a PC.  So, I'm getting all these insights in the future from looking at these shows.  But, the show that it was, was 'Star Trek.'  And I'll never forget I cou- I couldn't get up on the roof 'cause I was bigger, but my little brother could.  Because we had a antenna, but I don't know if remember these days were it was a power antenna you could turn it and then it would turn it in the direction of the station and you could bring that station in clearer.  Well, this motor, you know, burnt out in three months.  So, you then you had, you had to go and do what?  Adjust it by hand, so I put him up on the roof and I was hollering out the window until we got the first episode of 'Star Trek' in focus.  And my life changed, I, I tell you--
Speaker 1: Now, did you see if from when it first came on?
Speaker 2: When, the first episode.
Speaker 1: This is 1966?
Speaker 2: Five [1965].
Speaker 1: Five [1965], okay fall of '65 [1965], yes all right.
Speaker 2: And that, that's when I, that's when my dream, the dreams of comic books.  I actually could see them personified in this show.  Before it's in these, these images in this book, you had to imagine stuff.  Now, it's was acted out on TV screen.  So, that's the thing, those shows are the ones that really encouraged me to be a healer and also to be like I am today a inventor, you know, a person always exploring the unknown.  Doing things that nobody else has done.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the there's a black inventor, computer scientist played by, well the name who played Blacula, William Marshall?
Speaker 2: Okay and he was a, was a--
Speaker 1: 'Star Trek,' yeah?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah! In one of the episodes, the early episodes, yeah.  Yeah, I remember him.  But, see that, that was the other thing about 'Star Trek,' you saw black people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but here, here is a genius, computer scientist that supposed to be the most recognized computer genius of the future and he's--
Speaker 2: And he was black in 1965, '66 [1966].  Now, that was liberating.  And I'll never forget the other thing, 'Star Trek' gave me hope that I believed the, the where this country was going.  Because I saw a Russian, you know, a Chinese person, I saw Japanese.  I saw, you saw all these people together and people of color were, were recognized.
Story_ID: 639159
Speaker 1: Well speaking of that, of the racial climate of the country in 1964, this is the year before 'Star Trek' came out, Mississippi was in the national spotlight.  Freedom Summer and then the subsequent movement by bus on the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party to the Democratic National Convention in Atlantic City [1964 Democratic National Convention, Atlantic City, New Jersey].
Speaker 2: Yeah, with Fannie Lou Hamer.
Speaker 1: Yeah, which made national news and she was from down in the Delta [Mississippi Delta] (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah!  She's from right up the road.
Speaker 1: --okay.
Speaker 2: She, she knew my father [James Rosser, Sr.] well.  I'll never forget Ms. Hamer when I was at Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi] and I was walking and she was there I, I spoke to her and she spoke back to me.  'Cause I was one of the few black people there at Ole Miss then.  And, you know, it's unbelievable what, she was around Ruleville [Mississippi] and Drew [Mississippi]. And all that went on and then 'Star Trek' happened that next year. So, and then and during that time, one of the interesting stories I had to let you know the other side. My, my family was terrorized by both black people who call you Uncle Tom and, and threaten to come down and burn the house down, and the same week the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] called our house (laughter) to burn it down.  That was an interesting dilemma.  So, my brother and I, I had to protect him.  Now, I never forget getting under the steel bed with this cars coming around throwing stuff in our houses.  As we found out later there were black people that came and did it first and then the white people came later on.  That was a interesting situation, that was confusing.  But, knowing what I know, my dad was right down the middle.  He was for what was right.  Just he, two wrongs didn't make a right.  If you were wrong and you were doing something stupid and you happen to be black, he was going to tell you, you were wrong.  You're doing something stupid and you're gonna exclude him and you were white you were wrong.
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember any of the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] volunteers living in the community (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah!  I remember them and the meetings they had.  I remember being at some of the meetings.  I knew these people were taking their lives in their own hands.  Because I had seen how, you know, some sick white people, how they were and how vicious they were.  But, see let me tell you the most part though, I'm gonna tell you right there, there was way more good white people than bad.  In fact that's why the movement worked.  Because, there was more good white people than bad.  These guys were in a minority, the only bad thing is the good ones, were the ones, they wouldn't necessarily do anything to stop it.  They kind of just never would contribute to it and thought it didn't include them.  So, then that let the rabble rousers and the minority rule.  Because good men and women refused to stand up for what was right.  So, that's why it looked as if everybody white in the South was like that and that's, that's not true.
Speaker 1: Okay, did, did you ever meet James Bevel [HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel]? I think he's from, from Itta Bena [Mississippi], right down the (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: Well, Itta Bena is eleven miles from Moorhead [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's a, he was a SNCC (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a SNCC guy, but I never met him in person (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm, I'm sorry but he was more SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, never met him.  And, and you know, it's interesting at that time I came up SCLC what they stood for.  And one of the highlights of my career was, was receive the Charles Drew award for medicine from the SCLC.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Memphis [Tennessee].  That was the first time they had been back to Mem- Memphis since Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it's, it's interesting how, you know, life comes full circle.
Story_ID: 639160
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about school now.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You went to James L. Rosser Elementary School [sic. James C. Rosser Elementary School, Moorhead, Mississippi], before it was called that I guess.  Then what was it called (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes it was, it was called East Moorhead elementary [East Moorhead School].
Speaker 1: Okay, East Moorhead elementary.
Speaker 2: And that went to from first to eighth grade.  But, before then another important thing in my life that my parents [Marjorie Mitchell Rosser and James Rosser, Sr.] did for me I went to special kindergarten.  You know, at Mississippi Valley State University [Itta Bena, Mississippi], which was called Mississippi Vocational College, at the time.  That got me really ahead, that gave me a head start.  My parents, you know, they said, "Look you--." I had to ride the bus everyday basically eleven miles with college students.  I rode the same bus as college students.  So, it's interesting, the, the pattern you set.  So, now here you are four, five, six years old and you're around these college students.  And you're riding the same bus to college everyday with them, going to your little preschool.
Speaker 1: So, you're learning things as an unintended consequence or something (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly. You listen to 'em talk, you hear about their studies.  And I tell you that gave me a tremendous insight and all of my brothers and sisters went to that preschool.  And they all in my mind they gained from that.  So, that's when Head Start came about, and my parents were in the first group of teachers to teach Head Start, that was a major move.  Because, now those kids could have what I had, 'cause none of those kids could have what I had.  My parents paid for that.  But, with Head, that's why I will always support Head Start.  And also, because Head Start gave me my first real job.  Well, not well, professional job.  So, that's why we need to fight for Head Start.  Because, I know that my parents being able to send me there to get some preparatory school work and to be with those college students that was really a big deal.
Speaker 1: So, that really set and you were the valedictorian of your kindergarten?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah and unlike what my wife [Dana Rosser] said, you know, I, I majored in building blocks, you know, I, I could read, I could write a much, accelerated pace.  There was no doubt, you know, like my grandma [Rosser's maternal grandmother, Pearl Mitchell] always say you know, "That boy been here before," (laughter) you know. It, I had, I always had an insight that went past my age.  And I think those were important ingredients.
Speaker 1: So, did you have a, well, in grade school I guess your mother was there, right, teaching?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and it was interesting 'cause my dad wouldn't let my mama be my first grade teacher.  But, interesting enough, my brother was his, was, was under her class.  That was interesting, my mom, my mom being the first grade.  But, I fell in love with my first day of fir- first grade with my first grade teacher Ms. Johnson [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just absolutely fell in love, unfortunately at an early age she subsequently died of lymphoma, but, oh, I just fell in love with her, just wanted to do anything I could to please her.  And she pushed me, that's the one that went on the, the, the treasure hunt with my, my map, you know.  Which, was pretty darn accurate to the topography of the land.  I went to the encyclopedia saw maps of that, so I said I'm gonna draw that, it just self-taught.
Speaker 1: So, you always had an encyclopedia at home (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, see my dad, remember I told he educated a lot of folk.  'Cause there were no library we couldn't go to the library.  We could not go to the public library.  So, my dad went around he sold almost every family in the Delta [Mississippi Delta] the Encyclopedia Britannica.
Speaker 1: This is important now in another sense that, that you couldn't go to restaurant in the front door, but you could go to the back to get something to eat.
Speaker 2: You could go to the back to get something to eat but you couldn't go to the library in the back.
Speaker 1: You couldn't even go to the back to get books?
Speaker 2: No, you couldn't do it.  You couldn't check out a library book.  I'll never forget when, when the seg- desegregation, and the law was passed [Civil Rights Act of 1964], and we could, it was a big thing for all of us to go get a book from the public library.  I mean see people can't even fathom this kind of thing.  But, I lived through that.  I lived through that.  And getting, oh it was just unbelievable.
Story_ID: 639161
Speaker 1: When the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] was pa-
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --was passed was once again 1964--.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the Vo- the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] was signed, it was summer of '64 [sic. 1965] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --and, you're ten years old basically.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, so--
Speaker 1: So, do things start, how soon did they start opening up?  I know it wasn't right away?
Speaker 2: Well, no but my parents [Marjorie Mitchell Rosser and James Rosser, Sr.] pushed it.  I told you we were one, one of the big memories I had was going to the courthouse, with white people with shotguns, as my parents came to register to vote.  I never forget that day, ever.  That took a lot of freaking courage.
Speaker 1: This would have been '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '65 [1965]. That took a lot of courage.  I mean, I mean it was just straight up intimidation.  Now, through that, my parents earned the respect of the whole community [in Moorhead, Mississippi].  But, you know, they had to break the ice first.  So, that, I think that made me comfortable with being in, always in a, in a, in a, in a situation where I'm the first to do something.  I, I, I really got comfortable because I, I saw my parents being the first to do stuff.  And in fact I kind of, I kind of, it kind of drove me to always want to be first.  I must admit that I use that for fuel.  I've always want to be out front.  I, I never wanted to be average or be part of the crowd.  Not that I was more than anyone else.  But, it's just that you know, I don't know, it just seems like, if you could do, you have to do it.  And, and, and if you dream it, your dream could come true.  But, you gotta put work behind it.  So, that's always been my motto.  And even now my colleagues can't figure how I, I get the testicular fortitude to do a lot of things I do. They, they don't see how, you know. They don't understand.
Speaker 1: It seems to me that a key to what you do, you've done in life is, is what did what you did when you were twelve, so.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And, you, you said you're perpetual, a terminal twelve year old.
Speaker 2: Terminal twelve year old (laughter).
Story_ID: 639162
Speaker 1: What was being twelve like?  This would have been in 1966 I guess (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Six [1966], yeah, '66 [1966].  Let me tell ya being twelve, let me tell you what it's like.  It's an unbelievable culture medium for, and launching pad for you to go to higher heights.  It really is and I'll tell you why.  It's an interesting time, you're now aware of the world from a more mature standpoint at twelve.  But, you're still young enough where you have boundless expectations of the possibility that could be.  That, that's what it is, and you have a youthful enthusiasm that drives you.  That's why I look at twelve, it's an interesting nexus where your childhood meets the start of your adulthood, at twelve.  But, you're dumb, you're too dumb to think that stuff can't be done.  And because, you know, your heart is just the purity of, of the process.  Does that make any sense?  That your heart--it like some athletes say, it's the love of the game, it's the love of the process for searching for the unknown, discovering it and then making it in to something.  And then moving on, that's a big thing, moving on.  And, and, and that's, that, that was an important time for me.  You had Motown [Motown Records] putting out these hits all the time.  We're listening to the music.  That was a happy, in the midst of all that, that was a happy time.  You dancing and now you, you start having a little interest in girls, you know.  Not too much, 'cause you won't let anybody know that.  But, you're started getting interested in girls.  I'm a big fan of automobiles and some of the best cars out there, we're now in the muscle car, we getting in the muscle car territory.  I never forget in '64 [1964] when the Mustang [Ford Mustang] came out.  I wanted my (unclear) my mama her name was Margie [Marjorie Mitchell Rosser], for Marjorie, "Margie, Margie, Margie got a Mustang." That was a song.  So, so we, you know wanted these car- now there's no hope getting that car.  But, you wanted these cars.  It was just a great time.  Now, I was aware of Vietnam [Vietnam War] about then and the people that were coming back in body bags.  So, you had to live with that reality each day.  'Cause it was a lot of people of color that served.  And we had people die, you know, in that war.  So, that was a sobering time.  Tornados tearing through town [Moorhead, Mississippi] killing some of my classmates, sobering time.  So, you see how you're actually touching on very serious adult stuff now?  But, you still got that youthful enthusiasm.  So, for me that time was very, very precious.  Because, I was really happy, playing Little League baseball.  And, then playing with the adu- that's my first sport baseball, first baseman.  And that's we loved it because my [maternal] grandmother [Pearl Mitchell] loved baseball, Cardinals [St. Louis Cardinals] fan.
Story_ID: 639163
Speaker 1: Now, your TV stations that you pulled in were from where?
Speaker 2: Limited okay, it started out when we look at 'Star Trek' I had to get up there and point that ant- well my brother had to get up there point that antenna to Jackson [Mississippi].  That was ninety--that was 105 miles away.  We, I will never forget when the 'Batman' series came out, because we had a station in Greenwood [Mississippi], twenty miles away.  That was an ABC station and I remember it, our first color TV, it was nine inches it was in our room.  And I remember seeing 'Batman.'  And we couldn't get Memphis [Tennessee], except on certain days.  So, we were winding up with two stations, that's it.  And you could get channel three in Memphis sometimes.  But, then we were listening to radios, we listened to Chicago [Illinois] on certain nights when the AM signal could skip.  Nashville [Tennessee] with they, the record, there was a record store there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Randy's Record mart [Randy's Record Shop, Gallatin, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Rec- Randy Record market, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah (unclear).
Speaker 2: Randy's Record mart, that's right and so we'd listen to that.  Rufus Thomas would be on, what's the Memphis station, 'cause I, 'cause I grew up a lot in Memphis too 'cause my dad [James Rosser, Sr.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) WDIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, WDIA.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's exactly, WDIA.  So, and the other thing that help me was we'd go up to Memphis a lot.  Because, my dad bought my mom--my grandmother [Hattie Rosser] a house after he got out of the [U.S. military] service and they lived in Orange Mound in Memphis.  So, now, okay, I'm in rural Mississippi, but I definitely am aware of more city things in Memphis because I grew up in Memphis too, we were there.  All my cousins played at Melrose High [Melrose High School, Memphis, Tennessee], which is one of the juggernaut, athletic juggernauts.
Speaker 1: So, so, so you actually spent time in, in Memphis growing up significantly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we'd go there and visit all the time.  We'd drive up on a Friday, come back on a Monday morning, stayed some of the summers there.  And, and that help me because black people walked a different way in Memphis, their backs were straighter, their head not bowed.  You know what I mean?  They were not as intimidated with the major race there. We actually see, saw people actually, you know, communicating with each other, there in the city of Memphis.  So, that really helped, 'cause I wasn't just there in that rural situation all this time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's interesting, blacks in Memphis could always vote.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) even though it's a southern city.
Story_ID: 639164
Speaker 1: Exactly, see that, those are the things that I'm aware of and I saw, that helped balance all the dismal and abysmal conditions that were there, yeah.  So, that, that, that helped that's another ingredient.  The other ingredient you know, I'm gonna tell you right now, because my family upbringing, looking at TV and all.  I really didn't think I was a second class citizen.  I always thought I was just as good as you.  And I always wanted to prove that I was just as good as you.  See, I, I, I went to a segregated school system, because when they were supposed to integrate they, they, they burnt they, (laughter) they burnt the high school down in Moorhead [Mississippi].  When we were supposed to integrate the pool--
Speaker 2: Now this is the white community?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Burnt down?
Speaker 1: Burnt it down rather than have, have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The only public high school they had?
Speaker 1: That's right rather than go with niggas.
Speaker 2: All right, okay.
Speaker 1: And then, they filled a brand new pool up with dirt.  A public pool that our tax, taxes paid help pay for.
Speaker 2: And their taxes?
Speaker 1: And their taxes.  They filled it up with dirt.  It's filled up with dirt to this day, rather than swim with us.  I'll never forget that, 'cause we used to have to, when I was growing up.  I lived in back of the pool, we'd hear the white kids having fun all summer at the pool.  We never could go to that public pool.  And, and it was tax payers' money.  We would have to go, interesting enough on Delta pine land and company [Delta and Pine Land Company, Scott, Mississippi], a plantation, they had a black pool and a white pool.  So, we'd go over forty-four miles to my [maternal] grandmother's [Pearl Mitchell] to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To the plantation?
Speaker 1: --the plantation, to get in the pool.
Story_ID: 639165
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about the level of science instruction that you could get in the public schools those days?  In terms of math and science what could you do and did you have like facilities for science in, in your rural school?
Speaker 2: In, in elementary school [East Moorhead School; James C. Rosser Elementary School, Moorhead, Mississippi] no, we were behind in the curriculum 'cause our books were from 1938.
Speaker 1: And they were hand me down books?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was hand me down books.  You have to understand we got the books the white kids didn't need any more.  They got the new books, we got the old books.  It wasn't until Title I or Title XI, you know, the title series [Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965], where I'll never forget we all of a sudden started getting stuff at our school, from the title funds.  Now everybody talk about the War on Poverty and, and, and President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], how it was a failure, unh-uh, not from where we stand, this was liberating to us.  I'm here today because of that.  Now, of course you can criticize it and go back and nitpick, but I'm telling you from a grassroots standpoint that was liberating.  We actually got stuff.  My dad [James Rosser, Sr.] actually had money to get kids stuff just like any other school.  And, and I know people say, "Well it's an entitlement." Look, when you don't have nothing and you l- hand me down books, those were the first times we ever saw new books.  When that series of governmental assistance came about, that mandated it.  'Cause it was always separate but not equal.  And that was the way of life.  I'll never forget my dad, it was in '66 [1966] I thought he was gonna get fired, the superintendent of education, my dad went off on him, in our yard.  And this--
Speaker 1: So, this is, this is (unclear), this is a white super the--?
Speaker 2: Yeah '66 [1966]. White super--
Speaker 1: All of them were--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --black segregated schools?
Speaker 2: Were under white superintendents.
Speaker 1: Yeah, all over the South, so.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, this is, so okay.
Speaker 2: So, he came to my father and it was about taking money from his school and then tried to sell him a bunch of goods of why that money was taken.  And my dad went off, I heard him cuss the man out.  I thought the police were come, come down and take my dad away.  Because, but what happened is this guy's name was Mr. Edwards [ph.].  And what happened is my dad threw a hissy fit out there.  And rather than arrest my dad, my dad was able to keep those funds from going away.  I mean, but, why you gotta fight for that kind of thing that was right.  Because they were skimming the money and still the white schools were getting more, you know what I mean.  But, but, but at least we were getting something.  My new, first new books were because of the title, and I forgot the Title I or Title--I can't remember all the title programs.  'Cause there were several different ones, but that was in, that was an important.
Speaker 1: So, this is interesting too, when you consider that, you know, and I don't think I'm wrong in this, in remembering these statistics that the state of Mississippi is, spends less of its money on education than most, almost any other state?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Period.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: Then they spend less on black ones, they were spending less on black (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Exactly right.  And, and, and you know, one of the things that, that's plaguing us now, and it's end- pandemic throughout all of education.  Is that we're not teaching these kids the proper way.  We're not capturing the digital natives.  So now, you know, what Mr. Gates talked about, this crisis in this nation, we're a drop out nation, and--
Speaker 1: Bill Gates.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bill Gates and all the efforts he's been doing has been bringing light to the fact that we're losing the battle to educate these kids.  And he actually commissioned the study and to find out why were these kids dropping out.  Well 62 percent of the people when they dropped out they had a C or above average.  Eighty percent of them said because what you're teaching doesn't really have any real world relevance, b- boring.  Because trying to get these kids to sit still and just listen to us talk and show us things.  The digital natives, they process differently and that's, that, the fact that I knew that education was going be a key to this country maintaining its freedom.  I just knew in my heart, that's why I focused the last several years on developing new, you know, educational pedagogies that can, that's appropriate for these digital natives.  And that's why I wrote the book 'Playin' to Win' ['Playin' to Win: A Surgeon, Scientist and Parent Examines the Upside of Video Games,' James "Butch" Rosser].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, because of that.  And started my own company, Stealth Learning Company to start this digital learning revolution and that's the big thing I think I going to be carrying from now on, while I'm here.
Story_ID: 639166
Speaker 1: Did you have any other teachers in terms of science and instruction, or math instruction, was there (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mr. Anthony [ph.], I tell you he was a consummate science teacher just, just great guy with dignity, understood stuff, he was huge.  Mrs. Kent [ph.] in high school, my English teacher that made me fall in love with writing, that's why I, I write today.  Shirley Bracey [ph.], my social science and political science teacher, she, she, she really help me to understand, you know, that I had a bigger calling.  And that--
Speaker 1: Was she in high school?
Speaker 2: This is all high school.
Speaker 1: At, at Moorhead, Indianola High School [sic. Gentry High School, Indianola, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Indianola High School.  Going back to elementary school [East Moorhead School; James C. Rosser Elementary School, Moorhead, Mississippi], it's Ms. Johnson [ph.] set the pace.  Mrs. Watson [ph.] who I think was a hundred years old when she was teaching me.  And was still alive thirty years later (laughter).  She gave me a lot of love and compassion.  She really did love me as an individual.  And that love along with the instruction was beautiful.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mr. Thomas Dillon [ph.] in math and science and sports.  'Cause he was the sports coach, you know, there.
Speaker 1: And you were playing baseball, you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Little League baseball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, that baseball was my first love, then basketball second and football third.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I love football, we loved sports.  Sports was a big part of our, our lives.  But, but we loved sports 'cause we loved competition.  And subsequently as time went on, you know, I developed more toward football.  And baseball kind of fell to the wayside and basketball fell to the wayside.  But, growing up, in, in, in elementary school, played all that, didn't play football.  We didn't have organized football--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: -- in elementary school.  (Unclear) and I'll never forget the big thing of going to Little League baseball in Indianola [Mississippi], that was great I was on the Cardinals [ph.].  And my brother [Charles Rosser] played also with me, 'cause we were close in age.
Speaker 1: Well, were you first baseman?
Speaker 2: I was first baseman, yeah, yeah.  And so that was a, that was a big thing for me.
Story_ID: 639167
Speaker 1: At Indianola High School [sic. Gentry High School, Indianola, Mississippi] that's like how, how many miles from Moorhead [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Seven.
Speaker 1: Seven miles, okay--
Speaker 2: It's on B. B. King Drive [sic. B. B. King Road] now.  You rode the bus every day.  That's why I didn't understand everybody making a big deal about busing.  Ever since I was a little kid I've been riding the bus (laughter).  And then I was see people having, you know, all these conniptions up north and everything about busing.  I said what are they talking about, I like riding the bus you know, I mean I like riding the bus.  'Cause after eight years of walking next door to the elementary school [East Moorhead School; James C. Rosser Elementary School, Moorhead, Mississippi], I wa- loved that we actually got a chance to move around.
Speaker 1: Yeah, seven miles is, is even within walking distance almost--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it wasn't that bad, it wasn't that bad.  But, people made a big deal out of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's, this is [HistoryMaker] B. B. King's hometown, right Indianola [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Yeah Indianola, he really actually is outside on Inverness [Mississippi] which is six miles away.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, but Indianola is the biggest town near there.  But, he's an Inverness boy.
Speaker 1: So, there, now what was, so you did have some laboratories in Indianola?
Speaker 2: Yes, a, after the ti- after, you know, desegregation was ordered, but never happened.  They burnt they school down.  They came up with this Indianola Academy [Indianola, Mississippi] so the white kids wouldn't have to go to school with us.  They came up with a private school system.
Speaker 1: So, they burnt the public school down?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then built a brand new one.
Speaker 1: Built a--
Speaker 2: Brand new--
Speaker 1: --a private school--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Indianola High School [sic. Indianola Academy], it's still there.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So, really there's no desegregation at all now, all these years later, in Mississippi.  Except in certain pockets and in bigger towns.  But, in certain pockets like Indianola, you're not, you're not integrated now.
Speaker 1: So, in Indianola the black students go to the public school and--
Speaker 2: Right, everybody goes to Indianola High.
Speaker 1: --then the white (unclear)--
Speaker 2: The, the academy.
Speaker 1: The academy?
Speaker 2: It's a amazing how many white folk can afford private school rates.  And, and that's just a fact.  It, it, it hasn't happened.  Elementary School either, you know, it's, it's tough.  So, these, it's still segregated, you know.  I mean Morgan Freeman you remember the big rift with the kids and the, the prom.  I think it was Charleston [Mississippi].  I may be wrong, forgive me if I'm wrong but, that whole thing, you would think that wouldn't be an issue.  But, it's still an issue.  Or even look at the little, the interracial family with the Cheerios commercial it just came up, with the little baby, cute little baby.  And here people all on, all over, you know, upset over that.   You would think, really.  Okay, you have a African American gentleman with a white wife with a interracial baby, you know we see that all the time.  But, that 'caused a national uproar on social media.  So, so we have a long way to go.  I do think that they're, these people are in the minority though.  And we have a long way to go.
Story_ID: 639168
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher at Indianola High School [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Well the favorite, most favorite teacher at Gentry High School [Indianola, Mississippi] was probably Otis Anthony, my chemistry teacher, probably Otis Anthony my favorite.  But I named the other folk, for the other reasons, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Mrs. Kent [ph.] taught me how to write and have a love for the English language.
Speaker 1: Did you, now do you still, I, I, I believe you wanted to be a doctor right in high school?  You still that was still your dream?
Speaker 2: I did, I never let go of that, but there was challenges to do less and settle, you know, go and play football and just be a, you know, not just be but, like my dad [James Rosser, Sr.] a principal.
Speaker 1: So, were you a football star, in, in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I have a hundred scholarship offers.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (unclear)--
Speaker 2: That's a interesting story.
Speaker 1: What position did you play?  What position did you--
Speaker 2: Offensive lineman and nose guard.  Offense guard, nose guard and what's interesting about it is that I came up loving football and watching it.  And I always wanted to be a Ole Miss Rebel, that's the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi].  Now, you know they have a Confederate flag as their mascot.
Story_ID: 639169
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is interesting, now why that and did you not make the connection that they were like, as a team determined to stay white and they actually were, would turn back the clock--
Speaker 2: Well, I, that's an interesting question now that you getting me to think about it.  What was it that drove me?  All when I was coming up I told you I always wanted to achieve.  I always wanted a chance to compete with people who were Caucasians, 'cause I, I never thought I was a second class citizen I wanted a chance to show that we were equal.
Speaker 1: Now, now, the I just wanted to, it just occurred to me if you live in Mississippi and you're watching Mississippi television--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --this is the norm, I mean, I mean the Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi] is the--
Speaker 2: It's, it's the mecca, that's right, the state team, Mississippi State [Mississippi State University, Starkville, Mississippi] was also, but prestige was, was with Ole Miss, because of the national championship and the bowl games with Johnny Vaught the coach.  So, I actually felt that I actually felt that was reachable for me.  I actually felt that.  That even going to Ole Miss, now you remember James Meredith, they, they, they kill people and I remember when I went to school there, they still had his room painted a different color.  (Laughter) Yeah--
Speaker 1: So they, I mean what was the significance of that, they (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, because it was different so your room is c- painted a different color, it, it significant of that this a designated room where the nigger lived, still. So I came up wanting to compete I felt in my heart that if I went to the same school you went to, same courses you went to you gonna have to recognize me.  And respect that I'm on the same level as you.  That was my way of thinking.  I had to prove, I felt I had to prove that.  And I had to prove it, not just for me, I had a sense of a greater purpose.  'Cause my parents [Marjorie Mitchell Rosser and James Rosser, Sr.] always said, "Every time you leave this door you represent more than you.  You're representing our race."  Now, that's what my parents told me.  Now, even today I co- conduct myself in a manner.  I dress, you won't see me dressing too causal.  I will come dressed, why?  Well, two things, big guy you can't get away with what little guys get away with, in fashion.  And also you have to look respectable.  'Cause you're carrying, you're carrying a race on your back.  That I was aware of that, so early on I said I want to go to the University of Mississippi.  And I'll never forget when James Meredith went there and they had all the riots.  I was undeterred.  I'm a play ball, be the first black athlete at the University of Mississippi.  I declared that as a young kid.  And I didn't care about Colonel Rebel or the Confederate flag.  'Cause in a lot of ways, see I was a, I love reading about the Civil War, it's interesting.  But, I was looking at it from the standpoint of military history.  And then how these people were such gentlemen even with this savagery you I, I, it was a mystique, there was a camaraderie even from the people from the point, even though you were on the other side there was respect.  So, I, I knew everything there was about the Civil War.  Now, this was as a kid reading.  And I still said I'm gonna go there.  And I'm gonna show 'em I'm just as good.  So, when I came around to that I was told by the University of Mississippi that they were not ready for Negro players, yet.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, (unclear) so this is when you're a senior in high school [Gentry High School, Indianola, Mississippi] (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Senior in high school.  Now, you have to remember what happened to me when I was a senior in high school.  I, my, my year that I thought I was gonna be a junior turned out to be senior.  'Cause I had been taking all these courses and going to summer school, to work and all like that.  Well, all of a sudden I had too many credits and they called me, I'll never forget with what I thought was my junior year.  The principal walked out and said, "You gonna have to get outta here."  "What do you mean?"  "This is your last year.  Well, look at all your credits, you got too many credits, unless you gonna take all home economic classes."  So, all of a sudden I'm a senior now, instead of a junior and there's this frenzy, recruiting frenzy.  So, I had all these people come in there.  But, I only wanted to go to University of Mississippi.  So, I was told, I'll never forget Johnny Vaught told me they weren't ready for black players.  That devastated me, devastated me.
Story_ID: 639170
Speaker 1: You were thinking about the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi], primarily because of the football?
Speaker 2: Well, and the prestige, in, in, in the state.  And if you're a bl-, there's not many black, James Meredith one of the few that had gone there.  It was like a history maker (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, you were (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I've always embraced being a history maker, I've never been intimidated by that.  And, and, and I guess that's from early age.  And so, when he told me, I respected him, because he told me the truth, they're not ready.  Now, interesting enough, the reason I was really disappointed is because the year before Coolidge Ball became the first African American athlete at the University of Mississippi ever in the history of the institution.  Basketball player from my high school [Gentry High School, Indianola, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: So, Coolidge Ball played basketball at Ole Miss, but--
Speaker 2: He's the first African American--
Speaker 1: --the football team just wasn't ready?
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: There's a, I don't know if you agree with this but it seems as if there's sort of a, some kind of paramilitary aura around football.  The people, I mean it's almost like going to war.  They have helmets on, flags, and it doesn't seem, it doesn't seem like basketball is the same kind of--
Speaker 2: Well, well also the popularity, it's much more aggressive, the, the history--
Speaker 1: Well, the crowds are bigger, 'cause it's a bigger stadium--
Speaker 2: Exactly and the history of excellence by the University of Mississippi, they won national championships all this sort of thing so.  It, it's like Nebraska [University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oklahoma [University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma], really if you look at the history.
Speaker 1: Well, southern football is big.
Speaker 2: It's big anyway, as you know that, that's a big thing.  So, you got that, so it's the creme de la creme.  So, the, the other thing is because it's creme de la creme, they don't want it polluted, with, with Negro players.  Now because of that I signed with the University of Florida [Gainesville, Florida], not wanting to go there.  It was just a second choice.  And got there, never could fit in and I was sixteen years of age.
Story_ID: 639171
Speaker 1: Now did you, before we get you there, did you when you graduated from Indianola [Gentry High School, Indianola, Mississippi] did you graduate with any, with honors?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I think I was a, that was an interesting think I was like I was not first to second in a class I think I was like fifth.  But, as it turned out they had altered my grades, they had altered my grades.  We had our transcript and when they did the final calculation I had gotten straight A's all the way out.  They had be having two Bs.  So, then we went up there once we found this out, I wasn't first or second.  My father [James Rosser, Sr.], the only time he's ever gone to school with me, was to say, "Look, here are the records here, how are you going to explain it."  "Oh, it looks like we made a mistake but it's too late now."  That when the reality hit me of how the world can be.
Speaker 1: So, they--
Speaker 2: So, here you have evidence that somebody altered the grades, so that two other people from Indianola could actually be the first and second.  'Cause they looked down at Moorhead [Mississippi], they looked down at Moorhead.  Now, (Unclear) McDaniel [ph.] had straight A's.  He played, he was, he was an end, he went on to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and everything like that.  But, but they, the second person my b- my grades were better.  And my dad came up we saw that.  That was an interesting moment for me.  It's like reality really slapped me in the face.  And I think I was bitter with that, for a long time.  And the other thing that happened is that I didn't feel the identity with the school because I skipped a grade so the class I was in I didn't know them.  I didn't know them, so even now I haven't been back to a reunion or anything.  I, I just don't have a sense of belonging.  And I think the memory still scars me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's an interesting thing of subculture how black people can be to black people because of where you live.  'Cause I'm in Moorhead, you always look down on the Moorhead folk.  We always gotta look down on somebody or step on somebody.  And I, I hate that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 639172
Speaker 1: The University of Florida [Gainesville, Florida], now, University of Florida probably hadn't been that long integrated?
Speaker 2: No, but they had integrated.
Speaker 1: This, this is in 19--
Speaker 2: You're talking about 197--I graduated in '71 [1971], from high school [Gentry High School, Indianola, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay, 1971.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, University of Florida.
Speaker 2: Doug Dickey had just come over, from University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee], very--and, and just never fit in there.  And, and wound up having a chance, now the next year University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi] they became integrated with Ben Williams and James Reed.  Ben Williams a defensive lineman.  James Reed a running back.  And I actually went back to the University of Mississippi with the idea of sitting out and then playing for them.  And as it turned out, well I was sixteen going into college.  I was, I had been doing all these credits I was almost getting out of college at nineteen (laughter).  So, I, he said, "Well look are you going to stay extra and play two extra years of football?"  'Cause you had sat out and there were different eligibility rules.  And then stay in grad school for two years.  And then I got a chance to go to medical school. I (unclear) get a chance to go to medical school.  So, had I to let go of my football dream to go ahead, and go ahead and pursue medicine.  'Cause I, I loved playing sports, I loved the, the whole thing of athletics.  But, I really wanted to be a doctor.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So--
Speaker 2: Really wanted to be a doctor.
Speaker 1: All right in terms of your, you took like a premed course I guess?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Yeah always (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Biology?
Speaker 2: The only black person, yeah, always the only black person, or one or two.  My friend Sidney Brown [ph.] who came, University of Mississippi, with me.  We were like the second and third black person to go through premed.  And actually, at Ole Miss, and go onto medical school.
Story_ID: 639173
Speaker 1: Were you prepared, I mean, you know?
Speaker 2: Was we, were--no I wasn't prepared.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had to work a lot harder 'cause I didn't have all the courses that these kids had.  I had to come in there and, man, work hard.  I'm from a handicapped situation that wasn't my own making.  But, we never complained, complained, we just adapted.  I'll never forget, the, the black people there it was just amazing because nobody had gotten anything more than a C from English lit before, or English comp, as, as a black person.  'Cause every black person knew every black person on the campus of University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi].  And what your grades were.  So, the thing that when I came out and I had got a B in English comp it was like it went through wildfire.  And was (unclear) 'cause nobody had done well.  Had all these great black kids who came from unprepared situations who always wound up dropping out.  And I'll never forget that was a source of pride.  Because they would say we weren't gonna be able to do with this sort of thing and we would do it.  And I came there, I was a youngster, I mean 'cause I was always ahead.  They couldn't even figure out how the heck did you get here this young, and how you staying here and doing well.  So, we were able, I was able to establish my reputation there as being a, of being a, a, a great student.  And the first black fraternity on campus was Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], and I was one of the founding members of that.  Eta Zeta Chapter in, in '73 [1973], they had not had a black Greek society on campus.
Speaker 1: Now, composition I, I was just thinking that composition that is one thing that University of Mississippi is known for.  It's known for its English department?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And its writing courses if nothing else 'cause (unclear)--
Speaker 2: And it's tough.
Speaker 1: --all the writers in Mississippi that have, have come out of--
Speaker 2: It's tough.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) have taught there like Faulkner [William Faulkner], so?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah! Yeah so, so that was a, but, but, people weren't doing well.  You have to realize at that time three black people couldn't meet for more than fifteen minutes in one spot on our campus.  That was in the rule book (laughter).  That was in the rule book.  But, you know what there was so many good people.  Friends today, Mikey Brunt [L. Michael Brunt], who's at Wash U [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] who's an unbelievable world class surgeon.  He was a guy that befriended me.  And to this day, you know, we have just such good feelings about, about each other.  You know, and he didn't go to University of Mississippi medical school [University of Mississippi School of Medicine, Oxford, Mississippi]; he went to another place.  But, but it's just a beautiful thing to talk about those days in organic chemistry.  And all, we always were in those courses together.  And he always spoke to me, always befriended me.  I mean a lot good people were there.  And really, for the most part, I, I think I got through there without a, a lot of problems.
Speaker 1: Okay, how did, I mean did the black students study together, did you have a, were they organized?
Speaker 2: No, no, socially everybody was a crab in the barrel thing. Uh, you know, I mean really wasn't that tight camaraderie everybody wanted to think they were special, and, and individual and, and they didn't do that much.  And, and in fact most of the time people weren't doing well as they had done before and they kind of kept that inside.  I saw we had a lot of people that would drop out.
Speaker 1: No, Black Student Union?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) yes, they did but it wasn't strong, you know what I mean.  As strong as (unclear) we had little simple things, some little organization things.  But, I wasn't, I wasn't really a part of that, as much.  Because I was trying to get out of there, I think.  Well, 'cause I, you know, I wanted to move on.  I wanted to move on.  The whole point why I accelerated through high school [Gentry High School, Indianola, Mississippi] and through college was to get to do what I wanted to do quicker, you know.  I was pushing for that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so was there any particular teachers or administrators or students at the University of Mississippi that stand out in terms of their association with you or?
Speaker 2: Not really, because you know that was a big situation, sterile environment.  Not really had anybody that was forceful, you were, it was, you were on your own (laughter).  You know, you were on your own.  And so, no, nobody there.  I was just, I didn't want to fail.  I didn't want to go home and have people point at me, "Hey there goes Butch Rosser [HistoryMaker Dr. James Rosser, Jr.], he could of done this.  He could of done that."  I heard that all my life, you know.  Somebody went somewhere and could of done this, could of done that.  They're still living on what they could of done.  I, I didn't wanna do that, I had a fear of failure, I really did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A fear of failure.
Story_ID: 639174
Speaker 1: You went to the U- University of Mississippi medical school [University of Mississippi School of Medicine, Oxford, Mississippi], but so, how were your grades and your MCAT scores leading up to school?
Speaker 2: Well, quite, quite frankly I didn't have a 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 average.  I didn't have the highest MCAT scores.  I had good grades, B plus average, I think it was three two or something like that, I can't remember, but what I remember is they had a minority student affairs office down at the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi].  And it was Peter Stewart [Peter H. Stewart].  And Peter Stewart, his job was to go and, you know, and identify, you know, recruits, who were, who were special recruits.  Now, they, that they felt could cu- cut the mustard.  It was almost kind of like the Tuskegee experiment, you know.  With the Tuskegee Airmen, where they recruited, they actively had to recruit folk.  You know, you have to look for right folk, because the prerequisites everybody didn't have, college degrees, et cetera, certain grades in science, et cetera.  So, that was Peter Stewart's job.  And Peter Stewart, I heard him speak.  Also, we went down to visit, he said we could do it.  He got to know me.  And I'm gonna tell you right now that's why I got in medical school.  Because he looked at everything I had given up and everything I had gone through, from the handicapped situation that I started in, and what I was able to do with one hand tied behind my back.  He told is, I'm the only person that he actually went to the admissions committee and said, "If this man does not make it, I'll resign from my job."  That was Peter Stewart.  And because of all the intangibles in my interview I got in.  Now, people talk about, there was no affirmative action at the University of Mississippi.  No affirmative action.  And it was just that you have to be able to cut it.  But, I know in heart I'm in there, because of my intangibles and Peter Stewart.  So, that's how I got in medical school.  So, now I'm getting in medical school and I'm twenty, right, twenty years of age, in medical school.  And with this degree, 'cause other people who come early they didn't get their degree.  They got it after they went to medical school.  And they kind of got a combined B.A., M.D. degree.  But, we were able to do that and get in.  Well, I got married 'cause ever since I was fifteen, I fell in love with this girl [Dana Rosser].  And, and just like my granddaddy, you know, you fall in love with somebody you marry 'em.
Story_ID: 639175
Speaker 1: Did you meet your wife [Dana Rosser] in Indianola [Mississippi] in high school [Gentry High School] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes my senior year.  I'd played baseball with her brother, with her brother before.  But, I didn't get, I didn't know her until my senior year.  And she was a sophomore we were actually in the same grade.  But, remember I got bo- booted up.  So, got married and then when I came to medical school [University of Mississippi School of Medicine, Oxford, Mississippi], you know, found out she's pregnant. We got married in '74 [1974] in October.  And in '75 [1975] the spr- the spring of '75 [1975], started medical school.  Not spring, fall of '75 [1975].  And so, pregnant then had a baby, all of that in medical school.  And I, listen, I failed the s- two courses that year.  I failed two courses.  I failed--
Speaker 1: And that means you --
Speaker 2: I failed two courses and, and I don't know what the thing was, I think being so young and everything happening so fast, I really believe I hit a wall.  I really think it was a, it was an element of depression.  Because what I would do, is rather than go to class, I would go out to the airfield and one of my big hobbies was building radio control airplanes.  And I would just build and fly that.  I, I just was disengaged, I think the, the pressure being a young man in medical school, married, kid and all the other stuff I had been through, accelerating through.  I think it finally caught up on me.  So, right then and there I was facing expulsion.  So, the committee had to come up--they had to decide on that.  I said, "Well I just wanna please have a word."  So, I came in and the fifteen minute oration I gave is still remembered in that school.  The personal plea.
Story_ID: 639176
Speaker 1: What did you say, how did you put it?
Speaker 2: I, I started it out where I said, "Gentlemen, ladies and gentlemen, I want to readily admit that if I looked at the academic rec- academic record of me as a student, you would face a easy decision to expel me of the privilege of being in medical school.  But, I would hope that you being scientists, you would realize that sometimes the obvious is not so obvious."  And I remember this, saying this for the first time in my history, "'Cause you don't know what you don't know.  What I want to do and all I ask to do is to chronicalize extenuating circumstances that impacted my performance.  And, and then contrast that to the backdrop of what made you believe in me in the beginning.  And let you know that, that person you believe in is still here, but, faced some extenuating circumstances."  And I went on basically and talking about those extenuating circumstances.  And I talked to them about what I would differently.  And that speech was still remembered.  So, I got a second chance [at the University of Mississippi School of Medicine, Oxford, Mississippi].  And I never looked back.  Now, the contrast to this is my career could have ended right there.  And then in 2008 I had privilege of being inducted into the University of Mississippi Hall of Fame before sixty thousand people.  I never forgot that second chance I was given.
Story_ID: 639177
Speaker 1: What did you do differently?
Speaker 2: Well, differently what I did is I was able to compartmentalize my personal life challenges as a father and husband, and my commitment as a student. And I was able to put school work aggressively upfront being proactive.  The other big thing I did, I became a teacher.  Gross anatomy I failed, I became an instructor.
Speaker 1: Tell me how did you, I mean?
Speaker 2: Because I read it I knew it, I gone through it before, so I had insight.  And I jumped on that.  And then what helped me is what I eventually become known for now.  I became a teacher, what my parents [Marjorie Mitchell Rosser and James Rosser, Sr.] were.  And by teaching other people and helping others I said I'm gonna help others, 'cause I have an advantage I can navigate you through these waters.  'Cause I felt that I had two things you had to get rid of being ashamed 'cause a lot of the guys that I had gotten in 'head of at the University of Mississippi [University of Mississippi School of Medicine, Oxford, Mississippi] now were coming to join me.  So, you imagine the humiliation of now being ahead of these guys and now they caught up, but I didn't care.  I said, "Look I'm gonna help you get through this easier, than I did."  And I was open about my failures.  So, by doing that, it put me in a leadership mode, and that's somebody who failed.  But, then once you get in a leadership mode you have what?  Leadership responsibilities.  And that's what I used to drive me.  So, gross anatomy, 90- 90s on that, 8- high 80s [percent], in micro same thing, neuroanatomy same thing.  But, the key is I because a teacher, I humbled myself, I became a helper and a teacher for others, that's what changed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I wound up finishing, you know, in the upper middle third of my class.  After that start and excelled clinically.  'Cause I have a way of assimilating information and coming up with diagnoses and, and articulating that.  Very, I had a special gift.  So, once I got out of the basic science I got on the floors I'm disting- I was absolutely a distinguishing young physician.
Speaker 1: Just for the sake of the young people that are aspiring to go to medical school, so the, the first two years are course, coursework?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, science work. You're doing science work, yes.
Speaker 1: You're doing--
Speaker 2: The last two years are clinical.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Where you're working with patients and using what you've learned.
Speaker 1: So, the first couple years are gross anatomy--
Speaker 2: Gross anatomy, neuroanatomy, microanatomy, fi- pharmacology, you know, it's all of those basic science type of courses.
Speaker 1: And the second two--
Speaker 2: And laboratories.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Second two years you're on the wards, you're working with patients, you're helping with their care, your junior and senior.  So, once I got there I, I just I, I was just a great, great clinician.  And like I knew I could always be.  So, then they--that I just breezed through that, after that hiccup.  I breezed through, which God was just such a blessing with that.  But, then the one critical thing that I made I made the decision to go overseas my senior year.  I got out of medical school early so I went to England.  And I read Robeson [Paul Robeson]. I had not been somebody who traveled a lot but I went to England, and that opened my eyes (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 639178
Speaker 1: You mentioned Paul Robeson a number of times?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And what, what is it about Paul Robeson (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I, I've called myself a modern day Robeson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You look at the diversity of Robeson's pedigree, this guy was unbelievable, an athlete, artist, you know, you just go on and on with Robeson, right.  Diverse in fact you figure how could this one guy do so many things?  Well, that's Butch Rosser [HistoryMaker Dr. James Rosser, Jr.].  You look at me and, and you see that, you know, I'm very diverse.
Speaker 1: You mentioned to that you really didn't feel understood in the United States?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You were trying to fit in.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You didn't feel understood.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And you didn't really feel understood until you went over, overseas?
Speaker 2: Yes, more open minded, they allowed me dream, it was Ms. Johnson [ph.] all over again (laughter).  And by being there and different atmosphere.
Speaker 1: So, so where specifically did you go at first, you went to?
Speaker 2: To Brompton Cardiothoracic Institute 'cause I thought I wanted to be a cardiothoracic surgeon.  Which, I found out that I didn't want to do that. But--
Speaker 1: Is this in London [England], or?
Speaker 2: In London, yeah Brompton Road.
Speaker 1: Brompton?
Speaker 2: Brompton Cardiothoracic Institute, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 639179
Speaker 1: So, that opened my eyes, and then came back and I, the thing is I always wanted to be a person of action and that's when the surgical thing came about.  It really came my junior year of medical school.  When Dr. Jim Hardy [James D. Hardy], you know, actually approached me about if I was interested in surgery.  And they had not had any blacks in the surgical program in the University of Mississippi [University of Mississippi School of Medicine, Oxford, Mississippi].  And I had this thing of being the first black to graduate from the University of Mississippi surgical program.  James Hardy was the first person to do a heart transplant.  And Christiaan Barnard in '67 [1967], in South Africa did his first successful one in a human was made possible by the work of Dr. Hardy.  So, a very respected man and I was flattered he knew who I was and thought I could be, could do the right, could have the right stuff.  I loved being able to operate and have and seeing the results of my work right away.  So, I like the instant gratification of surgical healing.  So, I decided to be a surgeon very late.  So, I applied for the University of Mississippi, but as would have it one of my colleagues' frat brothers had gone from the University of Mississippi up to a place at Akron General Medical Center [Akron, Ohio].  And he had talked about how well they treated him, how much experience he got.  And he got paid a lot differently.  So, right at the last moment I switched my ranking to Akron General, and I tell you that was a very special decision that was made.  Because I was able to go to residency where I was treated like a man.  I had all the technological stuff at my disposal, a lot of responsibility, excellent training and just great people.  So, that, that, that's how I got to be a surgeon and how I got to Akron General Medical Center.
Story_ID: 639180
Speaker 1: Now the University of Mississippi [University of Mississippi School of Medicine, Oxford, Mississippi], is there a, medical school, is there any teacher or administrator other than, the gentleman that made it possible for you, for you to go to school, that stood out (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know what, Peter Stewart [Peter H. Stewart] was huge, Charlie Dodgen [Charles L. Dodgen] in the biochemistry department was very huge.  Dr. James Hardy [James D. Hardy] was an important role model.  And Dr. Guyton [Arthur Guyton] in phys- the, one of the fathers of physiology.  These guys just really inspired me either directly or indirectly, by their greatness, for me to try to achieve higher heights.  And, and, and I tell you they've stamped, they put an incredible stamp on my life that drives me even today.  They say you were actually taught be James Hardy, you know, that's a huge thing to say in today's society.  That's one of the greats of surgery.  Or to Dr. Guyton in physiology, oh, oh the guy who wrote the book, was your professor, yeah.  And he was the best teacher I ever seen, he made complex things so simple.  So, these are the people that, you know, that really were icons in my life, that I've tried to emulate and tried to contribute like they did.
Story_ID: 639181
Speaker 1: Now, what about at Akron hospital [Akron General Medical Center, Akron, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Well, Akron I tell ya, I, there are two people that struck me, it was Dr. Douglas Evans, who was the chief of surgery.  He had fought in the Pacific in World War II [WWII].  And, just a tremendous amount of respect.  Unbelievably trained, great skilled surgeon and a great man.  And then Bob Scarcella [Robert Scarcella] he was a chief resident at the time and I saw I, I actually scrubbed in on an operation with he and Dr. Evans and boy that guy had so much confidence.  He it was like, you know, he had so much, he was in charge of that operating room and he was chief resident but he behaved like an attendant.  And I said wow I love this, this place.  And you know what, he could give the, the chief of surgery sit back and the chief of surgery didn't mind it, it was like they were colleagues.  I said oh my god this is different from University of Mississippi [University of Mississippi School of Medicine, Oxford, Mississippi] where all the attendants were god, you were in the back.  So, I said wait a minute I can get paid better, I can have all the best technology, I can do more and have training and I'm gonna be treated like a man too.  I switched, I switched my ranking.  I said this is my number one place and I was be, blessed to get there.  And interesting enough one of the things they discussed, and at the time see, I was 6'4", 360 [pounds].  And people talked about my size, and my weight, but you know what, Dr. Evans didn't let that stand in the way.  And he subsequently, you know, said, "Look this, I believe, is a good kid."  So, I went through five years of training, you know.  Father with kids and I had a great time, great colleagues, a happy time.  I, I it wasn't a chore.  And then the day I finished they actually had asked, asked me to stay.  I stayed on as an attending surgeon and that was an unbelievable compliment for people, to keep you on.  So, that was my residency years.  But, then that was just the beginning I was just going to be a regular general surgeon.  And all of sudden then I become on staff at the, at the medical school, then I start teaching medical students, then I'm teaching residents.  Then, then all of a sudden, okay, here comes this laparoscopic revolution, where we weren't cutting people open anymore.  We were actually having this little bitty holes going in.  And I tell ya it was like that's where I was supposed to be.  'Cause I had been a big video game player throughout my whole life, starting with Pong.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is in the--
Speaker 2: This is 1985 to '90 [1990].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I, I started residency in 1980.  I got out of residency in 1985.  Started my practice there in Akron [Ohio], in 1985.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then five years in practice, instead of cutting you open we had a TV and little small incisions looking at a screen.  So, that's when the whole thing with the gall bladder came about.
Story_ID: 639182
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this now, who, can you tell us something about laparoscopic surgery and who were the pioneers of it and you know?
Speaker 2: Well, laparoscopic surgery, usually open surgery you make a, a big, big incision.  And you do all the work with your hands on the insides.  Laparoscopic surgery you could put gas in the abdomen, blow it up, put little holes in it with these little tubes, and then you can access the abdomen with these long thin instruments and you do all the work looking at TV screens just like a video game.  Now what's the advantage of that?  Instead of a big ol' incision you got little incisions.  So, big operations that would keep you down for a week, two weeks, out of work for three months.  You gone the next day, you back to work in a week to two week.  That's unbelievable, it's a miracle.  It's one of the most major advances in medicine the last century.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, then the problem is nobody got trained to do it.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a issue too in the sense that it's not that, with the way you describe it sounded easy, but I also read, I think, that you even said it's like tying your shoes with chopsticks?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it, imagine having to tie your shoes laces with three foot long chopsticks.  Looking at a TV screen not able to look directly at it.
Speaker 1: And, and image trusting your doctor to do that?
Speaker 2: Yes and then your doctor wasn't trained to it.  That was the issue, everybody was trained traditionally with open, so, then now you gotta make the conversion.  Well, some people were better than others.  And I happen to we- be would be one of those people that happen to be better than the others.  Now, I not only was better than others, but I was not only better, but I could see a vision of where this could go.  So, I actively wanted to innovate, invent and all this.  It was an unbelievable time where everything was so new.  So, that's what started me on my career.  What I am now.  Because, everything has been driven by teaching the world how to do this how to do this modern day miracle.  And how to teach 'em faster and how to make 'em safer.  So, that's what, that changed, that focus changed my whole life.  Because, then I began writing, I begin doing stuff I said I'd never do.  That's why you don't ever say what you would never do.  I never wanted to be an academic physician.  I never wanted to write a paper, then I started writing papers.  I never thought about being an inventor, even though I kicked around with stuff.  But, then I got two patents, ten products with my influence.
Speaker 1: Now, we're, we're gonna get to those things.  But, I just want, want to understand, like how did you, now who trained you to in laparoscopic surgery?  How did you learn it was it difficult?  How was hard was it, and how long did it take to learn it?
Speaker 2: Well, let me tell ya, I didn't get necessarily training.  What I, was exposed to by Dr. Herbert Awender, who's really influenced me quite a bit.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: A-W-E-N-D-E-R, Herbert Awender was European trained.  His father was looking into abdomens without opening them up in 1938.  He passed down to me, the 1938 peritoneoscope that his dad used to take look in people without cutting them open.  So, he taught me how to take a look, but not how to do anything.  So, we basically, he and I once, they said that they were taking gall bladders out, he had gone to Germany and had seen this, 1987.  And he came and told me.  So, he had taught me basic laparoscopy, but we taught ourselves how to take a gall bladder out.  Now, I before I went to any course I had removed, you know, five of these with him.  So, you see it, it wasn't anybody teaching me this.  I just seen that I was adept at this and I could understand it.  And then I started, you know, we had videotape then, so we could look just like playing football, break down the tape.  And then you start getting better.  So, so what happened is that, you know, I just started pushing this thing, inventing this thing, what if-ing this thing.  Drawing stuff out on paper.  And then I, I, once again like in medical school [University of Mississippi School of Medicine, Oxford, Mississippi] they say, "Hey, you're a great teacher of this stuff."  So, I begin teaching. Now that's what put me in the product development, education, traveling the world.   You know, trying to get more people trained.  And, and inventing stuff to help train people.
Story_ID: 639183
Speaker 1: In that regard, I know when I was reading about it, I mean.  So, a lot of the standard tools that are used now, you invented?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, its several products with my name, and I've influenced (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so what did it look like when you first trying to do this, what kind of tools where you using and how did you envision the difference and the changes?
Speaker 2: Well, the big thing is they weren't ergonomically designed.  So, what I tried to contribute is a ergonomic pattern so you could do this without getting tired.  Because, you're in poor ergonomic position.
Speaker 1: How long does it take to do that kind of surgery?  I mean, to do laparoscopic surgery?
Speaker 2: Well, and sometime, some ways it can be shorter than open surgery, 'cause you don't have to take time cutting all this open.  Take time with all this closing.  Sometimes, some inst- in some instances it's lot, you know, more tedious.  And so it could take a little longer.  But laparoscopic surgery has been shown to be just as fast as an open or faster.  And just as safe in the right hands with the right training.  So, the big thing was getting the right hands and the right training.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you try to make 'em ergonomically more--
Speaker 2: I wanted to so your hands aren't in this cramped position.  I--we came out with what we call inline instruments so you can grab 'em just like you would normally grab like this (gesture) instead of like this (gesture).  You can imagine look at the strain, stress and strain.  So, I that was the influence I had.  We had a, also suturing, you have to be able to needle and thread.  But, we didn't have good needle and thread instruments.  So, I can out with the Rosser Signature Series of instruments.  So, also you don't have as much personnel so I came up with a whole system to be a solo surgeon.  So, you could operate safely by yourself, and a system with that.  And so, that's where I started on my journey and writing and investigating and being a scientist.  I started investigating and putting all these paper out.  But, the big interest I had was how do you teach others to do this safely.  And that's where I made my mark.  So, I came up with whole training program based on the military aviation training program called Top Gun.  Where we actually I'd actually develop a boot camp, using some of the methodology of Top Gun.  And instead of taking 350 hours to learn how to do this we were able to get it down with our system to twelve.  So, that was my claim to fame.  In addition we started collecting data.  I felt that surgeons, you should be able to give a surgeon a report card.  A surgeon shouldn't be just a, you know, other (unclear), you know a legend in their own mind.  But, truly be one of the greatest surgeon of all time proven by data.  And so, I started takin- take--getting a database, on folk.  So, with the database I could give you a report card.  Now, with over seven thousand surgeons I can show you a world ranking.  Seven thousand surgeons have gone through this.  So, I could take like these kids I have here and other folk.  I could take them put through, you through the training program.  Tell you where you rank, with other surgeons.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, that's, been a big thing that I've done.  And then the technology, remote control surgery, telementoring, I was the first person to do a remote control surgical mission on global television on the Discovery Health Channel.  First one to do a remote control surgery from the jungle (laughter).  From Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] to the jungles of Ecuador.  I mean there's a, numerous firsts.  And that's my 'Star Trek' days.
