Story_ID: 12632
Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers interview is being conducted with John Andrew Ross, composer, organist, choral director, jazz musician and musical educator.  The interview is being held at his home, 3 Edge Hill Street in Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts.  The date is April 21, 2005.  The interviewer is Robert C. Hayden.  And the videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Mr. HistoryMaker, would you state your full name for us and spell your name?
Speaker 2: John Andrew Ross, R-O-S-S.  John, J-O-H-N, Andrew, A-N-D-R-E-W, Ross, R-O-S-S.  And what else did you want to know, Bob?
Speaker 1: That's, that's--.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's it, okay.
Speaker 1: The next question is straightforward.  Mr. Ross, what year were you born and where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Boston [Massachusetts], December 15, 1940 at the Lying-In Hospital. (laughs)
Speaker 1: Boston Lying-In.
Speaker 2: Boston Lying-In, yes.
Speaker 1: What is your occupation, Mr. Ross?  How do you define your profession?  What do you do?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm a musician.  And out of that has come other various responsibilities.  I'm the minister of music, now emeritus, at the First Parish in Brookline [Massachusetts].  And I'm still connected there, but I have reduced responsibility after eighteen years; the music director of the National Center of Afro-American Artists and the Elma Lewis School [of Fine Arts, Roxbury, Massachusetts], which is a subsidiary component.  I am the producer and the creator of the National Center's production of 'Black Nativity', which is now entering its thirty-sixth year.  And I play the piano and the organ and I teach voice, and what else can I say?  Well, everything I do has something to do with music.  So I guess I'm in the best of all possible worlds because that's really what I love, you know.
Story_ID: 12633
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food, John?
Speaker 2: What is my favorite food?  Well, now, you threw me curve ball.  I love food, and I had a reputation for eating.  But since I've gotten older, I've--my appetite somehow has curbed itself.  I, I didn't have anything to do with it.  And my, I just--the only thing I say when they say, people say to me, well, what would you like to eat?  I say, anything except lobster (laughs) because A, it's too expensive, and it's too rich for me.  I think I'm about--just about everything else.  In the seafood category, I just about eat everything, fish, chicken.  I'm--I don't do a lot of eating of meat.  Favorite food, it would be hard to say because one of my favorite meals isn't even something that contains a lot of what we used to call roughage.  I have a--I'm very fond of a mixture I make in my blender, which is basically an envelope of [Carnation brand] instant breakfast of chocolate flavor with coffee ice cream by Starbucks [coffee company] and milk and cream, and oh, it's so good, and I have it every day (laughs) (mic scratching).  I got into the habit years ago, and it's almost an addiction I, dare I say, almost an addiction cause there's real, you know, coffee in it.  And, but it is nutritious.  And then in the evening I usually prepare for myself--lately, I've been on this, I've been making my own fish chowder, which is delicious and things that.  I do cook.  I used to do a lot of cooking, and, but that was when I was by myself.  And I always felt, this is a little bit indulgent to sit down with candles on the table and slicing and dicing for hours just so I could sit down and feed my own face.  So I got out of the habit, but now I have two friends of mine who share this apartment.  So when, when, when the mood strikes them, and they feel like eating, I will fix something.  It's hard to say what my favorite food is because I really enjoy everything.
Speaker 1: I think we have a good sense of your cuisine.
Speaker 2: I, oh, and I have, my three cookbooks are, I have a, two volumes of Julia Child, 'Mastering the Art of French Cooking', and the when the, hundred, best recipe book, published by 'Cooks' [Illustrated] magazine, and 'The Way to Cook', by Julia Child.  And it's in those--that's the kind of area I work in.  I've done, I've, I've, I've worked with 'Fanny Farmer Cookbook' and stuff like that.  I love to cook, and I, you know, I learned to cook, and then I said, "This is ridiculous.  I can't just spend all that time on me."  It seemed so indulgent.  And, and what happened, the--I was so sure, and I was in a, a building where the person across from me became connected with us, the National Center [of Afro-American Artists, Boston, Massachusetts], but at the time he was just graduated from college.  And I introduced him to a friend of mine, Odette Bery, who was a chef, one of the great chefs in Boston at the time back in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s].  And ultimately, he went to work for her.  And he became a chef, learned how to cook on the job.  And the result was that he would knock on my door three times out of seven, per week, and he'd say, "Well, I've got swordfish" or "I have bluefish" or whatever.  "Well, what do you have?  We'll put it together."  So we, I got into the habit of combining, pooling our talents.  And, and that was the first I'd ever had to cook for anybody but me.  So finally, Marshall got married--his name was Marshall Wisoff (ph.), and for years, he was, he worked with us, ultimately, as the head of Capezio [dance apparel] store in the National Center.  And when he went to get married, I said, "Gee, this feels strange for me to be cooking like this for just one person again."  And so I said, "I'd better stop that."  And at that point, I sort of went to things like salads, simple food, you know.  And I got off of the, I got away from the habit of making really nice elaborate things.  But I do like all that stuff, and if I were on the rubber chicken circuit, which was part of what we used to do, Ms. Lewis and I, Elma Lewis, I, I ate a lot of very fine food in other, other venues, but I didn't have to cook it so.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: A favorite time of year.  Well, of course, the 'Black Nativity', which is the Christmas spectacle, I guess you'd call it, well, it's my favorite time of year.  It would have been anyway because it's a wonderful holiday, and being a musician and a church musician at that, I--it has so many wonderful memories, and, of course, it helps to create so much joy and happiness, the, the whole observance of the Christmas holiday.  So, and then, of course, thirty-five years ago now, I started the product--our production of 'Black Nativity' at the National Center.
Speaker 1: It's hard to believe its been that long.
Speaker 2: Yes, I--it's hard to believe too (laughs) it was a minute ago.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) It seems like it was yesterday and today.
Speaker 2: (Laughs) I said to a friend of mine, I said, "You know, I--a minute ago I was twenty nine."  That's the year I started with the center, and I said, "The next time I turned around, I was sixty-four."  And I said, "What happened?  I don't feel any different except that I may stumble around a little bit.  I lose my equilibrium, but other than that, it's the same."  But it has been such a reward to, in a sense make, in one sense, you're making Christmas or you're making some time of festivity or you're making some kind of joy for big audiences that come to see it.  And we've gotten such a great response from the public because many people who've never seen it, and then who come to see it, and they say, "Well, now, Christmas has a new meaning."  And we've, we've used it as a vehicle to combine artifacts from our culture as black people and cultural artifacts, musical artifacts, traditions, all that, anything that, of that sort, is poured into this vessel, which is the production.  So it's, it's really invested with a lot of meaning, although it may not be obvious as you're watching it that you're being given a tutorial of sorts.  But that is exactly what happens, and in order to do that we have to make sure that our casts which--the youngest member this year was three.  It's a big cast of a hundred and twenty five or so people from little people up to adult.  And so, we have to spend a lot of time in that eight-week rehearsal period putting it together every year to make sure that everybody who's new on board is--has internalized the meaning of everything we try to do and try to display because it's not only a cultural experience and a musical experience, and a spiritual experience and a Christmas experience, all those things combined.  And it's probably--it tries to unite our purposes, philosophically and educationally as an institution.  So it carries a lot of responsibility.  And we have been gratified that the, the public has received this.  We, we offer it to the public, general public, as a kind of a Christmas card from the black community to the rest of the world.  People say, "How come there's so many white people in the audience?"  I say, "Well, if you look up there on the stage, you'll see the black community is up there." (laughs)  I mean, I don't know that there's anybody who hasn't been in it that's in our black community, and their children, and by now, we're working on third generation.  And, but that accounts for why we have (laughs), not a, not exactly a diverse audience.  But when you combine the cast of a hundred and fifty or so, and the people in the audience, it gives you a good sense of what the community looks like in all of its parts.
Speaker 1: Later on in the interview, I want to come back and talk about you and Langston Hughes, and at that point, we'll say more about 'Black Nativity'.  Let me ask you one other question.  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying that you use from time to time?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have many.
Speaker 1: Well, give me one.
Speaker 2: One of them is "Things are like the people they happen to."  That's been an expression I've offered as an observation many times because sometimes when we see people getting themselves into a, a thicket of trouble and woe and so forth, they have to step back and look and say, "Well, now, wait a minute," that somehow it all computes because that, things are like the person to who they happen.  A more extended piece is the, the letter from Brother Giovanni [Giocondo], 12th [sic, 16th] century writer, Benedictine [sic, Franciscan] monk who, who wrote.  And it was commum-, communication between him and a member of, of perhaps a royal family or at least in Italy, a duke or somebody, I--but he is, he was offering a sort of condolence.  And he said, "There is, there are many things that I can give you that you have not, but there's much that, though I cannot give it, you can take."  The--and he goes on to say the--he talks about the world, about the, the, "No heaven can come to us, except our hearts find rest and to take, take heaven, no peace can come to us except--and, and it, it goes on and that they--our hearts find peace, take peace.  The gloom of the world is but a shadow that behind it, it within reach, is joy."  The--it goes on to point out that, "We can see in anything that's apparently gloomy.  We can see that there's a radiance and glory in the darkness, could we but see.  And to see, we have but to look."  "I beseech you," Fra Giovanni [Giocondo] says, "to look."  So it's a wonderful, balance kind of utterance about the things, the gifts maybe of the spirit that we can claim.  We have to know how to unearth them and how to see that even in darkness is hidden, some kernel of joy which we can claim.  And I guess that's the, the spirit of that letter, that you, you have to claim these things for yourself.
Speaker 1: Very cogent.
Speaker 2: Yes, and then you won't be too troubled by what happens in the world, in the, this immediate present, which sometimes looks pretty grim. (laughs)
Story_ID: 12634
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your family background.  We'd like to talk about family history so that people who use your interview and listen to you understand the context and the framework and the foundation of your life.  And that, of course, starts with your mother.  Would you give me her name and--?
Speaker 2: Her name is Olga Evelyn White before she--.
Speaker 1: And when was she born?
Speaker 2: --was married.
Speaker 1: When, when was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in 1917 in Everett [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: In Everett, okay.
Speaker 2: She was born, her mother, Jama, J-A-M-A, Jama Pope--Jama Annie Pope White was by the time she was raising my mother and later her brother, she had, had a little difficult marriage.  And so she was divorced when the children were quite young.  So in those days, which would be back in the teens and twenties [1913-1919 and 1920s], in the twentieth century, she had to, she was a single--essential a single mother.  This is my grandmother.  And she was raising these two little children, and she was a very, very brilliant and eccentric woman, who had studied law.  And she combined her--and, and music.  She originally came here to study music at the Conservatory, the New England Conservatory [of Music, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Where was she from?
Speaker 2: She was from Danville, Virginia.  And she was one of three siblings, she, and her sister, Jewel, and her brother, William.  So she had these two children.  And my mother being one of the two.  And I always start with my grandmother because she was quite a colorful character.
Speaker 1: You remember her?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about her.  Give me her name again.
Speaker 2: Jama, J-A-M-A.
Speaker 1: J-A-M-A, White?
Speaker 2: Jama A. White.  Jama Annie--she was originally Pope, Jama Annie Pope White.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me what you know about her?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) And the Jama, it's interesting.  Yet her brother's name was James W. Pope--I'm sorry.  Her father was James W.  So Jama is a, is sort of cribbed from James.
Speaker 1: James.
Speaker 2: And he was a lawyer here in Boston.  He was what they called in those days a master in chancery.  And he had an office up in Pemberton Square.  I know that my sister--he was, he was the first black graduate of Boston University's law school, but they didn't know that. (laughs).  My sister [Paula Ross] went to look him up, alumni records, and she said, "My great-grandfather was one of the first black graduates of Boston University, and his name was James W. Pope."  And they said, "Well, we have a James W. Pope, but he's not black."  She said, "Yes he is." (laughs)  Well, if you understand about things like, that happened in the, in the Virginias, both Virginia and West Virginia, you'll find there's lots of the confusion as to whether somebody was--what they were racially and what they were mixed with.  So anyway, he came up here, and then my grandmother came up here, his daughter.  And then my mother was born, and she grew up in Everett and Malden [Massachusetts] with her brother, Bill.  And she met my dad, and they were married.
Story_ID: 12635
Speaker 1: My father was from Cambridge [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Cambridge, okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, and his name was Melvin E. [Everard] Ross.
Speaker 2: Melvin E. Ross?
Speaker 1: Melvin E. Ross.
Speaker 2: And when was he born?
Speaker 1: He was born, let me see, in 190--I think it was 1908.  It was nine and a half years difference between him and my mom.
Story_ID: 12636
Speaker 1: Let me stay with your mother [Olga Evelyn White Ross] for just a minute.  She grew up in Everett [Massachusetts].  Did she ever talk to you about her growing up years in Everett?
Speaker 2: Well, much of her growing up years were--she was somewhat dazzled by my grandmother's [Jama Annie Pope White] personality.  She was a brilliant and eccentric woman.  So much of what she tells about her life has to do with the adventures that my grandmother had.  My grandmother went to law school at Portia Law School, which is now the New England School of Law [Boston, Massachusetts].  And by a series of misadventures, she ended up suing her law school. (laughs)  And I, I remember I was hitching a ride at the university, I was at the U [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], and I was hitching a ride back into town to where I was staying.  And I got into somebody's car, and they said, "I'm on my way to law school, Portia Law School."  And I said, "Oh, yes, my grandmother went to Portia Law School and she sued them."  And the person driving the car almost cracked up the car because he said, "Is she the one?"  I said, "Yes."
Speaker 1: She had a reputation, huh?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, oh, man, they--she was one of the legends, I guess.  And at any rate, she had this, she was a Justice of the Peace and notary public, and she practiced, as you could do in those day, you could practice law even if you hadn't yet passed the bar.  And she didn't wait to take the bar.  She--in those days, people read law, that is to say, they apprenticed themselves with an attorney.  And in doing that, they acquired most of their knowledge even before they went to law school.  So that's what she did.  She read law.  She apprenticed herself with an attorney, and she went on and became quite a, an effective advocate for the poor, actually.  She, she, she had a sort of a Robin Hood-esque, spirit about her.  And she was always trying to help the underprivileged.  And to that end, she had several pieces of property in the South End [neighborhood in Boston].  And she had rooming houses.  And people who stayed in her rooming houses always had a story to tell.  And she, most curious about everybody's life, would, would sort of inquire as to, "Well, how are you?  Now, tell me about your life."  And so, and she discovered all kinds of things.  Like there was a, the story she told about her and the backstreet heiress, who was a woman who apparently had fallen on pretty hard times, but who had come from a very wealthy family in the West Coast.  And, and my grandmother helped to reconstruct this woman's life.  We don't know what caused her to move--be brought low, but it wasn't anything like alcohol or any kind of substance abuse.  It was just some incredible difficulty and unhappiness.  So my grandmother, among other things like that, that she did, she researched and found finally this woman's family in California.  And she tells this story with great relish, how the--one day, a real fancy car pulled up.  She had been in touch with woman's family, and they had been trying to find this woman for ages and ages and ages.  Now, the car pulls up, and they come to take her back to her--the bosom of her family in California.  And my grandmother had seen to it that this lady had a nice lovely dress and everything.  And, but that's her story about the backstreet heiress.  And she has, she had millions of stories like that.  Well, anyway, your original question was about my mother's childhood.  Well, my mother's childhood was sort of infused with all of these adventures that she and her mother, she observed, had.  And since they had boarders, each person--there was, there was, stories just abounded, you know.  And, and I would sit when I was child, and my grandmother would come over.  She traveled--in those days, she hadn't learned how to drive yet.  She was already a grandmother.  She learned how to drive when she was fifty.  But in those days, she was still traveling on the 'T' [MBTA, Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority] from Everett.  And she would come over, and I was in a thrall about who these stories that she told, how she had won in court, and how she had sued this person on behalf of one of her boarders and this and that and the other thing, not the least of which was the story of how she hauled the entire board of the Portia School, Law--Portia Law School into court because, they had, they had taken sides with her ex-husband who had convinced them that they had trained this woman--they didn't like women in those days very much in law school. But they, now, they had--he said, "You see what you've done.  You have trained her to subvert the intent of the law, and you should be ashamed.  And you--she should not be your student."  This is my grandfather.  And so they agreed with it, and so they, they let her go.
Speaker 1: And she brought--,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Took them to court.
Speaker 1: --took Portia Law to court.  What, what decade are we talking about?  We're in the 1800s now?
Speaker 2: No, not quite.  She was born in the late 1800s.  I think it's '85 [1885], something like that.  And she died at ninety three.  But it would have had to have been the 1910s.
Story_ID: 12637
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father, Melvin Ross?
Speaker 2: Melvin Everard Ross.
Speaker 1: I remember your father well.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So go ahead.
Speaker 2: Well, he's a Canterbridgian, he comes from Cambridge [Massachusetts].  He grew up in what must have been kind of a fertile and wonderful period in Cambridge cause Cambridge was still--very much reflected the, the presence of Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And people like my dad who grew up, grew up sometimes masquerading as Harvard students because you had the culture of Harvard, and you had the culture of North Cambridge, which is where he was raised for the most part, and when they were young dating and things like that, you know, they, they would, they wouldn't mind being confused as yet another Harvard student.  And, and they enjoyed that, and, and the whole, well, the ambiance of Cambridge at the time and Harvard Square and all of that was pretty much the way it was when I grew up too, and, and, and as it is now.  It's sort of a time warp that exists in its own dimension.  At any rate, the black community was a very cohesive community even then, and though it was distributed across the state of Massachusetts--we recall that W.E.B. Dubois comes from far Western Massachusetts--but it was a cohesive community, and I would say there was no more than one degree, probably two degrees of separation between one black person and the other.  In fact, it, that's still pretty much the same today.  You know, if you don't know somebody, then it probably turns out that both of you know [Robert] Bob Hayden.  And that's what I mean when I say there's two degrees of separation.  So my father was from Cambridge.  My mother [Olga Evelyn White Ross] was from Everett [Massachusetts].  They met, and socially, people, those that were from Cambridge, those that were from Everett, those that were from Brockton [Massachusetts] and Sharon [Massachusetts] and different places, all the way out to the western suburbs [of Boston], Worcester, Greenfield, etc., had some social connection.  And so you had this large group of people that were spread out all over the state.  But in my mother's day and my father's day, even as it is now, everybody, just about everybody knew everybody else.  And it was always of some of remark, people would come to visit you from out of town, and they'd say, as you walked down the street with them and they'd say "Hello" to this one and that one, and they'd say, "You know everybody!"  And they would say that to anybody who lived here because it, they couldn't, you know, they had never seen that degree of acquaintance the people had.  But that's, that was unique to this situation here in Boston and New England.
Story_ID: 12638
Speaker 1: Let me continue, John, telling us a little bit more about your father [Melvin Everard Ross], born and raised in, in North Cambridge [Massachusetts].  What did he tell you about his childhood, his growing up here?
Speaker 2: Well, he had a very, very, very unusual experience.  He was born with polio.  And I remember--not too long ago, before my mother [Olga Evelyn White Ross] died, I happened to come across a picture of this adorable little boy who was all, had braces on his leg.  And he was leaning on a crutch and everything, and he had this wavy hair, and he's a beautiful little boy.  And I looked at this person, and I said, "Who is this?"  And my mother said, "That is your father," because I had known from the beginning of my life that he had been stricken with polio and was not expected to survive.  And, in fact, in the course of his mother taking him back and forth to the, the hospital, the Boston Floating Hospital [later the Floating Hospital for Children, Boston, Massachusetts] and so forth, they tried to convince her that they had to take his leg.  And she said, "No."  Well, she was right, and they were wrong.  They didn't take his leg.  They thought he was gonna have gangrene, and they were gonna have to remove it, etc., etc., etc.  And the, the upshot of it all was that he survived the polio, and then he went on to become a star athlete in Cambridge in Rindge Technical High School [later Rindge School of the Technical Arts at Cambridge Rindge and Latin High School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 1: In what sport?
Speaker 2: --and he ran--.
Speaker 1: Track?
Speaker 2: Track, football, anything you could name.  And when he went to college, he went to Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], and he did the same thing down there.  Now, he was there--I should mention also, his roommate was Langston Hughes.  So he had a, a literary background he didn't even know about (laughs) because Langston was then a student and had transferred to Lincoln from somewhere, Columbia [University, New York, New York], I think.
Speaker 1: So they were at Lincoln, when?  About, let's see, he was born in 1908.  So what was, late '20s [1920s], I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So was that--we're gonna come to it, was that your connection to Langston then, through your father?
Speaker 2: Exactly.  When I was a little boy, Langston used to come up.  I think his publisher, Alfred [A.] Knopf, had offices here or something.  And he was in and out of Boston, sometimes to do poetry readings and so forth, but from the time I, earliest time I can remember, he would stay with us in Roxbury [neighborhood of Boston] at 107 Townsend Street.  And he and my father, they were frat [fraternity] brother, Omega Psi Phi Fraternity.  And they remained close, close friends until Langston died [in 1967].
Speaker 1: What did your father do when he finished Lincoln?  What was your father's occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, when he finished--actually, he left Lincoln because his father had died.  And he felt responsible for his mother and his two sisters.  So he didn't complete four years at Lincoln.  He came back because he felt responsible for--.
Speaker 1: They were still here in Cambridge?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And I should point out, his mother was Irish.  She was an Irish woman married to a black man.  And things were not--the world wasn't kind to her because, you know, she would be sitting, she was a seamstress.  And she'd be working with other Irish ladies who were seamstresses, and they were always passing snide remarks about somebody who would sleep with a black man and something like that.  And it was hard.  Anyway, for many reasons, not the least of which was that, you know, her, her life here was somewhat troubled, although she didn't--it didn't affect her.  She went on--we have a family biography that was compiled by a cousin of mine, Phyllis Braxton, who is a scholar.  She went and put together a whole bunch of material about the Ross's because my grandmother was from Ireland.  And she came here, and she worked in a hotel, and she met one John Andrew Ross, who worked at the hotel too.  And they fell in love, and because they were a mixed couple, they were not welcome--well, they were, they continued to be employed, but it caused lots of people some consternation.  So what they did was, they dated in the South End [neighborhood of Boston], which was the only racially-mixed, really, really mixed urban community, more so than any other in the country.  And so when they went out and dated and so forth, they went and they spent much of their time in the South End, which put them in some proximity to some of the great jazz venues and so on and so on.  And they married, and they had my father and two daughters.  My--one of who still survives.  My father is deceased and his sister, Gladys, died at the age of ninety-six.  And his next sister, Inez, is still with us, and she's about ninety-two.  They had a, the, the history of that part of the family is compiled by my cousin, Phyllis Braxton.  And it was, I've read it.  It's very, very interesting because you have, on the one hand, the story of my father's father, who was John Andrew Ross, the first, after whom I'm named.  And he had grown up in Virginia, and among other things, I think Robert E. Lee's horse used to be let loose to run through the town 'cause he was much a part of the scene.  And, you know, it was quite all right to have this horse trotting around, and everybody knew the horse and so forth.  And he came up from that part of Virginia, and he met his, the, the woman he married up here.  They worked together in a hotel in Dorchester [Massachusetts].  And she was Josephine Halliday (ph.) was her name.  And they raised this family in what would have been very difficult times for anything, any kind of racially-mixed marriage like that.  But, nevertheless, my father went off to Lincoln and became an Omega, fraternity, and quite proud of all of that.  It, it never--it seems to me that, except for the occasional comment that people would make about my father having an Irish temper, (laughs) he didn't seem to feel identified with, with that.  He was--and, and I think it had a lot to do with his upbringing in Cambridge because his friends in Cambridge were all black, and they were a very cohesive group of people.  And they socialized with other black people from Everett, Malden, Randolph [towns in Massachusetts] and so forth, and, and he just grew up identifying, you know.
Speaker 1: What was his ultimate occupation (unclear)?
Speaker 2: He went to work--first, he did barbering.  He came up here, he got a job barbering and painting houses and things like that.
Speaker 1: Now, this is your grandfather now?
Speaker 2: No, this is my father.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And then he went to work, I guess he was thirty-seven years in the post office.  Now, it's important to remember that jobs for black men were scare except if you worked for the post office or you worked for the Union of Sleeping Car Porters, which was A. Philip Randolph's union and which--and there were plentiful jobs for black men in those two areas.  And my father was fortunate to get a position in the federal government, in the post office, which he maintained for thirty-seven years, and then he retired.  But I remember going down to see him at the South Postal Annex [Boston, Massachusetts], you know, and my grand--my father's, I mean my mother's father also was a postal employee.  And I guess that a lot to do with how they came together (unclear)--.
Speaker 1: All, all of the men in my family save one were postal workers--.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --including my father and my grandfather who was a Roxbury, from the South, he was a Pullman porter.  So (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: And then there was, that was one whole group of men.  And then another whole group of men were chefs on the Boston and Albany Railroad [Company].  If they weren't porters, they were chefs and so that, so that a whole bunch of people that cooked, including my paternal grandfather, Shorty Ross, who was a cook on the railroad.
Story_ID: 12639
Speaker 1: Tell me about your sibling or siblings.  Do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: I have one, yeah, Paula, my sister.  And she lives in Newton [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: In Newton?
Speaker 2: In fact, she lives in, presently, she's living in the house that I own, which was my aunt's house on Watertown Street.  My aunt, my father's [Melvin Everard Ross] sister, Gladys [Ross], lived to be ninety-six, and she lived in that house, I think, for about sixty years, maybe more.
Story_ID: 12640
Speaker 1: Now, you were born in the City of Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what are your earliest, farthest back memories, being a child in Boston?  What are your earliest memories?
Speaker 2: Well, one of them was the discovery of what Christmas was.  I was awakened one morning--I was about three or four, ushered into the living room, and the, this was a Christmas tree all lighted up, and all these toys and things--I was the only child.  My sister [Paula Ross] hadn't come along yet.  So I had to be about three.  And mother [Olga Evelyn White Ross] said and my father [Melvin Everard Ross] said, "Merry Christmas, Santa's been here!"  And, you know, some things like that imprint themselves on your memory.  I said, "This is Christmas?"  "Yeah, Santa brought you these things and these things and these things and this, that and the other."  It was a--I thought the whole thing had been arranged--a holiday for John Ross. (laughs)  So that's one of my most vivid memories as a child, discovering what that was and coming to understand, ultimately, the true meaning of it all.  It wasn't about Santa Claus, it was a Christian holiday.  And, but here I am at sixty-three--four, and still connected to Christmas in a unique way.  But it did start with that.  I have that picture so clear in my mind, that particular memory.  It's one of the first memories I had.  Another one, closely related to that was, I think the first birthday that I celebrated as an event.  And I remember I wore this little two-piece outfit--suit and sport jacket or something like that.  And it was, and people brought presents. (laughs)  Oh, boy, I, I had a, I, I wouldn't say I was mercenary at the time, but if, I sure was, well, tempted to become a materialist because it seemed like, "Isn't this wonderful.  You can get things, stuff," but I had wonderful friends and some of whom, you know, those that are still living are--still I'm very close to, a very nice group of people.  And, of course, as children, our lives were managed by our parents in such a way that our children--our friends were selected by our parents.  We didn't have to go looking.  The, the social groupings were such, and, you know, this--"That that's your friend, Gwendolyn, Gwendolyn Tucker, Judge Herbert Tucker's daughter.  And that's your friend, Sue Hilton, Ralph Hilton's daughter, and that's your friend, Ronnie Brown [Ron Brown]," Ronnie, by the way is the former [U.S.] Secretary of Labor who died in that unfortunate plane crash.
Story_ID: 12641
Speaker 1: He [former U.S. Secretary of Labor, Ron Brown] and his mother, Gloria [Brown] and [William] Bill lived right around the corner from us when I was very young.  We grew up together until we were about six.  And then Ron's father, Bill, was made the manager of the Hotel Theresa in Harlem [New York, New York], and they moved away.  It was like Damon separating from Pythias.  We were so close, and we cried and we cried and we cried.  And we had a couple of opportunities to see each other again after they moved away.  I went to see him in New York at the hotel, and we, we, we ordered from room service, (laughs), in the manager's suite at the top of the hotel, always calling down for--.
Speaker 2: And there was a new book that came out a couple of years ago, you may know this, the title is 'Meet Me at the Theresa'.
Speaker 1: No, I didn't know about that.
Speaker 2: And I, and I know the author, [Dr.] Sondra [Kathryn] Wilson.  And I'll tell you more about that later, but there's stuff in there about the Brown's and all the people who went--they were the, I'm trying to think--.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Well, I remember, I went to visit, when I went to visit Ronnie, I went on the plane, and they put me on the plane.  And, and somebody met me at LaGuardia [Airport, New York, New York].  And we drove in, and the first thing we did was we went to the, the grill or the café, I forget, whatever it was, at the Hotel Theresa.  And there Evelyn Cunningham and all these people.  It was like a roundtable of people who wrote for the 'Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] Courier' [African American newspaper] and who had various levels of importance.  And I, of course, I only knew the, just meeting them, but my, when I got back home, and I told my mother [Olga Evelyn White Ross] about it, "Oh, you met this one and you met that one."  And, of course, it was still very much the place to be, the Hotel Theresa.  And Ronnie and I used to play with the electric trains.  He had a wonderful set up of electric trains.  And we, well, we--.
Speaker 2: I remember you told me that you went to school with him at the [David A.] Ellis Elementary School [Roxbury, Massachusetts]--.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --when you were, I guess, early on.
Speaker 1: And our kindergarten teacher was Miss Kathleen McCants (ph.), and I happened to meet Miss McCants at, at the age of ninety something at a reunion.  We had a reunion for our primary school, elementary school.  And she was there, and I said, "Miss McCants, you wouldn't remember me.  My name is John Ross, etc., etc., etc."  And she said, "Well, they may call you John Ross, but I remember you as 'Jackie'."  And she opened up her arms, and we hugged each other.  And she said, "Now, your friend, Ron, what ever happened to him?"  (Laughs) I said, "Well, he's right now--," at that time, he was the Chairman of the Democratic [political] Party.  I said, "Well, he's doing pretty well.  He was the chief counsel for the Urban League, and now he's the head of the party."  And so on and so on, and she was very, very, very overjoyed to hear that.  At any rate, they left Boston [Massachusetts] when I was seven.  And so we only had the first grade to spend together, and then he went on to Hunter College [of the City University of New York, New York].
Story_ID: 12642
Speaker 1: What was elementary school like for you here in Boston [Massachusetts], John?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to the David A. Ellis [Elementary School, Roxbury, Massachusetts].  And in those days, you had a group of teachers that were very dedicated.  They were still "Miss" if you had a female teacher, she was Miss.  And the, the key to understanding that was that their dedication to teaching was so great that they had to forsake marriage.  You could not be married.
Speaker 1: I just told my college students that last week.  I said, do you know my elementary teachers were not married and quote "Could not be married."
Speaker 2: They could not be married.  And Miss McCants, who was the, probably the person I, I would, I was most immediately impressed with as an adult teacher, teaching children, and she opened a world to me.  She understood about a child's imagination.  And so she would--going to school, her kindergarten class was like going to Disneyland.  I mean she created that kind of atmosphere in the classroom.  And I remember one time, she came with butter churn, taught us how to make butter.  And then we made butter (laughs), churned it, and then we had the saltine crackers and buttered--oh, and everyday was--and Ronnie [Ron Brown, former U.S. Secretary of Labor] was right there with me, everyday was just a pleasure.  And we didn't even know we were being educated.  We--the songs I remembered (sings) "The circus, the circus is coming to town, with great big elephants and funny clowns."  She would play the piano, taught us songs.  We learned about the nations.  She had secured little miniature paper flags of all the countries that were then existing before there were extensive political changes.  And each day we would--every so often, I don't mean each day, but every, maybe every other day or something like that, we'd go to the box, and we'd take a flag.  So sometimes I was an African nation.  Sometimes I was Israel.  Sometimes, I was Yugoslavia, sometimes--I particularly like the Italian flag. (laughs)  And we, all of us identified that day with that particular country.  It was a wonderful--for children, it was a wonderful way of comprehending the diversity of this earth.  And it was unpolitical and, you know, as far as we could tell, there was no special pleading on behalf of anybody.  It was just the wonderful idea that we celebrated the fact that we all came from different places, and, and we were in fact. You know, the class at that time, we had children who were, some of them were newly arrived immigrants who had mastered English by that early grade.  And we had lots of immigrants from different places, Lebanon, Syria, Ireland.
Speaker 1: So the school, in the '40s [1940s], kindergarten, first, second and third grade was fairly mixed in terms of cultures and--.
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed.  In fact, I remember Matina Horner, who was the president of Radcliffe [College, later Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], she was Matina Souretis, and she was in my first-grade class.  And so she, she went right through.  She, I never saw her parents.  I used to wonder why.  Well, her parents were Greek immigrants, and at the time, they didn't speak English effectively enough to make an appearance.  So Matina just kept on making straight As all through (laughs), all through, all through the primary school and elementary school.  And then the next time I saw her was at a commencement at Harvard, and there was Matina Horner, the president of Radcliffe.  And I said, Matina, I only one Matina in my life.  And I went up to her afterwards, and I said, "Are you Matina Souretis?"  And so she said, "Yes."  So we renewed the acquaintance at that time.  But, now, the interesting thing about her was that her parents sent her, they--she lived near Dudley Square [Roxbury, Massachusetts], outside of the district, but she--the district, school district in which she attended.  But her, her parents had discovered that the David A. Ellis School was the superior school.  And so they sent her there.  And she was on her own pretty much.  I never saw her parents.
Story_ID: 12643
Speaker 1: What street were you living on, with your family, when you went to the [David A.] Ellis [Elementary] School [Roxbury, Massachusetts]?  What was your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: I was living on Townsend Street, 107 Townsend Street.
Speaker 1: 107 Townsend.
Speaker 2: Later in my life, my parents [Melvin Everard Ross and Olga Evelyn White Ross], my mother actually acquired a house on the same street, which I grew up in, much later.  There was a little interim there where we lived in, a little closer to Dorchester [Street] on Crawford Street, but basically, I began my life--before I was conscious of living, I was on Bower Street in Roxbury.  And then when I became aware of my surroundings, I was on Townsend Street, and for many years.  And then when I was a teenager, we moved to Crawford Street for a couple of years, and then we bought the house on Townsend Street.
Speaker 1: How do you remember Townsend Street at that time?  What was the neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: No, it was very interesting cause it was full of people from everywhere.  Roxbury was not unlike the South End [neighborhoods of Boston, Massachusetts], but the South End was total varied that it, it was an hist--it was a place where people studied how people from different backgrounds could get along without rancour and without turf.  Well, Roxbury was like that too.  We had, as I looked around the classes, yes, there were black kids, but we were the distinct minority and because the teachers were committed to teaching whoever was brought in front of them, we didn't have the sense that teachers were standoffish in any way on matters of race.  They taught whoever was given to them to teach.  And the way they had been trained as teachers in the school then, if the child did not learn, it was because the teacher didn't teach.  And that was a very important difference.  As we sometimes learned later in subsequent generations, notably my sister [Paula Ross], who was four years behind me, by the time she went to school, teachers were wondering if the child had been breast fed or bottle fed and perhaps that was the disadvantage, etc., etc.  And that, in my going through school, that was not a part of anybody's thinking as far as we could tell as children.  And so we were treated with great equanimity, and it was like that.  I, I just missed the--see, by the time I got through, upwards of high school, the migration from the South that happened after World War II, where people--black people chose not to return to segregation in the South, and so, so many of them settled up here.  And then we began to hear for the first time, the, phrases like "The black community."  By the time my sister was in school, four years behind me, we had a substantial number of black people who had, whose families had settled here.  When I was on Townsend Street as a youngster, we had--it was a Chinese family next door.  And there were Irish immigrant families, French-Canadians. Around the corner were lots of black people that I knew, and Harrishof Street which is next to my street, Townsend Street.  And all around Monroe Park were people that, many of whom were black, we could see that we had lots of people around us that looked like us, but in addition, we were in school with kids that didn't look like us.  And on my street, Townsend Street, there were people that I played with the Duvall's and Alice Lemont and this one and that one.  And I don't think, I think I must have been twelve years old before anybody in my family mentioned the unfortunate topic of racial conflict and it was introduced to me by my mother saying, "Don't let anybody call you a nigger."  But up until that time, you know, that didn't figure in my thinking socially.  Now, it's also true that my dad, going to Lincoln [University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], like so many who went to historically black colleges, are proudly black, and they might refer to each other in, in terms of endearment by using what would be racial slurs in other application.  So there was that sense of being black and being happy to be that way.  But I was so shocked because, you know, so many of my friends that I played with were black and white and everything.  And I said, "How could that be?"  And, of course, very soon thereafter, I was shown in the newspapers like the 'Afro-American [Newspaper]' and the 'Pittsburgh Courier' and the black papers that were published nationally, you know, incidents of, of racial strife, particularly lynching in the South.  And I guess I was about thirteen, twelve or thirteen when I came to understand the horror of that.  That introduced another idea, which those of us who were raised in the Northeast came to understand more deeply, that while we were not being lynched as black people, we were treated with special consideration.  And so the, the whole investigation of the idea of racism, which corresponded to the increase in the numbers of black people, it's been observed over the years that, you know, there's never any racial trouble until the numbers of minorities increase.  And right at that time, after the second World War, we, our numbers were increasing here in Boston.  And even though the Haydens had been here since, I think, the Revolutionary War or thereabouts, old, old family, that's your family, there were others who came more recently after the second World War.  And with that came the--perhaps, it was the beginning of what we would now call the modern era with a different dynamic entirely.  And by the time my sister was into school behind me and so forth the, it wasn't, it wasn't too far after she began school that the situation racially in the school system in Boston was becoming very grim.  And, ultimately, it was placed--the whole system was placed in receivership by Judge [W. Arthur] Garrity [Jr.] to make sure that the numbers were kept healthy and that people were not discriminated against because the, the, the reality of it was that there was a discrimination that was burgeoning because of the large numbers of black folks that were in school.  I was not--I was just ahead of that.  So I didn't feel that, and, and as I said, the teachers that we had when I was a child were there to teach whoever they were given.  So I never had--well, I would say I was very fortunate because all the teachers I had, I know we had mean teachers and crazy teachers and so forth, but I never had any of those.  And I had the feeling that somehow somebody was selecting, (laughs) who would get what teacher.  At any rate, it didn't--I was not affected by that, and I guess I just missed it by the skin of my teeth.  My sister, on the other hand, my mother was very dissatisfied by the time she was in school because she didn't seem to be learning how to read effectively.  And my mother--and then she wasn't gonna go to the same schools that I went to.  And my mother said, "I'm taking her out of the schools and putting her in the Everett [Massachusetts] schools.  So my sister actually went to school in Everett where my mother had gone to school.  And--
Speaker 1: You know, it was in the '50s [1950s] when Ruth Batson and--.
Speaker 2: Yes, I do know that.
Speaker 1: --and Barbara [Clark] Elam and the other mothers, the mothers were organizing around the schools.  Your mother may have been part of that--.
Speaker 2: Oh, I remember that cause we had--,
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously)  going, organizing the--.
Speaker 2: --we had a, I was part of a school district.  It was the David A. Ellis, the [W. L. P.] Boardman [School] and the [Henry L.] Higginson [Elementary] School District.  And there were three schools and they comprised the district.  And it was the beginning of difficulty, although it never affected me directly, but there was lots of consternation, (unclear)--Muriel Snowden were community people, and they were in these, kind of a leadership and there were lots of people who were becoming increasingly more concerned about what kind of education was being delivered to their children.  I was just ahead of that, just ahead of that.
Story_ID: 12644
Speaker 1: John Ross, when did music first come into your life?
Speaker 2: Well, the first thing that becomes--occurs to me is that my grandmother [Jama Annie Pope White] was a composer, the same one who went to law school.  And I remember going out to visit her.  I was a little boy, and she was--she had just published some songs that, one of which was used at the inaugural of [U.S. President] Franklin [Delano] Roosevelt in the local celebration.  But it was a revelation to me.  She--everybody in those days had a piano.  We didn't have one then, but my grandmother saw to it--my, we did eventually get an upright piano.  But when visiting my grandma, then she was regaling the neighborhood with songs that she had written.  'Somewhere in the Land of Dreams', and very, it was very--I just thought, well, you know, I didn't think it was usual cause we, I knew that my grandmother had come here to be, to study music, and she had gone to the conservatory and so forth.  And she had, by her own effort, you know, had her music published and so on, so it was an early introduction.  My father [Melvin Everard Ross] had this wonderful ability to improvise--sort of scat singing (sings scat).  And everybody in his generation would follow, let's say [Duke] Ellington, Johnny Hodges.  They'd say, "Listen to Johnny play--whoa!"  It was like following baseball.  And the men in that generation, black men in that generation had such a high regard for the kind of musical accomplishment that came through the [Count] Basie band and Lionel Hampton and Duke Ellington.  And there was such a sense of connection between that--the Harlem Renaissance and so on that you just sort of were surrounded by this atmosphere that was infused with music.  Now, "We" thought of ourselves as a family as being deeply involved in many ways with music.  My mother [Olga Evelyn White Ross] sang. (laughs).  She had a vocal group she was a part of called the Tan Sisters.  And they had a musical program on the radio--(sings) that's, "Tan Sisters are on the air." (laughs).  And that was from when she was quite young and still living with her dad on Symphony Road [in Boston, Massachusetts].  The, we, when, when we first acquired a collection of records, it included the best of Erroll Garner and the best of Louis Armstrong and so that we, we in one fell swoop, with my father and my, a whole bunch of great records.  So we had that kind of thing going on, and it was such a, it was so routinized, you know, we just heard this stuff all of the time.
Speaker 1: So you were still in ele--you were still in elementary school [at David A. Ellis Elementary School, Roxbury, Massachusetts] when all this was happening?  Or were  you--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, between elementary and, well, yes, in the first six grades, yeah.  This was all before middle school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when people like my dad would sit down with his friends and so forth, they'd say, "Damn, listen to that, oh, go on, Johnny" on (unclear)--whoa!"  And they could act--they could identify who was playing in whose band.  And that was just kind of routine.  That wasn't any special gift or ability, that was just something that you, you grew up with.  It was, in, in effect, it was a form of learning black history, musical history the easy way.  And we would go away in the summer and like, in, on the [Martha's] Vineyard [Massachusetts] or on this side of the Cape [Cod, Massachusetts], and everybody had wonderful recorded music to play.  My godfather, Dawson Johnson, he had these wonderful recordings.  And I was very receptive to that, hearing things, and, and there were certain kinds of funky beats that I responded to.  And if it wasn't, if it didn't have enough of that funk in it, I was indifferent to it.  What was happening was, I was becoming acutely aware of the ethnicity of the music.  And then there was the brilliance of the music, and you see what Erroll Garner who was in a special category and Ellington, and all those people, then that was not so closely identified with ethnicity as in music from the South or the blues.  But it was another kind of icon.  And we had that to listen to, Dinah Washington and Ella Fitzgerald and Sarah Vaughan and, and in those days complimentary to that experience were the radio stations, which were not segregated.  That came later, that the radio became so segmented that if you turned on the radio station, it was to listen album-oriented rock or to listen to acid rock or to listen punk rock or that, but when I was listening to the radio as a, growing up youngster, the programs that were hosted by people like Bill Marlow and so forth included Dakota Staton and the Crows singing, 'Gee', and even Little Stevie Wonder, when he was a little boy and all kinds of--a whole conglomoration of, of talent.  It was sort like listening to the radio as though one were going to the Apollo Theater [New York, New York].  And I grew with that.  I was very, very aware of that.  I, I sort of mourned the loss of that as things became so segmented.  And by then I, I was pretty well enriched by that.  But I thought to myself, I said, "The people that come along behind me don't know what they're missing," because it was so much richness to that culture, the musical culture of America, and most especially, black America's contribution by way of jazz.
Story_ID: 12645
Speaker 1: When did you first begin to play and maybe formally study music?  I mean when--?
Speaker 2: Well, I first began to play when we acquired a piano.
Speaker 1: And how old were you then?
Speaker 2: Oh, gee.  I don't know because I remember going to a playground.  In those days, the Boston [Massachusetts] schools had playground--excuse me--playground activities in the summer, and I remember we already had a piano.  And I was already sitting down at the piano and my fingers were wandering idly over the noisy keys.  And then we had a, a playground situation at the [David A.] Ellis [Elementary] School [Roxbury, Massachusetts] where they also had a piano, and one of my older colleagues sat down to play the piano.  And as soon as I heard what she was doing, I had to copy that.  She was a study--she was taking piano lessons, and I wasn't.  But she played, 'As the Caissons Go Rolling Along' (sings).  And I slavishly copied that.  And it was the beginning of the, what we would call playing by ear.  And Yvonne and her sister, Yvonne, what was her, oh, I forget what Yvonne's last name was, and her younger sister, and there were the--there was a group of people around the corner from me who were studying piano already.  And I became particularly interested in those that had the ability.  And finally, my mother [Olga Evelyn White Ross] put--I was playing and playing and playing and playing, and she said, "Well, it's time for you to have lessons."  And so, again, that part of my life taking--.
Speaker 1: And who was your first teacher?
Speaker 2: My first teacher was Doris Dandridge, the sister of Dorothy Dandridge, the actress--the screen actress and entertainer.  Then I was taught by Sammy Lowe, who was a, a band leader locally.  And, and then finally my mother decided to try me with the woman that she had grown up with, Arabella Henson, who was a much-beloved musician all of her life in Malden [Massachusetts].  She was an organist at Emmanuel Baptist Church, among other places, and I started with her, and I continued with her until I was ready to go to university.  And we had a wonderful relationship.  She (laughs), I, I just loved the kinds of things that she selected for me to play.  And though it wasn't a conventional repertoire, I mean I wasn't doing [Fryderyk] Chopin 'Etudes' and so on, but it was enough.  I would be playing [George] Gershwin, 'Rhapsody in Blue' and so on.  And I did these recitals with her students, and well, when I got to college, even though it had first felt like, "Well, it's a little risky to commit yourself to music because you're not necessarily going to wealthy."  But, of course, by then I said, "That is not--the important thing is to be happy." (laughs).  So I said, I figured that I would just, "I would do well enough to be happy.  And I will just be determined."
Story_ID: 12646
Speaker 1: Was there anything during your high school years in Boston that continued to (unclear) your interests in music--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, my goodness, yes.  I went to Memorial High School--.
Speaker 1: Roxbury Memorial?
Speaker 2: At Roxbury Memorial High School [for Boys, Roxbury, Massachusetts].  And that particular, that was a vintage year for people who were in the arts.  Jackie Washington was my classmate, and he's still one of my best friends.  And he was, he, also, he became an actor in New York.  But he was extremely talented and gifted.  And we were very close.
Speaker 1: I remember Jackie.
Speaker 2: And when we got to high school, we, all we needed was permission.  And we would put on a show--a class day.  And we, and we had discovered among the students who were enrolled at the school, people like Lawrence Crawn (ph.), who became a commercial artist, others who were--became professional dancers, black and white, James Brandt, who's a tap dancer.  And so we, when we would put a show together, it would be at the level of what we considered the professional.  There was somebody like Larry to paint the scenery.  We did a class day show once which was, which was a whole scripted drama in which we, we were the senior class on our way to the Caribbean, and in the course of that, the class will was read by Madame Lazonga who was a fortune teller.  I was Madame Lazonga, and she read her fortunes--the class prophecy from magic bananas that she picked from the tree.  In those days, we had the, the Calypso era was upon us.  So we had Harry Belafonte and so forth, all those wonderful songs.  So we, we, we created a show built around Calypso and about the West Indian element in music.  And we had all kinds of people who danced and sang and so forth.  And we thought it was pretty great because we didn't notice that anybody was doing that around the city.  There were talent shows and one thing or another.  When we had a talent show, we had a talent show that people came from far and wide to see because I remember, even some of those dudes that used to hang on the corner, who would have, you would have looked at and thought, "Well, they, they're not gonna amount to much.  They seem to be just hanging around."  But when it came time for the talent show, they would go and get their saxophones, and they'd (laughs), they would get up there and stand over the microphone and play and, and together as a ensemble.  And I was amazed.  I said, "I didn't know these dudes could do this."  There was a guy named 'Cool Bill' Johnson (laughs), and he blew sax.  And, well, it was really quite miraculous for anybody who interested in music and was, and performance because we had more than enough opportunity.  And when we were--by the time we were seniors in high school, you know, we just said, "Just give us a faculty advisor (laughs), and we'll take the rest."  And so we would this--those things.  And when I went on to college, Jack went on to Emerson [College, Boston, Massachusetts], where he majored in theater.  And I went on to first Liberal Arts College at BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], and then I transferred in the School of the Arts [Boston University College of Arts and Sciences] and went on from there and had college study.  And all of those other fellows who had, had been bitten by the same bug, ultimately did go on and achieve in the arts.  And I don't know what they--what do you call it, the alignment of the stars were in those days, that allowed that to happen.  But there as Roxbury Memorial High School were these people who did wonderful things.
Story_ID: 12647
Speaker 1: What role did the church play in your life, your family's life and what role did the church play growing up in terms of your--?
Speaker 2: Well--.
Speaker 1: --music influencing you in music?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --the church, the black church--.
Speaker 1: And what church did you--.
Speaker 2: --was part of the social fabric of my life in the neighborhood.  So it was almost--you hardly needed to make a distinction between those folk who were the church folk and those folk who were your mother [Olga Evelyn White Ross] and father's [Melvin Everard Ross] friends.  So socially, I, when I first went to Sunday school, I went to St. Mark [Congregational Church, Roxbury, Massachusetts].  Many years later, I became the music director at St. Mark, but at the time, I went to St. Mark's Sunday School, and I was seeing these same people all the time.  And then I went to--there was another church in, a Congregational Church, in Roxbury.  St. Mark was Congregational.  Then there was Eliot Congregational Church [Eliot Church of Roxbury, Roxbury, Massachusetts], which had a large white constituency, but which was already on its way to being fifty-fifty [percent].  And I guess I divided my time, first at St. Mark, and then at Eliot.  And then those same people were people who were close friends, many of them, in my mother's club.  The girlfriends, many of those people were involved socially, that way.  So the church was a significant part of, a dimension, in, in, our lives.  Then I became affiliated with the Church of All Nations in the South End [neighborhood in Boston, Massachusetts].  And because I was involved in a musical group that evolved out of the, the complex known as Morgan Memorial.  And I eventually became a part of the Church of All Nations, which was a Methodist church.  Ella France Jones was the music director there, and she was a famous black music person who had a degree from the [New England] Conservatory [Boston, Massachusetts] and etc.  And I guess it was, it'd just be--it was so routine by that time to be a part of something musical.
Speaker 1: But did the church influence you musically in any way?
Speaker 2: Well, of course.
Speaker 1: Were you playing there?
Speaker 2: It, it is so much--.
Speaker 1: Did you play at church, for example?
Speaker 2: I didn't play at church at first, but by the time I was at Morgan Memorial [United Methodist] Church of All Nations [Boston, Massachusetts], which would have put me in middle school, and upper school, I was playing.  And I was surrounded by people and, and music, singing, ensembles and so on.  And what proficiency I had, I just continued to develop.  And then I became fascinated with the gospel style, which in my experience was not a part of the St. Mark experience or the Eliot experience at that time.  Those are both black churches in the black community, and now they have gospel choirs, and so forth.  But at that time, we were dealing the novelty of what we perceived as the novelty of gospel music.  In fact, what was happening was that we were in the process of restoring our memory of our own music, as it was mediated through the African experience.  And as I looked back and studied it more carefully much later, I realized that though gospel music seemed to be a peculiar expression of secular feeling, it turns out not to be that at all.  It, it--that's how, in fact, we reconciled as a people.  We reconciled the music with ours spiritual expressions because it became clear about the 1960s that the church was sort of an analogue to the African village, and that the music of the African village became translated or transferred into the African church experience.  And more and more black churches, some of who were white denominations, but which had at the--their core a population of black people, it became very difficult, by the time I was grown, to discern, "Well, what's the difference between a Congregational black church and the Baptist black church?"  There were differences, but by then the cultural artifacts in those worship forms were nearly identical.
Story_ID: 12648
Speaker 1: I came to gospel music late because I was in the Congregational [church] situation.  But we all discover it, whenever we discover it, and I found--particularly when I went to work for Elma Lewis, and I was really embedded in black musical forms.  And it gave me a lot of opportunity to develop along those lines.  The, the preparation for it was the musical experiences I had had as a child.  But the musical experiences that I had as a child in growing up were not totally inclusive.  They became that, they became that.  I said to somebody on my faculty when I was then the music--first appointed [in 1970] music director of the National Center [of Afro-American Artists, Boston, Massachusetts] and the Elma Lewis School [of Fine Arts, Roxbury, Massachusetts].  And we had a lot of teaching people, a lot of teaching faculty who were jazz musicians.  So I said to one of them, my colleagues, I said, "You know those chord symbols, explain that to me."
Speaker 2: The what?
Speaker 1: Chord symbols.
Speaker 2: Chord symbols.
Speaker 1: C-7, C major, seven.  C-7 sharp five.  I said, what is that?  So the fellow, it was Clifford Weeks, he said, "Oh," and he took about five minutes to explain it.  Well, I'd already studied harmony and solfege and all those things in college.  So I said, "Oh, I see." (laughs).  And after that I was fine.  I said, "Okay," and then I, you know, learned to do that form of notation which is common to popular music and jazz music where you just use chord symbols and you work with the voicings, the various voicings that attend to that.  And so it was just--I guess, as a colleague of mine once said about his upbringing--I have a colleague in Atlanta [Georgia], Richard Long, he's a retired professor.  And I asked him once about his broad knowledge of--and he's cultural historian.  I said, "How did you get to be like that?"  He says, "Well, I was"--this is his description--"I was fascinated by everything.  So if it had something to do with civil war, I was fascinated by that.  And if it had something to do with Romare Bearden and black artists, I was fascinated by that, and music and dance and so on and so forth."  And it was this voracious appetite that he had for all things connected with the black culture, and the black image in, in history.  And he became an authority of that.  And his friends were James Baldwin and this, (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) (Unclear) Baldwin (unclear)--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, I guess I had the same kind of appetite for the things that I was exposed to so that, and then the real opportunity was when I started working for the National Center, and I could just sort of stretch out and, and learn things as fast as I could learn them.
Story_ID: 12649
Speaker 1: You went to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], liberal arts for a couple of years, and then you studied music at BU [Boston University].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: When did you finally leave the academic formal training at--?
Speaker 2: It's a--well, the transition from academic to life for a musician is purely painless.  You don't even realize that you have moved from one place to the other because all of those people who were colleagues of mine when I was in school are still, if they're still living, they, they're colleagues of mine now.  And I made this--it wasn't really a transition because so much of what I was doing when I was at BU, I continued to do when I was in the world of work.  For instance, I was the manager of a clothing store over on the hospital area, on Longwood Avenue and Brookline Avenue.  And I would take a couple of extra hours at lunchtime and go do a recital at the [Isabella Stewart] Gardner Museum [Boston, Massachusetts].  And, of course, eventually, the Gardner Museum won out, and the, the performance aspect of my life won out, and, and eventually I was no longer managing the clothing store over there.  I was working for Elma Lewis in 1970.  And then it was all music twenty-four [hours a day], seven [days a week].
Story_ID: 12650
Speaker 1: You said you were working for Elma Lewis beginning in 1970 or?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I began January 2 of 1970.
Speaker 1: Now, who was Elma Lewis and when you say you worked for her, what were you doing?  And what did she do?
Speaker 2: Well, she was the dueña of culture in black, black culture.  She was the child of Garveyites [followers of Marcus Garvey], people who a very strong sense of identity, not only with Africa, but with the Caribbean culture, etc.  And her fa--her mother and father were members of the UNIA, the Universal Negro Improvement Association, led by Marcus Garvey in the '30s [sic,  late 1910s through early 1920s], and she grew up with that imprinted in her experience, not only Garvey, but she had the good fortune to meet [actor, singer and activist] Paul Robeson when she was young and studying theater.  And she and Robeson even read lines from [William] Shakespeare together.  But her sense of identity with Africa, which was a Pan African identity, was fused when she--forged when she was a very little girl because her parents were in the movement, which was the precursor to such movements of black identification as the black--the Nation of Islam.  I mean we really have, as a predecessor to Malcolm X and Elijah Muhammad.  We have the, the auth--the authority and leadership of Marcus Garvey.  And she grew up in that.  And her whole philosophy of ethnicity and racial identification evolves from her parents' experience in the Garvey movement.  And as I looked at the people like that generation who grew up in the Garvey movement and how proudly identified they were with the things that Garvey was teaching.  He was, of course, before his time, and so he was limited by circumstance, but his leadership did not fail.  And when he ultimately passed on, the germ of that idea continued to germinate and flourish and out of that came, among other things, the sense of black identity that, that was expressed through the Nation of Islam, and coming down through Malcolm X and Eli--well, Elijah Muhammad and Malcolm X and Louis Farrakhan, etc.  And she was part, she was very much a part of that, but she had also had training in the Western arts--ballet, classical music.  Her brother, Darnley [Corbin], was a trained classically at the New England Conservatory [Boston, Massachusetts].  So she had an appreciation of all of that.  Now, the question comes up, is there a conflict between that kind of identity--black--and the Western culture because she was, of course, a child of both.  And I remember having a conversation with Adelaide Cromwell [Hill], who was the founder of the African Studies department at BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], and she wrote paper once for her students about what she called an African American dilemma.  And it posed the question, "Is there a conflict between these two experiences?  Is one at war with the other, the fact that we have an ethnic identification from Africa, and then we have a cultural identification that includes, but is not limited to, the African American experience and Western culture."  And she concluded, "No, there's no conflict.  We, both spirits reside within us if we have inherited both cultures.  And there's no need for them to be at war with each other. They complement each other."  And you have wonderful examples of how those things complement each other.  You take someone like Leontyne Price, a child of Laurel, Mississippi, and who will not let you forget it and whose whole career was based on a white art form, but who brought to that expression something which was so uniquely Laurel, Mississippi and black and Southern, even though she probably didn't do much singing in English, except when she was Bess, in 'Porgy and Bess'.  It, it, it shows you how one unites those things.  And then there's really no conflict.  So Elma Lewis comes along, along with others like her, in other parts of the country, who had absorbed the cultural influences of Western culture, ballet, drama and so on and so on, fusing that with a strong identification with black culture.  And you get the beginning of what on this side of the water would have been Pan Africanism and she introduced ballet, as we know it--one of the people who introduced that in, in the black community.  By then, there was such a thing as a black community, and before that in the early '40s [1940s], there were lots of black people.  But we hadn't thought of ourselves as having formed a community because there weren't the numbers.  But after the Second World War, there was this huge migration of black folks.
Speaker 1: Did the join the, Elma Lewis and the Elma Lewis School of Fine Arts [Roxbury, Massachusetts] at the initiation of the school or shortly after?
Speaker 2: The school was initiated in 1950.  And in those years, I did some work with Elma Lewis from time to time.  It wasn't until I became a member of the staff in 1970.
Speaker 1: 1970.
Speaker 2: January 2nd of 1970.  But before that, I had a lot of experience because there were productions that required participation, and my participation so notably, the production of 'Babes In Toyland', that Miss Lewis used to do, and I, I was frequently part of that because they needed somebody who could play.
Story_ID: 12651
Speaker 1: So you were saying that you went to the Elma Lewis School of Fine Arts [Roxbury, Massachusetts] in 1970, and that--was that as director of music?
Speaker 2: Yes, Ms. Lewis had suggested the, the job to me, oh, perhaps a year before.  I was then managing a clothing store called Tweeds on Brookline Avenue [Roxbury, Massachusetts] in the hospital area.  And I was a little daunted by the prospect, so I said, "Oh, no, I don't think I could be the director of a department."  It had never occurred to me, but as I continued to work at Tweeds, they were about to transition to ladies.  It was a men's wear store, but they had a small ladies' department.  But then, as a result of the new partnership, they were going to become a ladies' store.  So it precluded any need for those of us who were salesmen in men's clothing.  So I revisited the idea, I called up Miss Lewis.  I said, "Is the offer still good?"  And she said, "Yes."  So I went and sat in her kitchen, and we ironed it out.  And I started work the second day of January, 1970.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about the school at that point in time.  What they doing--,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) At that point--.
Speaker 1: --Who were they teaching?
Speaker 2: --the school had, the school, which was founded in 1950.
Speaker 1: In her home, I understand, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, and then she had rented some property in which she could run a school--houses in Roxbury and then a studio and so on.  That was all in advance of 1968 when she started, she--well, the school was a way of teaching children through the arts, children and adults, through the arts, many things.  It was sort of a humanistic endeavor because she knew that not all of these students would become professionals in the field of ballet and modern dance and primitive dance, etc., etc.  So there had to be something else that they could learn which could be of some use to them.  So she trained people for the profession with some assistance from her brother, Darnley [Corbin], who was a musician and other people like Talley Beatty, the great dancer and choreographer and George Howard who was responsible for Afro-Caribbean dance.  She trained these people in an era which was developing its own consciousness about blackness and the, sort of a Pan African sensibility, which comported with her identification with the [Marcus] Garvey movement.  And so, and also she wanted people to have, be acculturated to this Western culture.  So she offered that, and after a while she was producing people who were professionally finished, and who could go into New York.  But New York wasn't really ready for black dancers.  You, you had no Alvin Ailey Company, and Arthur Mitchell was still dancing with the New York City Ballet and so on and so, and so there's--and she looked around, and she said, "Well, now, where are these people going to go unless we created a platform?"  And out of that concept, self-empowerment really, from the Garvey perspective, she started the National Center of Afro-American Artists, which was intended to be a platform for the interpretation and display of black culture and art.  The idea being that if we had nothing else, we could create a platform on which the black artists could stand and perform and display, etc.  So, the National Center became the parent body of the pre-existing Elma Lewis School.  And the Elma Lewis School therefore became a component of the National Center.  Now, the National Center had a much larger reach because it intended to address itself to the black world, culturally here and in Africa, and in all such places as the diaspora has deposited black people.  So with that, the--1968 was the beginning of the incorporation of the National Center.  The school remained, as it does to this day, and this--became this sort of teaching arm.  But the National Center as a concept was evolved by 1970, and by that time, Ford Foundation and Rockefeller Foundation and so forth had given support to the effort.  So when I joined the institution, we had already a resident dance company, a modern dance company which was headed originally by Talley Beatty and then by [William Adolphus] Billy Wilson.  And we had a primitive dance company which was directed by George Howard.  And we had a teaching program at the school which was funded by the Ford Foundation.  Rockefeller provided funds for the dance component, the, the dance company and the teaching.  And we were at a place in history where a lot of attention was being focused on the development within black communities of such efforts.  So we were in the news a lot because it was of some interest to the general public as to what was happening.  And at that point, I entered the picture.  Actually, I had been a part of activities before that, but from a, you know, on a formal basis, I became a part of the staff in 1970.  Now, at that time, we had the, the urban unrest that attended bussing.  And we had many, many things that were happening.  I mean it was quite an age to live through because we already were in the middle of the Vietnam [War] era.  And civil rights was a fact, and [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was abroad in the land, and so many issues were being debated and considered and thought about and worried about, and black anger, was what it was and mutual cooperation across racial lines in terms of civil rights, and all those things were happening.  It was a happening time.  And it had been for some time because King, of course, had made his emergence much earlier, in the middle '50s [1950s].  So a lot of ferment culturally, and into that--I, I was glad to be part of this effort because in this era of civil rights consciousness in the '60s [1960s], I had said, "Now, what can I do to make a contribution because all I got to do is make music."  So the invitation that Miss Lewis extended gave me a glimpse of what could be.  I said, "Well, now, here's an institution that intends to be more than just a platform of expressions.  It's partly to define what is black art, to participate in that dialogue, to educate, not only the public, but the people who are participating in this creation of art, and ultimately, a cultural institution."  I said, "Now, I guess that will be just the thing where I could feel that I would be contributing to an effort that I felt comfortable with."  I couldn't see being a social worker, but, of course, as it turns out, what I defined as being a social worker, was actually realized in terms of the work that we did as an institution.  We just didn't call what we were doing social work, but there was that about it, which benefited the society.  So, and Miss Lewis, of course, a charismatic and gifted person.  And so it was very easy to help with the dream that she had, which was to create this platform for the expression of black art and culture, and to extend our reach over to the African continent and to all those places where the diaspora had deposited black people.  And it was a fortuitous time because we were really at--it was a time when we could do all these things and develop along, all these lines simultaneously.
Story_ID: 12652
Speaker 1: In the fall of that year, of 1970, I had the opportunity to put together a Christmas program because our board, our national board, came together for their annual meeting.  And we used to like to provide something in they way--by way of product to demonstrate to them what we were doing as an institution.  And some black young people came, interested in doing some kind of ensemble singing.  And that's where I got the idea.  I said, "Well, you know, you guys"--they didn't have a music director.  So, I said, "Well, maybe if you'd like to participate in a project, I think could put this together.  You want to sing in four parts?"  "Yes."  "Let me see who I can scare up to join you or a couple of more adults.  And I'll put some children together where the"--that's the idea took shape, and I said, "We can do 'Black Nativity'," because it was possible still to reconstruct from the original materials that were part of the original production of 'Black Nativity', and I said--I called up Vinnette Carroll who was the person who, with Langston [Hughes] created the production in New York.  She sent me the script.  And we began.
Speaker 2: When did Langston create 'Black Nativity'?  When was the show produced?
Speaker 1: He created it in the middle '60s [1960s]--no, wait a minute.  Let me see, that--no, no, I'm sorry, about 1959, somewhere around there.  That--when Lincoln Center [for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] opened [in 1961], it opened with the production of 'Black Nativity', which had been produced originally by Vinnette Carroll, a woman of great powers and genius and who had been in New York as a non-profit organization called the Urban Arts Corps, and she was producing many, many things that out of that operation came 'Don't Bother Me, I Can't Cope' and 'Your Arms Too Short to Box with God', etc., and 'Black Nativity' was one of the earlier pieces.  And she collaborated with Langston to produce that.  The, and it traveled, the production had traveled and had come to Boston [Massachusetts].  And I saw it here at the, I think it was Colonial Theatre.  And so when these young people came to me in 1970, looking for an opportunity to do some singing, I said, "Well, why don't we try that?"  And I put some children with it, a couple of dozen children, and we did it for our national board, for their meeting, we did a production of 'Black Nativity'.  We, of course, invited the parents and the people in the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Where was this done?  Where'd you do it?
Speaker 1: At the new 400-seat auditorium in, at 122 Elm Hill Avenue.
Speaker 2: At the school [Elma Lewis School of Fine Arts, Roxbury, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: The school.
Speaker 1: And it seemed a good idea to do it again.  We did a couple performances that year, and then the following year, we just notched it up a little bit, and we just kept on going.  And the rest is history.  And through all of the financial hardship that the, the institution experienced, the one thing that remained--two things that remained substantially growing, the museum, which was headed by [Edmund] Barry Gaither who's now our acting administrator for the whole center on the death of Miss Lewis, and 'Black Nativity', which we could, you know, bring alive every year.  And it grew, and it developed its own audience and so on.  And it's continued down through these thirty-five years.
Speaker 2: Every year for thirty-five years?
Speaker 1: Thirty-five years.
Speaker 2: Give me some of the hard data because I think the numbers are important in terms of the number of performers that you had, the number of people who attended--?
Speaker 1: Fifteen performances on weekends in December.
Speaker 2: Fifteen each year?
Speaker 1: Yes, fifteen, weekends would consist of a Friday performance, two Saturday performances now and a Sunday matinee.  That's the way it is now.  We played around with scheduling in the past, but eventual--and ultimately it came out to be four performances every weekend for four weekends--sixteen performances, I'm sorry.  And there are people in the cast who were in it in 1970 when we began.  What we've created over this period of time is a kind of a village of people, some of whom I knew, some of whom, like Vivian Collier, are part--present at the creation, Buddy Hughes and people like that.  And so there's an institutional memory that goes along with the production of 'Black Nativity' that includes all these people who are veterans as well as the new people, little people, for instance, the youngest of which last year was three. (laughs)  We, we do have a, a cut-off age of six, but some of our people who are adults insisted upon having children, and their children would come to the rehearsal and so forth, and one day, one of our soloists, Cornelia Ware, she had children, one child who was older, who was like twelve or thirteen, and then these two little bitsy children that came along later.  And they sat in the rehearsal, and they kind of got it.  And so I said, "Well, try it, get up there."  And they made their day view last year.  One was three and the other was four (laughs).  And they did it.  They went through--now, did--what do I mean when I say they did it, they participated fully in this performance, which meant that the children who were 'Black Nativity' are on stage for the whole time.  Once the show begins, they're on stage the whole time with nobody standing in front of them conducting.  They have to do the whole thing, having absorbed and internalized the process, so that they can, without any prompting, they can do what they're to do, sing what they're to sing, act, gesture, do all of these things.  It's a wonderful training, and watching how little people and the adults sort of internalize the whole process is the beginning of a kind of a discipline thing, otherwise, would never have to impose on themselves, but which will enrich their life as people.  So you have, as I was saying the other day, you know, the people ask, "How come the audience is predominantly white at 'Black Nativity'?"  I said, "Because the black community is up there on the stage, a hundred and some people every year."  So--and we get wonderful response from the black community, but usually the response is, "Can I be in it?"  (laughs) "Can I be a soloist?"  "Yes."  So, we continued downtown Boston now.  We started as a, in our original house on Elm Hill Avenue, and now we're downtown at Tremont Temple and have been for many years.
Speaker 2: And how many people to each performance?
Speaker 1: Well, it's a couple of thousand, and, you know, its--times sixteen.  So we get a big audience, a big audience.  And I don't have the numbers in my head, but I know that, as I look out there, I see a lot of people. (laughs).
Speaker 2: Well, I've been several, several times, and it's just been a tremendous gathering of people.
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, it's quite an experience, it's quite an experience.  I, I--.
Speaker 2: There's never an empty seat from what I remember.
Speaker 1: Sometimes I look at the, the 'Passion Play' over at Oberammergau in Germany, which is something of the same kind of thing-- its genesis was of the people.  And it continues after, you know, a huge, long period of time.  And it doesn't travel and nor do we.  So people come from wherever they're coming from to see it.  And it becomes established as a, as a focal point in the holiday season in Boston.  And it was particularly beneficial to us because it was something that we could produce every year, even in years of great financial difficulty and distress.  And it was something that stays in the mind and hearts of not only the participants, but the people who come to see it.  So you get the same people coming every year to renew their spirit.  And those who are in it, the same thing.  And so it's kind of--become a kind of signature piece for us.  Meantime, other work goes on, but the most visible artifact of our life right now, while we're in the process of developing an expansion of the National Center [of Afro-American Artists, Boston, Massachusetts], is still 'Black Nativity'.
Story_ID: 12653
Speaker 1: One of the things that I remember about Elma Lewis, and the Elma Lewis School of Fine Arts [Roxbury, Massachusetts] was that she was a phenomenal fundraiser and had to work very hard at it in early years.  And she had a program, I think it was weekend program, which I attended, called 'Celebrate'.
Speaker 2: Yes, well, that was our big fundraiser.
Speaker 1: Tell me about Celebrate because it's one of my fondest memories.
Speaker 2: It was, it was thematic.  It was our way of raising funds.  Once a year we'd have a weekend of activity and the, it was always built around a theme.  One year we celebrated black cultural catalysts and as guest of honor, we had people like Talley Beatty and Lloyd Richards, the director of 'Raisin in the Sun' and so on, and we built a whole program performance and exhibitions and so on around the idea of those who had been the cultural catalysts, Katherine Dunham, etc., and we had a resident dance company, and we had lots of resources.  So we could perform a show, built around that theme.  Another year we did 'The Black Preacher', which was a lot of fun.  And we had lots of black church--demonstrating itself, and the gospel tradition and so on and so on.  And every year we did that.  We did Celebrate.  It became difficult at points because we didn't, we were in the process of moving from one venue where we were at Elm Hill Avenue to a venue which has not yet been developed.  So we haven't done a Celebrate in a few years, but we've continued with 'Black Nativity'.  But at Celebrate, we had, oh, all kinds of wonderful people come, [Noble] Sissle and [Eubie] Blake and we honored all kinds icons of the culture.  And--.
Speaker 1: I remember Saturday nights were, I guess the culmination of the weekend and--.
Speaker 2: That's right.  He would do something on, at [Boston] City Hall [Massachusetts], which we used like a theater.  And then we'd do something at the, the Wang Center [for the Performing Arts, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts], and a big show.  And then we'd have a big party afterwards, and it went on all night.
Speaker 1: And it would, it would go from--.
Speaker 2: With Billy Taylor.
Speaker 1: --from sun up to sun down.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And we'd be leaving at 6:00 [A.M.] in the morning.  I remember.  An there was music--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes, yes, yes, and at 6:00 in the morning, you'd have Jaki Byard and--the great Jaki Byard, the saxophonist who--now deceased, and he would be out on the sidewalk blowing his sax, and people would be lined up behind him, parading down the street, sort of a New Orleans [Louisiana] style.  And--.
Speaker 1: That was quite a tradition, Celebrate was quite--.
Speaker 2: It was quite--and still is, we'll do it.
Speaker 1: You still do it, you still done them?
Speaker 2: We will be doing it.
Speaker 1: Oh, you will?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we just haven't had, we--since we've sold our property in, in preparation for achieving some other property, we haven't had a, a venue to have it, but, so that, that means that 'Black Nativity' becomes very important because it keeps our face before the public.
Story_ID: 12654
Speaker 1: In addition to 'Black Nativity', John, what other roles are you playing currently with the schools and with the National Center of Afro-American Artists?
Speaker 2: Well, at this point, all of us are engaged in the development of the, the new National Center, the National Center on a new site.  Miss [Elma] Lewis in the meantime, died January 1st of 2004.  So she was replaced with [Edmund] Barry Gaither who had been the curator of our museum.  And we go on with the negotiations with the City of Boston [Massachusetts] and the BRA [Boston Redevelopment Authority] and so forth for a site will would be Parcel Three, the last, one of the last of the big parcels in Boston, which is located on, across from the police headquarters building on Columbus Avenue, behind Madison Park [Technical Vocational] High School [Roxbury, Massachusetts], next to Madison Park High School.  In the last two years, I have been in and out of the hospital.  So I have had to restrict some of my activity to such things as 'Black Nativity', which I could do in a wheelchair.  And so that was fine.  The, the remaining staff people, we, we reduced our staff to a size that's manageable.  We had as, as many as a hundred and twenty five people on staff in times of, where we were flourishing or had funding.  At this point, we have a wonderful board, headed by Margaret Burnham, and Barry is our acting administrator.  And I'm still the music director, and this year, because I had--was hospitalized quite a bit and have come past that just about, I haven't had an opportunity to do much more than that.  But, now, we, we're heading now into the fall eventually, and we'll be back with 'Black Nativity' once again.  There are other things that we've been called upon to do over the years professionally, and I've participated in that, festivals and arts festivals in other parts of the world, etc., as has Barry.  And we have requests to fulfill. For instance, the opening of the New Hampton Inn and Suites down by the Boston Medical Center.  We sent a group of singers down to do these African songs and things to establish the cultural feeling of Roxbury [neighborhood in Boston].  And we'll continue to do that.
Story_ID: 12655
Speaker 1: I have another position, as I think I mentioned earlier, as the music director, the minister of music at First Parish in Brookline.  Now, almost emer-, emeritus (laughs).
Speaker 2: You achieved that notable position, how ago was it?
Speaker 1: The--as minister of music?
Speaker 2: At the First Parish.
Speaker 1: At First Parish, eight-, eighteen years ago, yeah, eighteen years ago.  And since then, I was ordained as a minister of music.  I came there as the music director, and--.
Speaker 2: Give us a brief, quick history of the First Parish, (unclear)--.
Speaker 1: It is the first parish in Brookline [Massachusetts].  It goes back to the seventeen--sixteenth century.  And it's part of colonial Brookline, what was the village of Muddy River.  And it's had this long, unbroken history.  I am the first black minister of music, ordained in the Unitarian Universalist Church.  There, there are two of us, as far as I know now.  The, the practice in Unitarian Universalism is to ordain--a, a church community ordains a minister on behalf of the whole movement.  And I think it was January--November 12, 1997, I believe, I was ordained as the minister of music.
Speaker 2: How did that happen?  How did that come about?
Speaker 1: I wish I could tell you.  I was in staff meeting one day, and we were just completing preparation for an ordination of one of our seminarians.  And at that point, our minister was David Johnson.  And he said, "Well, we have one more piece of business."  And I was a little bit--"Another piece of business, what else have we got to do?"  "Well, we have another ordination."  I said, "Really?"  And this is the staff and they're sitting around.  He said, "Well, we--the, the parish committee here has decided to ordain John Andrew Ross as Minister of Music."  Well, that was the first I had heard of it (laughs).  And we had an ordination with the laying on of hands and all of that.  And two weeks later, the second person in the UUA [Unitarian Universalist Association], Elta--I'm sorry, oh, the name just went away, at Lexington [Massachusetts], was ordained similarly.  So there are two of us now.
Story_ID: 12656
Speaker 1: You've been a director, a teacher, a performer.  You've also established several musical groups, Voices of Black Persuasion?  Tell us--.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's the core of, that's the vocal ensemble, which I always use the name, Voices of Black Persuasion, and when there's children involved, they become the Children of Black Persuasion.  It's a line that I cribbed from Nikki Giovanni who had written a poem where she mentioned, "I'm gonna lay this black persuasion on you."  And I liked the sound of that.  So where we have vocal activity, I call them--those voices the voices of black persuasion or the children of black persuasion.  And it can be a large ensemble or a smaller one, but we use the--it's a working title.  So that when we function in the context of the National Center [of Afro-American Artists], it's always the Voices of Black Persuasion.  And I do other things--I've done other things that had--for instance, when Nelson Mandela was released from Robben Island [South Africa] prison and came on an international tour [in 1990], we welcomed him to Boston [Massachusetts]--"we" meaning a large rainbow chorus, black and white and pink and green, at the [Charles River] Esplanade.  And we had a wonderful time with that.  And we've done things like that, which combine the resources of the National Center with other things, other components, children in the park school in Brookline [Massachusetts], for instance.  And we did something for the hundred and twenty-fifth anniversary celebration of the Congregational Church and commissioned work with the children's chorus and things like that which kind of routinely come to an institution like ours.
Story_ID: 12657
Speaker 1: John, you have put together other musical groups.  Jazz has certainly been part of your musical life.  Tell us about your jazz work?
Speaker 2: Well, it's all attributable to my presence at the National Center [of Afro-American Artists, Boston, Massachusetts] because I got to meet a lot of wonderful people and got to do a lot of things which were, allowed me to develop along certain lines, which I otherwise wouldn't have had the opportunity to.  So early on '70s [1970s], I got involved--I had around me a whole bunch of jazz musicians and things.  And so I, you know, I gigged with them, and I still do some of that now.  And, but, in the pro--in the, the years of this involvement, you know, I had a chance to meet people who were, who've become our good friends, Randy Weston, being one notable one, the great master of the jazz piano.  And we featured him, as we did Billy Taylor and others, Duke Ellington, who was part of our 'Playhouse in the Park' program.  So I had a lot of opportunity to observe styles of, of people who were pianists themselves.  And that was influential, and it was kind of a fortuitous situation, you know, because I didn't have to go to a school or anything.  They came to us.  So they were part of our activities.  And so, as a result, I've done quite a bit of, of jazz performances, as well as classical performances, which I had been doing anyway, you know, before I started with--.
Speaker 1: Where have you done your jazz work, performances?
Speaker 2: Muse-, Museum of Fine Arts [Boston] and private gigs we would call it, and things for the National Center, and notably, 'Celebrates' and those kinds of things.  And then around the world, I mean I've, I've been festivals, music festivals.
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: Oh, Jamaica, Santo Domingo [Dominican Republic], Haiti, places where--what we would say the, the diaspora, places where there's a black presence already.
Story_ID: 12658
Speaker 1: Did you and Elma Lewis ever travel outside the country to perform--?
Speaker 2: Not at the same time, no.
Speaker 1: Not together?
Speaker 2: We've been outside of the country, both of us, but usually--somebody had to (laughs), someone has had to stay and mind the store.  She, she had wonderful opportunities to go when Leopold [Sedar] Senghor had his, sort of a jubilee celebration, she went to Senegal for that.  And much later, I went to Senegal for--I guess I was participating in some kind of a festival.  It was in Senegal and in The Gambia.  And, and I've, haven't really stopped traveling, but I've gotten to, you know, quite a few places.  I, I would say that the traveling that I have done has been largely the results of my, the position as the, at the, at the National Center [of Afro-American Artists, Boston, Massachusetts].  I've gotten to see the black world.  It, it--when you think of the diaspora, the dispersion of black people to the various places in which we live in the world, I've seen about, all of those places except Cartagena in Colombia which is somewhat in upheavals, so it hasn't been a place that is, is yet ready for us to visit.  But I've certainly been to Haiti and to Africa and South America, Rio [de Janeiro, Brazil] and Bahia [Brazil] and places where there's a tremendous amount of African retention and--within the culture.  And that has been transforming, really transforming.  I remember the first time I landed in Haiti, and I got off the plane, and I knew the atmosphere was different.  It was charged with something else.  And the same thing happened in Bahia because, for the same reason, there, there's, there's a life of the mind and the spirit that exists in those Brazilians in Bahia, the sense is--consciously the connection with Africa because there are cultural artifacts in Bahia as there are in Haiti, which no longer are extant in modern Africa.  So in order to see them, you have to go to these places, and they're in the new world.  So I've had the wonderful experience of going and connecting with those people and participating in, in performances or making performances happen.  And I've taken singers and stuff with me.  It's been a lot of fun.
Story_ID: 12659
Speaker 1: As you look back over your life, John, and particularly your musical work and career, who are the people or the events that stand out as being most influential and most inspirational to you in your music development?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess it would--I'd have to go back and say, well, starting in 1970, there are a whole bunch of people because the, the--it was a kind of a constant exchange with people whose, whose very existence was influential, you know.  It wasn't just a matter of getting to know musicians, you know.  If Elizabeth Catlett, the sculptor was in Boston [Massachusetts], and her son, Ali, studied with us, African drumming with Mr. [Michael Babatunde] Olatunji, and she was displaying--we had exhibitions of her sculpture.  And we got to meet people, the great John Wilson, whose a native of Boston who sculpted our 'Eternal Presence' sculpture, which is that gigantic bronze piece that sits in front of our museum.  It was sort of like being in the middle of a great intersection, to be at the National Center [of Afro-American Artists], and just people paraded in and out.  And they were usually, had some direct connection with Miss [Elma] Lewis--Talley Beatty was, was directing the dance company when I came there.  And he and Miss Lewis had been colleagues for years.  Well, the greatest of all black choreographers was right there, teaching, at times the children, you know.  And he had the opportunity to give his choreography to kids as young as fifteen so that when they went into New York to audition at twenty, they already knew 'Congo Tango Palace' and all of these great works that Talley had created.  So it was really quite a, a diet, I guess you'd say.  I was--it was nourishing.  It was very nourishing.  I can't think people of any significance who made contributions in this black world that we didn't have some direct connection with.
Speaker 1: You mentioned the personality of Mr. Olatunji--.
Speaker 2: Well, he was--.
Speaker 1: --for some reason he stands out in my mind cause I remember hearing him at the center.  I never met, but I always was fascinated by his, his drumming.  Well tell me about him.
Speaker 2: --he was, his first album, 'Drums of Passion' sold six million copies in the '60s [1960s], and he was the beginning of a, an intensified concentration on the African experience as communicated to this side of the planet.  He, himself, was a, alum of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].  So he had spent time here, and he married a black American woman, Amy [Bush Olatunji], who is a member of our board to this day.  He, of course, is passed on a couple years ago.  But when I came to the National Center, he and Miss Lewis were already--and Amy, were already associated.  And he had, he was then already on our faculty teaching African drum and as a result, teaching the culture of the drum, which was very significant because in that time, starting in the 1970s, he had, he had--he was educating all the boys who were registered at our school to play the drum.  And one select group of boys he took to another--a more professional level because they had the gift and the talent.  One of them Leon Mobley who's right now in California--.
Speaker 1: I remember Leon.
Speaker 2: --doing great things.
Speaker 1: He was a student of mine.
Speaker 2: Yes, and he was, of course, when he was a young boy, he was starting with us when he was six.  But when he was about twelve, he was on 'Zoom', the national T.V. program on educational television.  And then he was too old for that eventually, but, but he still had his drum.  And he's been Los Angeles [California] ever since, and all over the world, actually.  He, he's done very well.
Story_ID: 12660
Speaker 1: John, is there anything else that you would like to add to this conversation, to this interview that I haven't asked you about?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I can tell you about other colleagues--excuse me--other colleagues of mine, like Richard Long down at Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia].  He's a retired professor at Emory, and I met him when I started with Miss [Elma] Lewis, and we've been great, great friends and colleagues ever since.  He is a, kind of a cultural polymath, you know, he was the--directed the African, African American Studies Department at Atlanta University [later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] for years.  And he has a chair at Emory.  He's now retired.  He retired this past year.  And he and I have continued to have communication with each other over these many, many years.  And he's a person who I never would have met if it hadn't been for my connection with the National Center [of Afro-American Artists, Boston, Massachusetts].  I met him in 1972, seventy--yeah, '72 [1972].  And he has been Virgil to my Dante [Alighieri].  He's a person who loves to show you the, the world of black cultural expression, and he's traveled widely.  And I have joined him on many occasions to go to these places where, again, where we see Africa being retained, outside of Africa.  And he's a great person for explaining what this is that we're looking at, you know.  So as I say, it was like Dante and Virgil.
Speaker 1: And he should be a HistoryMaker, and if he's not on the list, I want to get his telephone number from you--.
Speaker 2: Most certainly, yes.
Speaker 1: --and we can get in contact with him, cause Atlanta is one of the places where we have a (unclear).
Speaker 2: I asked him once, not too long ago on the telephone--we talk once or twice a week.  And I said, "Richard, I've never asked you this question--" I said, "--but how did you get to be involved in so many things?"  I mean he's an art historian, cultural historian, dance historian, took his doctorate in French at the University of Poitiers [Université de Poitiers, Poitiers, France] in France and so on and so on and so on.  And he's a mine of information, and, of course, he--everybody that he knows is somebody, [James] Jimmy Baldwin and Maya [Angelou] and so on and so on.  So I said, "How did you get interested in all of this?"  He says, "Well, as a child, I guess I was just sort of receptive to everything."  He said, "I loved it all."  And I thought to myself, "What a great way to start out, you know."  There wasn't anything that he wasn't interested in, and he built a whole career in life on that, most especially, those things which had to do with the evolution of, of black culture in this hemisphere and in Africa.  So he's a, one of the world's leading authorities on so many subjects I can't even name them.  But I always consider him--he's very much a part of our family at the National Center, although I have more direct contact with him.  Excuse me--and, but, I, I always like to mention him in the context of the, the National Center because we wouldn't have known each other if it hadn't been for the fact that I met him in Atlanta at a convention, and I was introduced to him by our own, the curator of museum [Edmund Barry Gaither], now the director of the National Center, who told me, "When you get to Atlanta, you must find Richard Long."  And we've been fast friends ever since.
Story_ID: 12661
Speaker 1: Come back to Langston Hughes, for example, or give us some more details--.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I was a little boy--.
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: --when Langston was back and forth, and he would stay with us.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about those visits?
Speaker 2: Well, I just knew him as Uncle Langston.  So he was like part of the family.  And, you know, it wasn't until I understood his stature in, with respect to the Harlem Renaissance, and that was when I was much older.  But by that time, he was more in New York.  I think he came up here to confer with his publisher, Alfred [A.] Knopf was his publisher, and I think that's what brought him to Boston [Massachusetts].  Other than that, he also did readings, poetry readings, which I sometimes attended when I was a child.  But he was my dad's [Melvin Everard Ross] friend, and they were frat [fraternity] brothers.  So they, they hung out together, even right up until the time when Langston died.  I remember my father called me at work, and he said, "Langston's gone."  And I said, "Awww."  And it was, they were really, you know, good, good friends, good, good friends.
Story_ID: 12662
Speaker 1: The other people that have been significant in my life are not people whose names you would necessarily recognize, but, you know, I've been, I would say, very fortunate in having had interactions with people whose--for instance, Howard Thurman.  When I was at BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], Howard Thurman was the Dean of Marsh Chapel.
Speaker 2: I remember.
Speaker 1: And to be exposed to that great mind was a blessing, absolutely a blessing.  And I can still quote to you sermons that he preached when I was in freshman year at, at Liberal Arts College at BU.  And so there's, they like run all through my existence that I can point out and say, "Oh, did I get a lot of that relationship."
Speaker 2: I still have all of his books.  I'll never forget my first or second Sunday at Boston University.  It was September, and there were four or five blacks, like myself--got to know each other quick, and the thing to do Sunday was go to church--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Go to chapel, yes.
Speaker 2: --and you had to go to Marsh Chapel, right.  We're sitting here in Marsh Chapel, right.  The service is about to start, and who walks out, but this black man in this long black robe--.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and we looked at each other.  We looked, we never would have imagined.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see, you didn't know that this was--.
Speaker 2: I'd never heard of this man before.  I'd never heard of him, right.  We just went to chapel because we're new freshmen at BU.  And here's Howard Thurman running the service.
Speaker 1: And the--.
Speaker 2: And so we went back the next week, and we had to keep going back--.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: --because it took long to process and understand what he was saying--.
Speaker 1: And he got better and better and better.
Speaker 2: And then I got his books, and so he's been a part of my life.  I knew his wife, I didn't know him cause he started the--.
Speaker 1: The--.
Speaker 2: --museum, Black Heritage Trail in Boston [Massachusetts].  So Howard Thurman certainly--anybody else, anyone last person that we can evoke?
Speaker 1: Well, I don't know.  It's hard, you know, I, I think of myself as being so fortunate to have been around.  When I was going to college, twelve--there were, 'Life' magazine or 'Time' magazine, I don't remember which, it named twelve outstanding preachers in the United States.  Six of them were right here, Reinhold and [Helmut] Richard Niebuhr, Thurman--.
Speaker 2: Thurman was in the (unclear).
Speaker 1: Frederick Meek at Old South Church [Boston, Massachusetts], Dr. [Theodore Parker] Ferris at Trinity [Church, Boston, Massachusetts].  Let me see, who else, I'm leaving out somebody, Paul Tillich at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And, you know, to be able to say--this is before I was even involved in regular Sunday-to-Sunday church work, I could say, "Well, let me see, where will I go this time?  Who will I go to hear?"  And six of the greatest preachers in the country were right here.  And it was just a wonderful thing.  Of course, I stuck with Thurman.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, I think when--I, I remember the same 'Life' magazine article--.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the great black--great theologians, and here was Thurman.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: And then I really found out who he was--.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: --by looking at that.
Speaker 1: I can still quote sermon--bits of sermons that he preached because they were so memorable.  And, of course, by the time he was really into mid-career here, he was preaching almost with no notes at all.  He would just come out and develop an idea in the most dramatic way.  I think, in his own way, he was as dramatic in his delivery, without being intense--emotionally intense.  In the, in the conventional way, he was very intense, but it was the, it was the power of thinking.  And, but, he was as dramatic in his presentation as any black preacher I ever knew who shouted.  And he didn't shout.  He would just lean over the--this wonderful, deliberate way he had of speaking, and he would--he'd say, "What is the word?  Vicissitude." (laughs)  And I know so many people who sat there, and there was thrall that existed around the chapel at Boston University.
Story_ID: 12663
Speaker 1: I'd like to ask you, John, how do you feel about the way you've led your life?
Speaker 2: Well, I feel pretty good about it, actually.  I mean I've been exceedingly fortunate.  I mean I would have to start with that, that life has been a blessing.  Now, whether I've lived up to the (laughs), to the promise of that blessing, I cannot be the judge of that.  But I've had an incredible amount of blessing because of the people that I've encountered, Elma Lewis being one of them, you know, that was most for me, liberating.  And then other people that I've encountered in that journey have influenced my life in such meaningful ways that, you know, now, I sit here at this age, and I say, "Gee wiz, I've met just about everybody who's alive, who had did--had done anything significant by way of contribution."  And some of those, like Duke Ellington, I was not able to get to know him as well as Miss Lewis did because, because he would come here to perform for us.  And so he was an icon in my life, and if I wanted to, I could look across the stage and say, "Hello, Mr. Ellington," and, and things like that.  But that would be, you know, the idea of being blessed, you know, is something that I never tire of witnessing to.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you have not done that you'd still like to do?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I, I've always been interested in traveling, and I haven't yet been to all of the places--in the diaspora, we have Haiti--been there.  I mean--(pauses) Cartagena in, in Colombia.  I've never been there, but Haiti and Jamaica, the West Indies, Africa, South America, most especially, Salvador in Bahia [Brazil] and Rio [de Janeiro, Brazil].  And I've been to Europe, but as far as those places where the kind of African retention that scholars look towards in order to interpret the whole African experience, I guess I've been to most of those places, and it was very, very enriching, very enriching.  I, perhaps, look forward to going to Europe and Asia.  I've been Southeast Asia, but, and looked at that culture, you know, Thai classical dance and stuff like that, thanks to my colleague, Richard Long.  And I supposed with what remains of my life, I would be most happy to continue that journey cause everything--from the first time I set foot on land outside of the United States as anybody who travels knows, it changes you profoundly, and in the places like Haiti, you know, where you just feel in the atmosphere that there's another vibration and in places where Africa is retained in a conscious way as well as subconscious, it's, it's transforming.  It really is.  And then we have the people who went before us, like [W.E.B.] DuBois and scholars in the nineteenth century who were black and so on.  And to feel connected to that tradition, you know, is--and, and to see it being expressed through art, is just a fabulous, fabulous experience.
Story_ID: 12664
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community today and in the future?
Speaker 2: Well, I think we lack institutions.  See, we need more cultural institutions because that's where we get our definition.  And that's where we, the tools for defining our cultural would, would reside.  So the National Center [of Afro-American Artists, Boston, Massachusetts] is one such place, but we need many of them because I can look at kids, now adults, who, with their experience with us had a sense of identity, not only with Africa--I say, of those that went through that process in our school, "They have one foot planted firmly in Africa and the other foot planted firmly in the African American experience."  Well, the African American experience includes the culture of the West, but it's the culture of the West as mediated through the experience of being an African American.  And the other part of that is the [Michael Babatunde] Olatunji part and the part that has us experiencing Africa as much as we can.  So having done this for so long, I would have to say that, you know, we really have to develop our institutions.  I remember once, when I was at--teaching at Morgan Memorial [United Methodist Church of All Nations, Boston, Massachusetts], the youth and children's center, and we had a little boy.  His name was Danny Moy.  And I taught this cooking class twice a week.  And Danny and his two sisters, they were about ten and nine and eight, and they would come on Wednesday only.  And I said, "Well, Danny, we meet twice a week.  What are you doing that you can't come twice a week?  This is a class."  And he said, "We have Chinese school."  And I said, "Well, Chinese school.  How can that, how can, I mean--."  I was trying to find words to say, "How can that be as important as this because anything I'm doing is supremely important."  And he looked at me with such pity. (laughs)  He said, "Oh, this fool"--he was ten.  He said, "I won't even bother to explain to him why it's necessary for me to know who I am.  I can learn how to bake macaroni and cheese on my off time, but right now, I got to Chin--."  He said very simply, he said, "I've got to go to Chinese school."  And it was so, and I--it was such a profound moment that I've never forgotten it.  I said, "I must think this over." (laughs)  And, of course, this was long--I was sixteen.  And I was really beginning to think about culture in the, in the deep sense, you know.  And, of course, I knew what he was saying.  And he was absolutely right, but I came to understand it even better as a result of, you know, growing older and learning more about my own culture.
Story_ID: 12665
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered or what would you like your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a good question.  I, I think we're all put here to fulfill some kind of eternal purpose.  So how I want to be remembered would have something to do with, if I made--did I make a difference.  Now, I've had a good opportunity to be in other people's lives, and to the extent that I've been able to affect the outcome of other people's lives--and I think Miss [Elma] Lewis felt the same way, with her commitment as a teacher.  Those of us who teach do have the opportunity to take a life to whom others have given life, the parents, the mother, and give that life meaning.  So the extent to which I've had, been able to participate in giving meaning to other people's lives is the, is, would be the thing that would be most fulfilling.  And since I've been around long enough to have seen what happens to people that I had something to do with, some intersection with, some, some way of touching their lives and, and, and giving meaning, as much as I could to their life, that has been very, very enriching, nourishing and it's the thing that kept Miss Lewis at eighty-two, when she could have been written off medically.  But she had, for instance, 'Black Nativity' to look forward to every year, and the children, and notably, she died after 'Black Nativity' season on January 1st of 2004.  She had to see one more season through.  So that's how I would like to be remembered as--Miss Lewis used to say about herself, "Did I make a difference?"  That's how she put it.  And I would say, "Yeah," that I feel the same way as if I, if I had an opportunity to make, to enhance the meaning of someone's life, then I think that's part of why I was put here.  I tell my friends, I say, "You, you have to really analyze why you were put here, and why you have been spared this long to, for what purpose, beyond your own self indulgence.  It must be a reason why you're here."  And my some of my friends, you know, actually, they look in wonder at how they could have lasted this long.  And I say, "Well, maybe it's because your purpose hasn't been fulfilled yet."  And you have to analyze that, particularly people who consider their lives to be broken, and they just don't understand why they're still here.  What meaning is their life?  And I say, "Well, that remains for you to discern, but you do have an opportunity as long you have breath in your body, and you have to think about that."
