Story_ID: 624083
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer and--Patrice, tell me your name--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Jai.
Speaker 1: Jai--I'm sorry.  What's your last name?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Jai Curry.
Speaker 1: Jai Curry is going to be in the room with us during the interview.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Would you please state your name and spell it for me, including your middle name?
Speaker 2: Patricia Ann Russell-McCloud, P-A-T-R-I-C-I-A, A-N-N, R-U-S-S-E-L-L, hyphen, M-C-capital C-L-O-U-D [HistoryMaker Patricia Russell-McCloud].
Speaker 1: Can you tell me your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Nine, fourteen [September 14, 1946], Indianapolis, Indiana.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an international motivational speaker.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Today's date?
Speaker 2: April the 20th, nine--2011.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: My home in Atlanta, Georgia.
Story_ID: 624084
Speaker 1: Tell me, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring, I love the spring.  It's fresh, it's clean, it's new.
Speaker 1: What about a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I would say Africa because it's so, it's a clarion call to the motherland, and I feel like I'm going home.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: Whatever you're going through, it's a temporary inconvenience for a permanent improvement.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Food?  (Laughter) My favorite food would be--I, I really love salads because you can get your protein, and blackened salmon or--I love it, I love salads, the mixed greens, I love it.
Story_ID: 624085
Speaker 1: Let's begin by talking about your father.  Tell me your father's name and when and where he was born.
Speaker 2: My father was Willie Hubert Russell [Willie Russell] from Elkton, Kentucky, and he was born in 1911.
Speaker 1: Did he share any stories about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was on the farm, one of four brothers, and they found themselves always engaged from sunup, literally to sundown, working.  As farmers they picked cotton and wheat or whatever the crop happened to be, to ensure their livelihood for their young life and young adult life.
Speaker 1: Do you know whether they owned the land on which they lived?
Speaker 2: They rented, and it was always problematic, because when you are a lessee, you are always subject to what the leasing agent would impose upon you.
Speaker 1: What about your father's education--
Speaker 2: Limited.
Speaker 1: --growing up?
Speaker 2: Not high school, not secondary school.  Limited, always a custodian thereafter.
Speaker 1: And tell me about your grandfather and your grandmother on your father's side.
Speaker 2: My grandfather, George Russell, Elkton, Kentucky, was very much a disciplinarian and a stickler for a strong work ethic, and my grandmother was the homemaker.
Speaker 1: Did you have a relationship with them?
Speaker 2: In the summers.  I would just look forward to going and staying in Elkton to visit my uncles and my grandparents.
Speaker 1: And what kind of relationship did you have with your grandmother and your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Very good, because they were, they saw in me what I did not even know existed.  They felt that I could be and become.  They felt that I could take over the world.  They saw in Patty [HistoryMaker Patricia Russell-McCloud] that she's going to be somebody, which didn't always sit well with my sisters [Barbara Russell Wilson and Verdie Russell Anderson], but Patty's going to be somebody.
Speaker 1: And was this the grandparent that you went to the post office for?
Speaker 2: I went to the post office, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me that story.
Speaker 2: They did not deliver mail to the residential homes in Elkton, a very small town.  So I went to the post office to get the mail, because I was a teenager by now, early teen, maybe thirteen.  And I went and I just asked for the postal mail for George and Verdie Russell [Verdie Watkins Russell].  And they paused as if something was missing.  There was a pregnant pause like what's wrong--give me my mail.  And they said, "Well, you don't know how to talk to people."  And I said, "What did I say but I'd like the mail for George and Verdie Russell?"  And then later they told my grandfather, "Your granddaughter doesn't know how to talk to people, and you would need to tell her that she needs to come in that post office and say, 'Yes, ma'am' and 'No, ma'am.'"  And they really attributed it to the fact that I was northern and I didn't know the southern way.  And I was offended--and even at thirteen, I was offended and thought they were out to lunch, and told my grandfather as much.  And he thought that I was, I needed to calm down, because when I would go back to Indianapolis [Indiana] they would still be living there, needing their mail.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I don't think that you gave the names of your grandparents.  Tell me their names and spell it for me, please.
Speaker 2: My grandfather was George Russell, George Lee Russell.  G-E-O-R-G-E, capital L-E-E, R-U-S-S-E-L-L, and his wife was Verdie, V-E-R-D-I-E, Mae, M-A-E, R-U-S-S-E-L-L.
Story_ID: 624086
Speaker 1: Your relationship with your father [Willie Russell], what characteristics do you think that you got from your father?
Speaker 2: Well, I think my parents both were hardworking, my mother [Jannie Burrus Russell] more so than my father.  But my father was, he believed in education.  He believed that his children should be the best that they could be and maximize.  He would go to work every day, but with the encouragement of my mother.  And to do extra work, that was not him, but he would work every day, so that was an encouragement.  I think he was high tempered, and I think the attribute that I inherited would be physical appearance and his high temper, at least in my younger years.  As I grew older and more globally placed and positioned in my career and world stage, I'm not high tempered, I just look at you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there anything else you can remember about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Just the fact that I had all those uncles, and his three brothers, and I loved it because I didn't have a brother.
Speaker 1: Do you remember their names?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Uncle John Lee [John Russell], Uncle A.C. [Arthur Russell] and Uncle Baby [Claude Russell].
Story_ID: 624087
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little about your mother.  Tell me her name and where and when she was born.
Speaker 2: My mother is Jannie, J-A-N-N-I-E, Lee, L-E-E, Burrus, B-U-R-R-U-S, Russell [Jannie Burrus Russell].  And she was born in 1915.  She was four foot eleven, size eight.  And she was a powerhouse.  She worked two and three jobs to ensure that one end would meet the other end, and she worked untiringly.  I don't know how she did it.  There were three girls.  I'm the youngest, and my mother, she was just the best, the love of my life.  We were inseparable.  Any dream that she had, I wanted to fulfill it.  She always wanted to go to the Apollo [Apollo Theater] in New York [New York].  She just had that in her mind.  And when I started working, I said, "Mama, we're going to the Apollo."  And we did it.  Anything that--any travel, any place.  I remember the day I bought her a fur cape and then she, I said, she said, "What, for me?"  And she deserved anything you could do, that's what she deserved because she was that kind of mother.
Speaker 1: Did she talk to you much about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Her responsibilities?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Her responsibilities, being one of nine children, she was a twin to Jimmy Burrus [James Burrus] and they worked hard all the time, just a hard life.  I don't think we knew we were poor.  I don't think they knew they were poor.  I think they knew that they had to make it against the odds, so they had strong work ethic.  My mother's was very pronounced, because it's never seemed a day that she wasn't working 24/7.  She came home from work and worked, because my father [Willie Russell] always loved homemade biscuits.  And I mean, you could not get a mix and make that up.  He had to have homemade biscuits every day.  And I was saying to him, "Do you realize this woman's been working all day?  Why would she have to come home and do this?"  And it was an issue for him, and it would have been for her if she had not made it.
Speaker 1: Tell me about her education.
Speaker 2: She was a high school graduate, which was wonderful.  She looked forward to being educated, and she saw in her children the steps beyond even high school.  But that she did not have that experience or opportunity but she made sure that her children had the opportunity.
Speaker 1: Do you know whether her parents and owned the land that they lived on?
Speaker 2: They rented.
Speaker 1: They rented as well?
Speaker 2: But they were farmers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And ultimately my parents moved to Indianapolis [Indiana], and my grandmother, William [William Burrus, Jr.] and Mary Burrus [Mary Slaughter Burrus], lived two blocks down.
Speaker 1: Did your mother ever work outside of the home?
Speaker 2: My mother?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: My mother worked outside of the home the whole time.
Speaker 1: Oh, what--I'm telling--what was her occupation?
Speaker 2: My mother was a matron.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she worked in private.  And then she also worked for the school district as a matron.
Story_ID: 624088
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Jannie Burrus Russell] and father [Willie Russell] met?
Speaker 2: I don't know it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, when your mother and father marry, where do they live when they start their family?
Speaker 2: They lived in Kentucky initially, but they thought there was a better life in Indianapolis, Indiana.  So one by one, my father's brothers moved to Indianapolis, and so did my father and my mother as a result.  And they were married.  They thought that the better life would come with the city, and they lived in Indianapolis.
Speaker 1: So now tell me about your family.  You said you are the youngest.  Tell me about your siblings.
Speaker 2: I have two sisters who are older, obviously.  The oldest child, Barbara [Barbara Russell Wilson], resides in Indianapolis.  She has two grown children and Verdie, V-E-R-D-I-E [Verdie Russell Anderson], named after my [paternal] grandmother [Verdie Watkins Russell], is deceased.  She had four children and they live from Tacoma, Washington and, to Indianapolis.
Speaker 1: So it's just three of you?
Speaker 2: Just three.
Story_ID: 624089
Speaker 1: As a young child, I want you to think about the area where you lived.  Give me a description of a square block from your home.  Who lives there, who are the friends, what stores are available if any?  Just give me a tour of the community.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I lived in Haughville, in Indianapolis [Indiana], which is the other side of town, not the main side, which means that there was a side of town of black working people that, blue collar people, strident people, working against the odds people.  It was well kept.  The schools were good because there was a feeder side further out that was the white side, and so we ended up in their old schools as a result of desegregation, so the schooling was fine.  Buses ran down my street, or on the corner where I would go to meet my mother [Jannie Burrus Russell] when she would come home from work with the groceries, to help her bring them home.  And, excuse me, I lived on Tremont Street, and there my cousin lived across the street.  And the neighbor ladies were, they were lookouts, and they would tell you what to do and how to do it, and if you did it incorrectly, they would tell your parents when they got home.  As soon as they got off the bus, they would tell your parents.  And then you would get a whipping, because that was the way we grew up, and everybody was your play aunt or your neighbor who had authority over you.  In my neighborhood, in that block square, people didn't get out, meaning, the get out means they didn't go on beyond high school much.  They didn't get out to the college or to travel or the rest.  They looked for jobs, they secured jobs, and they did what their parents did before.  But I got out.  Hallelujah.
Speaker 1: What were some of the occupations of some of your friends who lived in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: They were day workers, custodians, matr- matrons and some would have been administrative at the lower levels for companies.  They would have been secretaries, they would have been landscapers.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends?
Speaker 2: I was very close to my cousin, who is now deceased, that lived diagonally across from me.  My aunt [Josephine Burrus] and my uncle [Edward Burrus], the one that is still alive, my mother's brother, they lived there.  And then the neighbors on both sides and all sides, they were all friends because everybody was friendly and they looked out for each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your cousin actually was your best friend?
Speaker 2: Yes, Mary Alice.  Mary Alice Burrus [Mary Burrus Dodd].
Speaker 1: Were the households majority two fa- two parent households?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Mostly everyone's mother and father were there.  And there were children and we'd play in the street.
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the games that you would play.
Speaker 2: Everything from jacks and dominoes and chess and jumping rope, and we would run up and down the street.  We just had fun.
Story_ID: 624090
Speaker 1: Tell me, what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: A very strong memory for me is the fact that I have been speaking nationally since I was eight years old.  So I was always in a rehearsal state of mind for the next piece, P-I-E-C-E, the next presentation, the next get ready to be before this audience.  So I played with dolls and I had a true collection of dolls, and they were my audience.  And I was always rehearsing and always getting ready for my next presentation.
Story_ID: 624091
Speaker 1: When you think about that time, if you can think of a, a sound, a sight or a smell, what comes to mind?
Speaker 2: A sound, a sight or a smell.
Speaker 1: And we're talking about in your elementary years.
Speaker 2: I would, I would think that it would be always the cooking that went on in my house, because that--my sisters [Barbara Russell Wilson and Verdie Russell Anderson] and my mother [Jannie Burrus Russell], they are really, they were really excellent cooks.  And they could prepare foods that permeated not only the house but the yard and the neighborhood, because people would come to my door and ask my mother for sweet potato pies because she was the best.
Speaker 1: What about a sound?  What do you hear?
Speaker 2: I would hear, I think I was cognizant of people driving up and down my street.  I live--we did not have a car at that early age, my early age, so I was cognizant that others did.  And I'm also very aware of the 500 racetrack, the Indianapolis 500 racetrack [Indianapolis Motor Speedway].  The (makes sound) (gesture) I could hear that, and I could hear the practices, and I could hear them running the track, because it was Haughville [Indianapolis, Indiana] and the raceway was in Speedway [Indiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sights.  What do you see there, what do you remember?
Speaker 2: I see very well kept homes, people who want to--they were, they were not, they were not middle class people, but you would have thought they were.  And I, I was always impressed with how everybody kept up, everybody kept their yards so nicely, and I, I liked that.
Story_ID: 624092
Speaker 1: Let's talk about school.  What elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: School No. 75 [Woodrow Wilson School No. 75, Indianapolis, Indiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where--who were some of your friends, and what was your best subject?
Speaker 2: English is my best, was my best subject.  And I don't, I don't remember friends at 75--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as much.  Mary [Russell-McCloud's cousin, Mary Burrus Dodd], no--Mary and I would go, and we were, we were best friends.  And, but beyond that it was a mixed school, mixed meaning white and black, and I really do remember that there was always a pull and tug about--when I would go to school, my math teacher put me in the cloakroom closet, literally, and my parents [Jannie Burrus Russell and Willie Russell] wanted to know why that happened, and why it happened with regularity.  And when they came to the school, I said, I didn't know.  When I came to the school then my parents went up there and asked her why.  And she said, "Because Patty [HistoryMaker Patricia Russell-McCloud] talks too much."  Now it's interesting to me that now all these years later that's all Patty does is talk.  And I say it in speeches, "Because I talk too much."
Speaker 1: Okay.  The teachers at the school--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you said it was an integrated school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: This was before Brown v. the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], because you started school probably in '52 [1952]?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The teachers, were they both black and white or were all the teachers white?
Speaker 2: Many were white, but as I recall, it's a distant memory I guess because I haven't focused on it a lot.  You're taking me to these early childhood days.  There were black teachers as well, but more white.
Story_ID: 624093
Speaker 1: I don't want to go into your speaking yet.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But other activities outside of school, did you belong to any other, did you have any extracurricular activities--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --like maybe music lessons or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were, many were church related--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --because we were A.M.E. Zion [African Methodist Episcopal Zion] at that juncture.  And there was an opportunity to always speak as a little girl at church.  She was the speaker, and then at church as well, when we became Baptist, I played the xylophone for the choir.  And the choir would come in: "We are soldiers in the army.  We have to fight although we have to die.  We have to hold it up, the blood stained banner.  We have to hold it up until we die," ['We Are Soldiers'].  And that was the procession, and I was playing.  I remember that.  And I remember singing a lot.  I'm an alto, and I always would be in the choir singing and loving it.  I love the worship experience then and now.  Additionally, I loved debate, debate clubs and that involvement, interface, mastery of the spoken word, any of that.  As a early child, I loved that.  And I didn't do well at piano lessons, and my mother [Jannie Burrus Russell] decided, correctly, that it was wasteful for her to work hard and to do that for me and then I wasn't effective.  Many people think that I took, had to take, speech lessons.  And I took them only fleetingly, because I'm gifted and I told them, we don't have to do this, for real.  And there was a Jordan College of Music [Jordan College of the Arts, Indianapolis, Indiana].  So I did try the piano lessons, had fleeting speech lessons; but I did not continue ad nauseam with either.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  Were there any family traditions that you remember maybe during the holidays that were different from anyone else's that you could think of?
Speaker 2: Just not different from anyone else, because big gatherings of family and friends around food functions for holiday periods, reunions, we did do that and church every Sunday.  But those things are not different from what other people in my neighborhood [Haughville, Indianapolis, Indiana] did.
Speaker 1: All right.  You said that English was your favorite subject.  When did you learn to read?  Was it before you actually started school?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes, because my parents were very intentional about being the best, and education, they always embedded in our brain that that would get you out and over and through.
Story_ID: 624094
Speaker 1: So you learned to read at an early age.  Talk to me about how you began to, to have your speaking engagements.  You said it started at church.  You had an opportunity at church.  So tell me about, if you can remember, about the first time that you gave a speech before a large audience.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I remember very well, because people at church thought that I was a child prodigy.  The bishop of the A.M.E. Zion [African Methodist Episcopal Zion] church for that area came to my local church and they asked him to evaluate and make a discernment as to whether in me he saw a child prodigy.  He heard me and he said, "Yeah, she is gifted, and I would like for her to keynote," I was eight, "the national meeting of the A.M.E.Z., to give the welcome address."  And my parents [Jannie Burrus Russell and Willie Russell] said that I could go, but my mother would have to go with me.  She did.  This was in Los Angeles, California, and I wore a white lace dress and my hair was plaited, my hair was ash blonde, plaited and big white ribbons and with--I think people made the big issue over the fact that this little girl is up there speaking without any notes or anything.  And it was oratorical in the presentation style, because that is my way of speaking.  And I gave the welcome address to thirty-five hundred people.
Speaker 1: How did you prepare for it?
Speaker 2: Oh, I wrote it from my heart.  I write usually without any assistance.  And at that age, I had it reviewed and reviewed so that it would be correct and in sync with what I should be saying at that age.  But I prepared by knowing, I knew the church because it was my church.  It was just the broader denomination.  And I prepared.  I needed to be certain that the animation and inflections were what would be expected.  But it was very oratorical, and I remember walking and talking and being cathartic with the delivery.
Speaker 1: So you memorized it, and it was about how many pages?
Speaker 2: Five typewritten.
Speaker 1: And it was easy for you to memorize your speeches?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 624095
Speaker 1: So in elementary school [Woodrow Wilson School No. 75, Indianapolis, Indiana], I'm going back to school now, were there any teachers that encouraged you or a teacher that you really looked up to at all during the elementary school years?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think Mrs. Harger [ph.] in math who put me in the cloakroom closet, I think she was very encouraging and that was because math was a challenge and she felt that I was smart enough to do well if I would do well and stop talking.  So because she stayed on me, I thought that was an encouragement, in a, almost in a contradictory way.  It helped propel me further, because when people are against me for any reason, even now, I do better.  I think that I've always had good teachers and a strong respect for what they do, because I give them good credit for what they bring to the table and I try to be front and center, front row often in most of my classes, because I want to be thirsty for--and receive what they offer.
Story_ID: 624096
Speaker 1: After your experience of giving that speech in front of all of those people, when you came back to school, did you, did you want to do better, to do more, to learn more?  Were you getting enough of what, you know, as far as what education had to offer at that school, or were you looking for more?
Speaker 2: I don't have that recollection.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What I remember is I always wanted to be ahead of the class.  I wanted to be the best.  I wanted to do things that were not common to my peers, and I could see beyond school No. 75 [Woodrow Wilson School No. 75, Indianapolis, Indiana].  So I wanted to tell them about having been in California and being the keynote speaker and I wanted to tell them they could expect that that would be my modus operandi.  So, I always could see myself propelling beyond where I was.
Speaker 1: And just tell me more about the feeling of talking in front of those people, and I'm sure you probably got a standing ovation.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Tell me, how did you feel inside?  What was your spirit saying (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was spectacular because I was on the apron of the stage.  And I could, I was standing there and I could hear them introducing me as a child prodigy that they had found in Indianapolis, Indiana who was here to give the welcome address to this esteemed delegation.  And I had never, that was my first major speech.  So people gasped when I walked out, because again, I'm eight, I'm in a white lace dress with plaits all over my head and big bows.  And people, they thought it would be cute and appropriate, and they thought that they would be almost polite in receiving my remarks.  But I'm gifted, so therefore they were euphoric and ecstatic and very participatory and engaged.  So I was truly excited and I wanted to make my mother [Jannie Burrus Russell] proud.  I knew the sacrifices that had gone into it, financial and otherwise.  So I wanted her to thumbs up, and that was what it was.
Story_ID: 624097
Speaker 1: Let's fast forward to junior high school.  Did you go to a junior high school or straight from el- elementary [Woodrow Wilson School No. 75, Indianapolis, Indiana] to high school [Shortridge High School, Indianapolis, Indiana]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember in 1963 when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated?  Because you're getting ready to go to high school, in 1964 you graduate.  So during high school that happened.  Do you remember anything about that time?
Speaker 2: Completely.  I was passing classes.  I was on the step going to history, and I thought I was going to die, because it was all in the corridors, "The president is dead."  And so I was trying to tell them, "I think that's the meanest thing you could say."  And they say, "And it's also the truth."  And I was very much a history major, very intrigued by the Kennedy administration and very supportive of it.  And so for me it was a catastrophic loss.
Story_ID: 624098
Speaker 1: This is also the time of the, you know, civil rights.  What's going on in your town, and are your parents [Jannie Burrus Russell and Willie Russell] involved in any civil rights activities?
Speaker 2: My parents are not involved.  The town is very divided, very racist, very us against them, very stratified by race and class.  So you knew your side and you stayed on it.  And it was not, it was very pre-today Indianapolis [Indiana], because Indianapolis now is almost the mecca of the Midwest because so many things are alive and well and vibrant and charismatic and magnetic.  They draw you to Indianapolis.  Not then.  It was Indian-no place.  There was nothing to do.  People expected you to have a slot and to fit the slot.  Period, dot.  And you did not go beyond their expectation.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your dealings with discrimination.  Were there any in your town?  You talked to, you talked to me about the post office incident.  But--
Speaker 2: In Kentucky.  In Indianapolis I always thought I was discriminated against.  I always thought that there was not room in the inn for a talented little girl who had a dream.  I always thought that it was a place that you had to leave to be somebody.  I didn't think you could be anybody in Indianapolis, and I always had in my mind I'm going to work hard at these lessons so I can get out of here.
Speaker 1: I guess what I'm trying to find out, as a teenager, what were some of the things that you were allowed to do or not allowed to do, even as far as going to the movies.  Was there any laws that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: So we went to Madame C.J. Walker building [Madame Walker Theatre Center, Indianapolis, Indiana] and that's where the blacks went to go to the theater.  And it was not until many years later that it was renovated by Eli Lilly pharmaceutical [Eli Lilly and Company].  But back then it was just the black theater.  And because it was on the cusp of downtown, it would have been considered on the edge of whether you should really be there or not, unaccompanied particularly.  You didn't need to be out there.  You--there was an us against them attitude.  And you knew when you were in a place, whether it was a mall or whether it was a store, they would follow you around.  And that's why I can't take that now, because it was the mindset that do you really belong here?  Are you really where you should be?  That kind of pressure that I felt.
Speaker 1: Were there stores owned by blacks that you were--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --able to go to?
Speaker 2: There were.  In fact, my aunt, my mother's sister, owned Cornell's Lunch [Indianapolis, Indiana].  And it was about eight minutes from my house.  And it was very popular, because you would go to Cornell's Lunch to get hot dogs and potato chips and sweet potato pie that my mother made.  And my mother would work in there with my Aunt Dorothy [Dorothy Burrus Cornell] to--and you could--there was a jukebox and you could eat and dance and all of that.  So many people owned convenience store types or store front types.  There were especially beauty shops and barbershops, and shoe repair.
Story_ID: 624099
Speaker 1: What music were you listening to then?  During that time there weren't a lot of FM radio, just AM.  So what was you, what were you listening to on the radio?
Speaker 2: I listened to talk.  I listened to a lot of talk, and then I listened to the music that was dance music, dance music.  I liked to dance, and music that was popular on the records.
Speaker 1: In 45s [45 rpm record], did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --buy 45s?
Speaker 2: 45s.
Speaker 1: Was Motown [Motown Records] mus- was that music that you listened to during that era?
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.  The Motown music was the music of that era for me.  And they had so many stars and hits.  So we danced the night away.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, and I, I--and the night was in my house.  I mean, you're, you're just going from room to room dancing (laughter), you're not out going somewhere dancing.
Story_ID: 624100
Speaker 1: What were people saying about Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] that you remember?
Speaker 2: That he was the man that God had sent to deliver black people from the oppression, that he was a preacher's preacher, that he was a visionary and a leader unparalled.  And I believed it, ascribed to it, wanted to be a part of the movement, and was not, because we didn't have the outreach to be a part of the, that movement.  But I kept up with it on the radio, on the television, in school.  When they didn't teach it, I raised it.  I was always an advocate for civil rights, for Dr. Martin Luther King.  And, so it was very much a personal victory, every victory.  I just could not as a child embrace the way the people of the movement were treated.
Speaker 1: Were there any demonstrations in Indiana (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not that I recall.
Story_ID: 624101
Speaker 1: Let's talk about--you're in high school and you go to--
Speaker 2: Shortridge [Shortridge High School, Indianapolis, Indiana] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Shortridge.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now this school originally was a white school, am I correct?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And they opened, and it was a school where kids went to school together, and it wasn't until I believe 1927 when they built the other school, the black school that they started sending students to, Crispus Attucks High School [Indianapolis, Indiana]?
Speaker 2: Crispus Attucks.
Speaker 1: Attucks.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Crispus Attucks was alive and well when I went to Shortridge.
Speaker 1: That's my question.  How did you go to that particular school--
Speaker 2: How did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) instead of going--?
Speaker 2: Because of where I lived and because of my grade average.  I just went to Shortridge.  We moved, we moved to Guilford [Avenue] and then Shortridge was my school when we moved to Guilford.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I had a little different understanding of how that worked out, but all right, that's fine.
Story_ID: 624102
Speaker 1: So tell me more about your high school years and what you're doing outside of school and in school.  Any extracurricular activities, and what are your favorite subjects and what are you doing in school now, in high school?
Speaker 2: I focused on history as a major and English as a minor.  And I want to be, I think, a lawyer.  I'm not sure of that, but I think.  So there I find almost isolationism, and that is from black and whites.  Whites, because I am not white, and blacks because there's the classism that intervenes.  I'm still from the other side, not the North Side [Indianapolis, Indiana], and so they're cliquish, and they hang together and they sit together in the cafeteria.  So I'm still--either I find my own groups, but I'm not in that group.  So I'm very aware of that.  It's very bothersome, but there were some people from my neighborhood who also went to Shortridge [Shortridge High School, Indianapolis, Indiana], and we would, we would find ourselves together more often than not, and so it provided that buffer.  Outside I was still doing my speaking.  I was the youth speaker a lot.  I was the debate person.  I was the little mistress of ceremonies for activities and occasions and I would get to go again to Elkton, Kentucky to see my [paternal] grandparents [Verdie Watkins Russell and George Russell] in the summers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you ever have a job while you were in high school?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think.  Was my paper route--I think my paper route was in high school.  I delivered the morning papers and then--did I leave high school?  No, otherwise, I didn't.
Story_ID: 624103
Speaker 1: So how do you begin to prepare for college?  You think you may want to be an attorney, but you're not sure.  How do you begin to prepare to go to college?  Who's there to help you?
Speaker 2: My godmother went to Kentucky State [Kentucky State College; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky], and she was very hopeful that I would be willing to be interviewed by the recruiter when he came.  She was telling him that I was a speaker, that I was smart and that I could sing, and that I could be on any or all of those scholarships and it would be a wonderful experience.   So I listened and I met the recruiter when he came, among other recruiters who came to my school [Shortridge High School, Indianapolis, Indiana], but I met him.  But he told me about a man named Dr. Henry E. Cheaney and that he was a history and political science professor at Kentucky State.  So I did all this research on Dr. Henry E. Cheaney.  Excuse me.  He was renowned.  And I said, "Oh, I have to study under him, I just have to go there."  And the choir, the concert choir of Kentucky State, was traveling all over and, including New York, inclu- I mean everywhere.  And they were under a master director.  And many of those people in that choir have gone on to be in operas and all that.  So then I said, "Oh, I want to be in that choir."  And, so then I looked at some of the other professors.  One of the top speech and drama persons, Dr. Winona Lee Fletcher, was at Kentucky State.  And when I went to their campus, I loved it.  Rolling hills, buildings that were welcoming, attitudes and behaviors that were embracing.  I'd never been around that many black people who were educated and had a mind to encourage me to be my best and to achieve against the odds and all that.  And it wasn't so far from Indianapolis [Indiana] that if, if anything else, you could catch a bus and go home.  So I selected Kentucky State.
Story_ID: 624104
Speaker 1: Who was the president at that time?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Carl M. Hill [Carl McClellan Hill].
Speaker 1: And so was it all that you wanted it to be once you got there?
Speaker 2: I think it was.  I loved it, because I worked for Mr. William Goodwin in the office of public relations.  I was the go to person to go across campus to get these papers, to distribute flyers, to collate materials.  All of that, I just thought I was in charge, living large.  And I loved it, I loved it.  And I was the campus leader.  I pledged at Kentucky State [Kentucky State College; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky] and I pledged alone, by myself, and that was major for me (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, let's talk about it.  You pledged AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]?
Speaker 2: I did.  And other people were eligible until they became ineligible.  And then I looked up and all of a sudden it was just me left.  And they, my mentor on campus, my big sister, came and said, she said, "This is what's real."  She was a chemistry major.  She said, "This is what's real.  You have been selected by Alpha Kappa Alpha to go forward.  That means you will pledge alone."  And pledging then meant a rigorous exposure to big sisters on line for a longer period than a day or two.  It was a long time with a big headache, but her position was you have to think this through and pray over it because it may be more than what you want to be exposed to.  And I said, "Well, let me just tell you something.  My parents [Jannie Burrus Russell and Willie Russell] are working two jobs so that I can be here, even though I'm scholarship."  So my mother said this, "You--," she did not even understand pledge, she said, "What does that have to do with your grades?"  (Laughter) And I said, "Nothing."  And so then I said, "But I want to do this."  Because I tried to make her understand how the networking and the involvement and the sisterhood and service connection.  She was--, "Just don't let, don't lose your scholarship."  I decided to go ahead and pledge because I was a sophomore, and if I waited to my junior year it would be too late because I'd be in my major, and I wouldn't have the time nor the inclination for somebody to tell me to go do, before some pledge line.  So I pledged by myself, and you have to do a Greek show.  And the Greek show is followed by a series of performing on the block.  And the block is in front of the student union.  So every morning, excuse me, every morning you have to sing at 6:30.  You have to go and perform and I was singing every morning (singing), "Woke up this morning with my mind stayed on Alpha."  So I went through all that.  And then the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] were out there singing every morning too.  And so they became my brothers.  That line of men today have called me to say, "Are you coming to our centennial?"  I said, "You know, you need to stop."  But we're that close because of all we went through during that period.  So we had the Greek show in the gymnasium.   And you have to perform.  You have to put on a show as if you are at a real production.  They hired a band, all the rest.  And then I came in.  I remember I came in with my paddle with my pink and green (singing), "Working, striving, trying hard to make it."  And then the band would say (makes sound) (singing), "AKA is on my mind."  So the people went nuts.  They went nuts because they knew what I had been through for five months of singing and doing and being the go to person.  And they said, "Oh my god, and she's doing a Greek show by herself."  And my economics teacher came and said, "You have more nerve than cod liver does pills."  And I said, "That's a good thing, right?"  And he said, "Right."
Story_ID: 624105
Speaker 1: What courses are you taking [at Kentucky State College; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: I'm taking history and political science as a major.  I'm taking speech and drama, English, choir--I was in the concert choir, the traveling choir, and science courses.  My language was, I didn't take Spanish so it had to be French. It was French.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there anything political going on on the campus?
Speaker 2: Oh, we always had political (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --political attitudes and involvements and engagements.
Speaker 1: Because we have civil rights and you have Vietnam [Vietnam War].  Are there anything, any- anything going on?
Speaker 2: I think more structured convocations that would bring speakers as opposed to students in demonstration.  We did not, we did not demonstrate.  We would go and hear a lecture for the lyceum program [Lyceum Committee].
Story_ID: 624106
Speaker 1: Talk to me more about your involvement with the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority].  Who was the president of the AKAs then, or your chapter president while you're in college [Kentucky State College; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky], do you remember?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay, fine.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: And were there any projects that the AKs, AKAs worked on while you were in college that you remember?  I do know that during that time they got a grant for the Cleveland Job Corps.  So was there anything similar to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Dr. Zelma George [Zelma Watson George] was at the Cleveland Job Corps Center [Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she's a mentor, she was a mentor of my, mine, primarily because as a speaker--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --she knew me and saw favor in what I do as a speaker.  So I got to know her well enough to go to her home and be at her home, and she would give me all kinds of invaluable information and best practices for a speaker.  I didn't know her on campus at all, but I knew her as a young speaker and I knew her well.  But she was over at Cleveland Job Corps Center.  As it relates to AKAs locally, we did everything on campus from chili suppers at Dr. Winona Fletcher's [Winona Lee Fletcher] house, because we all called her Mother Dear--she became the surrogate for us all.  And she's now in her upper eighties, unbelievable, unbelievable.  And she still takes care of all the professors up on that hill called faculty row, and she's doing that.  It's amazing.  We did service projects, many of them, and we were intentional about giving service because it was impressed upon us that that was what our mission was.  We were not just supposed to be a sisterhood that was elitist and apart.   We were to give service.
Story_ID: 624107
Speaker 1: So as you get nearer to your graduation, have you decided what you're going to do after you graduate?
Speaker 2: From Kentucky State [Kentucky State College; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky]?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Every summer I had come home, and my junior or senior year I was a person who was employed by a lawyer.  And I was to do the filings, and at the end of the day as well I was to take the court papers and file them there for the next day for the lawyer.  So one day I was going up those steps at the courthouse, and I said, "You know what, one day those doors are going to open for me."  And then I said to myself, "What, you're going to be a lawyer?"  And I said, "And you know it."  And I decided I'm going to be a lawyer, I'm going to be a lawyer.  And I went back to school, and I asked them, "Okay, where are the scholarships for law?"  And they said, "There's a CLEO program, Council on Legal Education Opportunity."  And I said, "Okay, I want to know about it."  They told me about it.  You--they selected--you're about to select the law schools that are in the program and you study for the summer at those schools, at that school.  And if you complete it successfully, then you are sent to the law school of your choice by CLEO.  So when I graduated, instead of showing good sense, I went to work in Detroit [Michigan], and I was a teacher without a car, and that's relevant because when you're catching buses in Detroit and it's winter, it will send you a message.  And it sent me a message, "Lord, if you let me out of Detroit, because I am so cold, I promise you I will go to law school."  And I had this scholarship.  I had gone to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] for CLEO that summer, but I did not go straight on to law school because they asked me, "Are you--do you want to stay at Harvard?"  I did not.  I wanted to go to Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  But I said, "I'm going to work, I'm going to sign my papers, I'm going to teach a year.  I just have to get my feet under me.  I want--I've been in school forever.  I want--."  So when I left Detroit I went to Indianapolis [Indiana], still willing to teach another year.  And I said, "Oh, you're getting off the path here."  So I taught at Arsenal Technical High School [Indianapolis, Indiana] for one year, in history and political science.  And then I said, "Oh, no."  I said, "I'm out, I'm going to--," and I enjoy teaching, I really do.  I enjoy the interaction particularly with students and how they think and giving assignments and hearing how they take the assignment and make it live.  But by the time I entered law school in the seventy--'70 [1970]?  Seventy [1970].  I said, "Okay, I'm here."  I was at Howard law.
Story_ID: 624108
Speaker 1: Let's go back a little bit--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: What school did you teach there?
Speaker 2: Foch, F-O-C-H, Junior High School [Foch Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan] at Fairview [Street] and Charlevoix [Street].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And why Detroit?  Why did, why did you go to Detroit first, especially because we're still in civil rights, and Detroit had one of the biggest riots going on there?  Why did you pick Detroit to go to school?
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: Or did they choose you, I mean?  What happened to (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One, I was chosen.  But secondly, I just, I have this yearning to help.  And I felt that I could contribute to the students there, and they had a good contract, they paid a lot.  I don't even remember the amount, but I remember it being a magnet that just said, "Come hither."  Because it was so much money to me as a person that had been in school and been poor.  And I said, "I can help my mother [Jannie Burrus Russell], and this--I can split this money up and (makes sound)" so I went.  And I had an uncle there and I could stay with my uncle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were there when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: I was there in '68 [1968] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eight [1968].
Speaker 2: Do you remember that time?
Speaker 1: I remember that time.  And I remember how it changed my life.  I just couldn't get over it.  And I still haven't today.  If I hear his voice, I still stop.  I thought he was that miraculous.
Speaker 2: Do you remember what was going on in the city at that time?  Because the riots were the year before and then the assassination.  Do you remember what the people were doing--
Speaker 1: I remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in Detroit then?
Speaker 1: I remember only the feeling of oppression that the people felt.  And I remember because I was striving to get children to be encouraged to go to college in Detroit.  They were encouraged to go to the factory because they wanted to make ultimately the eighty dollars a hour.  And I was trying to make them see that the very fight that Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. was engaged in related to better opportunities, better jobs, broader reach, all of that.  And they wanted to get to the plant.  There was no--I don't remember any direct encounters for myself against a system or a policy or practice that impeded me, but I certainly kept it ever before my classes about the movement and the sacrifices and the struggles and the importance of voting.
Speaker 2: Do you remember the first time that you voted?
Speaker 1: I just remember that when I could vote, I did vote.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Was teaching in Indianapolis [Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana] a lot easier than Detroit?
Speaker 1: I don't think it was a lot easier, because I had junior high school in Detroit, and those students, if you have them framed right, they're eager, they're excitable, they're interesting and fresh.  And high school students can get cynical.  And they were white and I was black and they were, "What can you tell me, what?"  So I enjoyed the, the junior high school students.
Story_ID: 624109
Speaker 1: So in 1970 you go off to Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  Talk to me about that experience.
Speaker 2: Well, it's important to know that I love Howard.  And it was just the best, because those professors had come out of the Civil Rights Movement.  Those professors were the mind, the legal minds, behind the filings before the court of appeals, the [U.S.] Supreme.  That's the school of Thurgood Marshall and oh, Paul Diggs and Professor Herbert O. Reid [Herbert O. Reid, Sr.] and Professor Chisholm [Elwood Chisholm].  They were just masterful at what they did.  And they put that into every student.  There was no room for you to be lax.  Wiley Branton--there was no room for you to not take hold and to be the top notch lawyer, because you were at Howard.  And we felt that.  I mean, when you were in study group, you didn't say, "I'm going to bed" or "I'm too tired" or "We have to break."  No, what you did was, you studied, because you knew that the whole of black America in particular was waiting for your legal skills and expertise to be a force in the larger society.
Speaker 1: Who was the president then of Howard?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: Was it James Clark [sic. HistoryMaker James Cheek]?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: It doesn't sound right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you also are working as you're going to school?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Do you have a job--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --teaching?  Okay.  Then tell me when you taught courses at Federal City College [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: (Pause) I might have taught--I teach--I was teaching maybe a few hours--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for a year maybe, but it wasn't, I don't ever remember having a full time job.  Some students were fully employed.  I wasn't ever.  I was--maybe a semester I did work at Federal City College, but--unh-uh.  This is what one professor said at law school, "The law is a jealous mistress, and she must be courted."  So I took him at his word.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  What else can you tell me about Howard at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, I loved the diversity of the students, because we were from all over the United States and Africa and the Caribbean.  So that exposure was broadening my reach.  And Honorable Andrew Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] came to our school and he told us, he said, "Get to know the person next to you because they will lead a country."  And I said, "What," (laughter), "what?"  And he taught us that way, and we had the best and the brightest of America's offering to come to Howard to speak to the students.  So you didn't say, "I don't know the name, I'm not going."  You were there, and you just felt blessed.  I felt that I was in a blessed environment.  And after I--while at Howard when I go back to Indianapolis [Indiana], I'd think my parents [Jannie Burrus Russell and Willie Russell] didn't know my name.  And I said, "Well, do you know I have a name?"  And they would say, "Patty [HistoryMaker Patricia Russell-McCloud], they don't need to know your, they don't need to know your name, they just need to know you're in law school."  (Laughter) They were that proud, because it meant they were living through my experience and their desire to have more education and information, and Patty's going to be a lawyer, and that was their signature.
Story_ID: 624110
Speaker 1: Who were some of your classmates?
Speaker 2: Well, Mac Hunter [James "Mac" Hunter], a very prominent attorney here in Atlanta [Georgia].  [HistoryMaker] Ewart Brown was not at the law school, he was at the school of medicine [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] while I was in law school, and he became the premier of Bermuda, and he was a activist at Howard.
Speaker 1: Did you know Ike Leggett?
Speaker 2: Yes, Isiah Leggett, very well.  In my class.
Speaker 1: And Alice Gresham [Alice Gresham Bullock]?
Speaker 2: Alice was, she became associate dean after a while, after we finished.  But Alice was there in my class--and Jean Loraine Eaves [ph.], very bright woman attorney.  They were--my class was the best.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Bernard McClendon [ph.]--they've done well.  And I asked Mac the other day, "Mac--."  Judge Les Gaines [Leslie Isaiah Gaines], Cincinnati [Ohio], Judge Deborah Gaines [Deborah Brown Gaines]--they weren't judges then obviously, but all of them were there.  And I asked Mac, "Mac, did we have extra conveniences, or what did we do to become this successful?"  And he said, "Just studied, girl, we didn't," (laughter), "we didn't have anything going on but just study."
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about studying and the courses and the professors and what you enjoyed most while you were there.
Speaker 2: I enjoyed the brilliance of the professors.  I just thought they were the best thing since sliced bread.  They knew their material, they were prepared.  They were not, they were not tolerant of your effort to make an excuse.  I never tried to make an excuse, I would just get my lesson and go on.  But they just, they didn't have time for it.  I loved that.  Then they took on the mantra of, this is Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and either you keep up the Howard standard or there are other schools that perhaps you would like to pursue that.  I loved all that ambience of seriousness of purpose and the camaraderie, because whenever you see a person that was there, a Bison [Howard University Bison], we have that affinity today.  And I think that's why I selected Howard, the civil rights component, the expertise of the professors and the alignment, heart to heart of the students today.
Story_ID: 624111
Speaker 1: Did you know what type of law you would go into?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I started law school to become a criminal lawyer.  I wanted to be Perry Mason on the female side.  And I knew that.  I was going to be the best criminal lawyer that ever lived.  But that changed, and it changed because, not because I changed it.  Ben Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks], the Honorable Ben Hooks, came to my law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and asked my dean, Herbert Reid [Herbert O. Reid, Sr.], for young people to come, young lawyers to come to the Federal Communications Commission.  And he came to me and asked me that, I said, "I don't know anything about telecommunications, and I don't want to do that.  I don't know anything about that."  And he said, "I know you don't, I know you don't, and neither does any other black lawyer much know about it in the country.  And what's going to happen, telecommunications will take over this country and there won't be a black lawyer to know anything about it.  And I'm getting ready to be the first black commissioner there and I'm not going unless I can get some sharp interested black lawyers to go with me."  And I told my dean after he left, I said, "You know that's nice and I'm proud of him and, you know, but what's this about?"  And he said, "I recommended you."  And I said, "Well, you made a bad choice, because I'm going to be a criminal lawyer."  I'm go--I could just see myself in court, I could just see it.  I went to the FCC, and every time I would get ready to quit, they promoted me.  So I ended up there for ten years.
Speaker 1: Okay, before we go into that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Get there.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well, I mean, that's the next step.  But you graduate from, you get your J.D. degree in 1973, is that right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And you go straight to the FCC?
Speaker 2: Straight.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So tell me about your first position there.  What was your title, and what did you do?
Speaker 2: I don't know what they called you.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me what you did when you--what was your position, what did you do?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't--
Speaker 1: You don't remember?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.  I don't remember--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --what I did when I started there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I remember more as the years progressed.
Speaker 1: Now being that this was your first position as an attorney, and this was a white world, how did you fit in there?
Speaker 2: I never felt that I fit.  Ten years of being there, I never felt that I fit, without force, let me add that.  I did not fit without force.  So as I felt acts of omission and commission that were in my view by design to impede my progress, I worked harder, stayed longer, arrived earlier, because my goal became to achieve against any odd.  And I did that, but I thought it was the good old boys network at the maximum.
Story_ID: 624112
Speaker 1: Tell me some of the things that the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] took on while you were there.  I know there's the Pacifica case [FCC v. Pacifica Foundation, 1978].  Was that something that you worked on?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I didn't do Pacifica.  I did the AT&T [AT&T Inc.] breakup.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: AT&T took the position that they were a monopoly and would be for evermore, that there would be no breakup of their company.  They were broken up, and they became baby Bells, and that's how you got all of the Ameritechs [Ameritech Corporation; AT&T Teleholdings, Inc.] and the this and the that companies.  Southwest Bells [Southwestern Bell Telephone Company; SBC Communications Inc.] and BellSouth [BellSouth Corporation; AT&T, Inc.], they broke off.  And, now interesting (makes sound) it turned full circle, and it's come back to the monopoly.  I did Madalyn Murray O'Hair, where a majority woman thought that there should be no religious broadcasting and she felt that it was against society's best interests to have religious broadcasting because she was convinced that Tammy Faye [Tammy Faye Messner] and all of that needed to go.  I was there when Ted Turner decided that there should be a Turner Broadcasting [Turner Broadcasting System, Inc.] and that there was going to be news.  He came there and told us that he was going to have a news station for twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week.  And we said, "What?"  And it was just funny he was there telling us that, and it happened.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Ratings.  When New York's producers and directors came to the FCC and they told us that there would never be ratings of what you could watch and what you couldn't watch, and that you would put ratings and say that this is a five, four, three, two, all of that.  So it was interesting, but it occurred.
Speaker 1: You talked about the outcome of the Turner and the ratings.  With O'Hair, what was the outcome of that case?
Speaker 2: Madalyn Murray O'Hair?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It was defeated.  I mean, we never have had religious broadcasting off the air.  And people felt like this is a Christian nation and who are you to--you're atheist, and you're going to tell the world that they can't have religious broadcasting because you disagree?
Story_ID: 624113
Speaker 1: So you were there [Federal Communications Commission] for ten years.  And, and you said each time that you got ready to leave, they would promote you.  Do you remember what your first promotion was?
Speaker 2: I don't remember a title--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to give you, but I was moving on up.  And that was, that was somewhat satisfying, because it was, every promotion was a rebuttal to a rejection of a black female.  And I felt, I wore that on my sleeve.  This black female is going to be in your face until I'm at the top of the heap.  And so I worked hard and I stayed late, came early.  For just my whole ten years, I worked hard.  And I don't know if you want me to go to the, to the last position--?
Speaker 1: Was that, which position?
Speaker 2: Chief of complaints (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Chief complaints--?  Yes.
Speaker 2: And there was an eleven thousand caseload backlog.  And I said, "Okay, so this is the program to fail slot, and it's impossible.  If you have eleven thousand cases, how are you going to move it?  It's programmed so that you can't move it."  So I started leaving work anywhere from 9 to 10:30 at night, 9 to 10:30-ish, and I was arriving at seven-ish, so that was just for a year.  It took me a year to move that backlog.  And that--and then I had a staff where my chief attorney, most of them were white of course, but one of my chief attorneys said to me, he said, "I'd rather work for a black than work for a female."  And I said, "And which one did you think was going to change?"  And I said, "So since neither one will change, perhaps either you do the work as assigned or guess what, find another department."  So we moved the backlog.  And everybody was just, "How in the world?"  I said, "Trust me, we did it.  Next."
Speaker 1: And this was in 1975?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: No?  What year was it?
Speaker 2: When I was promoted?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't think I was in that position for--from '75 [1975] to '83 [1983] when I left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know what year I went into the chief of complaints.  But it seemed like--it could have been '75 [1975], but it seems like it was a little later.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I was going to say, because at that time, you know, you're not even thirty years old and you have this--
Speaker 2: Massive job.
Story_ID: 624114
Speaker 1: I, I just remember working hard all the time, and I remember always being on front street, always isolated.  And an exciting thing happened while I was at the FCC [Federal Communications Commission].  The black broadcasters of the nation were up in arms, if you will, about the fact that they thought that the process of getting their licensing completed through the FCC was laborious, financially crippling and all of this was by design.  And they felt that they needed the ear of the FCC and the undergirding of the lawyers inside to move the paper and to not get caught in the bureaucratic maze that inhibited them becoming licensed operators with some efficiency, so that they could effectively be on the air.  So they came en masse.  Pepe Sutton [HistoryMaker Pierre Sutton] and Ragan Henry stand out.  They had larger properties, multiple broadcast entities.  And they all were there.  I mean, thirty or forty of them.  And they met with Commissioner Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] and the commission and told them they thought it was intentional, they thought it was labor intensive, it was financially crippling, da da da da.  So he called me up, he, the commissioner, Hooks, and he said, "Pat [HistoryMaker Patricia Russell-McCloud]," and he laid out what I just have for you, and he said, "Perhaps we need a conference."  And I said, "Yes."  And so I said, "And what would you like to do?"  He said, "I would like for you to plan it."  And I set a minority owners' conference so that we could explore all the issues that impacted whether and to what extent minorities were getting a fair shake.
Story_ID: 624115
Speaker 1: In 1983 is when you finally deci- decide to leave.  Tell me what prompts that (background noise).
Speaker 2: I was prompted to leave the Federal Communications Commission because I got married.  We need to stop.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  Carry on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I left the FCC in '83 [1983].  My now husband and I had been dating, and he had proposed and I decided to get married.  So I told my staff and my bosses at the FCC that I was leaving.  And they said, "What?"  And I said, "I'm going to Texas."  And they said, "What, you're going to commute?"  And I said, "No, leaving as in see you, gone."  And they said, "Pat [HistoryMaker Patricia Russell-McCloud], you're leaving your job, your good paying government," (laughter), "job?"  And then I said, "Yeah."  And I left, and I was glad.
Speaker 1: Well, let's back up and talk about this proposal and the marriage.  Who did you marry?
Speaker 2: I married a then military man.  His name is Errenous Earl McCloud, Jr. [E. Earl McCloud, Jr.], known as Earl.  He was a soldier, chaplain in the United States Army.  He was stationed in San Antonio, Texas at Fort Sam Houston.  So, we were going to get married on March 12, and we did in Indianapolis [Indiana] and we moved to Texas.
Speaker 1: How did you meet?
Speaker 2: He was a professor at Alabama A and M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama], and I was the speaker for some occasion.  He was with his class in the stands as I spoke.  And he tells the story, I don't know the truth of it, that I put my hand in my pocket of the suit I had on, and he said, "Oh, I'm going to marry that woman."  And I said, "Right."  So (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So that's the story he tells.
Story_ID: 624116
Speaker 1: Now before you actually leave the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], you also become involved with The Links organization.  Tell me about that and your involvement.
Speaker 2: In 1976, The Links were very dedicated to the cause of attracting membership by invitation to very young, vibrant, interesting and interested young women to flood their membership rolls.  And by flood, I mean they recognized that they were women of distinction, but aging, and that they needed a young breed to come.  And so I joined the, was invited to join the Arlington Chapter of The Links, Incorporated.  They are a sisterhood, friendship and service organization.  They numerically are twelve thousand, and it's intentional because they don't, it's not a sorority where they want fifty people to come in at one time in the one chapter and all that.  It's very select, and it's very heart to heart, sister to sister and very service minded.  So they're engaged in everything from organ donors to breast health for women to Habitat for Humanity.  And it's built around four facets.  And those four facets have generally been national trends and services, services to youth, the arts and the international trends and services.  And this president has added a health and wellness component as well.
Speaker 1: In 1976 who was the president at that time?  Do you remember?  If you can't remember, that's fine. But--
Speaker 2: I should be able to--that's criminal.
Speaker 1: But that--that's okay.  In the organization you rise to the top very quickly and you're on the executive board almost immediately.  Tell me about some of the positions that you held, and what you hope to have accomplished at that time.
Speaker 2: I was the national parliamentarian.  And I think that came from the fact that I was a lawyer and I understood policies and procedures and parliamentary law, right.  And I was, I was on, and have been on the executive board of The Links, Incorporated ever since I have been a Link, because as you take on your positions, you stay on the executive board or you have leadership capacities.  So I have been the national vice president, I have been the national president, I have been the president of the foundation [The Links Foundation, Incorporated, Washington, D.C.], et cetera.  So--
Speaker 1: What year did you become president?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-four [1994] through 1998.
Story_ID: 624117
Speaker 1: Talk to me about the legacy that was left to you, what you accomplished, and the legacy you left for the, the next president [Barbara Dixon Simpkins].
Speaker 2: I think the legacy is rich because they have been very productive in their programmatic offerings.  The heart of Linkdom is program.  And those presidents have been very focused about ensuring that we had stellar programming that included--every president had a vision for what could be.  For example, Dr. Dolly D. Adams [HistoryMaker Dolly Adams] who is an esteemed educator, she wanted to purchase the headquarters of The Links [The Links, Incorporated].  Now black organization owning a building in Washington, D.C.?  That was pretty unheard of.  She did it.  She not only purchased it in, during her administration, she furnished it.  Paid in full, out.  So, I mean, that was miraculous in D.C., D.C. property at 12th [Street] and Mass [Massachusetts Avenue].  Come on, now.  So that kind of thing was the legacy that you were living up to all the time.  And my inheritance, if you will, in Linkdom I became president for the fiftieth anniversary which was held in New Orleans, Louisiana.  So, I had, in my view, a license to make it memorable, and memorable it was indeed.  And it was phenomenal to celebrate fifty years of Linkdom there in the way only New Orleans can lay out.
Story_ID: 624118
Speaker 1: So, and as it relates to what did I leave as a legacy, I was a change agent president.  As a telecommunications lawyer I was swift to understand and know that we needed to come into the 21st century technologically.  So I have always been (laughter) unimpressed with the way African Americans in particular stand up on the hotel room floor, convention floor, and they say, "Do you know who we are?  We brought a thousand delegates here and we will not take this from you and we will--."  What have you codified, what have you demonstrated?  What demos can you show us of your constituent base so that when you say sponsorships dollars is what you want, when you say hotel accommodations is what you insist upon.  Duh, where is your proof?  So I had a commission to give us woman power.  The woman power commission came up with my database for Links [The Links, Incorporated].  It was a perfect tool to walk into any Fortune 100 company, Fortune 500 company, to say, "Here we are.  This is who we are, this is what we've done."  My foundation doors opened wide because I had a codified record of who we were.  So monies started coming into Links as never before from the private sector, now, and the public, but the private sector--and it made a huge difference in, when you have a service organization to a non-profit, to propel your work.  The president was, not then, but she is a great grants writer.  She became president later, President Dr. Gladys Gary Vaughn, terrific grants writer.  So I told her what I was trying to do, and so she said what she would write grants, and she did.  And she wrote a grant to Kellogg [W.K. Kellogg Foundation, Battle Creek, Michigan].  So we were getting ready for a conference, and I want to say this was, this was in 1996 at the fiftieth, but we were there several days early because we were getting ready for workshops and all that.  And I had just gotten notification about the grants.  So I went, I was on this personal effort to try to find her--and I think a million point two [dollars] or something, and they had granted it.  And she just, I remember her just almost collapsing, and I said, "Gladys, you did it."  And she said, "What?  What did I do?"  And I said, "Gladys, we got the grant."  She said, "All of it?"  And I said, "Yeah."  And she just, I remember her falling backwards, and I caught her, because I said, "Gladys, are you okay?"  And she said, "Yeah."  So then others, entities of contributors, donors, philanthropic agents, thought it was a good marriage.  So we were able to announce, oh, major money at the fiftieth.  And they were "What?  Who?" And it was just a new day for Linkdom at that level.  I was a change agent because our membership needed to be online.  We needed to be technologically proficient.  And everybody was kicking and screaming who, the fifty and older crowd, which would be a great number of the membership.  They were like, "Who do you, who do you really think you are, because we don't want to learn that, we don't want to do that."  I said, "You will.  Just kick and scream.  Come on."  So we got them acclimated to where we could go in this 21st century readiness.  And that was exciting but it was also very difficult.  I've always had the difficult jobs, because they were like, "Okay, next, next."  Kind of, "Good riddance."  But they're better for it, and they know that now.  And they come up and they say, "You know, Pat [HistoryMaker Patricia Russell-McCloud], it's never been that somebody could change us like that."  And I say, "Yeah, it's okay."  Now we register online, and everything.  I mean, everything is just, you just go online with your number and you get everything done.
Story_ID: 624119
Speaker 1: Was there another major project, you know, once you got the funding that you took on, or was that passed on to the next president [Barbara Dixon Simpkins]?
Speaker 2: No.  I remember this.  I remember, I remember sitting with my foundation exec [executive], and we were with a company of pharmaceuticals, and they couldn't hear me tell them that I needed their funding.  They couldn't hear me, they were, they couldn't sign the match.  And I wanted them to sponsor the Boys Choir of Harlem.  And then I said, "And they have asthma, because they live and work in Harlem [New York, New York], don't you get it.  They're there, and you would be sending all of these young men to my convention."  They said, "Done."  Then our anniversary year, a choir down the street from 12th [Street] and Mass [Massachusetts Avenue, Washington, D.C.].  I was on the plane, and I was reading The Washington Post, which I love.  Oh, I love the, that paper.  And they talked about a school right there at my headquarters [of The Links, Incorporated] that could go to Europe to sing if they had the money.  They needed thirty thousand dollars more to go.  So we went over, my board and I went over to the school and we asked for the music teacher.  And she came down, and was very ruffled because you could tell she was overworked and underpaid and just tired.  But her choir was award winning.  And she had a child in her choir who couldn't speak.  And I said, "But the child sings?"  And he had seen his brother shot dead, and it silenced him except when he was in the choir room or getting ready to perform.  And we told her that we were prepared to pay the thirty thousand dollars to send them, because this was our anniversary year, to send them to Europe.  And she said, "My kids, if they got the thirty thousand dollars, they still wouldn't have toiletries."  And I said, "Oh, they're going to have toiletries."  So then we called all of our partners and from Colgate [Colgate Palmolive Company] forward, they just had everything they needed.  So our projects were, I had a masterful--JoAnn Brown, program coordinator--so in every facet that I mentioned previously, we were doing things that were in my view, spectacular.
Story_ID: 624120
Speaker 1: One was, I collect black art, personally, and one of my friends said, "Well, when you're in Mexico I want you to go and visit [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett, the renowned--." I said (laughter), "Oh really, you think so, right?"  So I called her, as instructed.  And she said, "Are you coming to the Zocalo [Zocalo de Cuernavaca]?"  And I said, "What is the Zocalo?"  And she said, "The center of town in Cuernavaca [Mexico]."  And I said (makes sound), "I wasn't, but I can."  So she said, "Okay, you come to the Zocalo, and Francisco [Francisco Mora]," her husband, "will pick you up, and then you stay at our home and it will be fine."  Elizabeth Catlett?  Well, my arts director--all this time later, my arts director--because I was on the Friendship Force [Friendship Force International], that's why I was in Mexico earlier in my life when I was at the FCC [Federal Communications Commission].  My arts director was a art broker, and Elizabeth Catlett, she is the designer and the artist and designer of the inaugural Catlett award for The Links [The Links, Incorporated], and it's the highest award that can be achieved in Linkdom.  And it's a bronze statue of a woman with her arms outstretched, and it's awarded by each president, and there are only four Catletts given per administration, and so that's a spectacular occurrence.  And you know, Ms. Catlett is now, well she is the matriarch of sculpture.
Story_ID: 624121
Speaker 1: We did things for services to youth that maximized our focus on education, national trends and services.  We did organ donor and international trends has been a facet that I've tried. I've tried to get our membership, our chapters to understand.  If you have ethnic foods or if you have persons to come and dress in African garb, you have not fulfilled the facet requirement of international trends.  Going globally is not to say we dressed up in African garb, so that's the most challenging facet.  But it's always facets.  And then I added legislative impact to my focus because I think policy makes a difference.  So we would have been always involved in letter writing campaigns so that the Hill [Capitol Hill] would not get amnesia that we were there.  And I added an educational linkage so that education would be a high priority for The Links [The Links, Incorporated] and the, as a partner.
Speaker 2: All right.  Is there anything else you want to add about your administration during that time, anything else?
Speaker 1: Just that we closed my administration in Boston [Massachusetts] (background noise) and of course the anniversary was over and my exit was at Boston.  And we did a lot of exciting things there as well.  I appreciated, I remember their committee was so welcoming to the board.  We had our opening at Cheers [Boston, Massachusetts], the real, the real Cheers that we know about.  And that's the president's dinner was at the Cheers facility.  And then we had a boat ride for my board.  And all of that was just marvelous to me.  And then I remember they had secured a vendor so that my total board, which is unheard of, my total board had--our flower for Links is white roses--had a bouquet of roses daily.  I said, "What?"  Gorgeous.  But daily, they had that arrangement with a florist.
Story_ID: 624122
Speaker 1: Now we're going to go back.  You--we're in 1980, (unclear) '83 [1983].  You're married now and you move to Texas.  Tell me more about your husband.
Speaker 2: He's from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who he is--well, where he's from, who he is, and who he is today as well.
Speaker 2: He's from Clio, C-L-I-O, Alabama, which is in the southern portion of Alabama.  He and his family were all educated at Tuskegee and they are loyal, loyal folk to Tuskegee University [Tuskegee, Alabama].  And every year for Turkey Day Classic, they play Alabama [Alabama State University] in Montgomery [Alabama], and we go for the Turkey Classic, and it's at Thanksgiving time, Thanksgiving day.  And they are so loyal.  I mean, my nephew played on the team, and if he had not been on the team I think we would have still been there.  They were tied, and, you know, when you tie in football, you have to play it off.  Well, I'm telling you it was the coldest day that you can imagine.  And we froze, literally, but we stayed until we won.  I mean they always win, but we stayed until we won.  And it would have just been too difficult to go home for Thanksgiving dinner and not be there.  He's from Clio and he had a poor upbringing, as I did, financially poor, very rich in church life and to a very disciplined home--a loving mother [Carrie Grace McCloud], who was the one who raised the children.  His father [E. Earl McCloud, Sr.] was not in the home and he was very dedicated to his military career, but he did not want to be a lifetime military man.  So when his time was up from ROTCF [ph.] college, he was saying, "I'm out," whereas his brother went on to become a colonel in the [U.S.] military.  He, Earl McCloud [E. Earl McCloud, Jr.], was a pastor in the A.M.--we were raised, he was raised A.M.E., African Methodist Episcopal church, and very active with the young people's department, all the way through.  And then he worked in Alabama [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama], as I mentioned, as a professor of military science and was an assistant pastor at one of the churches there.  Then he was given his own pastoral assignment after he left the military, and after he married he was a pastor in Fairfield, Alabama.  Of--and there it was a moderate sized congregation.  And he is pastoral, he is a servant leader.  He is of the people, by the people, for the people--and, so much so that now he's called the people's bishop because he moved through and to the high level that he now holds.  He is the presiding prelate of the Fifteenth Episcopal District of the African Methodist Episcopal church, which means that he is a resident bishop over Cape Town [South Africa], Namibia, Angola, Kalahari, and Port Elizabeth, South Africa.
Story_ID: 624123
Speaker 1: You marry, you move to Texas, and you have quit your job.  Tell me what's on your mind?  What are you going to do?  I know that it has to do with speeches, because you have been doing these speeches all around the United States.  Even when you were working for FCC [Federal Communications Commission]?
Speaker 2: Yes, always whatever else I was doing on a career path, I was always a speaker, the speaker.  So they ran side by side.  And now it's '83 [1983] when I leave the FCC.  I move to Texas and I decide, and I tell my husband [E. Earl McCloud, Jr.] that I've decided to form my own company as a speaker.  And he said, "Well, how do you know that's a business?"  And I said, "I don't know that it's a business, but I think it could be."  And he said, "Whatever.  I can support you, so you can try it.  And if it doesn't work?"  I said, "I can teach school, and I'm a lawyer, so either one, I can do it.  But I think this can be successful."  So what I did, I sent the world a notice.  Pat Russell [HistoryMaker Patricia Russell-McCloud], have speech, will travel.  And I, at that juncture it was just me.  So I wrote the letter, and it was almost in memo form.  So it didn't matter who signed it.  It was, it was a flyer like that was sent to the world.  Then clients who had heard me, heard about me, they would call.  And I started flying out of San Antonio, Texas.  And the reason why I stress that is because you had to go through Dallas [Texas], you had to change planes to get to where you were going.  It wasn't like Atlanta [Georgia], you could leave and just get there.  But I did that, and then I said, "You know, I think this could be a business, a real business," and it became that.
Story_ID: 624124
Speaker 1: So talk to more about how you market yourself, and in the next years that you get clients--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Who are your clients?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And talk to me about being on the road.
Speaker 2: Okay.  As I mentioned, leaving San Antonio [Texas] to come to Dallas [Texas] to go anywhere was more challenging certainly than living in Atlanta, Georgia.  But what was a blessing, one satisfied client would tell another.  And that was very encouraging and empowering, because the U.S. Postal Service would tell the IRS [Internal Revenue Service], and the IRS would tell social security [U.S. Social Security Administration], and the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] told the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], and it just went like that.  And I was thankful.  Then I realized that everybody probably needs a speaker, and they're having conferences or retreats or whatever and I started developing a pretty impressive and early client list.  And I said, "I wonder could I get into Corporate America?"  And it started through the affinity groups of Fortune 100 companies like AT&T [AT&T Inc.].  They have a big affinity group, the African American conference.  Then they would have Verizon's [Verizon Communications, Inc.] conference--the African American conference--and they had names that I don't recall, but they--huge, two thousand folk and all of that.  Xerox [Xerox Corporation] has one.  And I said, "Okay."  And I was, I was the keynote for all of those.  And, so then they said, "Well, the company, the company, not just the affinity group, but the company has events."  I was speaking at General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], and we were there for the diversity conference and I was a keynote speaker, and they were there from all over the world.  And they asked me right there, the president said, "I want you to do something."  And I said, "What is that?"  And they said, "We want you to speak in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] at my leadership conference."  And I said, "Whoa."  And, so I said, "Sure, you know, have speech will travel, that's me."  And then in Vegas I spoke.  And I remember, this is an aside, but I remember complimenting General Motors on their huge, wonderful podium from MGM [MGM Grand Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada].  I said, "This is marvelous, this is the best podium I've ever had."  And they said, "But it's not theirs."  I said, "Well, whose would it be, we're at MGM, why wouldn't it be theirs?"  They said, "It's ours, because our people, our executives have to be accustomed to using what they're used to."  I said, "You brought this podium from Detroit [Michigan]?"  They said, "You've got it."
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: I was so impressed.  But my clients include Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.], Sam's [Sam's Club], CVS [CVS Corporation; CVS Health].  They include probably 99 percent of all the black colleges and universities [HBCUs], and many majority universities ranging from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Auburn [Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama], Georgia State [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia], Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia]--and then entities like CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia], anything you can think of, any government agency, I've probably spoken there at some point of my career.  Any college and university, and many, many companies--AT&T, Verizon, the FCC [Federal Communications Commission].  One of the apex moments for me was when Howard law [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] asked me to be the commencement speaker, and I was very moved by that invitation.  I was already booked for the day, but I asked them, which I don't do--as a speaker I don't speak and leave, but I asked them if I came to do the commencement--that there would be no way I could explain, because I don't cancel.  That's a part of my national reputation.  I'm always there if I sign on the dotted line.  And I said, "Can I leave?"  And they said, "Yeah."  So I spoke and then they rushed me away, but I did get to speak.
Story_ID: 624125
Speaker 1: Why are your speeches so inspiring or encouraging, and, and how do you pick your topics for what you speak about?
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm blessed by the Lord to be gifted, that's the first thing.  I'm gifted and I'm committed to a walk away, being that which you can deal with it on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday after the speech.  It's--it permeates your soul what I'm talking about.  Because first of all, I'm going to research it, I'm going to write it, I'm going to make sure that there is a walk away.  I don't want you to say, smile and be happy.  I mean, I want you to feel good, but I want you to know that if you're supposed to be in grad school, you're supposed to be in grad school.  You are not supposed to be still explaining why you're not there yet.  And so I just talk that way to my audiences, thousands of people at once.  I just say it.   And I'm so real, coming up from the toenail level, and I tell them how many nicks and slaps that I've had in my career, but you rise again, you rise again.  And they can see themselves in me and go forward.  Because I don't want them to ever think I woke up a lawyer, woke up wealthy, woke up a philanthropist, none of that.  You go through, everybody has a story, so I encourage my audiences to know that I had a story and they have a story and they have a obligation to tell their story.  Because what tires me frankly are people who act like I've always been just where I am.  Duh, you haven't been.  Tell your story.
Speaker 1: And so that's another reason why you mentor, is that right?
Speaker 2: That's right.  Thank you (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me about your mentoring program.
Speaker 2: My mentoring students, my students that I have mentored--many, many, many, many people, young and old, ask me every day to mentor them.  That's not the way I mentor.  I mentor because I see in a young person more than they see in themselves.  And I say to them, "I think you can be the president.  Let's go for it."   Something like that.   And I've been blessed to be exposed to them.  They're the best things since sliced bread.  They're so bright, 145 of them, and probably 80% of them are lawyers or judges.  They're persons who now work on Wall Street, they're in the financial areas, a few are educators.  Most are lawyers, and they're just bright, capable young people who now are married and have children, whatever.  And by the time I deal with all of my 145 plus their children, I, I really don't take on new people now, but I'm very proud of them.
Story_ID: 624126
Speaker 1: You also are an author?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me about your book.
Speaker 2: I--one day I received a call from a literary agent and she asked me had I ever considered writing.  I said, "I consider it all the time, but I just haven't had time."  And she said, I said, "The only thing I can think of offhand--."  She was thinking a compilation of speeches would be a book.  And I said, "I'm sure that's true, but I don't have time to put all that together."  I said, "One thing they love, they, my audiences, they love this thing I wrote called the alphabet."  She said, "What is it?"  I said, "It's A to Z, and it is the walk away."  Even at, even when I'm with corporations, they said, "Will you do the alphabet?"  I said, "The alphabet is not in this speech."  They said, "But would you just do it?"  I said, "You're the client, of course I'll do it."  And every letter is a word of empowerment, attitude, brain power, courage, dedication, preparation, now, all of that.  And it just goes (makes sound) like that.  It goes very quickly, and people just cannot believe that I'm going through the whole alphabet in a new form and way.  So she said, "I believe that every chapter is a letter."  And I said, "Really?"  Attitude, brain power, courage.  So she said, "Write me an outline of three chapters.  Write me an outline of your book and then write me three chapters and then I'll shop it."  And she did, and the book became bestselling.  And she said, she called me one day and she said, "I don't want to blow your mind."  And I said, "Okay, what happened?"  Like I said, I had dismissed it, you know, what's this?  She said, "We shopped it to five houses, publishing houses in New York [New York], and--," I'm sorry, "--we shopped it to seven, and five bought the book.  Five bid the book."
Speaker 1: Tell me the name of the book again.
Speaker 2: 'A Is for Attitude: An Alphabet for Living' [Patricia Russell-McCloud].
Speaker 1: And what year was it published?
Speaker 2: Ninety-nine [1999].
Speaker 1: Ninety-nine [1999]
Speaker 2: And that--then it was re-launched last month, because it was bestselling.  And then they changed the cover, the forward, and the acknowledgements.
Speaker 1: Who wrote the forward?
Speaker 2: Margot James Copeland [HistoryMaker Margot Copeland], the national president of The Links [The Links, Incorporated].
Story_ID: 624127
Speaker 1: You also wrote a stage play?
Speaker 2: 'Keep Rising' [Patricia Russell McCloud].
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: The year was '95 [1995], I think it could have been '95 [1995], this is 2000--the year Indianapolis expo was in celebration, and they were calling it the Year of the Woman.  And they wanted to bring home women from Indianapolis [Indiana] who had achieved at maximum levels.  So they called me, they called Pam Davis [ph.] who is a master musician and a stage producer, and they wanted us to think of what they could do at Madame C.J. Walker's theater [Madame Walker Theatre Center, Indianapolis, Indiana].  Eli Lilly [Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, Indiana] was underwriting this, because they had just renovated that same M.J.- Madame C.J. Walker Building [Indianapolis, Indiana].  And, now it's mahogany and it's beautiful.  It's a magnificent theater.  And they wanted to know what we could do.  And I told them I thought I could write a play for the women.  And they said, "Really?"  And I said, "Yeah, a one woman show.  And it's entitled 'Keep Rising.'"  And I shall never forget.  We were in the planning meeting and they said, "Well, one person's job is--."  They had a whole team of people--audience development.  Attorney Faye Williams [HistoryMaker E. Faye Williams] who is also a mentor of mine, and I said, "Audience development, what would that be?"  And they said, "No, people who actually develop the audience and ensure the numeric strength of the audience."  And I said, "Okay, is there a charge?"  "No."  So it was for women only.  The theater would hold a thousand people, and this is the truth.  A thousand people came, and a thousand people were turned away.  And they said, "Well, when is the second performance?"  And it wasn't.  It was just that performance.  But I remember this.  I remember, and it's doing what this interview is doing.  It takes a little girl through her whole life and ends up with career and church lady status and marriage and relationships--but it's an hour and twenty-seven minutes, 'Keep Rising.'  And I can tell you that women ran the aisles at the Madame C.J. Walker, because they had gone through cancer, they had gone through divorces, they had gone through strife, but keep rising, keep rising.  And then the Black Women's Agenda [Black Women's Agenda, Inc.] during the Congressional Black Caucus [Congressional Black Caucus Foundation], we asked that it be produced, be presented there.  And we did that, and Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] saw it and then Coca-Cola placed it in three different locations on their college and university circuit, and then as it was seen, different people placed the play.
Story_ID: 624128
Speaker 1: So you have a gift also for raising money--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --(laughter) for your organizations, and is this true for your church, your husband's [E. Earl McCloud, Jr.] church?  You are the first lady (laughter). Well--
Speaker 2: Talk to me about your giving, your philanthropic giving.
Speaker 1: I try to be generous in the support of good causes, because sometimes a little bit of money'll go a long way to make a difference for a good cause.  And I particularly am intrigued by young people who have a mind to work, to do, to be excellent, to excel against odds, because I know that with the right example they can make it and they can take it.  They just need somebody to believe in them.  So I do that, and I don't try to think about it, because I know how bountifully I have been blessed.  I don't know that I have the master technique of best practices for fund development, but I know that I have always been associated with non-profits, be they churches or service organizations, and they always need that extra several thousand dollars to get them over the hump.  So I'm always in somebody's face asking, "Can you, will you?"  And they hate to see me coming, and I tell them, "I'm here and all you can do is tell me no" (laughter).  So they, they have supported generously my causes because I've tried to make them a win-win.
Story_ID: 624129
Speaker 1: Let's see, you also go into the studio and record a CD, 'Never Give--'  'Never Give Up'?
Speaker 2: 'Never--,' 'Never--,' 'Never Give Up.'  And it's eleven cuts on it, and there are portions of speeches or thoughts that relate to a few good men and different unveilings of empowering, encouraging spoken word.  And not rapping, but speeches that--and it's out of inventory now because it sells out, it's just--because people--they--we've gone through a recession, and people have lost jobs and homes no less, and they're at a need, at a need to be motivated.  So never give up.  (Laughter) I was speaking somewhere, and the lady asked me, she came up and she said, "Would you, would you say the never give up part?"  And I said, "It's not in this speech." She said, "Oh, no, that part makes my hair stand on my head" (laughter).  She said, "That never, never, never, never, never, never, never."   I said, "Okay."
Story_ID: 624130
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we had not talked about that you want to talk about?
Speaker 2: I really have been very pleased with what we have talked about.  I'm--I think that the only component I'd like to add is that when you are married to a bishop, the role of the spouse, male or female--because there are female bishops--there are only twenty-one of them in the world for the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, but that spouse is over women and children's programs, so that is my role in that capacity.  So in three days I will leave for South Africa and I will be there to ready my delegation of sixty-two to come to the quadrennial meeting of the women and children, called the Women's Missionary Society, to meet in Orlando [Florida].  And for many of my delegation, it will be their first time to America.
Story_ID: 624131
Speaker 1: I just want to ask you about other people who are motivational speakers.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Who do you listen to for, for motivation?  I know you get your inspiration from the Father, but I'm sure just like music, other musicians listen to other music.  Who do you listen to?
Speaker 2: I listen to anyone I can listen to any time because I enjoy their craft, the craft, so much and their ability to deliver so much.  All right, [HistoryMaker] Les Brown is very excellent at his craft.  George Fraser [HistoryMaker George Cylie Fraser]; Iyanla Vanzant; [HistoryMaker] Julianne Malveaux, an economist, but she still comes with that message.  I don't know--Gail Perry Mason is a financier, vice president of Oppenheimer [Oppenheimer and Company, Inc.], senior VP in Detroit [Michigan].  If you ever hear the name, hear her, Gail Perry Mason.  I hate to hear about finance, but I'll tell you, she will have you laughing and crying in the same speech because she is that expert at her craft.  She's marvelous, and I love to hear her. (Pause) Those would be some of my favorites.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't--those would be some of my favorites.
Story_ID: 624132
Speaker 1: Now you have received a number of awards and I'm sure they're all special to you.  But there, is there one in particular that you're most proud of?
Speaker 2: Well, I have over three hundred keys to American cities, and that makes me proud, because it means I've been to the city.  I've tried to leave a memorable offering there.  And by offering, I mean a speech, a retreat, a conference presentation.  I'm the recipient of the Catlett award that I referenced earlier, and not when I was president.  To be presented the Catlett by your colleagues and peer group in The Links [The Links, Incorporated] was amazing.  I couldn't imagine it.  I'm not a big award person.  I'm often asked to come and be awarded for this or that, and I shy away from it, because I don't have a lot of time, so the time I have, I don't want to be on a podium receiving an award.  So I do shy away from it, so my awards come to, at the time of the presentation, typically.  But lately, the Women of Wealth and Philanthropy [ph.] have honored me in their magazine and increasingly, Women on the Move, they just honored me.  And I don't usually go to all of that, but I've gone because I've decided, quasi decided, that I need to do something other than (air quotes) just speak.
Story_ID: 624133
Speaker 1: So is there something that you haven't done that you would like to do?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I'd like, I'm a shopaholic, and I'd like to do more global travel to just travel and shop.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  Is there anything in your life that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I would, if I knew to have, if I had known to do it, I would have studied for a J.D./M.B.A. program at the same time.  I didn't know to do it, because I'm first generation college in my family, so I didn't have anybody saying to me, "Take the M.B.A./J.D. program."  I didn't know to do that.  So I would have done that differently.
Story_ID: 624134
Speaker 1: Because this will be available for future generations--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --if you had to send a message to generations down the line, what would it be?
Speaker 2: Life is not a red carpet, and you may think it is.  There is not the gift of entitlement designated for you.  So you have the obligation to turn a stumbling block into a stepping stone and an obstacle into an opportunity.  You must turn a barrier into a benchmark, a vice into victory.  And even when you believe you've reached the end of your rope, tie a knot and hold on.  The whole world is waiting and watching for you.  You are standing in the incubator of immortality, to rise up as a giant in our time.
Story_ID: 624135
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: That Pat Russell-McCloud [HistoryMaker Patricia Russell-McCloud] tried to make a difference.  That I arrived early and I stayed late in my effort to achieve the impossible.  And notice I said impossible, because I've always felt that my life was climbing up the rough side of the mountain.
Story_ID: 624136
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead please.  Tell us about this one.
Speaker 2: Start talking?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes, please (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: (Unclear), no problem.
Speaker 1: Okay, that is Patty Russell-McCloud, but that's the little girl, Patty Russell.  And I don't know the age, but obviously, those are the plaits I was talking about and usually, I had a bow on my head.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: A career woman working in Washington, D.C., [HistoryMaker] Patricia Russell-McCloud, Federal Communications Commission.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: My nephew is an artist, and that is his--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That is his--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Patricia Russell-McCloud as a lawyer and that is the rendition, the artistry of my nephew who resides in Tacoma, Washington.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Bishop E. Earl McCloud on the day of his installation as presiding bishop of the African Methodist Episcopal church, the 127th elected and consecrated bishop, Bishop E. Earl McCloud, Jr. (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Okay, next.
Speaker 1: The Links, Incorporated, the executive board.  And the front row would be all the presidents who were living at that time, Marion--from your left to right, Marion Sutherland [Marion Schultz Sutherland], Patricia Russell-McCloud, Barbara Dixon Simpkins, Dr. Gladys Gary Vaughn, Pauline Ellison, Regina Frazier [HistoryMaker Regina Jollivette Frazier].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: Black Career Women honorees for a given year, and we were being presented in our various fields of endeavor, and mine would have been for the mastery of the spoken word.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Same occasion, Black Career Women honorees for various fields of endeavor.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead, go ahead.
Speaker 1: The Dogwood City Chapter of The Links, Incorporated gave time and talent and resources for a Habitat Humanity house in Atlanta, Georgia as a part of our service project.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good, next.
Speaker 1: Bishop E. Earl McCloud, the 127th elected and consecrated bishop of the African Methodist Episcopal church.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: Pat Russell-McCloud in her one woman show, 'Keep Rising.'
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: "Have speech, will travel," that is Patricia Russell-McCloud at work, giving a motivational speech.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I'm motivated just looking at it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Patricia Russell-McCloud, humbled, awed meeting and assisting Miss--
Speaker 1: Rosa Parks.
Speaker 2: It's just too much, Rosa Parks--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --the mother of the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Pat Russell-McCloud following a speech that concerned international trends and services, global readiness.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Reverend E. Earl McCloud, Jr. and Pat Russell-McCloud in his preparation as a candidate for bishop of the A.M.E. church.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Got it, next.
Speaker 1: Sponsorship for The Links, Inc. by Colgate [Colgate Palmolive Company] and we were there in a service walk-a-thon for The Links, Incorporated.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: Presidents of The Links, Incorporated, Pat Russell-McCloud, Dr. Dolly Adams [HistoryMaker Dolly Adams], Regina Frazier and Marion Sutherland.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: I think that's it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: I think this will be (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Pastors' wives, Tamara Gibson, Mary Norris and Pat Russell-McCloud.
