Story_ID: 22296
Speaker 1: Alright, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer with The HistoryMakers today. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Steven Leslie Richardson, S-T-E-V-E-N, Leslie, L-E-S-L-I-E, Richardson, R-I-C-H-A-R-D-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Brooklyn, New York on July 22nd, 1953.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm a physicist and a university professor.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is Saturday, July 14, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at my home in Silver Spring, Maryland, 14540 Jaystone Drive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22297
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I would have to say paella, mixed seafood paella, so paella with chicken and beef and seafood.
Speaker 1: Alright, now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably purple.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring, it's the end of winter.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Always liked Nassau in the Bahamas.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: It's not mine, but I heard someone say it. So I'll adopt it. "Do only what you can do." So it's, think about it, it sounds pretty simple. But it's pretty deep. So make sure you do only what you can do.
Story_ID: 22298
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Juanita Pearl Richardson, J-U-A-N-I-T-A, Pearl, P-E-A-R-L, Richardson, R-I-C-H-A-R-D-S-O-N. Her maiden name is Wilkins, W-I-L-K-I-N-S. And my mother will be 85 years old on August the 12th, 2012.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was born in what? Nineteen twenty six [1926]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen twenty-seven [1927].
Speaker 1: Nineteen twenty-seven [1927], okay. So born in 1927, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born on a island named Neville Island which is nine miles West of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. So she was born on Neville Island, Pennsylvania, but she grew up in a small town called Coraopolis, Pennsylvania, about eight or nine miles West of Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Coraopolis?
Speaker 2: C-O-R-A-O-P-O-L-I-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, like Neville Island is an island on the Monongahela River or--
Speaker 2: That's a good guess (laughter). Let's see, so Pittsburgh meets at the confluence of the Monongahela, the Ohio and the Allegheny. I'm gonna go out on a limb and say that I think Neville Island is in the Allegheny, but I'm not a hundred percent sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I would say the population of Coraopolis is, was no more than a thousand folks.
Speaker 1: Okay, and Coraopolis, that's right outside of Pittsburgh?
Speaker 2: About nine miles West of Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, well, tell us what you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Okay, so my mother comes from a family. There were three girls and three boys. My mother and one of her sisters are the only ones still living. My mother's father, his name was Leslie, so my middle name follows from my maternal grandfather.
Speaker 1: So he was Leslie Wilkins?
Speaker 2: He was Leslie Wilkins, and he came from a family of 13. My mother's mother, my maternal grandmother, her name was Bertha. Garrett was her last name, and she came from a family of 12 [cough], excuse me. My brother--my mother's father and two of his brothers moved to Pittsburgh from South Carolina. So I would say most of my mother's family was born and raised in South Carolina. And my grandfather, Leslie, and two of his brothers relocated to Pittsburgh for the simple reason that they thought that there would be more of a job future in the steel industry than in picking cotton in South Carolina. So a lot of his brothers and sisters stayed in South Carolina. But he and two of his brothers relocated to Pittsburgh. And my grandfather, Leslie, worked in the steel industry in Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story as to why they chose Pittsburgh as--the usual migration pattern from South Carolina is New York and Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: That's a good question, and I don't know the answer. The, I mean through family reunions and just talking about this with my mother, my sense is that the steel industry basically attracted them to Pittsburgh. But I have no idea why they didn't relocate to Jersey or New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, I was just wondering if there's a railroad line or something that connects--
Speaker 2: There definitely was a Penn Central. There definitely was a railroad line.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And probably we'll get to this later, but some of my family did eventually end up going up to New York from Pittsburgh, but most of my aunts and uncles lived in Pittsburgh, and then my mother and a few of her brothers eventually moved to New York.
Story_ID: 22299
Speaker 1: Are there any stories in your family from the end of slavery or Reconstruction on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Not from my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Well, we'll get to the father's side.
Speaker 2: Probably my father's but--
Speaker 1: They don't have any such stories on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Well, we typically have had in the family, lots of family reunions on my mother's side. And we can trace the family history back to my maternal great, grandparents. So the family tree has been traced all the way back to them, and I would assume that they definitely were, oh, they were probably around either pre-Emancipation Proclamation or during or post. But it's amazing that the actual family history actually has been traced back to my maternal great grandparents. The tree has actually been mapped out for that.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, now, are there any stories from that side about the, about South Carolina or the migration to Pittsburgh or--
Speaker 2: Other than the fact that there were more job opportunities further North, and Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] being the center--remember during World War II, they produced more steel in Pittsburgh in any one day than they did in most of Western Europe or the world for that matter. So Pittsburgh was--just Oakland [California] was the center for folks in ship building during World War II, Pittsburgh was a center for steel, the steel industry. And in those days, when the country decided that they needed talent to do things, they, racial issues weren't a factor. They just needed hands and bodies, and so I'm positive there were more--one of the reasons why my great, my grandfather, Leslie, and two of his brothers relocated to Pittsburgh was they just felt there're better job opportunities in Pittsburgh rather than staying in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, is there a story about how your mother [Juanita Pearl Wilkins] came to be born on Neville Island [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge. Again, her father, Leslie, and her mother, Bertha, my mother's mother was a homemaker. And my, and my mother's father, Leslie, worked in the steel industry. And why they ultimately ended up in Neville Island rather than Coraopolis or Sewickley or other parts of the greater Pittsburgh area, that I don't know. I'm sure there are relatives still alive who probably have the better understanding of the history of that, but that's just something that, that I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they weren't actually living on Neville Island?
Speaker 2: No, my grandfather, Leslie, was born in South Carolina. And my grandmother, she was born--that's a good question. I'm not sure if she was born in South Carolina. I don't think she was born in Pittsburgh or the area around Pittsburgh. But my mother, she had three brothers, Howard, Elman, Henry and two sisters, Marguerite and Alfreda and only my Aunt Alfreda and my mother are still alive. So all six children, they were born on Neville Island.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, but there's not a, I mean so I'm just asking if they, so the family never lived on Neville, did they live on Neville Island at one point?
Speaker 2: Well, as far as I can tell, my grandfather, Leslie, and my grandmother, Bertha, they were born in South Carolina and they relocated--
Speaker 1: No, I'm talking about your mother.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, my mother and her siblings, they were all born on Neville Island.
Speaker 1: And did the family live on Neville Island when they were born?
Speaker 2: They lived on Neville Island, and then--
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: --eventually moved to Coraopolis which was a bigger town.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, alright.
Speaker 2: And it was not, again, it was only about eight or nine miles outside of Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: Now, usually people have a reason to live on an island 'cause there's work on the island for them to do.
Speaker 2: It was more work in Pittsburgh, really, than--so the economic engine of the region was definitely Pittsburgh and the steel industry. The river, that's where coal and all the ingredients to make steel were all shipped up and down the various rivers you mentioned before, the Monongahela and the Allegheny and Ohio. So there was a lot of river traffic, raw materials in and out of Pittsburgh, but why my mother's parents settled on Neville Island versus other parts of the greater Pittsburgh area, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I do remember as a young boy visiting aunts and uncles and visiting my mother's high school, Coraopolis High and visiting relatives in Sewickley and actually going through Neville Island which was, if you blink, you go right past it. There's a little bridge that goes across that links the island to Coraopolis itself.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's not like you have to have a boat to get to it.
Speaker 2: No, there was a, I guess the mode of transportation were streetcars, buses and a bridge. I do remember her saying some of her brothers, my uncles, would walk--there were times where they actually would, they might miss the streetcar, and they would walk to Pittsburgh, just on the weekends--
Speaker 1: Oh, it's --
Speaker 2: --for excursions. So.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I get it now. For some reason I imagined an island, you know, when I think of island, I think of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I say, "island", it's not Coney, it's not Long Island or it's not Manhattan Island. It's, it's--
Speaker 1: Just a little--
Speaker 2: Very, very, Neville Island is a far smaller community than even Coraopolis. And I don't think Coraopolis' population was larger than three or 4,000 people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22300
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Juanita Pearl Wilkins] discuss what it was like when she was growing up with you?
Speaker 2: Oh, very, very much so. It turns out, one of my mother's brother's, Henry, wanted to and became a physician. And he trained--well, let me just go back. I remember her saying that her parents had to take out a second mortgage on their home in Coraopolis to finance his medical school education. Well, he ended up studying and doing his medical internship at Harlem Hospital in New York. So my mother I would characterize as, when she was young, she was very sociable, she was very adventurous, and she wanted to basically pursue a career in nursing. So it was my brother--it was my Uncle Henry who suggested, why don't you come up to New York. You can stay with me. There's a school, at that time, there was a school for black nurses, Lincoln School of Nurses, located in the Bronx. And you can get a good education here and take it from there. And I think it was pretty courageous of her at the age of 16 or 17, just to basically take up roots and go up there to New York and follow him. Another brother, Henry, he eventually relocated to New York, and the other brothers and sisters, they stayed in Pittsburgh. So my mother went to New York. She stayed in Brooklyn, stayed in Bronx. At one time, she actually stayed in Harlem. She rented a boarding room on Strivers' Row in Harlem, and she was a student at the Lincoln School of Nurses. And actually, last June, she, her class was honored as one of the graduating classes of the Lincoln School of Nurses. It's been closed for a number of years now, but they've had luncheons where they've had fundraising events, and they provide scholarships for students of color to go on in studying in the nursing profession.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Not coincidentally, in New York, as rumor has it she says that she saw this strapping young man one day at the YMCA in the pool. So she decided that the best way to make her play was to jump in the pool and feign that she was drowning, which she said that she did. And the person who jumped in and saved her turned out to be a gentleman named Edward Alfred Richardson. And that eventually turned out to be an interesting move on her part because he turned out to be my father.
Story_ID: 22301
Speaker 1: Okay, so your father's full name is Edward Alfred Richardson--
Speaker 2: Yes, father's full name is Edward Alfred Richardson.
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're officially doing his side of the family now.
Speaker 2: We've segued to my father. We don't know as much about my father's background as we do my mother's. So my--
Speaker 1: Well, first, what is his birth date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: So my father passed in 1994, and he was born on March 18th, I believe 1920. He's, and he was born in Brooklyn, Brooklyn, New York. My father was raised by his mother. Her name was Ann, A-N-N. And their oldest child is my sister, Valerie, and her middle child name is Ann. So my sister, Valerie, is named, her middle name is the name of my father's mother. My father's father left the family at an early age. And he really never spoke to us much about his father growing up. So we know, "we", meaning the five kids, knew a lot more about what was going on in my mother's side of the family than my father's side. My father had a step--well, it was his sister, Annette, and it turns out she was really his stepsister. And they were raised primarily by my father's mother, Ann, and my father's grandmother. Her name was Josephine Duckett, D-U-C-K-E-T-T, Josephine, J-O-S-E-P-H-I-N-E. We, meaning myself and my siblings, we referred to her as Gram, G-R-A-M, but she actually was our great grandmother. She was my father's grandmother, but she really was our great grandmother on my father's side. And she had a strong influence in raising my father and his stepsister when he as young in Brooklyn. It turns out, incidentally, one of the neighbors of my father in Brooklyn was Lena Horne. She lived a couple of blocks, not a couple blocks, a couple of doors down the street for a period of time. So the best that we know on my father's side of the family is that he was definitely born and raised in Brooklyn. He went to Catholic school in Brooklyn. We believe that my father's father and my father's mother were born in Brooklyn. My father's grandmother, Gram, she was probably born in the South. I'm not quite sure. And that's really the extent of what we know about my father's side of the family.
Speaker 1: So you don't know where in the South--
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Story_ID: 22302
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did your father [Edward Alfred Richardson] say about growing up and what were his aspirations?
Speaker 2: Well, it was very interesting. My father was a very affable, strong individual, had this wonderful baritone voice and wasn't even, and just in singing--he actually sang and recorded some records. They weren't commercially, put out commercially, but I remembered--my mother [Juanita Pearl Wilkins] still has to this day a set of his records that he's recorded. He's the type of person that, he went to Catholic grammar school in Brooklyn [New York]. He went to Abraham Lincoln High School in Brooklyn. And that was the end of his formal education. But almost everyone to a person who's ever met my father always walked away with the impression that here was a fellow who was quite intellectual. My father read a lot. I can remember him reading--in those days, New York had may papers. In addition to the "New York Times", was the "New York Herald Tribune", "New York Journal American", "New York Post", "New York Daily News". I remember when I was a little older, my father always faithfully reading the "New York Times" on Sundays, religiously. And he would keep all of his papers in piles in the living room. And perhaps to this day, I've sort of inherited some of those traits. I have a tendency to be a pack rat. I keep papers around longer than, probably than I should. I do remember my father talking about Brooklyn as a place or a city of neighborhoods. You would go through Brooklyn on streetcars, and there were Italian neighborhoods, Irish neighborhoods, Jewish neighborhoods. So it was a, you have to remember Brooklyn before the beginning of the Nineteenth Century was a city. It was, in fact, the fourth largest city in the United States. And, but it, in many ways it was a city of, that, in name, but it was comprised of many other cities or neighborhoods. And people stayed in their own little geo-political regions, and if you ventured out from one part of the city to some other part, you really had to know where you were going and be aware of your surroundings. I can remember my father talking about going to some of the very same movie houses that we went to as kids and having to sit in the back of the movie theater. And, you know, as kids we would sit down and listen to this, our mouths wide open. We just couldn't believe this, but my father would just basically state it as a matter of fact.
Speaker 1: So he remembered the segregated Brooklyn.
Speaker 2: He remembered that Brooklyn was sort of a place that you, you were, you lived--Brooklyn was a place where folks lived in certain parts of the city, certain ethnic groups. And going from one area to another, you really had to know where you were going and be aware of your surroundings.
Speaker 1: So the implication is it could be dangerous if you didn't, right?
Speaker 2: I remember him telling me once an incident of somebody being dragged off of a streetcar because they happened to be going through the wrong neighborhood. I also, on the flipside, remember an incident where my father kept on his drawer a textbook that he used in high school. And it was thicker than the bible, but it was just jam packed with facts on arts, humanities, the sciences, literature. And it was just amazing in this one little book, and I can't say that was the only textbook they used in high school, in the public schools at that time. But it was just really compact with information. Father always used to have a saying when, especially, there were four boys and one girl, and he said this to everybody. He would say, look, such and such a corner in Brooklyn is a bad corner, meaning that if you're out there, you need to be aware of your surroundings and where you're going and things like that.
Story_ID: 22303
Speaker 1: So my father [Edward Alfred Richardson] in many ways was a very--I wouldn't call him a strict person, but he was very firm. He knew what he was about, and we knew what the rules of the house were. When it came to discipline, that really was my mother's role. She was the one who basically disciplined us. If she wanted to put the fear of God into us, the easy way for her to do it was basically to say, "Wait till your father gets home", and my father had this philosophy that in five kids, there was no such thing as one kid getting into trouble by his or herself. They always had to have a partner. And so if somebody got, if one person got disciplined, or somebody got into trouble, that meant that there was somebody else that dragged them into it. So after high school, my father enlisted in the United States Army, which at the time was segregated. He was stationed in Washington State and spent some time in Hawaii. After he was discharged, he worked for the U.S. Post Office for a few years, and then essentially started a 35-year career with the New York City Transit Authority. So he was one of the celebrated conductors of the A Train in Duke Ellington's and Billy Strayhorn's music. So he started out as a conductor and retired as a train dispatcher. It was interesting, if you look back at the job prospects for young, black men after World War II, especially in the New York area, a lot of black men typically worked either in the Post Office or in Civil Service jobs. And New York had a very, very strong history for a number of reasons of having jobs that, because of unions primarily, were very supportive of lots of good benefits. And so he, you know, today it's sort of unusual to think of somebody having a job and staying in one company or institution for 30 or 40 years. Well, back in the day, that wasn't the case. So he, he joined the New York City Transit Authority probably around 1949, 1950 and stayed with them for about 35 years.
Speaker 2: Now, did your parents meet before the War or after the War?
Speaker 1: Let's see, my sister was born in 1951. My mother probably relocated to New York, my sense is '47' [1947], '48' [1948], they probably met.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, that's after--
Speaker 1: So it was after World War II. So I would, if I had to put a year on it, I would probably say '49' [1949], something like--that incident I described to you about the YMCA pool, that was probably about 1949.
Story_ID: 22304
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities, your, their looks, their habits, their talents, their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: It's interesting. My mother [Juanita Pearl Wilkins] says 'cause I've asked her recently, that growing up, I was a very sociable, outgoing, extraverted child, very curious, running around doing lots of things. And I think as I developed into a young boy, I became a little bit more introverted, little bit more shy, little bit more reserved. So it's clear to me that in the beginning, we're talking about my mother's traits, and towards, as I grew up, certainly pre-adolescent years, adolescence, those are more my father's [Edward Alfred Richardson] traits. I tell people today, even before I go out and give a talk at some convention or conference or give a lecture, that I'm really a very introverted individual. And they look at me and laugh because they, that's not how they perceive. And so I think the idea of, you know, being self effacing and not going out there and promoting yourself, but waiting till the opportunity presents itself, those are traits I get from my father. My mother is clearly, she had far more friends at church, school. She was in all the activities. She knew all the parents. She knew all the neighbors. Those are traits, that according to her, I had when I was very, very young, but somewhere--and maybe the dynamic is different for boys than it is for girls, but somehow when I became, got a little older, I became a little more reserved. I mean I didn't really, I guess, school for me was something that I enjoyed immensely, grammar school where I felt was fantastic. I had a lot of fun in it, and people said I was good at it and very smart. But I just didn't think that that meant you should walk around bragging about it. So those are sort of traits that I could see my father having. So it's a nice, it's a nice mix or balance of both.
Story_ID: 22305
Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you name your brothers and sisters and tell us where you fit in the lineup?
Speaker 2: Sure, so the oldest child is Valerie. She's the only girl, and she grew up to be a 911 supervisor for both the City of New York. She retired form that, and she's presently a 911 supervisor for the City of San Diego [California]. I'm number two. I'm the oldest boy, Steven. So I'm a theoretical physicist; third child is deceased, Stanley, and he was an electrical engineer; fourth child is David. He's still with us. He's a physician with, who specializes in neurology. And the baby is Donald, and he's a corporate lawyer. So I think, I know that if you sit and look at us, all five us grew up to become in terms of contributing, productive folks in society, all of that credit goes to my parents. There's no question.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22306
Speaker 1: Now, did you move around a lot when you grew up or did you live in the same neighborhood basically?
Speaker 2: We basically lived in the same neighborhood. So, I was born, I spent the first two or three years on Green Avenue, 566 Green Avenue, right across the street from Tompkins Park. And then when I was four or five, we moved to the Breevort Projects in Brooklyn, in Bed Sty--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, what's it called?
Speaker 2: Breevort Projects, B-,as in boy-R-E-E-V-O-R-T. And we probably moved there in 1956. The Breevort Projects, what the city did was they demolished completely something like five or six city blocks in the middle of Brooklyn and built affordable housing in the term of, in the form of seven-story projects. And we moved, we were one of the first families that moved in there. We lived at 302 Bainbridge Street, which was on the corner of Bainbridge Street and Patchen Avenue for about three, four or five years. And then we needed, as the family grew, as my younger brothers, David, Donald, Stanley came on the scene, we needed more space. So we just moved, stayed in the projects, but moved to the other, another unit which had a little bit more space. So let me tell you what space was like for us. We had a family of seven. We had relocated to 342 Bainbridge Street on the corner of Ralph Avenue and Bainbridge Street, still exists. Seven of us shared one bathroom. My brother and I shared, my brother, Stanley and I shared one room and a double bunk bed. My brother David and Donald, the two youngest boys, they shared a room, double bunk bed. My sister, being the only girl, she had her own room. My parents kept all their clothes and belongings in the room that David and Donald slept. My father did. And my mother kept all her clothes in the room that Valerie slept. There was a living room that had a Castro convertible couch. So that as the bedroom for my parents, and it was also the sofa for all of us to watch television and fight over who got to watch what program, "Bonanza" or "Get Smart" or "Man from Uncle" or whatever on the one black and white television. And there was the kitchen where we all basically hung out. So, I mean if you look at where we are in this house and you look at the space here and compare it to the space where the seven of us grew up, and there was one bathroom. So how we basically maneuvered around and shared and scheduled all that, I don't know. But it, to us, it was, it was normal. It was huge, and it was fun, you know. And obviously, our parents did a lot of planning and logistical thinking about what to do and where to put this and all of that. And they also did a lot of sacrificing, you know, because they really didn't have their own separate, private rooms until, I guess we bought a house in East Flatbush in 1969. 	The grammar school we went to was Holy Rosary Grammar School. And that was two blocks down the street. So we walked to school. My parents made sure that at least one of the parents was, one of the parents was home to get us ready for school, to fix lunch for us. We came home for lunch, and somebody was there to get us ready to go to bed at night. And I distinctly remember my father who used to work as a conductor for the transit authority, he would work early after--his shift was from early afternoon to late at night. So when we were getting up in the morning to go to school, he was still asleep, but we would come home for lunch, my mother would be at work. And his job was to fix lunch for us. Not only did he fix lunch for us, as a routine he put the five boys through, he would comb our hair again, with the Vaseline grease and the part and we weren't gonna go out the house until we looked presentable. Catholic school, you had to have a uniform. You had a jacket, and you had a tie. You had a pair of pants, slacks and all of that. But it was clear that going to school was our jobs. Our parents had jobs. Going to school was our job, and living in the projects, you have to appreciate the fact that New York, even to this day, a large number of people are confined to a small amount of space. And the projects, the density is even higher. So what that means is that you can come in contact, you do come in contact or you did come in contact with lots of different kinds of people. There was no such thing as being isolated growing up in our neighborhood. So you had friends, you had acquaintances, and you had people you had to deal with, and if you didn't know how to deal with them, you had to learn fast (laughter). Otherwise, they would discover that you were prey, and you would be preyed upon. But it was very interesting that the school was just two blocks down the street from where we lived. And then there were people who went to school, we went to school with, who didn't live in the projects and visa versa. So we, we had, we were very fortunate. We had lots of friends within a two, three square block radius to where we lived. And if we went five blocks in one direction, that's a whole new world. So, number one, we couldn't, you know, our parents always made sure that they knew where we were going and what we were doing. But with the density of people in New York, you know, you walk five blocks one place, and it's a whole different neighborhood, whole different world. I discovered years later that Jackie Gleason lived literally two blocks from where we lived in the projects, and in fact, the street, Chauncey Street, where the "Honeymooners" is named after in the TV series, that apartment building literally exists to this day, and it was two blocks from where we grew up. It was a different neighborhood, of course, at that time, but it just gives you a sense of--I mean we didn't grow up in Omaha [Nebraska] or we didn't grow up in, on Long Island [New York]. We didn't grow up in Miami [Florida]. You know, growing up in New York meant that you were just surrounded with people and all kinds of people all the time.
Story_ID: 22307
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this now. Moving into the projects, now, in 19--
Speaker 2: [Cough] I'm sorry, 1956.
Speaker 1: Fifty-six [1956], that's when you all moved into the--okay, in 1956, did the projects--now, today the projects has a stigma.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so this--
Speaker 1: And it's considered that's the last place you'd wanna live.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: But in 1956, was it, was that the case?
Speaker 2: I think people have to understand, so historians understand this, that the projects were a place that were built to solve the problem of affordable housing. And the projects, circa, 1956 are a different creature than the projects of, you know, the 21st Century 'cause you didn't have the proliferation of drugs and gangs and street violence that you do today. So when we go around, my brothers and my sister and I, telling folks that we grew up in the projects, you know, people, they look, you know, "And you're still alive?" But it's your point exactly. Growing up in, everybody was there. You know, you had all kinds of folks, various socio-economic backgrounds. I can remember playing this street game called "Skelly" with two Italian neighbors in the projects. So it was a place where there was a lot of social transformation or movement. The projects didn't have, as you said, the stigma then that they have today. But, by the same token, there were lots of things that happened on the streets of Brooklyn. And my father and mother, far more so my father because he was a native New Yorker, and my mother wasn't, he knew what was going on in the streets in New York and Brooklyn. And he had this favorite saying, "There's stuff that goes out on the street, and it stays out on the street, and it doesn't come into this house. Make sure you understand the difference." So I think people have to understand that for us growing up in Breevort projects was a wonderful experience. We had wonderful neighbors (laughter). You know, we didn't know, okay, so we lived in the ghetto. We didn't know that that, we didn't assign any value to that. You know, to us it was fun. We just knew this person, that person, this person, that person. The school was two blocks down the street. We had a little park we played in. We had a big park we played in. My younger brothers, they were far more athletically inclined than I was. The rule was, of course, that you couldn't be out till 12:00 o'clock at night. I mean on a school night, your behind had to be upstairs. And if you were outside past a certain time, and then one of my parents went to the window and called, and you didn't respond. And you didn't come up, you didn't come up, you know, to the house by a certain time, and if they had to come down and get you, well, you got beat twice (laughter). You got beat there in front of your friends (laughter). And you got beat when you came back home. So, sure there were things that were going on that our parents protected us from, but, you know, at the time, you know, we were just, to us it was a very wonderful, very supportive, loving community. I remember once in the eighth grade, I guess I was acting out, and I got into a fight with some guy. So my mother's best friend saw me. She came across the street and broke up the fight. And then, you know, I went home. By the time I got home, you know, I got confronted about it because she called my mother (laughter). So you had neighbors looking out for other people's kids at the time. It wasn't just a situation where you had teacher, your immediate parents raising kids. You had extended parents, you had neighborhood parents, you had teachers, boy scout leaders, girl scout leaders, Cub scout leaders, activities, and, you know, you try not to be nostalgic and say, well, what, am I missing something out of this or am I filtering it? But to us, you know, it was, it was, it was fun. It didn't have the stigma that perhaps it has now. Again, there was stuff going on at the time. But we made sure, specifically, my father made sure that, you know, our behinds were not gonna be out there in the middle of something--we were not hanging out on the street at 1:00 o'clock in the morning. During the school week, at 1:00 o'clock in the morning, we were in bed (laughter). We were in bed at 10:00 o'clock (laughter). On a weekend, okay. You had more time. You did your chores on Saturday, and you could go out and play. But that didn't mean that you could be out all night. The summer you didn't have a structured school event, a structured school. But that didn't mean you were gonna be hanging around the house or playing out in the street all summer. My mother, I definitely remember my mother telling us, look, this is summer. This doesn't mean that your behind is gonna be here in this house doing nothing. If you don't have to, if you do nothing more than go down to the school and volunteer to sweep the floors for summer camp, that's what you're going to do. But you're gonna have some type of structured activity, either going to summer camp or a CYO Camp or some excursion or going to the library or something. You weren't gonna just be allowed to just hang out, looking for things to have happen.
Story_ID: 22308
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, definitely the sound of the Good Humor truck and the bell ringing and you knew that the Good Humor ice cream truck was coming. New York had "Mr. Softee". He was another brand of selling ice cream. And so his truck had a particular chime. I remember something that's probably just unique to New York. Maybe it was true in Baltimore [Maryland], but I can remember during the summer and early part of the evening, there was a vendor selling watermelons with a horse-drawn cart. And he would say, Watee melon, watee melon, watee mel, watee melon. And then a couple of times, I remember my father going out in the street and just buying some watermelon. So you knew that, when you heard that sound, you knew that summer was coming around. Brooklyn, you know, they always say Brooklyn, there are no trees in Brooklyn. Well, there are trees. There're sycamore trees in Brooklyn. And when Spring comes, they have the unique smell, and it's beautiful. And so I can remember the smell of sycamore trees in Brooklyn, growing up.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a reason for that, why there's only--are there only sycamore trees?
Speaker 2: That I don't know. I mean somebody in the New York City park department (laughter) in the eighteenth or nineteenth century when they planned or designed Brooklyn, that this is what they're--I mean there's this myth that it's an urban jungle, and it's just asphalt and there are no trees. Well, of course, I mean it's not, it's not part--it's not Connecticut or Maine. But there are trees and they do flower. I guess another, oh, lightening bugs in the summer. I can remember before the sun went down, you would see these little lightening bugs, just flying around, around bushes and the grass. And we used to have jars, mason jars and you'd punch holes in them and try to catch these little lightening bugs and things like that. So it was, you know, for the five of us, my sister and my four brothers, it really was, I'd say we were blessed in the sense that, you know, it was a really exciting childhood. It was balanced, if you will, with the experience of spending a lot of our summers in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. So since we had a lot of family members on my mother's side in Pittsburgh, we would go down and spend two weeks out of the summer in Pittsburgh. It gave my parents some time for, for rest and relaxation. It gave us an opportunity to meet and live with our cousins, and aunts and uncles in Pittsburgh. Pittsburgh is quite different from Brooklyn, lots of different things going on--it's more rural, and it's more, you know, it's sort of the opposite of Bedford Stuyvesant, if you will, but that was a unique experience. You saw things down in Pittsburgh that you didn't see in New York.
Story_ID: 22309
Speaker 1: Okay, now, your parents, you said they both worked, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What did your mother do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was interesting because she started out, as I said, she went to nursing school, Lincoln School of Nurses, Lincoln School for Nurses in the Bronx. When she had some of her older children, she would take time off. So she had sort of the flexibility of part-time schedule. But she primarily worked. And the amazing thing, I can remember in high school my mother was a healthcare administrator at one of the local clinics in Brooklyn. And she decided, probably because it meant more money, that she was gonna go back to school or she was going to go to school and get a college degree. So I remember when we were in high school, when I was in high school, my mother was at Long Island University, working on a Bachelors degree in science in nursing, part-time, and still working. I can remember her using some of the same textbooks that I used in high school. I remember her using, I assume they still use this, it's a famous book on grammar called "The Harbrace Handbook of English". It's probably in its 35th edition. And I remember my mother using that book. I remember my mother reading some of the same stories in American, English literature that I would have to read in, in high school. I remember tutoring my mother in chemistry when I was a high school student. She didn't stop there. She's still working. She then went on and got her Masters degree in healthcare administration at LIU [Long Island University], and eventually got a Masters degree in Public Administration from NYU [New York University]. So my mother was one of these folks who, both she and my father, strong felt that education was important. That was our job. That was something we needed to do. And we had good role models to emulate. I mean I was probably eight or nine, but I would, there was a friend of mine, Stevie, Steven Warren. He came home one day, when he came to class one day, he told us that his father gave him a dollar bill 'cause he got a "B" in English. So I went home to my father, and I said, well, if Steven Warren gets a dollar for getting a "B" in English, hell, I've gotten seven A's in these courses. You definitely owe me at least ten dollars or more, right. So my father said basically, I was delirious (laughter), that his job was not to bribe me to get good grades. That was my job. That was what I was expected to do, and the conversation never came up again. So, it was perfectly clear at a very young age in our whole household that education was important. My father didn't get the opportunity for a number of reasons to go past high school in terms of his formal education. But he was a very intelligent man. My mother went back to school, got three degrees, all at the same time, while working and raising teenaged kids. And I don't know how you do that, raise five teenaged kids, work a job and then go to school part time. I mean it's just unfathomable. But she did it.
Story_ID: 22310
Speaker 1: Now, where did you start school? Now, did you go to pre-school first?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a funny story. So, when it came time to go to school, my mother brought my sister and I to the local public school and said, we wanna enroll, she said, I wanna enroll my children in this particular public school, PS-21. It still exists on Patchen Avenue. And then she asked the following question. She said, when do you teach the kids how to use pens and pencils to write and draw, and sign their name and, and do simple arithmetic problems? And the staff said, well, we do that the second year. We don't do that the first year. So my mother was very polite. She shook her head. She said, okay, thank you very much for your attention, and she took her two kids and she left. So she went back home, and she had a discussion with my father. And she said, there's no way in the world that I'm sending Valerie and Steven to this school since they already know how to write (laughter). They already know elementary math skills. She said, you know, I don't know how we're gonna do this, but we're gonna have to put our pennies together and figure out a way to finance their education at the local Catholic school because my kids already know how to do these things. And if we put these kids in this environment where they are doing things that are a year behind what they're supposed to be doing, they're just gonna get lazy and they're gonna, these skills are gonna atrophy. So my father was actually raised Catholic. He was baptized Catholic. It was my mother who converted to the Catholic faith. So all five of us went to the local Catholic school, Holy Rosary Grammar School. Again, it was just two blocks down the street. Unfortunately, it's not in existence anymore. There was a time when that Catholic school--I happen to know this, there was a time when my father was growing up when that school was probably 78--70, 80 percent white. When we were there, it was 99 percent black (laughter), in fact to the point, one percent person who was white, we knew who she was. Her name was Georgia Boshen (ph.). We knew she was a nice person. But we didn't, you know, we were eight, nine or ten. We didn't know. So this concept of race and difference and all that, it didn't make any sense or we didn't know how to, to filter that as young folks.
Story_ID: 22311
Speaker 1: But there was something about this Catholic school experience and being with this set of really dedicated nuns who were serious about what they were doing. They knew that you had to be serious. All the stories you hear about the corporal punishment and bamboo sticks, and the, you know, knuckles, getting your knuckles rapped, all these are all true. So, the, I mean there probably were things that the nuns did, and if they did today, they would be put in jail. But they did all these things. You did not mess with nuns.
Speaker 2: So this is 1950 nuns.
Speaker 1: It was 1950. I can remember, it's not a popular foe. It's an actual story. It was two years ahead of me. Somebody in my school actually hit a nun. Well, we figured that that person was, in addition to going to hell, (laughter), there was gonna be a problem. Well, there was a problem, because the parish priest came over to the school and it turns out the parish priest at the time, he was the only priest at the school. He took this young man, opened up the window of the third story and hung him outside by his ankles and shook him (laughter), okay. So, again, you know, this would be on the national news today if it happened. These are the types of things that you could do in those days. The nuns did not play. I had classmates who I just felt so sorry for. They, if they got into trouble, the parent--the nun would do something very simple. They would just say, I need to call your parent, and they need to come in and get you. Well, the parent, the mother and father, they're pissed because they're losing half a day's work to come in and get you. So, of course, they're gonna beat your ass in front of your classmates (laughter). If that had ever happened to me, I would have just died of embarrassment and shame. In addition to that, once they got you home, they beat you again. So it was well understood what you were supposed to do, what you were not supposed to do. And, again, I can't speak for how things are happening today, but you definitely had an environment where discipline was not up for debate. People knew what they were supposed to do. Again, you could argue that we don't have these resources today for a number of reasons, lots of--it's no accident if you look at a lot of inner-city communities throughout the United States, the impact of the Catholic church on local school systems has been enormous. But the fact that a lot of young men and young women, not going into the priesthood or the lay or becoming nuns, and just financial situations, these number of Catholic, a great number of Catholic schools have been closing over the last couple of years.
Story_ID: 22312
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I take it you like school since you felt obligated to go there and do well?
Speaker 2: There's no question that I loved school.  It was fun.  I liked the people in this particular school, Holy Rosary [Grammar School], so I probably have to give the props to the nuns and priests, the way they structured this environment.  It was fun.  I liked it.  I enjoyed my fellow classmates.  I was always involved in lots of activities.  Nobody mistook me for a student athlete, and probably had I had an older brother who would have said, look, let me sit down and show you how to shoot a basketball correctly, I probably would have been a little better.  I mean there were some sports I liked.  I liked, I couldn't swim, but I liked stick ball, and I liked softball.  I liked touch football.  I'm not saying I was great at it.  I definitely, my basketball skills poor to nil, poor to non-existent.  I couldn't swim, but school, to me, was fun.  And I can remember in the summer just anticipating waiting to see, gee, school's gonna start.  What teacher are we gonna have?  And, you know, so it, it, for me to sit here and say that school was not a fun experience, is just betraying a whole lot of folks and reality.  It was, it was a great experience.  I loved it.
Speaker 1: So did you have favorite teachers in school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I will probably have to start out with my first-grade teacher, Sister Mary Angelica.  So the story behind her is she gave a math exam, and at the end of the exam or the next day, she said, you need to have your parents come in and see me.  I said, oh, my God, I failed the exam (laughter).  Well, I brought my parents in, and they had a meeting with her.  Well, I didn't fail the exam.  What I did was, I did an exam that had nothing to do with the exam she had on the board 'cause I was sitting in the back row.  And the numbers that she wrote were not the numbers that I wrote down and saw.  I couldn't see the blackboard.  I needed glasses (laughter), so that's the first, that was the first message.  Second message was, she said to my parents, your son is wasting his time in the first grade.  He really needs to be in the second grade.  He knows this material.  He knows more than everybody, what everybody else knows.  The problem is, if we skip him to the second grade, he's gonna be in a group of people who are older with him, but I think he can deal with it.  So they went home and thought about it.  They didn't ask me for my vote (laughter), but they just said, okay, this is what you're gonna do.  And I remember coming in, cleaning out my desk, leaving my friends in the first grade and going upstairs to the whole new group of people in the second grade.  And I just never looked back.  Had a nun, Sister Mary Cornelia, in the sixth grade.  And she was wonderful, and she also encouraged me in science and math.  So I was one of these kids who, I was fortunate to have parents who would give me the, what is it?  Oh, I had a telescope, I had a microscope.  I had a Gilbert Chemistry set.  I did chemistry experiments at home.  I loved mixing things together and trying to figure out what they, how they worked and why they worked.  And she gave me her high school chemistry laboratory notebook.  I could not have been more than nine.  But she just felt that this was something that I needed to have to encourage me to do more.  She also gave me a fetal pig to take home and dissect.  That didn't work out too well (laughter).  My parents said, okay, you have to throw that away (laughter), but you can keep the lab notebook.  And probably my eighth grade teacher, Sister Mary Cornelia.
Story_ID: 22313
Speaker 1: Eighth grade was an interesting experience because we didn't go to junior high school.  So the way the Catholic school system worked, you started at kindergarten and you went to eighth grade.  And at that time in New York, you took an exam for getting into Catholic high schools.  So it's a Catholic grammar school.  Of course, they're gonna push you to go to Catholic high school.  And I took the exam, and I picked four Catholic schools I wanted to go to that were supposed to be very good and got into all four of them.  Well, I had this acumen for science and engineering and math.  I didn't know what engineering was, but I had an acumen for science and math.  So at that time, the best science schools in New York City were Brooklyn Tech in Brooklyn, Peter Stuyvesant High School in Manhattan and the Bronx High School of Science.  So Brooklyn Tech was a place that you, this is, again, an eleventh--I was 12 years old.  This is a twelfth grade mind figuring these things, making these decisions.
Speaker 2: A twelve-year old mind.
Speaker 1: Twelve-year old mind, sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: I thought Brooklyn Tech was a place you went if you wanted to be an engineer.  I knew something about chemistry, so I thought engineers were people who made better flavors of Crest toothpaste.  That's not what I wanted to do.  Scratch that off the list.  Peter Stuyvesant at the time had a campus on the Upper West side of Manhattan, and it was a fire, it was a death trap.  It was a fire trap.  It was an old, decrepit building.  I went there and looked at it, and I said, uh-uh, this is not gonna work.  Scratch that school off the list.  Bronx High School of Science, okay, I lived in Brooklyn.  The Bronx High School of Science was in, wait for it, the Bronx.  That was an hour and a half train ride on the A Train; no way in the world was I getting up that early to commute back and forth to the Bronx.  Well, to make a long story short, I took the exam for those three schools, got into all three.  We make decisions for--career changing decisions, for unique, for all sorts of reasons.  I didn't have anybody around who could sit, who sat, who would sit down and tell me, look, fool, if you wanna be a scientist, there's one place you need to go to, and that the Bronx High School of Science.  I just dismissed it because it was a 90-minute trip on the A Train to the Bronx.  There was a Jesuit High School called Brooklyn Prep.  It was a college-bound, college-preparatory high school.  And I remember going and visiting it.  It had a swimming pool--it didn't help me 'cause I couldn't swim.  I remember going to meet the physics teacher who was a priest, who gave me a slide rule.  And I thought this was wonderful.  And I remember he showed me the physics lab that had a blue carpet on it.  And after that, I was sold.  So (laughter), so that's how I chose the high school that I went to.  And it was just no rhyme or reason.  None of the nuns sat down and told me, you know, this is where you need to go.  I guess, I probably graduated, not Number One, Number two in my class, and I got a scholarship for academically talented, but financially needy minority students to go to Brooklyn Prep for high school.  So, sure, if I could go back and turn, change the clock, maybe if I'd gone to Brooklyn, the Bronx High School of Science, maybe that would have been a better place to go to have a burgeoning career for science and math.  But you do, I just mentioned this simply because as a young person, and especially as a young person of color, and particularly, if a young person of color was interested in any of the STEM fields, science, technology, engineering and math, we probably don't have a lot of the mentors and the resources around to sit down and say, look, boy, this is what you're going to do.  This is not, this is what you're not going to do because you don't have typically either in your family or at school, folks who have first-hand experience with these endeavors to sit down and say, look, you need to do this and you need to do this if you wanna get there.
Story_ID: 22314
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any knowledge of, or did you know any black scientists or have or even seen someone play a black scientist on television or anything.  I mean was there any role model for what a black scientist ought to do?
Speaker 2: No, I had the television program, "Mr. Wizard".  There, I lived in the library so I loved, worshiped and adored the library.  And even the books on becoming a scientist were all filled with pictures of white scientists.  I knew no one who did science.  I had an uncle, again, who was a physician, but I didn't have any day-to-day, I didn't get the guidance that he gave my mother in terms of going to Lincoln School of Nurses.  So the simple answer is, no.  I had no person who could sit down and say to me, okay, you like chemistry, you like math, you like to draw, you like art.  You need to basically go someplace that's gonna get you to the next step.  And I sort of had to figure this thing out on the fly.  So one of the themes I find or I found in my career was, I would typically be the big fish in the little pond.  So at Holy Rosary Grammar School, I was the big fish in the little pond.  Then when I went to high school, I was the little fish in the bigger pond.  Okay, high school Algebra, I was not Number One.  I was not Number Two.  I wasn't even Number 10.  I was basically in a universe of folks who knew more than I did.  And so I wasn't an A-plus student in my freshman year.  The thing I learned was, okay, you need to just keep working and keep working and working, and eventually, towards, when I got to be sophomore or junior or senior, my grades got to the point that I was taking more AP courses and things.  But, clearly, had I known somebody at the age of 10 or 11 doing science, I probably would have ended up at Bronx High School of Science.  Please don't misunderstand me.  I don't have any regret for any of the career choices that I either made actively or got pushed into (laughter) by accident.  I go back to my father.  If you know anybody who's a black Catholic, you know that at one point in time, they considered becoming a priest or a nun.  And I remember coming home at the age of 11 (laughter) and telling my father that there was a special high school in New Jersey that you went to that would put you on the road to become a seminarian, a person studying for the priesthood.  And I needed a letter from him (laughter) to go to this school.  Now, exactly, your reaction is the shaking--my father didn't shake his head and look at me and say, this boy is crazy.  My father was very--he said the following.  He said, "I want you to do the following.  I want you to go to a regular high school.  I want you to do that first, that's your choice.  If you go to, once you go to this regular high school, once you graduate from that, if you wanna go study to become a priest, I'll sign any piece of paper that you have."  Well, a funny thing happened in the next four years, high school and puberty.  And needless to say, that that discussion (laughter) never came up again (laughter).  I never had to go back to my father to make sure that he would come, you know, fulfill his part of the bargain.  So we make choices and decisions, but we don't have all the right facts and data.  And that's, that's unfortunate.  That's really, that's the role of a mentor or somebody to be able to sit down and say, okay, you need to do this if you wanna prepare yourself or you don't need to do this.  You know, someone who eventually wants to become a professional basketball player.  There are certain colleges that you will need to go to because the scouts are there.  You're gonna get the visibility.  And if you go to, I won't name them, but if you go to other places, even if you do well, you're not gonna have the exposure.
Story_ID: 22315
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's no shortage of scouts and mentors for basketball players if you--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, and--
Speaker 1: --you're seven feet tall, there'd be, they'd be coming to you trying to guide you--
Speaker 2: And I was 5'4", glasses, big ears and 120 pounds.  So they weren't coming to knock on my door.  But--
Speaker 1: I'm just surprised that the Catholic school didn't have better counseling.
Speaker 2: Well, that's actually an amazing, that's a reoccurring theme because I can remember, if we flash forward to the end of my senior year in high school, I was a national achievement scholar.  And I remember applying to college and I remember having this discussion with the guidance counselor.  And I told him that I was going to apply to Manhattan College which was in New York, and I was gonna apply to New York, to NYU, New York University, and that was it.  Now, being a national achievement scholar meant that every day in the mail I got 10 letters from colleges and universities throughout the United States, basically trying to sell me and convince me that, you know, I should, I needed to go to their program.  But somehow, I picked those two schools, somehow I had in my mind the idea that I wasn't gonna go anyplace West of the Hudson River, typical New Yorker, right?  No life--you saw "The New Yorker" poster, there's nothing going on past New York.  And I remember telling the guidance counselor that I was gonna apply to Columbia [University].  And I'll never forget this.  He said to me, "Well, you know, I'm not so sure you'll get into Columbia.  You'd better pick a safe school because (laughter), you know, I don't want you, your ego to be crushed if you don't get into this place.  So pick a nice, safe school like Manhattan College or some other place or maybe even NYU.  And maybe things will work out for you."  Well, it turns out as a National Achievement Scholar, I got into every school I applied.  I got a scholarship from every institution I applied to.  And it's one more example of the case where you have people who you think that they are giving you the best advice that's available at the time, but what do you know?  I mean you're 16 years old.  You've gone through this system where you think that adults or your elders know everything, and you just sit there and listen.  I got this far based on the fact, on the premise if I listen to people and did what they told me to do (laughter), everything would be right.  So why should I basically (laughter) not listen to this guy?  But it was just something about when he told me I needed to pick a safe school, I just said, no, I think, you know, I'll go with this.  Should I have applied to other schools in the United States?  Of course.  Should I have ventured out and thought of other places, other geographical areas?  Of course.  But, you know, it's, it's, you take these things with a grain of salt.
Story_ID: 22316
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we leave high school, now, you're at a--did you do anything like run for class office or were you involved in any extracurricular activities in high school or even--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was--
Speaker 1: --science activities.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, so forget athletic activities.  We had gym.  We had swimming one week, and we PE the next week.  Gym meant I stayed in the short end of the pool 'cause I couldn't swim.  Gym meant that I prayed nobody was looking when it was time to play basketball 'cause I couldn't play basketball.  But I was in photography club.  I was in the French club.  I loved French.  I had a great French teacher.  I graduated the second best French student in the, in the high--in my class.  The only reason why I was second was because the Number One guy was a Haitian American friend of mine (laughter) who spoke French before he walked in the front door.  I had a favorite high school teacher, Charlie Weinans (ph.) for Advanced Placement English, and he was somebody that opened my eyes to the world of Humanities and the Arts and Literature.  We had, I would say Brooklyn Prep gave me a good solid classical education.  I had three years of Latin, History.  We had physical science, biology, chemistry, physics.  So I, I can't sit down and say that I would be better off, I would have been better off at the Bronx High School of Science, but I'm, I'm happy with the education I got from a Jesuit high school.  What I did leave high school with was the feeling that, well, okay, the Catholics have this thing that if you're not baptized Catholic, you're going to hell (laughter).  And I had this great friend of mine, Frank Hayward, who eventually went on to, he went to college at Fordham, played in the NGA for a while. I haven't seen Frank in a number of years.  But Frank was a, was Baptist, and he was--he and I went to the same grammar school together.  And the idea of being a Catholic meant that if you weren't baptized Catholic, you weren't gonna be saved.  And I had real problems, even in grammar of trying to figure out, well, why in the world would God send Frank Hayward to hell just because (laughter) he's not a Catholic.  But, again, you know, you're eight, nine, 10, 11 years old.  You keep your mouth shut and you go with the program.  By the time I got to senior year of high school, you know, I said, okay, now, this is just one representation of many.  These folks don't have a monopoly on the way the world works (laughter).  And then I'd been exposed to existential philosophy.  I'd read, Bearcat Muse "Stranger", and I read some James Baldwin, and the rest was history (laughter), and then the Jesuits, they're very, they're a very liberal wing of Catholic education.  So it was clear to me that Catholicism was not the only way to sit down and do these things.  But, again, you, it's this big fish in the small pond.  And as the pond gets bigger and bigger, you start getting exposed to more things.  Your worldview changes.  Grammar school, don't forget.  For me, grammar school was an environment that was 99 percent black.  High school was an environment flip.  It was 98.5 percent white, okay.  So it was just, in a sense I, to go to grammar school, I walked two blocks down the street.  And I stayed in my neighborhood.  To go to high school, I effectively, it was defacto busing 'cause I took two buses to get there (laughter).  It took me 45 minutes to go to the, to get to high school.
Story_ID: 22317
Speaker 1: College was another thing.  College you think that, oh, okay, here you are this great National Achievement Scholar, and so you go in, and your first year as a freshman at Columbia [University], you're gonna basically just knock it out the park.  Well, no, (laughter) because you're gonna, you're gonna go there, and you're gonna be put into a bigger pond of folks who know more than you do.  So my freshman year in high school, I remember loving chemistry, but, you know, you got grades based on a curve.  You have students there who are vying over grades to become pre-med, to go into medical school.  And I remember getting a "C" in freshman chemistry.
Speaker 2: At Columbia?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And so it's always this question of you think you are the master of your own universe, but your universe [cough] is, excuse me, small.  You really don't know what the universe is, and it just gets bigger and bigger and bigger the more you are exposed to.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, now did you stay on campus at Columbia?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so Columbia was interesting because, again, I was a Brooklyn boy.  So that meant to me that Manhattan was a whole, new different world.  I remember when we were kids, my father found this free clinic for dental, free dental clinic.  It was a Guggenheim Clinic on the upper East side of Manhattan.  And when we were in grammar school, he would take us there to get dental work done.  The good news was it was free.  The bad news was, these were dental students (laughter).  So it was, it was a house of horrors.  But any time I went through Manhattan, I just saw all these huge office buildings and people running around.  I didn't think people lived in Manhattan.  I just thought Manhattan was a place that just had buildings.  And I looked at Brooklyn, Brooklyn was a place that had homes and grass and trees and neighborhoods.  So going to Columbia, Manhattan, meant I got exposed to Harlem.  You know, Bed Sty is the second largest black community in New York, but Harlem is Harlem.  Harlem is "the" black Mecca of New York.  I didn't know anything about Jazz until college because I listened to the AM sections of radio that played all the popular music growing up.  And it wasn't until somebody in college said to me, okay, there's this guy called, you know, John Coltrane, and he's made this piece of music called "My Favorite Things", and you need to listen to it.  Okay, and once I listened to it, I said, this is something I've never heard before.  I need to hear more things like that.  So it's just, always this question of, you have to basically expand the world that you're being exposed to.  And it's easy to say.  You have to understand there are people who grew up in Brooklyn who have never set foot in Manhattan.  The opposite is certainly true.  There are certain people in Manhattan who've never set foot in Brooklyn.  But there are people who were born and raised in Oakland [California] who've never been to San Francisco [California] and vice versa.  And if your universe is just confined to a particular area, you're not gonna be exposed to different things.
Story_ID: 22318
Speaker 1: Now, did you take advantage of the museums growing up in New York?  Museum of Natural History and other--
Speaker 2: Well, for me, college was work, work, work, work, work.  The only extracurricular thing that I did in addition to listening to music and maybe hanging out at a couple of bars, was I tutored.  So I did tutor freshman chemistry and organic chemistry.  That's interesting.  So I got a "C" in freshman chemistry, but I still managed to be able to tutor students in freshman chemistry.  But the idea of going out to museums or hanging out on Manhattan Island, no.  To me, college was an environment where, I didn't have a television.  I certainly didn't have, maybe I had a record player.  But college was an environment that you were studying, at least for me, to two, 3:00 o'clock in the morning, every day.  I'll say in retrospect, it was isolating, it was an isolating experience in the sense that I was always typically "the" only black student in my science courses by, once I passed the first year.  That would change later on when I was in graduate school at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology].  But at Columbia, you just got used to this idea of being "the only person", and you just had to develop a sort of tough skin and just go with the flow.  Most of my friends, they were doing other things in political science or pre-med.  I mean I had, I can't tell you the number of people who came up to me and said, Richardson, you're a fool.  You know, you like science and you like math.  Why don't, why don't you, you know, go pre-med.  You basically will end up being a doctor, and you'll make tons of money.  And the world will be your oyster.  I said, one problem with that theory.  I don't wanna be a doctor (laughter).  And that, a lot of people didn't, you know, they had problems with that.  But I just felt that science, basic science, was something that I was interested in, and I wanted to pursue it.
Story_ID: 22319
Speaker 1: Now, who, what teachers, I guess, at Columbia [University], would you consider like special or if any, you know, that--
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  Columbia's chemistry department is unique in the sense that the star researchers also teach the introductory courses.  That's not always the case at lots of other places.  So that's not the case at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology].  And I remember taking freshman chemistry and the "C," but I, but I loved it because I got exposed to something called Quantum Mechanics and started learning about atoms and molecules and electrons and orbital's.  And I just said, gee, this is fantastic stuff.  This is what I wanna do.  I wanna, I wanna study this stuff for the rest of my life.  I saw it in high school, and it excited me.  I really wasn't that excited in physics, in physics that much.  I though physicists were people who built bridges.  You know, if you took freshman physics, you typically take classical mechanics.  You study Newton's equations of motion.  And I thought people who, again, this is a 17-year old world, right, 17 year old's world, vision of the world, I thought that somebody who studied mechanics did it to go out and build a better bridge.  And that wasn't me.  I wanted to understand what electrons are doing inside atoms.  So after freshman year, the chemistry curriculum says that you take this course called Organic Chemistry and then you take a third-year course called Physical Chemistry.  And Physical Chemistry is when you actually study about atoms and molecules and quantum mechanics.  And I just said, well, that's what I wanna do.  Why do I need to take this Organic Chemistry, foolishness.  This is gonna be a waste of time.  You're just gonna have to memorize stuff.  One of, I remember the young man who didn't follow that advice.  He took Physical Chemistry right after freshman chemistry.  Unfortunately, he had a nervous breakdown, and I never knew whatever happened to him afterwards.  So here I am taking Organic Chemistry I, the regular Organ Chemistry with all these pre-med students.  Well, it didn't disappoint me.  The first day, the instructor was Charles R. Dawson.  He comes in and he started writing things on the board, and you're memorizing facts, and it's very hum drum.  And I said, oh, my God, this is horrible (laughter).  So I had the nerve to go up and ask him about it, and I just said, you know, this, you know, is your course gonna get any more exciting than this?  And he said, Richardson, you know, you wanna be a chemistry major, right?  And I said, yes.  He said, well, you're in the wrong course.  You should be taking the Honor Organic Chemistry course.  That's what that course is for.  That's designed for a smaller group of people.  They're more motivated.  They wanna learn the material, and they're not trying to do this just as a prerequisite for medical school.  So I went to the instructor who taught the Honors Organic Chemistry course.  His name is Nick Turro, T-U-R-R-O.  And I said, Professor Turro, I wanna be in your course.  So he said, Mr. Richardson, what did you get in freshman chemistry?  And I said, I got a "C".  So he said, Mr. Richardson, you need to go back to the regular (laughter) Organic Chemistry class.  This is not for you.  And this, I guess, is growth.  There probably was a time when I would have done exactly what he told me to do, but I went back to Professor Dawson, and I said, well, Nick Turro is not gonna let me in this course because he said that it's, you know, I needed to take the regular Organic Chemistry course.  And I remember Professor Dawson looking at me, and he frowned, and he said, you go back to Professor Turro, and you tell him that I told you that you need to be in his course because if you're gonna be a chemistry major, this is what you need to be exposed to.  So I went back to Professor Turro, and he said, okay, here's the freshman chemistry book.  If you go, make sure that you understand the first six chapters of this book, I'll let you in the course.  And that turned out to be a pivotal moment in my career.
Story_ID: 22320
Speaker 1: Do you think that if they had an honors course for chemistry as a freshman, you would have been more excited about it or done better, you know, on the--
Speaker 2: They did have an honors course, and that, quite frankly, I looked at that course. And that was even more difficult than the general chemistry course. So that was a, that was even a bigger--that wasn't a pond. That was an ocean (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, I just wondered if it was the way they taught it, you know, kind of uninspired--
Speaker 2: Well, it had, the--
Speaker 1: --you're talking about the professor being sort of uninspired.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the organic was question--well, the teachers in the general chemistry were good teachers. It was an inspiring course. It's just that it was, I think simply put, I was studying for, when it came time to study the exam question, study for the exams, I was studying the wrong material that I was gonna be tested on. And, again, this idea of getting into a bigger pond, you're always gonna be competing with folks, you know, there were people in my class who had AP chemistry in high school. You know, I only had regular chemistry in high school.
Speaker 1: So they sort of knew what the professor wanted or was trying to get at ahead of time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had more experience.
Story_ID: 22321
Speaker 1: So there's no question that taking Honor Organic Chemistry with Nick Turro who's a world's famous organic photo chemist and Gilbert Stork, who's a world famous synthetic organic chemist, these guys were not just great researchers, they were outstanding teachers. And the, the problem was that I became, I actually did very well in organic chemistry, and I loved organic chemistry. So I, so I have a new dilemma. The typical chemistry major, there are two types of chemistry majors. There are those who like to study how to make molecules. Those are organic chemists or inorganic chemists. And then there are those who like to study math and physics to under--to use math and physics to study what the properties of atoms and molecules are. Those are called physical chemists. And you very rarely have a person who wants to do both. So I took, I ended up taking Turro and Stork in my senior year, and I took their graduate courses. My senior year I took the graduate Organic Chemistry course in organic reaction mechanisms with Nick Turro. I took the graduate synthetic organic chemistry course with Gil Stork as a senior. And in retrospect, my grades in organic chemistry were far better than my grades in physical chemistry. So life, life has its way of presenting challenges. You know, I was faced with the question, well, what are you gonna do when you grow up? What's gonna be your profession? What kind of chemist are you going to be? Are you gonna be somebody who's gonna try to figure how to make molecules or are you gonna learn how to make more, learn more mathematics and physics to understand how molecules work. And that was a battle that I had to fight. It turns out, I had to go out and learn more physics and math because I had more experience in organic chemistry and inorganic chemistry than math and physics. And eventually, the math--the physics and the math side won out. I took some courses, I went to Wayne State University, started out being an organic chemist for graduate school. But I discovered--
Speaker 2: So this is in, now, now--
Speaker 1: This was after Columbia.
Speaker 2: So this is 1974, I guess?
Speaker 1: This is 1975.
Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975], okay.
Speaker 1: So I ended up taking--
Speaker 2: So you graduated in '75' [1975]?
Speaker 1: So I took organic chemistry, I took, I finished my undergraduate work at Columbia in '75' [1975]. I went to Wayne State [University], started taking courses in chemistry and the advanced courses in chemistry and then discovered that I really wanted to be a physicist. So I started taking courses in the physics department at Wayne State, physics and math and came to the realization that, well, if I really wanna learn how to do physics and math, I need to go to, probably a stronger program than Wayne State. And I was fortunate enough to get accepted in the graduate program at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], in the physics department. That was 1977.
Story_ID: 22322
Speaker 1: Okay, so MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], arguably the top school.
Speaker 2: Well, it's one of the top, one of the top.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did things go at MIT?
Speaker 2: Interesting. So you probably have spoken with or interviewed or you know Shirley Ann Jackson. So it's one of these instances again where somebody just happens to give you some advice and you just happen to listen to it. So, when I got to MIT, I basically went hog crazy, and I just said, okay, not only do I wanna to do, study more physics and math, I wanna be a particle physicist. I wanna understand what the world is made of, and I wanna understand what electrons are made of and what neutrons are made of, and I wanna understand about quarks and quantum electric, quantum electrodynamics and quantum chromodynamics and all this exciting new stuff. And Shirley [Jackson] stopped me one day in front of MIT, the steps of MIT on 72nd and Mass Ave, and she said, look, let me give you some advice. Theoretical physics is a very competitive field, it's a very elite field, and the problem is that there are more, there are more theories in the field than there are experimental data. So you know something about chemistry. So if I were you, instead of studying particle physics, I'd start worrying about material science or that part of physics that ask questions about systems and the solid states. It's called Solid State Physics or Condensed Matter Physics. She said, you'd have an advantage because you know more chemistry than most physicists. You're, you're learning, you've learned a lot of physics and math more, you've learned more math and physics than the average chemist, and you really would be able to make a contribution in that field because there's a lot of, there are a lot of experimental situations or data around that need theoretical interpretation. And she knows what, she knew what she was talking about. She's the first African American to get a PhD in physics from MIT. She's the first female, African American, to get a PhD in physics from MIT. She started out in theoretical particle physics, and she was on her way to a job at Bell Laboratories in New Jersey when I talked to her. So she suggested that I really switch gears and concentrate on the specialty of physics known as Condensed Matter Physics, which really worries about solids and metals and insulators and super conductors and semi-conductors.
Story_ID: 22323
Speaker 1: And maybe the guardian angel was floating around there. I listened to her. So I found an advisor at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] who was in that field. The problem was they didn't, he didn't get tenure. So I remember going to his office one day, and he told me he wasn't gonna get tenure, and he asked me if I wanted to go with him as his graduate student. And I said, it all depends. Where are we going? He said, well, I have a job as a tenured associate professor at Ohio State [University]. And I said, well, where is that (laughter)?
Speaker 2: He said, well, it's in Ohio.
Speaker 1: I said, yeah, I figured that much. And I said, Ohio State. So it's probably close to Detroit [Michigan]. It's probably close to Chicago [Illinois]. It's got to be close to some center of civilization. It's not like you're in the middle of the boondocks. And I talked to some friends and colleagues and professors. And they said, look, if this guy is gonna take you as his graduate student to MIT, that means he's--from MIT to Ohio State, that means that he's committed to seeing that you finish. He's gonna stand behind you, and this sounds like a good thing. So I basically went with him from MIT to finish my graduate work at Ohio State. That turned out to be an excellent decision. Ohio State gave me an opportunity to become independent, to build up my background in physics and math. It was Columbus, Ohio. It's not the Mecca of the universe, but, you're not there to basically be in the Mecca of the universe. You're there to do graduate work. Coming there as his graduate student, the faculty members sort of treated me a little differently than other graduate students, got a chance to teach. I got an opportunity to get a lot of financial support from IBM and Xerox in terms of fellowships. It turns out I spent one summer at Xerox in Rochester, New York working on a problem during the summer. It's an interesting problem, but it boils down to doing a calculation, and I remember the technician I was working with. He told me, look, if I were you, I wouldn't run the--so it's a calculation involving computers. And the more involved the calculation, the more computer time you use. And computer time is not cheap. It's expensive. And he basically said, look, if you spend all your time doing this aspect of the calculation using this much computer time, our boss, Charlie Duke, is gonna be pissed, and I'm gonna be pissed. Well, he just missed one important thing, that you needed to do the calculations a little further to figure out what was going on, what the data was doing, you know, at these higher energies. It turns out I carried out the calculation further. We discovered something new. We actually discovered a new surface for the semi-conductor Gallium arsenide, 110, the 110 surface Gallium arsenide, and we published a paper. It turns out to be the paper that's most cited for even today. And that taught me an important lesson, that at some point in time, you have to listen to your internal gut. People are telling you that you should do this or you shouldn't do this. And you have to have the courage of your conviction to, basically go out and do what you think needs to be done, at least as far as science is concerned. Science consists of asking the right question and getting the tools to get an answer. So I came back to Ohio State. I had a paper already published. I used that as part of my thesis. In those days, once you got a PhD in Theoretical Physics, you applied for what's called a post-doc.
Story_ID: 22324
Speaker 1: You're flowing really nice, but I want you to go back and tell us what Gallium arsenide is.
Speaker 2: Oh, so, electrons in solids do lots of things. So there are three types of solids. The most common type of solid is metal, a copper wire. So electrons and metals do something very interesting. When you apply an electric field across the wire, the wire conducts electricity, and it conducts electricity very nicely. So materials in which electrons move very quickly or move fast with great speed are known as metals. And metals have lots of interesting, important properties. And we understand why electrons do what they do inside metals. That theory has been worked out. There's another type of solid called an insulator, the complete opposite. Those are materials that electrons don't move appreciably. If you apply an external voltage to an insulator, the electron basically stays put. And that's an important type of material because if you send, let's say, the Space Shuttle, to the upper atmosphere, you don't want or you build some type of device where you don't want the device to conduct electricity. You want it to be resistant to electric flow. That's called an insulator. So that's the opposite property of a metal. So, you've got metals on one side and insulators on the other. In between, there's this unique type of solid called a semi-conductor. So semi is Greek for half. This is a material that conducts electricity, but it doesn't conduct electricity as well as a metal does. You can get it to conduct electricity if you heat it up, but you only have to heat it up a little bit. And it turns out the semi-conductor is the basis for the modern electronic industry as we know it. The reason why the Twentieth Century from 1954 on is what it is, is because of semi-conductors. The most famous semi-conductor is silicon. The next most famous semi-conductor is something called Gallium arsenide. It's a compound semi-conductor. It has two elements, Gallium and Arsenic. You put them together, and you form a material that, it's not metallic, but it's not insulating. And you can use these materials to build transistors. So every single computer, every single iPod, every single iPhone, every single Mac Book, every single charge coupled device, any modern device that the electronics industry uses, uses semi-conductors. So there's a lot of basic research involved in trying to figure out what these materials are, how they work, what they look like. So the calculation we did at Xerox was to simply look at a particular surface of Gallium arsenide [cough] and predict how the Gallium and Arsenic atoms are positioned with respect to each other. And we found a new geometric arrangement that no one else had seen before. And we did all of this, not in the lab. We did all of it on a computer. So semi-conductors, we are trying to figure out new materials to use to make devices and maybe 50 years from now, we will have more exotic devices. But right now, semi-conductors form the work horse of the modern electronic industry. There's a reason why the Nineteenth Century is the Nineteenth Century. The Nineteenth Century because we didn't know anything about semi-conductors. And the Twentieth Century is what it is because basically, of the semi-conductor. So the type of work I do, there are three types of scientists. There are people who go out and measure and make things. I did that when I was a kid with my Gilbert Chemistry set. I don't do those things anymore, okay. I don't burn sulfuric acid holes in my suits anymore. Then there are people who try to figure out the laws of nature, like Newton and Einstein and Jim Gates and smart people like that. They sit down and take paper and pen, and they just figure out what the world should be doing. And these are theorists. And then there are people who sit down who use computers, in particular, super-computers, to do calculations or experiments on. So I don't have to, when I wanna do work, I can just go upstairs in my office. It's connected to the Internet. From my office, in my bathrobe, it's 4:00 o'clock in the morning, I can sit down and do a calculation and through the Internet, I can connect to a computer at Howard University or the Naval Research lab or Maui in Hawaii or anywhere in the world and do my experiments 'cause I do them on computers.
Story_ID: 22325
Speaker 1: Now, in 1979, like a computer that could handle the kind of calculations you were doing would look like what?
Speaker 2: That's a good question. So let's go back a few years. So the summer before Columbia [University], Columbia always had this unique relationship with IBM. In fact, IBM used to have a lab right around the corner from Columbia's campus. And at the time, the machine that Columbia had in 1970, the summer before I was a freshman, was an IBM-360. You would need a room basically, that computer would fit inside of a high school auditorium. You would need the computer and more importantly, you'd need an air conditioning system to keep it cool. So what I used to do at night was, the computer was very busy during the day 'cause there were people using it during the day. I used to basically become friends with the operators who were brothers. And at night, I used to go to Choco-and-Nuts and buy 'em coffee and come back. And at 3:00 o'clock in the morning, they'd run my jobs for me 'cause I bought 'em coffee. And that's how I learned how to use the computer. Those computers, the amount of speed that they had and the power they have, if you take a flash drive today (laughter) and store a computer chip on a flash drive like that, that's more computing power than that computer. So computers are getting faster and they're getting cheaper. In fact, folks who play these Nintendo games, they have more, those Nintendo X-Boxes have more computing power and processing capabilities than this fancy IBM computer had that I used as a freshman in college. So computers are getting smaller, they're getting cheaper and they're getting faster. And the reason why is that we're using semi-conductors to put more and more information on chips. And the more transistors really, the more transistors we put on chips, the smaller and smaller and smaller and smaller these things are.
Speaker 1: I think it's amusing that IBM in those days, which that was the standard was called a 360 (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: --it means a whole, you know, the whole circle, you know, full circle.
Speaker 2: IBM was, they were the only folks on the street. Today, lots of competitors. IBM actually almost went out of business. It's no great secret. About 20 years ago, they were close to going bankrupt, and they basically had to change their business model. There're a lot of computer companies, Sun Microsystems, Convex, Deck, to name a few. These are computer--Apollo. These companies don't exist anymore. But IBM does exist. This funny company, Apple, it still exists and Intel. These are new companies that come along all the time. Fifty years from now, I'm not sure that they'll be around. But I do know, they'll be some type of super computer that'll be fast, that'll be small, that'll be cheap, and we'll be using it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, the 360 you were using, was that like a cobalt or Fortran--
Speaker 2: It was Fortran with punch cards (laughter), okay. So if you wanna see a person cry, you know, if they're carrying a bunch of IBM punch cards, and they happen to trip, and they fall on the ground, that's the end of their world, okay. And so when I started using computers, we used punch cards. The idea of using, sitting down and going someplace or doing a calculation at home or doing it on a laptop or desktop, these things didn't exist. And 20 years from now, they'll probably, the technology will probably be even more, more remarkable.
Speaker 1: Well, in 1970, the pocket calculator was a fantastic tool that--
Speaker 2: Well, I couldn't afford one, so I remember for freshman chemistry, we used slide rules (laughter), okay, and for people who had, who could afford pocket calculators--they probably costs, maybe $200.00 which in those days was extremely expensive.
Speaker 1: I know they kept 'em in a case, the Texas Instruments.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Texas Instruments, they had a monopoly on 'em.
Speaker 1: With designer sleeves.
Speaker 2: Right, right. Today, I was just reading the other day, their typical freshman chemistry courses, it's required that you have a calculator. And they probably costs, I don't know, they're much cheaper than the hundreds of dollars, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And they certainly don't use slide rules anymore.
Speaker 1: The scientific one, I think, 70 or $80.00.
Speaker 2: Yeah, which was quite remarkable. But you can go out and get a good MAC, for what? 700, 800, $900. You can get a Dell running, you know, on any Microsoft operating system for 200, $300, you know, depending on how many bells and whistles you wanna put in. So, the semi-conductor industry has been very good to the computer industry. The two work hand-in-hand.
Story_ID: 22326
Speaker 1: Now, one thing I was gonna ask, the first, the initial question I had was what was it like in '79' [1979]? What were you working with in 1979?
Speaker 2: So '79' [1979], good question--
Speaker 1: You did the work on the--
Speaker 2: --seventy-nine [1979], we weren't using punch cards. And so you're used to now, let's just say--let me do a few years after that. Let's say '82' [1982]. People think that the personal computer was invented by Apple and Steve Jobs gets the credit for all that. That's not the case. When I was a summer graduate intern at Xerox in 1982, there was a machine called the Alto Machine, and it was produced by Xerox. And that was the first personal computer. So that meant you sat down at a keyboard. You typed on a keyboard, and you watched letters appear on a screen. Xerox invented the mouse. Apple did not invent the mouse. Xerox invented the laser printer. Apple did not invent the laser printer. Xerox invented the screen that you look at when you're basically interfacing with an iMac or iBook or some type of device. Jobs visited Xerox and said, gee, this is a nice little device. Maybe I can sit down and figure out how to use this thing and make some money. Xerox, to its credit, did not do that. They didn't bring that machine to market. Apple did, and the rest is history. So in the late '70's [1970s] and early '80's [1980s], we had versions of personal computers around, but they were nowhere near as popular as they are today. We certainly didn't have punch cards. And we also did have, we didn't have the Internet as we know it, but we had phone modems. So this is interesting (laughter). So, you would have in your office a phone line, and you were connected to what's called an acoustic coupler. And you connect the computer to that, and the signal would dial out on the phone line. It was slow, had a lot of background noise, but it worked. So you could sit down and connect. You could send people email messages. You could basically log into computers elsewhere. You didn't have to go to the actual, physical site where these machines were. So when I started in 1970, if you wanted to use a computer, you had to get off your ass and go to where the computer was. In 1978, that was sort of still the same game, but by the mid to early '80's [1980s], we developed a model where computers were at special locations or sites that had lots of air conditioning, lots of technical staff, big buildings, lots of security. And then you worried about connecting to that machine from the outside. I guess the version of computing that exists today is something called cloud computing. That means that all the important data is where on some huge disc farm in Indiana, and all you do is use your PC or MAC as a front end to connect to it. And you just communicate back and forth. If you drop your MAC in water or you break it in the driveway, your data isn't destroyed because it's all out on this machine in Indiana somewhere. So the ability to have more information on smaller pieces of circuits, that's the through advent of semi-conductors. And the ability to talk to these sites remotely through the Internet, through high-speed connections, that's made our life a lot faster.
Speaker 1: Okay, but the machine you had in '79' [1979] was the one with the green screen and the little (unclear) (simultaneous) readouts and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do remember using--IBM actually had a machine, and they had an operating system. They didn't, it wasn't too commercially successful, but the machine that I remember seeing at Xerox was something called the Alto, A-L-T-O machine. And it was, it was big, but it was a personal computer that was far more powerful than the machine that I had used at Columbia, nine years before. And it was, it had, they had a mouse, if you will.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there was, things were moving ahead.
Story_ID: 22327
Speaker 1: So, after you finished your PhD at Ohio State [University], now, this Gallium arsenide compound paper, you say it's still--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, so, so one of the things I do, so people sort of ask me, I remember getting--my father passed in '94' [1994]. And we had this conversation a year before he died, and, you know, he said, you know, people always ask me what is it that you do (laughter). He said, well, tell me what it is so when I tell 'em, it'll make some sense. And what do you make or what do you build. And I said, well, I don't make things. I don't build things. All I do is try to contribute to a body of information. In other words, basic research, and then people take that basic knowledge, and they use that to go out and make things and build things. So in terms of, well, you wanna--
Speaker 1: Go ahead and finish.
Speaker 2: In terms of the work that we did back at Xerox on Gallium arsenide 110, it still has lots of applications today. People look at that paper, and they read it, and they quote it and they cite it. We're not getting any money off of it (laughter), but it, but it's an important contribution to the literature.
Story_ID: 22328
Speaker 1: Alright, so 1983, you got your PhD from Ohio State [University]. Now, tell us about your advisor at Ohio State?
Speaker 2: So my advisor at Ohio State, I would say the best piece of advice he gave me was the following. He said to me, Steven, he said you need to pick your battles carefully and selectively. And that turned out to be one of the best pieces of wisdom he ever gave me. He also gave me the ability to sit down and become scientifically independent because it was not a question of sitting down, saying I want you to do this, this, this, this. But you have to go out and do this, this, this, this, this. And when you get it done, then come back to me. So there're all kinds of advisors that you can have. You can have advisors who sit down and give you a laundry list of do this, a, b, c, d. That was not his style. His style really forced me to, not only become independent, but really interact with other faculty members and other students. So I mentioned this work that we did at Xerox. He was very encouraging in letting me go and spend that summer at Xerox. And we didn't know that that was gonna turn out to be some work that was gonna highly publishable, that was gonna turn out to be half of dissertation. I remember coming back to him and saying, okay, I've got half my dissertation written. This work is gonna turn into a paper, and all we have to do is figure out what the other half is. And the only thing I want you to do is make sure you proofread the sections at a reasonable pace, but I'm getting out of here. So there's always this question of when you're a beginning graduate student, you take courses. When you're an intermediate graduate student, you wanna get a sense of when it is that you're going to finish. And you're sort of waiting for a day when your advisor says to you that you're going to finish. But then you realize, it's really your call as to when you finish. You have to wake up one morning and say, okay, I have done a body of work that I think merits a review, [excuse me] by my peers. I can get up and defend in front of a dissertation committee that'll get me to the next level, that won't embarrass me, that, more importantly, will not embarrass my advisor. And I can go on with my career because your advisor already has a job. He or she is employed at a university. They've got tenure. You're the one who wants to go to the next step and do what needs to be done. So my advisor was very helpful and basically not putting up impediments or walls to prevent me from getting this opportunity at Xerox and working on this Gallium Arsenide 110 paper. And as I said, that comprised half of my thesis. The other half was a problem involving a class of materials known as Ferro magnetic super conductors. These are materials that conduct electricity with no resistance, but they're also magnetic. And it turns out these materials that my advisor and another faculty member, J. J. Precosh (ph.) were also interested in. So, I learned very early in the game with my thesis advisor to collaborate and work with other faculty members, other scientists, other students to solve problems and to figure out ways how to get them solved. I mean he didn't come into my office and say, okay, this is how you do this. His attitude was, you need to go figure out how it is to do this. Some advisors have a different philosophy. Some advisors say, okay, here's a list. Do these 30 things. Do them in this order, and you do these in this order, and you get all these things done and at the end of the day, there is the cheese, and the cheese is a PhD. So, there's no question in my mind that--I don't know if he thought about this initially, but it turned out that working in this independent mode, I think really got me thinking about science at a different level. And I think I'm better for it. It helped me in my career.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your advisor was Bruce Patton?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, Dr. Bruce R. Patton.
Story_ID: 22329
Speaker 1: So from '83' [1983] to '85' [1985] you go to University of California at Berkeley as a Chancellors Distinguished Post-Doctoral Fellow.
Speaker 2: Well, that was sort of interesting. So let's back up a little bit. So the Xerox paper opened lots of doors. I applied to post-docs at Exxon, Argonne [National Laboratory], University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, General Motors. The gentleman, Charlie Duke, who I worked with at Xerox, he said, I wanna hire you as a post-doc. So I had five offers waiting for me which made it even easier to finish the dissertation 'cause I knew that there was a rainbow, there was gold at the end of the rainbow, a pot of gold at the end of the rainbow. And I knew that once I finished I had a job. One of the purposes of an advisor is to not only get you a PhD, but to make sure you have employment afterwards, right? Just getting the PhD and having no options afterwards, that's not gonna work out too well. I remember interviewing at Exxon, and a high-level manager was a gentleman named Morrel Cohen. He's a theoretical physicist in his own right. M-O-R-R-E-L, and he asked me where was I thinking of going to do a post-doc besides Exxon. So I went through the same list that I just went through with you. And then I said, well, I would like to go to work with Marvin Cohen at Berkeley because I know that he's produced a lot of students. They've gone out and done things in science and industry. And he said, stop. He said, go no further. That's where you're going. End of story (laughter). So it's one of those instances, again--we talked about this previously. There are times when people tell you things, and you just need to shut up and do exactly what they tell you to do (laughter), okay. There may be some, there are times where you need to question what they need, what they're saying. But then there are, really are times where people are telling you things that you need to do that are in your best interests. And so I followed his advice, and it was wonderful advice. Going to Berkeley was a wonderful experience. It was a very productive environment. Marvin Cohen is an internationally distinguished physicist in his own right. He received the National Medal of Science from President George W. Bush a few years ago. He served as, a term as the president of the American Physical Society. He's written hundreds and hundreds of papers. He's on everybody's short list for a Nobel Prize in Physics. Even though he's retired from teaching, he's still very active, and in addition to all that, Marvin's a very wise man. So, he's one of these people who basically, when he sits down and tells you this is what you should do and this is what you shouldn't do, you need to listen. He's very good with running a research group, very good at mentoring students, very good with working with graduate students, working with post-docs, looking at people's strengths, working with people's weaknesses. You know, a lot of people give scientists a lot more credit than they deserve. People assume that scientists are great managers of personalities or are well versed in management skills. And that's not necessarily true. There's always, we talked earlier about Bell Laboratories.  And there's always been a philosophy at Bell Laboratories, if you want to be a top manager, you should be a top scientist. Well, that sounds good on paper, but it turns out that some of these folks who are great scientists [cough] excuse me, need not necessarily be great managers. So Marvin was somebody who not only is an outstanding physicist, is an outstanding person, outstanding mentor, and when you work in his group, you just wish that you could just stay there forever.
Story_ID: 22330
Speaker 1: So you learn a lot. Berkeley [University of California] is an exciting environment to be. Berkeley was a place where I ran into a number of black faculty members who mentored me. Bill Lester, who you probably have interviewed. He's an outstanding theoretical chemist.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: I saw him at the American Chemical Society meeting in San Diego [California] earlier this year. The late Harry Morrison, he was a black physicist in the Department of Physics at the University of Berkeley. These are always folks who had lunch meetings with me and other black scientists and engineers. They had parties at their homes. They basically went out of their way to nurture and mentor folks. And it's this recurring theme of, you know, people tend to think that you do things in the abstract, and you do things by yourself, and you do things in a vacuum, and then you wake up one day, and you come up with this great body of work. That's not the case at all. Maybe Einstein [sneeze] excuse me, maybe Einstein functioned that way, but the rest of us, we don't work that way. We work with other people guiding us, helping us, preventing us from making mistakes or at least picking us up once we've made mistakes. So the experience, I would say the two, Columbia [University] was a great experience in terms of learning science. It was a little isolating socially, but it was still in New York. MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] was a great experience in having a lot of interaction with other black scientists and engineers and Berkeley also was an experience that fit in that category.
Speaker 2: Now, did you meet Robert Bragg while out there?
Speaker 1: Well, not only did I meet Robert Bragg, but as you alluded to earlier, I had a two-year experience at Berkeley as a chancellor's minority post-doctoral fellow. And Harry Morrison and Marvin Cohen were instrumental in helping me get funding for that. Well, those two years came and went. The third year, I initially did not have any means of support for my research. What Marvin typically does is he uses his grant money to support graduate students and the post-docs come in and bring their own money. And he's got a list that goes out the door of folks who would love to come in as a post-doc and work with him. You know, and the idea is that they bring their own research money with them. So Pete Bragg at the time, was instrumental in working with that chancellor's minority post-doctoral fellowship program at Berkeley. So I knew Pete very, very well. He, in fact, ran that program my second year. When that fellowship, post-doctoral fellowship was over, I was fortunate to get support for a third year at Berkeley through the Ford Foundation. They had Ford Foundation Minority Post-Doctoral Fellowship program which I applied. And so I spent my third and final year as a post-doc with Marvin [cough] in the Department of Physics and at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. And that was supported through the Ford Foundation program.
Story_ID: 22331
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, now, at U.C. [University of California] Berkeley, you worked with something with an intriguing name, a pseudo potential. I don't, pseudo-potentials, what are they and what--
Speaker 2: Well, essentially, electrons are negatively charged particles and ions are positively charged particles. And Coulomb tells us that like charges repel and unlike charges attract. So in solids, you have electrons moving around, and they move around in a sea of ions. And this interaction between these electrons and these ion cores is very, very complicated. It's complicated to write down, it's complicated to calculate. It's expensive to calculate. So when someone says something is expensive to calculate, that means it could take months and months and months, and in some cases, the results of your calculation may not be accurate. So there is a way to model the interaction between an electron and an ion so that you'll get the right answers, you'll get the right physics and the right chemistry, but you can do it cheaply. And one of Marvin's pioneering efforts was to use this device, it's called a pseudo-potential, so it's a potential like. It's not, it doesn't treat the exact interaction between an electron and an ion, but it's a good approximation to it. And that approximation is good enough to predict from first principles the properties of solids. So what do I mean by "first principles"? First principles means that you can sit down on a computer and take quantum mechanics and get an answer and not have to go next door and talk to your experimental friends to find out what the answer is. You'll be able to predict without any experimental input what these metals, what these semi-conductors, what these electrons should do based on your belief that quantum mechanics works, and your belief that you know to use quantum mechanics on super computers to do this. So one of Marvin Cohen's pioneering efforts in his career, has been quite distinguished--he's worked on super conductivity as well as electronic properties of solids, is to use this approximation called the pseudo-potential approximation, to calculate the electronic, the structural properties of solids and do it with enough accuracy, but do it in a sense that you don't have to get too involved with the true interaction. The true interaction is far more complicated to deal with than this approximation. So there's always this philosophy that if you can approximate some behavior in science and get a good, a pretty decent result, that's good enough. The day will come when people will come up with better ways of going beyond that, but you wanna be able to use these approximations to help the experimentalist. And in the '60's [1960s] and '70's [1970s], Marvin used this pseudo potential approximation extensively and religiously. And that's one of the methods that I learned how to use when I worked with him. So it's, the idea of a post-doc is you don't someplace to learn what you learned in graduate school. You go someplace to learn new techniques and new skills.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Today, we can go beyond the pseudo-potential approximation in some [cough], in some cases, not all. We can actually get accurate results on properties, real properties and materials by looking at their real potential. But when these pseudo-potentials came out, they were really the only game on the street.
Story_ID: 22332
Speaker 1: Okay, now, '86' [1986] and '87' [1987], you're at, I guess, three different places. You went to Eastman Kodak in '86' [1986], right?
Speaker 2: So, let's put this in some perspective.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, when I finished my post-doc with Marvin [Cohen], all good things come to an end. And a brother has gotta eat, gotta pay rent, gotta figure a place to sleep. And you gotta get a job. And at the time, the only job offer I got was from Eastman Kodak, and there was no question that was due to my work that I did with Marvin and as a result of his reputation. And I remember having many nice parties in Berkeley and getting on the plane in San Francisco [California] and leaving sunny California, getting to Rochester, New York and going to my apartment and starting to work for Eastman Kodak. And sometimes you just have a sense of what things are gonna be like before they actually evolve. I looked at Rochester, New York, and it just was not sunny California, and it was not San Francisco. And more importantly, at the time the United States had a number of preeminent research laboratories, industrial research laboratories. Bell Laboratory was certain one. IBM was another. Xerox was another. I had spent some time as a graduate student at Xerox. I actually spent some time at IBM as a graduate student. And I took the job at Kodak thinking that Kodak was going to be one of these powerhouse industrial re--let's back up. I took the job at Kodak 'cause it was the only job offer I had (laughter), period, okay. End of story. The longer I was there, the more I realized that five or 10 years down the road, Kodak was not going to build the type of a basic research program that Bell Labs had or that AT and T had or IBM had or Xerox had or General Motors or a number of companies or a number of other companies. And that just didn't, that idea, in terms of the long term didn't sit well with me. And so, a mentor is not just somebody you talk to when things are going well. A mentor is somebody you talk to when things aren't going well. So I remember distinctly not getting a phone at my house, my apartment in Rochester. I remember not unpacking half of my boxes in my apartment in Rochester, and I remember getting on the phone with Marvin the week after I got to Rochester. And I said, Marvin, I gotta figure out a way to get out of here (laughter) 'cause I just don't see that these folks are gonna basically create a long-term environment--short term was okay. But long-term environment, I don't think it's gonna be a place where they're gonna invest in basic research. I made a assessment, turns out history proved me to be correct, that Kodak was more interested in quarterly profits rather than long-term basic research. The irony is that Kodak invented the digital camera. A lot of people don't know that. They invented that in 1975, and they put it in a safe (laughter), okay. And the reason why they put it in a safe was that this would eat after their crash crop. So they started digital photography, but they insisted on, that film was gonna be the future. It worked very well, worked for what? Eighty, seventy years, but there wasn't gonna go on forever. So I told Marvin that I didn't think Kodak's long-term future and mine were in the same direction. And he made the following suggestion. He said, well, have you ever considered a career at the National Science Foundation. So I knew what the National Science Foundation was. The National Science Foundation is a autonomous part of the government whose responsibility is to fund research in the STEM fields at universities. You essentially write a proposal, you send it to them. This proposal gets reviewed by committees or individual scientists. It gets evaluated and eventually, the NSF, National Science Foundation, decides on, to support these folks for a period of time. This money is used to support graduate students, train students, buy equipment, etc. It is "the" premiere reason why research is what it is in the United States in my opinion, because unlike some of the more mission-orientated funding organizations, the National Science Foundation supports everything from, you know, looking for the Higgs Boson to climate control or climate change issues to polar studies to studies of microbes and it just basically is worried about the basic scientific problems. The reason why he was asking me if I was interested in a career at NSF is obviously, somebody had approached him about an opening. And when he mentioned this, I said, well, this will be great 'cause this will be a way for me to get out of Rochester and avoid the snowy winters to go down to D.C. and do something different. Marvin said this would enhance your visibility, said this to me, it would give you a lot of contacts. And it might be fun and it might solve the problem. So I went to the management at Kodak, and I said, gee, I'd like to do this. I'd like to take a sabbatical leave and go down and be a program director for the condensed matter, theoretical physics program as NSF. And I guess I found out in retrospect, nobody had done this prior to that. So this was sort of a first thing. I'm one of these people that just because someone else hasn't done it before doesn't mean that I can't do it. And with some help, with some managers at Kodak, particularly, some managers of color, we were able to get an arrangement together. And I spent a sabbatical leave at Eastman Kodak--at NSF. I was there for two years. The person who primarily helped me, helped engineer this was a gentleman, Walt Cooper, Dr. Walt Cooper. He was the first African American scientist to get, first African American scientist--he's a chemist who was hired at Eastman-Kodak in the 1950s. And I actually got a Christmas card from him this year. He's still quite active--he's retired from Kodak, but he's very active in education.
Story_ID: 22333
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there, you were at National Science Foundation from '87' [1987] to '89' [1989].
Speaker 2: I was there through '88' [1988], and then as '88' [1988] started to come to a close, I had another set of interesting issues. Kodak wanted me to come back as, you know, it's look, your sabbatical leave is coming to an end. You've done what you wanted to do. We've let you do this. Now, it's time to come back to have your job, if you want your job. The National Science Foundation said, well, we want you to stay, you know, we like what you've done. And we want you to take up a permanent position here. Well, the first part was easy. I wasn't going back to Kodak because I wasn't going back to the snowy winters of Rochester [New York]. And none of the reasons for my leaving Kodak initially changed. Going to NSF would have been nice because it meant staying in D.C. But NSF involved going down a career path of science administration. And I never said that I was gonna grow up to be a scientist who's gonna discover something that was gonna get me the Nobel Prize. But if I started down a career path of working at the National Science Foundation, I would be doing more and more science administration and less and less actual science. I happened to find out that Howard University at the time received a multi-million dollar grant to do research in material science while I was at NSF and talked to some people I knew at Howard University. And we started a set of discussions, and I just said, well, look, you know, I'd be interested in coming to Howard as a faculty member. What could we work out? Could we--here's my wish list and these are the things that I would like to do. What are the things that you can do? Can we go back and forth? And it's a set of negotiations. And, as you know, any set of negotiations you have your list, they have their list. You go back and forth. You don't get everything you want; they don't get everything they want. But at the end of the day, I got most of the things that I wanted. So I retired from Kodak, left Kodak, told NSF, thank you for the opportunity, but I started in January 1 of 1989 as a faculty member at Howard University. That meant I got an opportunity to go back into research. I got an opportunity to go back into teaching. And I've been there professionally ever since. I'll say the following. I tell people this all the time. I've had the experience, I've had the fortunate experience as a scientist to work in academia, to work in industry and to work for the government. And if I sit down and look at all three, it's perfectly clear, I am where I am and that's the best place for me. It gives me the most flexibility. It lets me do what I want to do. I enjoy teaching. Teaching is something I still enjoy. Sunday night, I consider myself to be blessed as one of these folks who can go to bed Sunday, and say, gee, tomorrow is Monday, and I'll go in and give this lecture on this topic. If it ever stops being fun, then that's something that I should stop doing. But an academic career--and I'd say this to any young person starting out, gives you an inordinate amount of flexibility in being able to be a researcher, be a teacher, be an administrator, be a role model, be an advocate, be a writer. You do lots of different things. And it's worked out for me immensely. And I don't have any regrets. So I may not have picked the straightest career path in going from A to Z, and I may have made detours along the way, but people have asked me, well, would you do anything differently in your career. And my instant answer is "Hell, no". I did what I did. There were reasons why I did what I did. You know, you know, forget the fact that you just can't go back and change time. But even if I could, there was a reason why I took certain paths to go certain ways and other paths to go other ways. And even though, again, I'll tell young people this, if you get a PhD--so back in the day, the model was, you would get a PhD in one of the STEM fields, and then you'd grow up to be a university professor, like your professor. Well, it may not be clear that in the Twenty-first Century that that model is still valid. It's valid for the people who trained me, and it's valid for me or was valid for me, but I'd like people to know that you can get a PhD in any STEM field or area or sub-discipline and use that to do a whole host of things.
Story_ID: 22334
Speaker 1: Okay, so 1989, you join the Howard University School of Engineering. Now, you were doing research here that it says was supported by the Office of Naval Records, the Department of Energy and the National Science Foundation, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Army Research Office, the Boeing Corporation and the W.M. Keck Foundation.
Speaker 2: That's right. So, some of those are individual grants from some of those funding agencies. So that's a single investigative mode of doing research. Some of those are opportunities where I've worked on projects with other colleagues at Howard University and we worked together as a team, and to solve a particular problem and it could involve as many three people. It could involve as many as 15 people. Some of those are projects where I've basically gone out myself and said, okay, let me see if I can approach a particular funding agency to get interested in the type of work I'm doing to convince them to invest in it. So the unique that a university brings is that you have lots of people that you can basically interact and network with as well as other people in the area. So one, I get asked all the time, why did you go--in addition to not going back to Rochester, why did you go to Howard University? And I like to say there are three answers. One, the winters are a lot better here than they are in Brooklyn and New York. Two, Washington University is strategically located in an area where there are lots, I mean it's the federal government. And there are lots of funding agencies within the confines of this geographical region. There's the National Science Foundation, National Institutes of Health, Office of Naval Research. There is a Naval Research Laboratory which is the primary basic research arm of the U. S. Navy, and I actually am a visiting scientist there. I've spent sabbatical leaves there. So, and quite frankly, Howard University has a unique mission of trying to generate the next, identify, generate and market the next generation of STEM scholars of color. And in that sense, we're sort of uniquely situated. There are people on the outside, both in government or from industry at other universities that are looking for ways to partner with us. So, there are advantages to being at a Howard University that being in the middle of Iowa or the middle of Idaho, you just couldn't compare with.
Story_ID: 22335
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in '91' [1991], you were--I think this is the establishment of an ongoing relationship with Bradley University. You become the major Robert H. Lawrence Visiting Lecturer?
Speaker 2: Well, it turns out that came about from a very, in a very interesting way. Sometimes things happen in life, and you never know why they happen. And then you think that, oh, you did this just based on your own magnificent self or the particular suit you had on that or, you know, your own well being. Well, I had a colleague, white colleague who was a graduate student at Ohio State [University] with me in physics. And at the time, he was on the faculty of Bradley University. And Bradley University had started a visiting lectureship for Major Robert Lawrence who was the first African American astronaut. He was in training, he was an Air Force Major, I believe, and he was training to actually go on one of the manned missions. And he was tragically killed in 1967 in an accident where he was actually training a test pilot student who the, they, both pilots were forced to eject. Major Lawrence lost his life. The other test pilot survived. Well, it's interesting that Major Lawrence got his PhD from Ohio State also. He got it in physical chemistry. He's from Chicago [Illinois]. And he did his undergraduate work at Bradley University. And he did it by being, by graduating in the top 10 percent of his class. I was honored to be asked to come to participate as part of that lectureship. And it's just one of those many instances where, there are lots of things that African Americans and folks of color have done in this society that we're just not heralded for. I don't have any problems with young people pursuing careers in music or professional sports. I have problems with folks thinking that those are the only two avenues where we can basically excel. And it's unfortunate that someone like Major Lawrence is not as well known, not only to the African American public, but to society in general. I always tell people that American history is a great subject. The problem is that most people don't know it, okay. We just know vignettes of it, and it depends on who writes it for what reasons they write it for. So I was able to give a talk at Bradley, I believe, in 1991. I think it was entitled, "Reflections of an African American Physicist". So it wasn't so much a talk about what I was doing scientifically, but how I got to be where I was and some of the factors that had led me there.
Story_ID: 22336
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you received a Career Advancement Award from the National Science Foundation in '92' [1992] and in '94' [1994]--now, tell if I'm, if we need to stop over something. But in '94' [1994], you were selected for a visiting professorship in Portugal.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how did that take place?
Speaker 2: That, again, goes back to Marvin Cohen. So at the time two of his post-docs, I was one. And we had a post-doc from Portugal. And we shared the same office, and we got along together marvelously, professionally and personally. And one year, after his post-doc, he spent some time at the University of Minnesota, and ultimately, he went back home to become a professor in Lisbon. And so I visited him at least two or three times. I, I should say that going back to being a college student, one of the things that I was always impressed with, professors got, it seemed like they got an opportunity to travel a lot. And they got an opportunity to travel to lots of exotic places. The first time I was ever on an airplane was probably my senior year in high--in college. And today, you know, I travel, not a lot, but I travel somewhat, and you see all sorts of folks on planes. I, I wasn't on my first plane till I was 21. So I must confess that one of the things that got me interested in a career as being a university professor is that in addition to teaching and in addition to doing research, you got an opportunity to go travel and talk and visit different folks in different places and interesting places. So I've been able to travel extensively throughout the continental United States, the Caribbean, Europe, Canada and Asia to basically talk about my own research, to meet other scientists. Science is a global community. It's not an enterprise that knows geographical boundaries. So this visiting lectureship in Portugal was something that primarily, A. Luis Martins helped set up for me just as James Garner, my colleague at Ohio State, he was the one that put my name in for the Bradley lectureship. And I should say in 2001, Ohio State [University] actually put a plaque at the front entrance of the chemistry department in honor of Major Robert Lawrence and his contributions. And we need to do more things like that. People need to know that the African American community is a distinct vibrant, non-homogenous community. We do lots of things and have done lots of things, and will continue to do lots of things. It goes back to this issue of making young people aware of the fact that there are lots of resources and options available out to them. And somebody has to basically take the time to point these things out to them.
Story_ID: 22337
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in 1995, you were, you achieved full professorship at Howard [University], is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you're a professor of electrical engineering, basically.
Speaker 2: I'm a tenured, full professor of electrical engineering since 1995. I've been asked, well, why are you in the electrical engineering department as opposed to the physic department, and the answer is that this material science center that I originally was part of when I came in 1989, most of the, most of my colleagues were in the engineering department. So it just seemed politically that that was the better place to be rather than the physics department, though I do know people in the physics department at Howard, chemistry and math. Again, a university cannot exist or thrive on individuals sitting down doing their own thing and being completely ignorant or unaware of what other people are doing. And even though it's easy to communicate with people these days, through the Internet or through cell phones, sometimes face-to-face is a valid way of doing things, not just in the STEM fields, but in any endeavor.
Speaker 1: Okay, typically, how many classes do you teach a semester or--
Speaker 2: So I teach, okay, so I teach--we have a semester system rather than a quarter system. So I teach one course a semester. I primarily have taught graduate courses throughout my entire career at Howard. I basically built, established, developed the first solid states physics graduate course in the electrical engineering department at Howard University. And I taught that course for probably, ooh, 12 or 13 years. I've taught the undergraduate electromagnetic theory course twice. And for the last five years I've taught a mathematical methods course for beginning graduate students in electrical engineering and mechanical engineering. And it's a course that I've spent a lot of time developing and building and designing myself. So it's sort of now at the stage where I think we're covering the topics that I think the students need to be exposed to, and so I can spend more and more of my time on research activities. One of the things we don't have at Howard that we saw at other places, like MIT or Ohio State, at Berkley, is a greater investment for using teaching assistance to help with the teaching mission. Howard is a smaller institution. The budget is finite, and a lot of that workload basically falls on the shoulders of the faculty member. So I typically do my own grading, my own designing of exams and meeting with students and discussing results, office hours, etc., and all of that. I have colleagues who teach at other places where they go and they lecture. And they've got two or three graduate students who grade and run recitation sections and all that. And that's, that's laudable and fine. And those are, those institutions typically have those resources, financial resources to do those types of things. It would be nice one day at Howard, we've got, we'll reach that stage. But, again, I think that's an issue of just the size of the institution and a question of the financial resources. But I, but make no mistake, the students who have gotten A's from me in my courses stand up to A students at Berkley [University of California], MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], Stanford [University], and the students who've gotten D's and C's meet the comparable criteria. So I think they're getting their money's--I know they're getting their money's worth.
Story_ID: 22338
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. You, in '95' [1995], you also served as a visiting fellow at the Cherry L. Emerson Center for Scientific Computation at Emory [University], right?
Speaker 2: That's a, that is an experience where, so the Bradley University, visiting lectureship, I didn't seek that out. That sought me out. The visiting lectureship at Lisbon was sort of two ways. I knew a contact at Lisbon, and he brought to my attention this was an opportunity. This visiting professorship at Emory, that was a case where I sought that out. There was a program. I applied, and got accepted and got an opportunity to spend a couple of months working with a wonderful quantum chemist, K.G. Morakumba (ph.) at Emory University. He had been recruited from Japan to start a world center in computational chemistry, quantum chemistry at Emory University. And he had some funding for that. And so I spent a, it was probably about six weeks in Atlanta. And Emory is, beautiful campus, lots of resources and we got a nice paper as a result of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're Sigma Zi Distinguished National Lecturer at the Scientific Research Honor Society.
Speaker 2: That was an opportunity again that I didn't seek out. Somebody else said, okay, here's this guy. I think this is something that he can do. And I think this is something, this is an honor that he deserved, and I got a letter in the mail. And it said, congratulations, and the rest was history. So what this is, is the Sigma Zi is a national scientific honor society. And what it likes to do is identify STEM experts, both in academia and in industry and in government, who go around to various universities and lecture, not only on their own work, but address issues of where, how to attract more people in the STEM fields or for that matter, they can basically talk about whatever they wanna talk about. So you can talk about using super computers. What super computers are. Why it's important. You can talk about issues of how to identify more minority students in STEM fields, more women students, etc. And it's a, you have to be nominated for this lectureship. And they provide the funding for you to visit a particular campus. Let's see, I visited Syracuse University, I think Bryn Mawr College, a few other institutions, and it's a nice template where you get to basically advertise your work. One of the things I've learned throughout the years is, you just can't be great "in a vacuum". You know, somebody has to recognize what you're doing and take note of it. And if you don't recognize it or if you don't use means to let other people know what you're doing, they're not necessarily gonna beat down the path to your door. So this doesn't mean bragging or being self aggrandizing, but it means that you have to learn how to toot your horn with the right frequency and let people know what it is that you do.
Story_ID: 22339
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you've done quite a bit with the Naval Research Laboratory over the years. I was just looking through the outline and it pops up several times. So just kind of summarize what your activities have been with them.
Speaker 2: Well, the Naval Research Laboratory has been unique because I got interested with them by taking a sabbatical leave. So they have a unique program where they're looking for faculty members to spend a year or so interacting with their scientists and engineers on problems of joint interests, to spend summers interacting with the same group of folks. And let's look at it this way. Both parties get something out of it. They are trying to identify where the next generation of potential employees are gonna come from in the STEM fields. And one way of doing that is letting people know who they are, what it is that they do. And the best way they can do that is to invite professors from other universities, come in, interact with their scientists and engineers. Then they go back to their respective campuses. They talk, tell their student population and their colleagues about what they're doing. And it's a win-win proposition. So as I say, the National Science Foundation, in my opinion, is probably the most preeminent funding organization for science, technology and engineering and mathematics. The Department of Defense has several other funding mechanisms, one of which is the Office of Naval Research. And it funds research of interests to folks in the Navy. The Navy has two major research laboratories, one in Washington, D.C. It turns out it was suggested by Thomas Alva Edison to build this laboratory, and it was built, oh, about 80 years ago, and it's in Washington, D.C. And another laboratory is in Monterrey, California. The Monterrey Laboratory primarily focuses on oceanographic sciences and engineering problems and the Washington, D.C. Laboratory has worked on basic problems in radar development. They're pioneers in radar, space sciences, material science, fluid dynamics, acoustics. So they really have the focus of looking not just at problems on a very narrow applications point of view, but problems that have long-term applications in terms of the environment, in the terms of material science, in terms of biochemical sciences, etc. And it is really the preeminent laboratory that the Navy funds. It turns out it happens to be physically close to Washington, D.C. One thing that's nice about once you get tenure at a university is that it's easy to go out and make interactions with other folks. And you're paid to basically teach. So let's get the, let's not get it twisted. You're basically paid to teach at a university. That's what a professor does. In addition to that, you do research which is a mechanism where you can fund the training of graduate students, post-docs, etc. You collaborate with people within your institution and places elsewhere, and you need not just collaborate with folks nationally. You can have international collaborations or you can have collaborations with folks in government. So one of the things that I didn't mention is Howard University is one of three universities that's currently on a proposal that's scheduled for a site visit from the National Science Foundation in either September or October to form a science and technology center with Howard--between Harvard University, MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] and Howard. And it will focus on the development of new quantum materials and their application for technologies. So we just found out about this three weeks ago, that we're one of 11 institutions that's been invited for a site visit. In the past, I guess the odds are 50 percent of those that get site visits actually get funded. So we're still, you know, we started out writing a small white paper together. This was a collaboration of 30 scientists and engineers. Then some subset of that was asked to write full proposals, and another smaller subset of that was asked to actually be available for a site visit. So we're still alive. So as of today, July 14, 2012, I'm not saying the proposal is funded, but I'm saying that we're at the final stage now, and we'll know, certainly by the Fall or maybe by the end of the year, early next year whether or not we'll get funding for that. And that, that'll be a wonderful opportunity. And I should say this, that it's not one of those things where Howard is this Johnny-Come-Lately, add-on partner. We're a full player in that proposal, that the funding mechanism for that proposal is 33 and a third, 33 and a third, 33 and a third collaboration. Gary Harris, who is an electrical engineer in our department at Howard University, he's the co-director. And he's really the brains behind putting this together on the Howard side. He will basically run our side of the shop. There's a respective, he has a counterpart at MIT who's also responsible for their third and the director, Bob Westerfeld is based at Harvard. He runs their third of the shop, but he's the head PI. It's sort of clear to me that science and engineering is moving away from this model of individuals working at their lab by themselves at their computer, doing work individually to ignoring everybody else. And if nothing more, that experience at NSF told me very early in the game that the way things are going, as money is getting tighter and tighter, and this idea of forming fruitful collaborations with other scientists and engineers is really the wave of the future because it's synergistic, one, plus one, plus one need not be, equal three. It typically equals 4.7. So it's something that again, if we're successful in it, it's gonna be a win-win-win proposition, not only for the three institutions, but for the nation as a whole.
Story_ID: 22340
Speaker 1: Now, Howard [University] offers, I know a Masters degree, but does--Howard has a PhD in Physics?
Speaker 2: So in engineering Howard has a PhD program in electrical engineering and has a PhD program in mechanical engineering. And it offers at the moment, Masters degrees in systems and computer science, civil engineering and chemical engineering, though I believe there's been recent activity in trying to start a PhD program in systems and computer engineering. Howard is, you know, when I first joined the faculty at Howard, the sense was that there were pockets of people who did research. It's like raisins in pudding, right? There are pockets of people who did research, but the greater, the larger part really followed from a liberal arts teaching mode. And the idea was, we'll hire you to teach, teach, teach, and if you wanna do research, you can do that. But we want you to teach, teach, teach. And it's clearly that we're way past that model. So it's been a generational "C" change. There are a number of younger--I like to think of myself as young, and the reality is, I'm not, you know, the kid I used to be. But there's a number, we've hired a number of scientists and engineers who have very, quite active research programs that are bringing Howard to the next level. Now, people need to, again, get this right and not get it twisted. You know, you're not gonna, we don't have--we're a small institution. And we don't have the resources that an MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] or an Ohio State [University] or a Michigan State or a University of Virginia has, but we have pockets of excellence in certain areas.  And it's important to basically recognize what those pockets of excellence are and strategize accordingly. The mistake is to try to sit down and figure out if you can be all things to everybody. The last time I looked, the only people who do that were folks at Harvard [University], and with the great recession of 2007, even they had problems. So everybody tries to focus and determine their own little niche. I think Howard has had a good track record in training undergraduates in the STEM fields who have then gone on to do graduate work at other institutions. And now, the model is to try to basically bring in a new era where those students, both stay on to do graduate work as well as bringing in other graduate students from throughout the country. We, we're, we basically have no problem in attracting--I don't know if this is an indictment or, but this is just the reality. When I first started teaching graduate courses at Howard, it was a good mix between international students and native-born African American students. These days, graduate populations primarily international, folks from West Africa, Caribbean. I've had students from China. I've had students from Columbia, South America. I've had students from the Middle East. So you certainly ask yourself the question, okay, this is fine, provided these international students stay in the United States. Well, once there was a time when that was the case. It's not anymore. Then the question is, well, if you're not seeing these native-born African American students in graduate programs, where are the going or what's happening to them? Are they being sucked up by other programs? Are they, you know, this leaky pipeline analogy. Are they being lost somewhere? Where are these, how does somebody get started at Bedford Stuyvesant and end up at Howard University? And that's a problem that, you know, I have to worry about. There are people who are smarter than me who spend all their time worrying about that. Shirley Malcolm, that your organization has interviewed at AAAS [American Association for the Advancement of Science]. She certainly has spent most of her professional career trying to address those issues. So you can't do everything. So you have to figure out what is your unique niche that you can make a contribution to and go from there.
Story_ID: 22341
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I've alluded to it before in some of your questions. My hope is that we just get beyond this model or this idea that we are trapped into two career patterns, either sports or music and realize that there's a whole array of intellectual pursuits that we can get involved in. And, again, please don't misunderstand me. I'm not denigrating sports, and I'm not denigrating entertainment. But it's almost like if you came into, if you came into this galaxy from another galaxy, and you watched television (laughter) in any major U.S. city for a week, you'd walk away with the impression that the major contribution of African Americans--so this is a sociological comment, just mine. I can't, no, you know, no attributes to anybody else, you might walk away with the impression that this is the only that, these two--these are the only two arenas that this particular population contributes to. And with other parts of society, you wouldn't make that assumption. And, you know, the problem is that it's one of manpower, and we said this before. There used to be a model in the United States that folks in science and engineering came to the U.S. to get solid training in science and engineering and then they stayed in the U.S. So the dirty secret is that policymakers have always felt that they didn't have to pay any attention from K through 12 because the real action was what was going at the graduate level and professional level and the U.S. had a monopoly on all the talent of the planet, and it just came in, got trained, and stayed. And that was the technological prowess of the U.S. The problem is that folks who work in this field will tell you that model does not work anymore. Folks go back. So I've traveled pretty extensively throughout China in the last couple of years, and it is frightening to get off the plane at LAX, having left Shanghai and Beijing. And you just look around, and you just don't get the impression that folks are realizing that we're in danger of having our lunch eaten right in front of us, you know. So if you wanna call it a national security issue, that's fine. If you wanna call it an issue of technological prowess, that's fine too. But it's clear that folks of color have a role to play in this, and, you know, as I always tell people, you have a better chance of being a surgeon than you do making it on a professional NBA team. If you look at the statistics, they're there. So I am tenuously optimistic that we can get past this mindset. And if we don't, there're gonna be some issues because it's a, we're dealing with the consequences of globalization. It's not a question of, you know, if we close our eyes, it'll disappear. It's here.
Story_ID: 22342
Speaker 1: Okay. What are--I didn't ask you this before, but I should ask you. Who are some of the--I don't wanna get you in trouble, but who are some of the graduate students that, you know, have come through the program at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] that you're proud of and--
Speaker 2: If I can be parochial, my first graduate student, Shawn Allen, he is a research engineer at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] Goddard. And one of the things that has always amused me about Shawn, and I've told this at a conference in Princeton [University] a couple of weeks ago, when Shawn started out with me, I had money to buy a Sun work station, and I basically gave it to him. I didn't have a place to put it, so I said, here, Shawn, we're gonna take this--we're gonna give it to you, and you take it home (laughter), okay. All you have to do is get the power. Now, here's a book on the UNIX operating system. I know a little UNIX. I want you to basically learn as much as you can about UNIX so that you know how to run this machine, and I teach a solid state physics course. And next semester, you'll be taking it, and I'll teach you the semi-conductor physics, the solid state physics that you'll be able to need to know. There's a computer-assisted software package known as Mathematica. I was the first person to basically purchase this at Howard [University]. I bought it, gave it to Shawn. I said, I want you to sit down and master this thing, and he put all these things together and out came a thesis, out came a dissertation, a series of papers, and he has been somebody who I'm extremely proud of because he's gone and produced some papers that, again, are very well cited in literature. And he's gone on to have a productive career in science and engineering. I would like to say and think that if I were not, if I had not been there at that point in time in history, that somebody else would have come up and stepped up to the plate and then been able to take him from "A" to "Z". I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, anybody else?
Speaker 2: There is another young man, Fred Lacey, who is a tenured associate professor of electrical engineering at Southern University in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. Fred was, I wasn't his primary advisor. I was his co-ed advisor with Ernie Carter. Fred did half of his dissertation with me, his PhD, on a problem involving magnetic materials, and the other part he did with Ernie Carter who's a MD PhD, Harvard [University], Penn trained MD, PhD in biomedical engineering. And Fred was just one of the most gifted students I've ever had the experience of working with. He was able to, you throw him into anything and he just would pick it up and use it. After he finished with me, he did a post-doc at the University of California, San Diego-La Jolla, in biomedical engineering. He spent some time at the FDA [Food & Drug Administration] here in Washington, D.C., and he decided that he wanted to go seek a career in academia and think about ways to train the next, to identify and train the next Fred Lacey or the next Shawn Allen. So he's an active faculty member at Southern University.
Story_ID: 22343
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Not at all, I mean (laughter)--you know, sometimes folks sort of come up with alternate careers. I think I could have been a good architect. An architect is somebody who has a good [cough] technical training and artistic flavor, and I think that's a way of combining both. But I don't have any regrets about my career path or anything. I can, I can remember in grammar school people calling me doctor and professor. And they weren't doing it in a condescending way, but they were sort of doing it as, I mean they were doing it as a compliment. And so there are a lot of people who I grew up with, if they saw what I was doing now, they probably would not say that they were surprised or anything, teachers and colleagues and friends. But I, I don't have any regrets about my choices and career paths. I've made mistakes and none of them were fatal, fortunately. If they were fatal, then we wouldn't be sitting here having this conversation (laughter), but the point is to learn from your mistakes. And I think that's important. So if you think that, I think growing up in Brooklyn, I started out in a very sheltered, cocoon-like environment. And as time went on, you discovered that well, you know, things don't work perfectly. There're gonna be setbacks, there're gonna be challenges. And it's a question of how you adapt to them. It's not a question of how many times you get knocked down or snacked down to the mat. It's a question of how many times you get back up again. And anybody who's successful will tell you that they owe their success to the way that they've adapted to failure. But I can't sit down and say I have any regrets on the way I've lived my life or made career decisions. On a personal level, sure, I've probably acted an ass to some folks who didn't deserve it, and I hope and pray that those folks will forgive me (laughter). And there are people who have acted an ass too and they deserved it (laughter), and I don't have anything else to say (laughter), you know. But, you know, this idea of revisionist history of going back and changing--I don't know what it serves by doing it. And I guess I'm fortunate and blessed to be able to say that I have a career, that Sunday night, I look forward to what I'm doing on Monday morning, knowing that, you know, not everybody can say that, you know. And so it's something you just have to come to grips with. But I wouldn't go back and say, ghee, I should have done this or if I did this, I do this or if I said this, I would have done this or if I went this way or went to the Bronx High School of Science, I mean that, it's just an academic exercise.
Story_ID: 22344
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask about your family, and just, now, one thing about your, growing up, I know we talked about growing up, and your brothers and sisters and everything. But I was just thinking, you are the oldest of--I know your sister--
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest boy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, your sister was successful when she dealt with the phone company, but you are the first of a group of terminal degree brothers, I mean brothers, right?
Speaker 2: I think my mother was (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your mother, okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Actually, my mother was. If you count the Master's degree, she got her Masters probably before I got my PhD or shortly thereabouts. And my sister worked for the 911--
Speaker 1: Nine one, one, right.
Speaker 2: EMS Service, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright, not the phone company, okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But in terms of having a terminal degree, you've got a brother that's a doctor, one is a--what was the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So one is an electrical engineer. He's got a Masters. One's a PhD. And one's a lawyer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So all, that, those props go to my parents.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't set the tone for--you don't think--
Speaker 2: That's my parents. I mean, you know, I can't--I think that somebody needs to write a book about my parents (laughter). I think they need to get interviewed. I think they need to basically figure out a way to bottle what they did and go out and market it because they, it was clear to us that education was a very important thing. It was serious, they were serious about it. And they didn't play. And so I think that's a testament to them. To maybe being the oldest boy, I may have had some influence on my younger brothers. I, you know, in some ways, it was probably crazy, but I remember in grammar school being so enamored with the idea of teaching that I would come home and I swear to God, I would write final exams of my own and give them to my younger brothers to take. Now, they were too young to know any better, so they did what they had to--they did it. My sister, who was older, she wasn't gonna have any of this (laughter). But the fact that they did this, and I don't, it just said that I was so impressed with what I saw going on in Catholic school and with the nuns and the importance of education and things like that, did that have some influence on them? I don't know. I think all the, all the credit really goes to my parents.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And especially, you know, I shared with you the thing about the living situation in the projects. And you sit back and look at that today in retrospect, you say, my parents literally did not have a room of their own, okay. So I mean here are folks who made a lot, I mean we, you know, we were not--we didn't go without. There were material things that we had. We didn't get all the presents during Christmas and holidays and birthdays that we wanted, but we got, you know, a fair share of what we wanted, and that was primarily due to sacrifices of our parents. And I don't wanna give you the impression that there aren't folks or weren't folks in Brooklyn who were smarter than me or more talented than me. There certainly were. What's that old say? "Therefore, but for the grace of God, go I". There was maybe some guardian angel or somebody who (laughter) basically said, look, we're gonna make sure that this fool at least (laughter) gets carried this way and not that way because, you know, it happens. I, even in high school, I knew guys who were very talented, and then you look at what happened to them. Maybe they got caught up in the streets or lots of other diversions, and they just never were able to take it to the next level. So as far as what my three younger brothers have done professionally, that's really, I put that on my parents.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you--were you ever married--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or do you have any children?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22345
Speaker 1: Alright. So today, do you consider--do you have some extended family you consider your family other than your biological family?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have two nieces. I have a nephew. I see a generational "C" change with them because I think the material things that we had to sacrifice or not get immediately, they didn't have those issues. So I don't, I'm sort of concerned that they need to spend a little bit more time in the wilderness trying to figure out that just because something is there, that it doesn't mean that they're gonna get it immediately, that there's a certain amount of work and drive that they have to have. But it's not, it's not fair to them, you know, I mean they, they didn't have any choice as to the circumstances they grew up--I mean they, basically, they grew up--it's always this dilemma of the generation of black folks who have strived to make sure that their children do better than they did. Well, then what happens to that generation? They don't see or they're not aware or they maybe don't connect with a lot of the challenges that folks went through in the '50's [1950s] and the '60's [1960s]. It's something you read about in history books, but it has not relevance to them. And the assumption is that somehow, they're entitled to things. They're just supposed to drop out of the sky without doing the work and doing, you know, all the preparation you need to do. I like to think that clearly, you need preparation. Clearly, you need to master a set of skills. And sometimes you just need to be lucky (laughter), you know. You need to be, you need to take risks, but you need to take calculated risks. I mean I'm not saying jump off a cliff without a parachute. If you're gonna jump off a roof or a cliff, either with a parachute or jump on top of somebody else's parachute or something. But you have to be willing to get outside of your own box or your own comfort zone and do things. So maybe my own contribution is teaching. If I can basically show the next generation--I'll give you an example. I remember one undergraduate course I had a young man who came in, sat in the front row. He brought in a Big Mac and started eating. And I said, okay, sir, I'm gonna start lecturing in about two minutes. Now, I don't know if you've eaten or not, but I have a news flash for you. This is not a cafeteria. This is a classroom. And that's, this is not gonna happen once I start lecturing. So (laughter) the poor young man got up. He was frazzled. I didn't mean him to do this, but he went outside, took his hamburger and threw it in the garbage and then just came back. Now, I didn't want him to basically throw away his lunch, but it was clear to me that he didn't think there was anything wrong with what he was doing. And I was one of the first people who basically pointed out to him that this is not a behavior (laughter) that you should be doing. But, you know, I may have somebody who will come in with a hat on and sit down. And, you know, you couldn't do this in a lecture of 300 people, but in a lecture of 15 or 20 people, once the lecture starts, you know, I say, okay, you know, you're in a classroom (laughter), you know. You wear hats on the outside. You don't wear hats in, in a classroom. Now, I mean you can call it old school, you can call it whatever you want to do. But you're not gonna do it in my class (laughter). And sitting down telling me that, well, so and so, let's me do it. I said, well, this is not so and so. (Laughter) This is my course (laughter), okay. So I control this, right. So if you don't wanna basically participate in these rules, then, then you don't need to be in this class. And they, it's simply, I don't know whether the parents are not telling the, their kids that these are things that they're supposed to do or not supposed to do. I don't know if they're aware of the fact that folks make judgments on people immediately--I'm not saying it's right; I'm not saying it's wrong. But it's a reality. They make judgments on what you look like, before you open your mouth. You know, so if you've got tattoos up to here, people are going to assume that (laughter), alright, here's somebody who doesn't have tattoos, I need somebody to work in this company for me. All things considered equal, who am I gonna pick? Those are decisions that people make, you know. And people are not learning these things the way they should be learning them. So, if I can impart my little knowledge and help along the process, that's fine too. It never fails. I tell people, do not wait to the day before the final exam to come to my office crying about (laughter) the fact that you're failing the course (laughter). If you're failing the course, you need to see me the second day of lecture. That's when we can do something about it. If you're coming in the day before the final exam and I can show you this is what you've done in your performance, the best I can do is give you a box of Kleenex and sit back and empathize. But I can't do anything else. So you have to--and to me, I think these are just common sense things. But you just can't make that assumption. You just can't make the assumption that what you think is common sense is what everybody knows. And we're not gonna get started on the whole topic of young men and jeans off their ass and all of that. I mean (laughter), so it is, especially in the black community, young people have to understand that you're gonna be judged by, right or wrong, what you--before you open your mouth, what your appearance is. And you take it from there. And we're living in a global society. Competition is getting fiercer and fiercer and fiercer. You can sit down and blame it on some other sociological reason or this or that, but the reality is that if you're not helping your cause, you now, I don't know what to tell you. So, I hope to be able to be teaching for another, I don't know, 10 years or so, and hopefully, make a contribution to the next generation and maybe some of these skills, they'll take and take to the next generation because I think, you know, these things--this is not rocket science, no pun intended. These things are, these are skills, the viable skills that we've known since the nineteenth and eighteenth century, but people have to be taught them, and they've got to be carrier, carried down from generation to generation.
Story_ID: 22346
Speaker 1: So, would you say that teaching is your legacy?
Speaker 2: I would like to say that, that's easy to say because I could say at the fifth, at the fifth grade level--when I was in the fifth grade, I knew I loved teaching. I would also like to be known as a scientist, and more importantly, I'd like to be able to show people that you can do great teaching and great research, and these two are synergistic. And they're not (unclear) to each other. So that's the way I would like, if you wanna call it--and legacy makes it sound like I wanna die next week (laughter). I don't intend to, but I'd like to be able to show--certainly, teaching helps my research and research helps my teaching. But the two work synergistically. So I'd like to be able to sit down and do both. So if I had to teach four courses a semester, I wouldn't be doing any research. I'd be teaching four courses a semester. And so one of the things that I negotiated when I came to Howard [University] is, if you want me to come there, and you want me to raise money and do research and make a contribution, I ain't teaching four courses (laughter). Now, if you can deal with this, this is fine. If you can't deal with this, this is the time to let me know so we can basically figure out other things to do and--because if you look at the other research institutions, they don't expect their faculty to sit down and spend their time teaching three or four courses and do research and mentor and write proposals and build buildings and go out and give interviews and things like that. There aren't that many days in the week.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22347
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I mean, not really. I mean I, I don't think--I always get the sense that these types of interviews are done for folks who are like two steps away from the grave, and I just don't (laughter), I don't, I don't feel that I'm--I mean I'm not, I'm not a young man, but I, I still feel that I can make more contributions to my field and I'm looking forward to continuing that. And, again, in some ways, I consider myself lucky because, you know, we've gone through this theme many, many times. There are a lot of folks in industry, government and academia that have identified funding sources for talented, but financially lacking students of color to pursue educational opportunities. And I make no apologies for that. I mean that's something that there's no question that that's been, from IBM to Xerox and the Ford Foundation to Pfizer, to the Jesuits. So all these organizations have allowed me to do the things that I do provided that folks have identified specific programs, opportunities, etc. And I don't look at this as charity. Those are acts of investment. So somehow the word spending has become a bad word, and somehow if we're spending things at a national level, then we're digging ourselves holes, deeper and deeper in a hole. I don't look at it as spending as much as an investment. If you look at what the folks in Singapore and Malaysia are doing in terms of educational investment or China or Brazil or India, they realize what the future is going to be. And you're gonna have to invest in all parts of your population if you want, you know, nothing more than a national security issue, you want the entire society to prosper. So I'm not an apologist for the idea of targeted opportunities for particular folks of color or particular social or economic levels in getting financial assistance to study A, B, C, D, E, F, G, if, at the end of the day, it turns out to be a wise financial investment, okay. It's not my job, but I think somebody can sit down and say, well, you know, let's look at how much money was invested in this guy. Did we get our money's worth? You know, I probably think so, you know. And so if you just look at it from a dollars and cents, take all the sociology out of it, alright. Take, you know, make it a purely dollars and cents proposition, it's definitely a smart thing to do. And if anything, in this age where you're sort of going against the extreme, we need to do more of it. We're, this idea that, okay, I got mine, so screw you, that's--we're not gonna basically benefit if we just develop a diverge, just a society where we have people who are doing very, very, very well and we have folks that aren't doing (laughter) very, very well. You know, they haven't built the gated community that big that's gonna protect (laughter) the former from the latter. So, we really have to, it comes back to education. Education is an extremely--it's been important in my life. It's been important in my family's life. It's an important venture that we really have to invest in. Are we doing a better job now than the nuns did at Holy Rosary? I'll let you be the judge of that. I don't know. I mean it's hard to tell, but I certainly know that, what the consequences are if we don't put in that level of investment.
Story_ID: 22348
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I sort of alluded to it. I, I think that good teaching and good research are synergistic. So I don't think you, I don't think, there are people who think that, what's the saying? "Those who do, do, and those who don't, teach" or something like that. And I've never liked that. I mean I think that I've seen in my experience, good, great teachers who are also great researchers and visa versa. And to the extent that I'm able to combine both of those things, that's, that's sort of a legacy. Now, make no mistake, I'm just one person. So there's all, there's this saying that a drowning person cannot save another drowning person. I can't sit down and spend 99 percent of my time and resources on one thing and then expect to excel in the one percent. You know, I need help with other things. But I think that if somebody can just show that I at least tried to balance both of those intellectual areas or pursuits, then I'm sort of happy with that.
Story_ID: 22349
Speaker 1: So that is a photo of me in 1970, my college ID as a freshman at Columbia University.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Let's see. That's a picture of my sister, Valerie and I, and that was taken in 1990.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: That is a picture of me at a international semi-conductor conference in Warsaw, Poland in 1988.
Speaker 2: That is a fun picture. That's a picture of my mother's retirement party in 1989, so going from left to right, that's my oldest niece Kendra. Behind her is my father, Edward. That's me hold Kendra. Then moving to the right, my youngest brother, Donald, my mother, Juanita, the guest of honor, my brother, David, standing up, and on the far right, that's my sister Valerie. She's the oldest child.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my PhD graduation ceremony in Columbus, Ohio from the Ohio State University. I'm in the middle. To my left is my Aunt Martha, who I visited often in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and my mother is to the right.
Speaker 1: This is a picture that was taken of me in about 1965. I was 11, doing a chemistry experiment with my Gilbert chemistry set in Brooklyn. It looks like I was distilling water.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my paternal great grandmother, taken in 1967 in Brooklyn. This was, Gram was really my father, Edward's, grandmother.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me at graduation at Holy Rosary grammar school in 1966. My father, Edward, took this picture, and I was receiving a plaque probably for the best student in my graduating class.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of me relaxing and kicking it with some friends in L.A. in about 2006, the gray is showing.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and my mother in Seattle. We're on a ferry in Puget Sound, heading to Bainbridge Island. I was going to a meeting in Seattle, and I brought my mother along with me, and this was probably taken about 2001.
Speaker 2: This is an interesting picture. This is a photograph of the family in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Let's see, if we start from left to right, one of my cousins, Herbert, then in the front is my sister, Valerie, behind Valerie is me, the small. I was probably about two years old. I'm being held by my maternal grandmother, Bertha. Next to Bertha, on her right, is my grandfather, Leslie, whom I'm named after in terms of the middle name. In front of him is a cousin, Tina or Cheryl and to the right of her is a cousin, Linda.
Speaker 1: This is a formal photograph of me taken as a faculty member at Howard University, oh, probably around 1995, contact lenses do wonders.
Speaker 2: I'm not positive the exact year. It's probably 1947. I think there's some slight resemblance between this picture and the previous. This is my father, Edward.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother, Juanita, roughly around 1950 as a nursing student at Lincoln School for Nurses in New York.
Speaker 2: This is young Steven at four months, drooling and just being captivated by somebody.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me giving the 1991 Major Robert H. Lawrence, Jr. Visiting Lectureship at Bradley University in Peoria, Illinois. Major Lawrence was an African American Air Force pilot who was destined to be on one of the manned missions for space and was tragically killed in an accident in a jet plane, jet pilot plane in 1967.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of me in New York receiving a notification of an award of a National Achievement Scholarship to attend Columbia University in 1970. I'm being handed a certificate from an official at Pfizer who sponsored the scholarship. My father, Edward, is in the back to the left, and my mother, Juanita, is to the back to right.
Speaker 1: This is my high school graduation picture and my high school yearbook, 1970, before contact lenses.
