Story_ID: 536361
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you pla- please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Norman Blann Rice [HistoryMaker Norman Rice], Norman, N-O-R-M-A-N, Blann, B-L-A-N-N, Rice, R-I-C-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is there a significance to Blann?  I've never heard that name.
Speaker 2: I hadn't neither, but I guess it's my grandfather [Orchie Rice (ph.)] on my father's side, his middle name, and I don't know where it's come from.  I've seen some in one time trying to trace lineage.  I saw that name somewhere, but I can't remember, but it was from the Rices of Texas somewhere (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 4th, 1943, Denver, Colorado.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am now a distinguished visiting practitioner at the Evans School of Public Affairs [Daniel J. Evans School of Public Affairs; Daniel J. Evans School of Public Policy and Governance], so somewhat like an adjunct professor.
Speaker 1: At the University (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] for civic engagement.  And my job is to talk about practical aspects of developing collaboration and coordination around critical social and urban issues.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you have a (unclear) important first in Seattle [Washington], right?  You were the--
Speaker 2: I was the first African American mayor to be elected, and the only one so far for the City of Seattle, uh, the second African American to be elected to the city council [Seattle City Council], so it's a wonderful distinction.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Today is October twenty what, fourth--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think so, yeah.
Speaker 2: --two thousand seven [October 24, 2007].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are now on the campus of the University of Washington at the Evans School of Public Affairs in their Forum room [Denny Forum].
Story_ID: 536362
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as a warm-up.  They only take a short time and require a brief answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Red beans and rice (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, I'm pretty eclectic, don't have any favorite--Hawaii, though, for probably, we're close enough from Seattle [Washington].  That's, that's one place, but I like lots of places.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Boy, I've never thought about that.  The best is yet to come.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 536363
Speaker 1: Well, I'm going to ask about your, your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family, and your father's [Otha Rice, Sr.] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her name was Irene Hazel, maiden name, Johnson [Irene Johnson Powell].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Boy, would that be, I think, I don't remember that exactly, but May 8th, probably 1920 something, '21 [1921], '23 [1923].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She died when she was seventy-four in '93 [1993], so maybe you could figure (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, she was born in--
Speaker 2: Hot Springs, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, Hot Springs, Arkansas.  So, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace that side of people?
Speaker 2: What I know, in general, is that my great-grandmother, my mother's grandmother, was born in Jeanerette, Louisiana, that her husband, who I don't know--I think his name was Frank [Frank Whitman (ph.)], worked with lumber and timber industry.  They migrated from Louisiana to Hot Springs.  Hot Springs was a tourist area 'cause people went to Hot Springs for cures.  And a lot of people worked in the service area.  And then, I think a lot of people worked on the railroad as porters and waiters.  And they moved from Hot Springs to Denver [Colorado].  And almost all of her--actually, I need to go back one.  My mother was born in Hot Springs, but then my, her mother [Susie Whitman], and her sister, her mother's sisters, her aunts and all, moved to Denver also.  And Denver was a terminus for the railroad.  That's the Chesapeake [Chesapeake and Ohio Railway], and the Santa Fe [Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway], the Denver Rio Grande [Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad], the California Zephyr.  So, Denver was a nexus for waiters and porters and other people who used, lived there.  And so, there was a lot of work.  As people got laid over there, people also started doing other jobs.  So, a lot of her uncles were handymen and painters, and did lots of work around Denver.  So, my mother lived with her grandmother until she was about eight, and then came to Denver, around when she was eight, and went to school in Denver, high school, didn't go to college, and then married my father, and the rest is history on that side.
Story_ID: 536364
Speaker 1: My grandmother, her mother, was one of the first African American pastors and was a minister, A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] and--
Speaker 2: And what's her name?
Speaker 1: Her name was Susie Rose Whitman [Susie Whitman].  And she came out here when my mother [Irene Johnson Powell] moved out here to Seattle [Washington], and worked at First A.M.E. Church [First African Methodist Episcopal Church, Seattle, Washington], and some other churches in traveling around.  When I was growing up, I used to have to take my grandmother to small churches around Colorado and New Mexico, too, for her to preach because she had other issues (unclear), like itinerant preacher.  I'll always remember one thing that was really fascinating, that there were places where they wouldn't let her have the key to preach 'cause she was a woman.  It (unclear), I always remember that well.
Speaker 2: Is there a story--I mean, is there a specific story you could tell about that?
Speaker 1: No, not so much. Just generally.  I, I got to drive her a lot to those places, so we had lots of conversations.  She was a deeply religious person.  And, and it was some time I, I liked to say I was quasi-religious.  When I was younger, I wanted to be a minister.  As I got older, I knew I didn't want to, but I, I still was steeped in spiritual learning and spirituality that's still with me today.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So, that, that had to be something.  Did she talk about how she, you know, was drawn to the ministry since there were no, no other women?
Speaker 1: It was really an interesting epiphany.  She was always active.  Her whole family was always active in the church and she was always active in, but I think it almost, at the age of like, late fifties, she decided to be a minister.  So, it was, came late, and then, she studied and went on to, to get herself prepared to become a minister at a very late age in life, but was very--little woman with a big, deep voice.  She could pray, out pray anybody in the whole world (laughter), when she got up into that, you know, podium.  She could, she could command presence, and she was formidable.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, you may not know this, but who, do you know, maybe who her allies were in, amongst the men who, in the A.M.E. church?
Speaker 1: I--it's, it's been so long now, I don't know.  They, but she had supporters, there were some (unclear) who supported her.  And, I think when she, when she came to Seattle, Solomon Hill [Solomon H. Hill] was one, and even Cecil Murray [HistoryMaker Reverend Cecil L. "Chip" Murray].  There were others who helped her as she, as she would (unclear).  And she used to go to conference, you know, A.M.E.'s had conferences and so, she built a network around those conferences.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I know we talked to--I think it was [HistoryMaker] Jamye Coleman Williams, who was active in the A.M.E. church pushing for a black woman bishop, you know, back in the early '90s [1990s]--
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: --before they got, you know--
Speaker 1: And Vashti McKenzie [HistoryMaker Bishop Vashti McKenzie] now is one, yeah.  My wife [Constance Williams Rice] has actually worked with her in South Africa.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah, it was like, Carolyn Tyler Guidry [HistoryMaker Bishop Carolyn Tyler Guidry] is the other black woman bishop at A.M.E. church.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That was a long struggle that Jamye Coleman Williams was (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well, I always say, if you really want to understand politics, understand A.M.E. politics.  They're probably greater than, than, than political politics in, in the city.  It's a tough, tough, tough kind of road.
Story_ID: 536365
Speaker 1: Any other stories from your mother's [Irene Johnson Powell] side about the family moving from (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, Denver [Colorado] was a wonderful place, and I'll talk to it on the other side.  But when I grew up in Denver, I mentioned that most of the individuals who lived there were entrepreneurial people--painters, electricians, plumbers, so everybody around me that I saw were entrepreneurial, as I like to say.  And, and most of the women, though, were service.  They worked in private homes and private families and all, sometimes in hospitals and janitorial places.  But there was a strong work ethic in Denver, a strong entrepreneurial one that I think I was very healthy.  And I think it was--I, I say that because I think it was what inspired us to know that we never felt we were inferior, not able to succeed that we, there were opportunities, and that you could make it in this world.
Story_ID: 536366
Speaker 1: Now, give us your father's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Otha, O-T-H-A, Patrick Rice [Otha Rice, Sr.].  Don't know where Otha came from, although I do, I'd always remember I did look up, tried to look up the genealogy.  And there were, there was a Othella Rice [ph.] from South Carolina that moved to Texas, and that's where my father was born in Cleburne, Texas.  And I always wondered if that wasn't where the genesis of Otha was, or some kind of contraction of it at the time.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Grew up in Texas.  I don't know what my grandfather [Orchie Rice (ph.)] and great-grandfather did.  I wasn't as close to them, and they passed before I was old enough to know them and but--
Speaker 1: So, when was your father born?  I'm sorry, when was your father born?
Speaker 2: Almost the same year as my mother [Irene Johnson Powell].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know that for sure, but August 15th, probably 1921, '23 [1923].  I, I, I'll try and find that.  I think I know it, but I don't.
Speaker 1: (Unclear), and he was born in Texas?
Speaker 2: In Texas, in Cleburne, Texas.  And then he, also, was, lived with his grandmother, as his mother [Orneice Smith Rice] came to Denver [Colorado] earlier.  And then, he came to Denver, went to high school and graduated, and then went for a little while to Prairie View [Prairie View State Normal and Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] for maybe a year.  He came back, worked on the railroad as a cook, as a porter, then got a job working for the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service].
Story_ID: 536367
Speaker 1: Then, a wonderful thing happened.  My mother [Irene Johnson Powell] and father [Otha Rica, Sr.] pooled their resources, and opened up a restaurant and tavern called Rice's Tap Room and Oven in Denver [Colorado], and it was quite successful until, as I like to say, until the Civil Rights Movement and integration took hold 'cause when they had it, that was the place where most blacks could go.  And once integration came, blacks could go anywhere, and so the business flow of patrons and all slowed down, so business was (unclear).
Speaker 2: So, they had a restaurant down in Five Points in Denver?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Matter of fact, I always loved the statement people used to say about my father was (unclear), "It's the place you run and take your lady," (laughter).  So, they used to have chicken in the basket, and jambalaya was their specialties, and we even used to deliver it.  And then, my father, who was probably a consummate salesperson and marketing person, he was kind of the front person for the, the Rice's Tap Room and Oven.  That's what it was called.  And my mother was kind of the behind the scene.  She kind of did the books, and did the ordering and, and they were a pretty good partnership until I was thirteen.  And then, my mother and father divorced, and then my father kept the place for a little while and then sold it.  My mother went back to working as a aide at a beauty shop.  And then, finally, she started to catering, and worked for Colorado Industrial Bank [Denver, Colorado], and was the head of their cafeteria, and then moved out of that into, as a teller at the bank.  And then, the bank was bought by Avco [Avco Lakewood Industrial Bank; Avco Bank], I think, and they, which is nationwide, and she came out here to go to work there.  And so, she--I always jokingly say, she followed the son she knew was going to take care of her (laughter).  That was so--anyway, she came out to Seattle [Washington] right around when I got married [to Constance Williams Rice].
Speaker 2: Okay.  And she worked for the same bank?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: My father stayed in Denver, and then, interestingly enough, he sold his, the restaurant, and went to Oakland [California] to try to open up a, a place, and it didn't work.  And he came back to Denver.  And he didn't realize at the time, but he was able to go back into the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], so he was, went back as a postal worker, and worked there until I think he had his stroke.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, he was a, like a manager at the post office or a supervisor?
Speaker 1: I don't know exactly.  I think he was really just--I, I used to use the term, postal worker, 'cause I don't think he was a manager, you know, or what he was.  I think he was just, it was a--not entry level, but the next step, you know, just a postal worker.  It wasn't a carrier.  He worked within the departments or--
Speaker 2: In the, in the office, okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: All right.  That was a place for a lot of black people in those days (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, they were.  I remember those postal worker picnics they--on Labor Day.  They were some of the best picnics I've ever been to for the employees.
Story_ID: 536368
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' [Irene Johnson Powell and Otha Rice, Sr.] personalities and their talents and gifts and dispositions--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and tempers, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, I see myself in both of them.  I think I have my father's congeniality, his (unclear), his self-effacing way to make everybody comfortable, and that's the show person's side.  And then, I look at my mother as a kind of having a gritty, rugged determination, hardworking, directed, serious, and I have that side also.  So, when I don't quit, never give up, and can take anything that's given to you, that's my mother.  My father was in--his own funny way, the same way, but, oh, in a more positive way in that there's, there was nobody he couldn't charm (laughter).  And I think I'm that way so, you know, give me an opportunity, and I'm going to, I'm going to dent your armor, one way or the other.
Speaker 1: Okay, so okay, so if he's more off on the offense, and she's on the defense, I guess (unclear).
Speaker 2: It's pretty much so.  So, I'm the yin yang, and I think I got, got them both, and I think I have it in probably equal parts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm lucky (laughter).
Story_ID: 536369
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: When I was young, and the only reason I remember, I, I, I joined, I took a writing class to see if I could start getting back to writing my memoir.  But when I was younger, I was very sick, sick a lot for someone that age.  So, I, I was in the hospital a lot.  I was always at home.  I, I think, from birth to twelve, if there was an illness, I got it, and if it was, if it was serious, I usually had it, so I--people thought I had rheumatic fever.  I was, so that experience probably got me to read more 'cause I was with my mother [Irene Johnson Powell] reading to me, or learning how to read.  I was very engaged in that whole aspect because it was something that helped me to focus.  And so, the library and books were a door, a world opening up for you, and so, I learned to read early on.  I learned to be curious from that, that aspect, so that I really do understand that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your earliest memories have to do with being home, you know.
Speaker 2: Being at home, being sick (laughter).  And then, I--it sort of, like at twelve, I now, I didn't ever want to be sick again (laughter).  I wasn't (laughter), so I didn't have another real illness until I was--boy, 'til 2001 when I had the knee surgery.  So, I was fairly healthy from then on.
Story_ID: 536370
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have two brothers and a sister.  I'm the youngest of four.  My two brothers are, are older, my sister [Audrey Rice Oliver] is the one in front of us.  My oldest brother [Gerald Rice] is seven years older than I am.  And my brother is one--and the other brother [Otha Rice, Jr.] is two years, and my sister is one year.  We kind of all go in (unclear) stair steps.  My oldest brother is April 7th.  My second to the oldest is the 17th.  My sister is the 20th.  And I'm May 4th.  Now, don't tell me what happened (laughter) nine months before that.  I'd, I'd still like to know what, what was the driver behind all those dates, but I never could figure that out.  But, so, yeah, I was the youngest.  I always tell everybody being the youngest probably also prepared me to be a politician 'cause I was the youngest and the smallest, so I always had to negotiate with my brothers and sister, in order to get my fair share of the bacon with them so.  We didn't fight a lot or anything, but I was always, I was always the peacemaker.  I was always the compromiser.  When there was less around, I was willing to give to, to share to make sure things were all good.  So, I was always that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, in your household, when you were growing up, consisted of just you and your brothers and sister, or did your grandparents live with you, too?
Speaker 2: No, they had their own homes.  My grandparents on both sides had their own homes.  They--I think my mother [Irene Johnson Powell] and father [Otha Rice, Sr.], when they first got married, lived with one of them, but I don't remember which one, with someone (unclear) on my mother's side.  I don't even think it was her mother [Susie Whitman].  I think it might have been her aunt or (unclear).  But they had property in other places--my relatives.  And so, I, there was always a strong home ownership, a strong economic independence since in the family.  I never saw it, everything in that way.  So, my brother and I talk about it.  We were really blessed with an edict and a life that was different; Denver [Colorado] was different.  And I, I notice Denver when I compare myself to other cities, even Seattle [Washington], 'cause I said there was strong entrepreneurial.  There was my friend's father's owned things and, you know, managed things.  There was, I was, so my peer group was a very entrepreneurial, self-employed kind of world that I lived in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I don't think it was bougie (laughter).  I (unclear) use that term, or bourgeoisie, but, really, it was--that's what I knew.  So, I say that only because that's also a major factor in who I am because I never thought that there was any barrier that I couldn't overcome.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that I was prepared.
Story_ID: 536371
Speaker 1: The black community in Denver [Colorado], you know, it's congregated around the Five Points area (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did, did you, when you were growing up, did you have much contact with pe-, people outside of Five Points or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --was it kind of?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I would say that Denver was very interesting because African Americans in Denver were the minority minority.  And it's an interesting phenomena when you're the minority minority.  You're treated differently than the minority.  Hispanic Latinos were the minority and in some way, they were more discriminated than African Americans.  I think there's a--I have a neighbor that looked at this theory.  I shouldn't even say it on camera, but I will.  But the--I think people are less fearful of the minority minority than they are with the majority minority.  And so, anyway, to make a long story short, the world we lived in and where we lived was always on either the edge or it's--the neighborhood I grew up with, it was pretty integrated for the time.  It changed, and now it's, it went predominantly toward African American.  And now, when I go back, it's been gentrified, so it's, it was always a, a well preserved wonderful neighborhood, well maintained, very few signs of poverty or anything else (unclear).
Speaker 1: What was the name of your particular neighborhood that you grew up in?
Speaker 2: It was called--god, you would ask me that--East Denver, but near City Park [Denver, Colorado], a place called, so it's at 21st [Avenue] and Race Street.  So, East Denver is what primarily is the, is the moniker for it--
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: In the high--the elementary school [Wyman Elementary School, Denver, Colorado] is fully integrated, maybe predominantly more white.  My junior high was definitely more white.  My high school was predominantly African American.  We were kind of on the edge of the districts.  I always, I tell you that because when I went to--well, when I went to elementary school, I was active in student government, and city coun- student council other kinds of things when I was at the junior high which was--Morey Junior High School [Morey Middle School, Denver, Colorado] was the name of it, which, which was further, closer to what I would call more of the elite Denver, with a lot of well to do kids.  I did fairly well as a student and as a extracurricular student body person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably could have been president of that student body, but I didn't run.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Then I went to the Manual High School [Denver, Colorado] which was almost the extreme opposite, which was predominantly black.
Speaker 1: Now, I want to get to that--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but I want, there's some questions I have to ask first before I get you to high school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Go, right.
Story_ID: 536372
Speaker 1: Describe your neighborhood, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Lots of trees, lots of trees, oaks and maples and they had, matter of fact, in the summertime, the tree would canopy the street, and almost be a canopy.  Lots of lawns, grass, sidewalks.  The sounds that I remember the most, and sometimes long for, although I don't want to do it--the sound of shoveling snow (laughter), that first snow, or the sound of snow, even though some people don't know it--that you can hear snow fall, you know, if you really think about it.  I, I miss that part of winter (laughter), but I always tell my friends when, in Seattle [Washington], you don't have to shovel rain (laughter). You I, I don't, I don't miss snow that much, but that part of that first snow.  Summertime's where you could keep the front door open, you know what I mean, and, the, but just the screen door, and let the breeze kind of come through.  The, the colors of fall which are really very generous and beautiful.  As I said earlier, that's my favorite season, and so at the time in Denver [Colorado] it was good.  Actually, though, Dutch elm disease came, and all the trees were cut down in Denver, and there's no more trees.  It's shocking, but the neighborhood, we used to be able to play in the street and play baseball, softball, hide and seek, ditch 'em as we used to call them and other kinds of things.  There was lots of kids, lots of voices.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was your neighborhood, would you consider like, a middle class neighborhood, in terms of the black community?
Speaker 2: For African Americans, I guess it would be.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: I, I, I think we were.  We used to call ourselves (unclear).  I lived on the street called 2118 Race Street, and there's a whole bunch of us used to call us the Race, Race Street crowd.  But if I looked at everybody in that, in the three blocks radius around there, we were all--one guy's father was a colonel.  Another guy's father owned a restaurant and tavern.  Someone else was a mail carrier.  Everybody was working--doing quite well.
Story_ID: 536373
Speaker 1: What were you primarily interested in as a, as a, as a kid growing up in Denver [Colorado]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Probably politics--no.  I, I wasn't an athlete 'cause I was kind of slight, and wore glasses and, and so, but I liked to play games--dodge ball, kick ball, you know, all those kinds of things, but I wasn't really a good Little Leaguer.  And I was too skinny to be a football player.  And so, I was always a person who was able to, if there was going to be a club, I was going to be secretary, vice president, or president (laughter).  If there was going to be some organization, I was somewhere in it.
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the organizations you were in as a, as a youth?
Speaker 2: Well, mostly, in, in grade school [Wyman Elementary School, Denver, Colorado], junior high [Morey Junior High School; Morey Middle School, Denver, Colorado], I don't there was any organized one.  But as I went to college were the Hi-Y, Key Club [Key Club International], Kiwanis club, the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], drama club, other things, you know.  There, there was something that I, if it was, if it had more (laughter), more than four people in it, I probably joined it (laughter), but so, I kept that perspective always.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, okay, so were you a Boy Scout at all?
Speaker 2: I was, I was a Cub Scout.
Speaker 1: Cub Scout.
Speaker 2: I, I've never gotten to Boy Scouts.  There's something about that rigor in uniform and didn't, I, I didn't adhere to it as well.  So, I just, I never, I never adapted to that, that much.
Story_ID: 536374
Speaker 1: Now, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: I used to--we used to go Sunday school all the time.  Matter of fact, I'd tell people, I probably learned how to read and study from Sunday school more so than I did in elementary school [Wyman Elementary School, Denver, Colorado].  We had some great Sunday school teachers 'cause a lot of Sunday school teachers were elementary school teachers, you know, who, who took on the responsibility.  So, I had a good memory.  I could memorize things, so whenever there was a, a church play, I usually got the big role, and the long lines.  I used to read well, and could read the scripture for the rest of the class.  I used to like to do that.  I listened very much to ministry and ministers, and I don't know.  I, I always liked to ask myself sometimes, so when was it that you decided that you didn't want to be a minister, you know, and be who I am today.  But, but there was something I lost.  And I always tell the story, so I won't make it too long, but my grandfather, my step-grandfather, was felled by a stroke.  And I used to have to go over and read to him on Sundays, the--and that was not a wonderful feeling, only from the standpoint that I used to read, and wish he could read, and wondered when he was going to get better when I used to get frustrated 'cause I could see him get frustrated because I, even though I was reading the Bible, I was twelve and I couldn't understand all the words.  He knew when I wasn't pronouncing them right, and would try to correct me, but he couldn't.  And I used to get frustrated that God would do this to somebody, so that they couldn't do it, so that they couldn't improve and read for themselves.  And after that, I kind of lost--I like to say I lost the call.  But then, over time, I recognized that, that was not the way I'd have looked at those things, you know, that I was there for a purpose, and I was doing something basically to serve.  And what I had really gained from that is that service comes in many different ways and doesn't have to be--you don't have to be a minister to serve.
Story_ID: 536375
Speaker 1: One thing I always remember is radio was an integral part of our lives.  So, I remember staying in bed listening to radio, listening to the stories.  I'd be in bed, and I could hear the radio.  And so, your imagination--I always say what I liked about radio is your imagination could grow with it, rather than when television came out.  But my mother [Irene Johnson Powell] and father [Otha Rica, Sr.], and, mainly, my grandmother on her side [Susie Whitman], were very good storytellers and mimics.  They could, they could take them in voices.  They'd have you laughing for hours.  They were able to really tell the story, and tell it in ways that were rich and make you want you to listen, and, and, and it was kind of fun to do.  And I, I picked up a lot of that, so I'm very good at hearing a voice and, and mimicking back.  And it was something that I, I used to do a lot, and I used to make up noises.  My brother [Otha Rice, Jr.] and I used to lay in bed and do sound effects from what we heard--somebody riding a horse (makes sound) (laughter), or, you know, or all kinds of noises.  And so, we used to sleep in the same room, so we could always do that at night.  And then, then, what I found is over time, as I began acting, I thought I wanted to be an actor, although I wound up, so I did a little theater as I got out of college, when I dropped out of college [University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado].  And, and, but I found acting not satisfactory.  I used to tell everybody, I liked playing [HistoryMaker] Norman Rice more than I liked any other role.  But I do understand the storytelling aspect of who you are, voice modulation, mood and change, so that you can tell a story even better.  And I think that's kind of the legacy that my grandmother and my mother gave me is how to tell the story in a way that people listen to you, so that it would be compelling.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: And it's important.
Speaker 2: --you said like when we were changing tapes that you said something.  I thought it was profound the way you said it, that, that being able to, to mimic, and to tell a good story has something to do with your understanding of what you're actually being exposed to--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --or your reading of what you're--
Speaker 1: I, I think that's really the truth.  If I really take it from its roots, I think it's our African heritage because, clearly, the storyteller was one of the most revered people in the village.  And so, I, I wondered sometimes if we didn't descend from the storytellers, you know, from Africa, as we came over to this place because that storytelling is the part of capturing your history.  And, as you understand your history, you, and you can repeat those stories.  You're going through a whole lot of things.  You're going through education.  You're going through human behavior.  You're going through a whole historical standpoint of, of the stories that you're telling in the parts that they make you.  And you're memorizing, so you're, you're, you're learning in this whole process, even though you may not think you're learning, and the lessons that are really important as you, you listen.  Even if you're laughing about so and so, who didn't do X or Y or look, it's, it's a learning experience and so, it's rich and I, I miss that.  People don't do that as much if you, you know, the, there's--I always laugh at Langston Hughes, and his 'Best of Simple' ['The Best of Simple'] and Semple [Jesse B. Semple] at the bar.  And, you know, that banter that people have as they sit and talk about the day.  There was a kind of--my father owned a restaurant and tavern [Rice's Tap Room and Oven, Denver, Colorado]--those people used to come in there, and that kind of banter going on, you know, what happened to me, you know, that was the place, kind of a quasi-newsroom (laughter), about a certain culture that you did get on TV, and didn't get anywhere else.  And people could express how they felt and so, it's really a, a lost art in some ways.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.  They, they say that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was an excellent storyteller.
Speaker 1: I bet you he was.
Speaker 2: He had mimic, too.
Speaker 1: I think, I think that's the downside of all the taping, the illegal taping of King is.  I think people were surprised because you see this sonorous, I Have a Dream guy, and you can't see him as just a guy sitting down laughing with, with the fellows, but you ought to, and you almost want him to be.  But, somehow we want them, we want to make our heroes larger than life and less lively (laughter).  I think that's the worst thing in the world.  People need to see the humanity of what a person is.
Speaker 2: And more symbol than substance.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Story_ID: 536376
Speaker 1: Okay, we're talking about different things you did growing up.  Now, television came along much later, but did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  What happened is just a little bit.  I graduated from high school [Manual High School, Denver, Colorado], got a partial scholarship to the University of Colorado [University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado].
Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute.  I don't want to get to there yet.  I was just asking about TV as a--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, what, oh, television as watching?
Speaker 1: Yeah, as a (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  We were, we were the last family on the block to have a TV, okay.  That's what you're talking about, '53 [1953], and--
Speaker 1: So, you're ten years old, yeah?
Speaker 2: Yep.  We, at the time, you know, TV kind of morphed at the time.  I think, I think TV hit Denver [Colorado] when the Republican convention, Eisenhower [Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] convention, 1953 [sic. 1952 Republican National Convention, Chicago, Illinois], if I remember.  We actually watched it because it was the only thing that was on TV, gavel to gavel coverage, uh, boring.  But then, over time, we would always--I--my most memorable times of TV is my mother [Irene Johnson Powell] used to make Friday a wonderful evening, family night, and we'd have cocoa and sandwiches, and watch TV shows.  And whether it was 'The Lone Ranger,' whether it was, boy, 'Life of Riley' ['The Life of Riley'], 'Amos 'n' Andy,' Molly Goldberg ['The Goldbergs'].  There were all kinds of shows.  It was really interesting.  There were a lot more ethnic shows when you think about it that way, that they were, you know, today, although they're coming back.  So, we would watch those shows, 'Hit Parade' ['Your Hit Parade'], lots of things, and then, as time moved on, 'Bandstand.'  We used to run home, and can watch 'American Bandstand' music, and then, morphing to 'Soul Train' and other places, you know, as you watch TV, and then 'Bonanza' and the Westerns, and all, and some of the, the TV.  But I found TV to be the narcotic that it is, which could be--it, it stops you from reading, gets you hooked.  You stay up longer watching some inane things.  And then, as I got older going into Johnny Carson ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'], not Johnny Carson, then Jack Paar ['Tonight Starring Jack Paar'], and then Johnny Carson, and watching those shows and all.  Denver was kind of fun because those shows used to come on at 10:00 instead of 11:00, so you could stay up a little late, and not be so sleepy 'cause mid-Mountain Standard Time, being in the middle, you, you had that kind of edge.  So, the TV news came on at 10:00, and so you'd get the news before you went to bed, and still have a good six or seven hour sleep.
Story_ID: 536377
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about grade school.  Now, what was the name of your first grade school?
Speaker 2: My grade school was Wyman Elementary School [Denver, Colorado].
Speaker 1: And how do you spell that?  W--
Speaker 2: W-Y-M-A-N, Wyman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you like school initially?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I liked going to school, I loved classes.  I loved teaching--the, the teachers.  I was always a, an interested student and, and alert, and got reasonably good grades.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Boy, I don't remember too many now in elementary school (laughter).  That's just too far away, but I don't think I had anyone, you know.  Probably the one that I remember the most, and I can't even remember his name now that I'm looking at you, but one gym teacher, just because he was very good with students, you know, and made us feel good in P.E., physical education, you know, and, and who was a little bit bigger than just a gym teacher, you know.  And he gave you life lessons, and was interested in who you were, it really felt that way.
Story_ID: 536378
Speaker 1: Now, when you were in grade school [Wyman Elementary School, Denver, Colorado], this is, maybe seem like an odd question, but were you interested in politics at all?  Did you--
Speaker 2: I was on this, even then, I was a student council rep, you know, I, I, I did that.  Most of the time, everybody wanted Norm [HistoryMaker Norman Rice] to be their friend.  And so I, and then, my friends were always so eclectic that they covered the bases that I didn't.  Had one, one friend who was the toughest guy at school (laughter).  Another guy was the fastest runner, you know what I mean.  There was a whole host of, for instance, your posse, so to speak.
Speaker 1: So, you assembled them yourself, huh?  You kind of (unclear), did you?
Speaker 2: Not so much assembled, but I knew how to network (laughter).  I was kind of the glue, you know what I mean, that, that somehow I could be a focal point, but--
Speaker 1: How did the--this occurred to me, too, that maybe when you were ten, did the Republican convention [1952 Republican National Convention, Chicago, Illinois] on TV, as you said, there's nothing else to watch.  Did that, like sharpen maybe your knowledge at all (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I don't think I--I think, I, all it did was maybe teach me a little bit about parliamentary procedure.  I didn't remember the speeches.  I don't know what anything was said.  Growing up in Colorado, I think I even actually was probably leaning toward the Republican side, you know, 'cause Colorado was kind of conservative.  As I moved toward high school [Manual High School, Denver, Colorado], I actually--Nixon, Kennedy [Richard Milhous Nixon and John Fitzgerald Kennedy], I thought Nixon had more experience, you know what I mean, at the time. I wasn't, you know--
Speaker 1: Well, Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] was a popular president (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was.  But I, I think what it was is that, and, and this is Norm Rice speaking today, rather than Norm Rice back then, but Stevenson [Adlai Stevenson II] was just kind of--there was an image.  Eisenhower was a general, a hero, you know what I mean.  Stevenson was who?  You know, intellectually, I wasn't prepared yet to be able to intellectualize what Adlai Stevenson was saying (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And be impressed by an intellectual, yeah.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  So, you're looking at Eisenhower's saying, "I will go to Korea.  I would--." You know, there was that--the general.  So, just a natural kind of inclination to look at the general as a leader, and the governor from Illinois--who that (laughter)?
Story_ID: 536379
Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Always history, social studies, that was my favorite subject, and then, English, probably second.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, you went to middle school in (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to middle school, which was a little different than my neighborhood school [Wyman Elementary School, Denver, Colorado], because as I had mentioned earlier, it was a school that had a--I don't want to call it upper class, but a lot of well to do whites who went to that school.  So, it was kind of on the (unclear).
Speaker 1: What, what was the name of it?
Speaker 2: It's called Morey Junior High School [Morey Middle School, Denver, Colorado].
Speaker 1: Morey, okay.
Speaker 2: It's on 14th [Avenue] and Clarkson [Street], I think, 13th [Avenue] and Clarkson (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, was it in a different district from the one that you?
Speaker 2: It was kind of--well, you know, how middle schools merged so many more districts than elementary schools, so, yes, it was.
Speaker 1: So, was, it was like--
Speaker 2: And we were kind of on the edge of that district, the outer edge, but we still were there.  I, I think in my ninth grade class, there may have been out of--I'm just guessing, but if I just gave you a number, out of 259 ninth graders, there couldn't have been more than twenty-five African Americans.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But then, even then, I was class secretary.  I was DAR--I won the Daughters of American Revolution Good Citizenship Award [Daughters of the American Revolution Good Citizens Award and Scholarship Contest].  I, you know, I remember the principal--
Speaker 1: None of them protested (laughter).
Speaker 2: Nobody protested.  I remember my principal took me aside, and chastised me for running for secretary instead of student body president, and told me that I could be president.  But I was always kind of a nice guy, and I said, I didn't want to run against the guy who was a friend, so I ran for secretary.  But, de facto, I was president (laughter), so it and a lot of respect from that peer group there, and long term friends from that group until I--and we could talk about it later, 'til I dropped out of school [University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado].  And then, I lost track of a lot of those people, but they did track with me through high school [Manual High School, Denver, Colorado].
Story_ID: 536380
Speaker 1: You went to Manual High School [Denver, Colorado], right?  That's predominantly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Manual High School was a disappointment for me.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And I, and what I mean by that is that most of the kids who graduated from Morey [Morey Junior High School; Morey Middle School, Denver, Colorado] went to East High School [Denver, Colorado], and which was predominantly white, and not very integrated.  And I went to Manual, which was predominantly African American.  The second largest population was Hispanic, had a large Asian population because in Denver [Colorado], there, there were a lot of Japanese who were relocated.  And they lived in Denver, and in our area, and then whites.  So, it was almost a reverse.  Mayor Webb [HistoryMaker Wellington Webb] and I sometimes joke and say, "Manual was diversity before people even knew what diversity was."  But, anyway, I didn't, I wasn't comfortable 'cause all my peer group was going the other way, and I was going to a school where I didn't know anybody.
Speaker 1: Now, I know when we talked to Asa Hilliard [HistoryMaker Asa Hilliard, III] some time ago.  He told us that Manual kind of fit the model of American education for black people--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --'cause it was a vocational school (unclear).
Speaker 2: It was a voc- it was, Manual came from, manual arts and labor--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and they were, it was a trade school.  Matter of fact, one of the, the mottoes was, "We're bricklayers, one and all," (laughter), that they, you know, so they taught those things.  It changed, but the name stayed the same as Manual, and but it had, it had somewhat of a stereotype.  You went to Manual, you weren't necessarily thought--
Speaker 1: To do manual work?
Speaker 2: --to do manual labor.  And, and so, people thought you were getting a less than quality education.  But as I came to Manual, I always remember I ran for student council.  I can't remember what it was, treasurer or secretary, and I came in dead last.  I was devastated by that (laughter)--that, that loss.  And I vowed to never--I wasn't ever going to lose election again and, and at Manual.  And I, that's why I was joking with you earlier.  I probably spent more time trying to get elected to office than I did in my classrooms.  But I actually was a good student in social studies, Latin, believe it or not, and English, college prep English.  And those were the ones that kind of inspired me, but what happened is, I don't test well.  And so, I didn't get in the advanced classes.  And I think that probably was a detriment because I, I don't feel I was necessarily pushed, except in the three classes I mentioned to you, Latin and like, as hard as I should have been pushed.  And I then substituted for that, for extracurricular, like joining the clubs, doing the other kinds of things to kind of get that reward I got which (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now-
Story_ID: 536381
Speaker 1: Now, when you were thirteen, your parents [Irene Johnson Powell and Otha Rice, Sr.] split up.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And how did that affect you emotionally and economically?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, emotionally, it probably had a bigger effect on me than I know to, you know, than I thought at the time, but because most people didn't have divorces back then.  And, but my mother was very adamant in making sure life was going to be the same since she really worked hard to make life the same.
Speaker 1: Did you live in the same house and the same--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, we stayed in the same house, you know, that's what I mean.  There were--you couldn't see it as much.  My father was a reasonably good provider, you know, as providing support.
Speaker 1: Did he move out?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but lived in Seattle [Washington], I mean in Denver [Colorado], but and then, he remarried [to Pearl Rice].  And then, my mother remarried.
Speaker 1: Now, did they still operate the restaurant [Rice's Tap Room and Oven, Denver, Colorado] together?
Speaker 2: No, once they divorced, I think he paid her share, you know, or bought her out, and then she moved on, and the same way with the house, you know what I mean.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, she worked hard to make up for that gap, but she gave us almost everything.  And then, my father was indulgent in the sense that he gave you those, what I call, visible things, but you know, as far as life lessons and learning, that probably ceased from my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, just wasn't around as much then?
Speaker 2: No, he just wasn't.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Were, were you fairly close before?
Speaker 2: No.  I, I was the youngest, so I never had it.  I think, you know, needless to say, with divorce, I think that probably was going on a long time, so he wasn't always around.  My father also, that, my mother and father had these weird hours where my mother opened up the restaurant and tavern in the morning and worked, so she could be home.  And then my father closed it, and they stayed open until 2:00, so I didn't see him a lot, you know, because he was always working.  And then, he was always sleeping when we came home or he was gone, so we didn't have a real interaction.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seemed like it would be hard for them to see each other, then?
Speaker 2: And I'm sure that probably played a part in their relationship.  I, I never distilled it as much, but I think that might be the case.
Story_ID: 536382
Speaker 1: So at Manual High School [Denver, Colorado], I mean, you, you--
Speaker 2: So, I was now at Manual.  I was thinking about what I want to do, working to become student body president, and doing a good job at it, and having a very good high school life, you know, in the sense of friends, social groups, everything that you might think of, I did.  And so, when I ran for student body president, I had done such a good job, nobody ran against me (laughter).  I ran out of post, so that was the culmination of my high school career.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Manual High School has the distinction of having graduated three African Americans who were mayors of American cities at the same time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's yourself--
Speaker 2: Mayor Webb--
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Wellington Webb and--
Speaker 2: --of Denver [Colorado], and Patsy Jo Morrison Hilliard [HistoryMaker Patsy Jo Hilliard].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It was really, and I, I--one of the things that's really interesting is who, and Manual had this one hundredth year anniversary.  They asked us, individually, who was the most important teachers that influenced us, and we all said the same three--Mrs. Wilson [ph.], our Latin teacher; Mrs. Lindemann [Genevieve Lindemann], English, college prep teacher; and Ms. Pagano [Mary C. Pagano], our history social studies teacher.  And what, what was unique about each one of them that I, I always share with everybody, they never accepted anything, but the best from you, and they wouldn't, they didn't mollycoddle you, in the sense of how, "Oh, these poor deprived kids, they just can't learn like other people."  Nope, you learned, you learned their way (laughter), and it was tough, and it was competitive, and it was fun, and they made school fun.  And I think those classes and those things served as a foundation for my experience as, as, in moving along.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Junior high [Morey Junior High School; Morey Middle School, Denver, Colorado], same way, junior high was very competitive.  Back then, they tracked, so they had several levels.  I was probably in the second to the highest level.  And we were very competitive in those classes, you know, for grades.  And, and you got extra points for doing more work and so, it made you really push to be very good.  And because my mother [Irene Johnson Powell] and father [Otha Rice, Sr.] were both fairly well educated, they were able to track what we were doing in school, you know what I mean, to make sure we're doing it right.
Story_ID: 536383
Speaker 1: Now, I've read where you told, I think, Christian Science Monitor [The Christian Science Monitor] that you, when you were thirteen, when your parents [Irene Johnson Powell and Otha Rice, Sr.] split up, your life changed.  And you, you flipped into a different kind of a mode or something.  You, you were different, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know if I said--well, I, I think what it is, is that when my mother and father divorced, I, I don't know if I was this profound or not.  But I realized that I, I kind of took my mother's side, you know.  And I wasn't going to spend my time trying to split between two parents (laughter), you know what I mean, to, so I just directed myself to making things right at home.  And it was a difficult time for my brothers and sister [Audrey Rice Oliver] though, in trying to be kind of the healing spirit, kind of make sure that if there was going to be trouble, she was never going to get on me (laughter), you know, so that she had something very positive in her life, so tried to make sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you didn't react by rebelling or anything like that kind of--
Speaker 2: No, I, I, I don't think I did.  I, if I did, it was deep down and but, no, I, I always had a reverse rebellion.  I always said, I'm going to make sure I'm good, and things are happening well, so that my mother doesn't have any more burdens to carry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, your brothers and sister, there are only maybe a couple of home and were, or were they all--
Speaker 2: Well, no, no, my brother and sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My sister--my dad doted on my sister, so she was okay (laughter).  And my second oldest brother [Otha Rice, Jr.] was just like, second oldest children anyway.  He was kind of rebellious, period, even before, so he was a load (laughter).  And, but he was, he's actually a pretty good friend, but to me, but we were different.  And he was always one to, to push the envelope (laughter) to come up with the, the one that would, could get you in trouble.  He could get you in trouble in a New York minute if he, if he wanted to.
Speaker 1: And your oldest brother [Gerald Rice] was out of the house?
Speaker 2: He was gone by then.  He was a, an outstanding musician, almost a classical trumpet player, could play the trumpet beautifully.  Was headed toward a classical music career, and then he fell in love, and got married, and became an accountant (laughter), was one of the first people in the City of Seattle [Washington], uh, Denver [Colorado], to get, become a CPA [certified public accountant]--without a B.A.
Speaker 1: So, he could take the test without having--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Someone told me that a lot of musicians have numerical, you know, mathematical kind of aptitude--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but he was very good with it.
Story_ID: 536384
Speaker 1: Well, when you were a senior in high school [Manual High School, Denver, Colorado], you know, were you being advised about college, or how did you--
Speaker 2: Yep, I was.  We were always counseled and everything.  And I, but I, because I wasn't as good a student, my grade point wasn't as high.  So, when I started looking at colleges, I realized, you know, and, and then, as I told you, I didn't test as well.  So, my, my college SATs were midrange, but they weren't high.  And so, I would, I didn't have as many choices as I would, I would have liked to have had.  And I wish I had a little more counseling, and a little more pushing 'cause I went to the University of Colorado [University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado].  And I found the University of Colorado almost to be the complete opposite of what a college should have been for me.  I probably should have gone to a small liberal arts college, and I would have thrived probably a lot better, but I went to the University of Colorado--I think it was sixteen thousand students.  Out of the sixteen thousand, maybe there were twenty African Americans.  It was a Greek school, and a Greek school that didn't have many African American fraternities or any--there was a big no sign for most African Americans unless you were an athlete.  And so, all the things that I thrived on--social life, you know, extracurricular being, belonging in clubs.  The other things that kind of helped me study, because I was getting that need, were gone.  And so, what I wound up doing, I used to say, as I, I found places where the club I joined was a place that had (unclear) beer and music (laughter).  And so, I used to dance and party a lot at, at the University of Colorado, and I just didn't study and apply myself.  I just went downhill.  By the time I finished my first semester, I think I had I had a .9 [grade point average].  I kind of kicked myself in the butt, went to 1.2, stayed out a semester, went back, but by then, I was in a hole, you know, in a sense, academically.  And by the time, I finished the second year, I would have had to have roughly about a 3.8 or, you know what I mean, to get a 4.0 to graduate, you know what I mean, to, to average out to a 2., so just, just begin to not pay much attention.  So, I kind of dropped out of, of college.
Story_ID: 536385
Speaker 1: You started school [at the University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado] in '61 [1961]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961], okay.
Speaker 2: And then, in '62 [1962], I worked as an orderly at a hospital--great experience 'cause I was an orderly in the emergency room, so I used to see a lot of the worst things in the world to happen to people.
Speaker 1: Now, what hospital is this?
Speaker 2: Denver General [Denver General Hospital; Denver Health Medical Center, Denver, Colorado].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I used to work in X-ray, so I used to have to take people who came from emergency to the X-ray, you know, car crashes, stabbings, you know what I mean.
Speaker 1: How did you get a job in the--I mean, it doesn't seem, well, a natural kind of a--well, extension of the stuff that you do to be an orderly?
Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, I, I--what jobs did I have when I grow up?  I was a paper guy.  I worked at a grocery store.  You know, I delivered health foods just before I went to college, so I didn't have a lot of skills.  So, there weren't that many jobs open, but orderlies were, at the time, not a bad paying job, you know what I mean, for an African American.  And I don't know, I, I think I, I mean, know how I got it.  I just applied.  I, I worked as an orderly, and then I finally decided I was going to go back to school and I--
Speaker 1: Well, before I take you there--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I hate to interrupt you.
Speaker 2: No problem.
Speaker 1: But you were talking about the stabbings, and all the stuff going on, is this--I mean, how did that all affect you?  You were--
Speaker 2: Well, it affected me in two ways.  It taught me how to build a somewhat of immunity to, to pain and despair because you can't take it home with you, and you can't let it build on you.  Otherwise, it just has a terrible effect on you, so you learn how to detach yourself a little bit from, from that.  But it also gave you an insight and an education about people, and what people do to people.  I think the most memorable moment in my life was a young kid who was, must have been maybe three, four, maybe, four or five, who had come in with--had drank some Drano or something, you know what I mean.  And he had tubes in his stomach, and all kinds of things.  And then, he was there for about two weeks.  And then, I saw him on the streets one time after he was out, and his mother was sending him to the store, no coat on, you know what I mean.  You just realized the, how people don't care, you know, the uncaring.  Had another one where the parents left their son at the hospital for two weeks over Christmas, and then came in to pick him up, and said, we didn't know where he was.  So, there's some very, very poignant stories about humanity and, and understanding what you need to do.
Story_ID: 536386
Speaker 1: So, you're an orderly at Denver General [Denver General Hospital; Denver Health Medical Center, Denver, Colorado] and what(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I am.  Well, I was going to tell you the story that I almost waited, so I could say it on camera 'cause it was--there are humorous moments, even in tragedy.  I will never forget I was an orderly, and I pulled this man in, and he had been stabbed multiple times.  And he was healed and sewn up, and I put him in his bed.  And there was this woman, sobbing uncontrollably, oh, and, you know, I said, "Oh, how poignant."  And the nurse leaned over to me--she said, "She stabbed him," (laughter).  I said, "Go figure," (laughter), but it, that's life, you know, and, and then, all its realities.  So, I think, being an orderly, and I, I tell this to some classes, taught me about life that was still a life lesson that would help me who I am today, and, and what I care about and, and, you know, how to deal with some of these kinds of things.
Story_ID: 536387
Speaker 1: So then, I went back to school for summer, went back to summer school--quit the orderly job [at Denver General Hospital; Denver Health Medical Center, Denver, Colorado].  I was, probably at that point in time, that summer, I took a logic class and a poetry class.  I liked English lit and--
Speaker 2: Now, where did you take these--
Speaker 1: At the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington]--I mean Colorado [University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado], in the summer school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it was probably there that I really began to read and understand kind of what I like to call relationships.  I'd also remember I was reading this poem about Dionysus.  And then, I was in a logic class learning about the Dionysian theory of something in logic that said, those two things are related (laughter).  And I always tell everybody, the light went on about relationships, and how you read, and how you understand, and what you need to ascertain from that.  And, at that point in time, I realized I could be a good student.  Now, I was still in a hole (laughter), you know what I mean.  I wasn't going to get out of it, but it, it restored my confidence in my acumen and, and, and what I believed I could do.  But I then went back and went to work for--because I didn't have enough money.  I, I, I just decided, and I was in the hole so, so deeply.  I went back and went to work for the Public Service Company of Colorado, the gas and electric company.  And I worked in the mailroom, and then, got promoted upwards in several jobs.  I always tell everybody the, the job that was probably the best job I ever had was being a meter reader in the City of Seattle [Washington]--I mean, Denver [Colorado].  I keep saying that, forgive me, but in Denver, because the meter readers were probably the world's greatest featherbedders.  What I mean by that, I won't forget when I first got my first book to read.  And new meter readers had to take the hardest books that, that hope--that is on seniority, so no meter readers had the lousiest places to read meters and do everything.  I got my book.  I went out.  I read my meters, and I came back that afternoon with my book all read.  And one of these meter readers said, "Come here," said, "you know, you're not reading your meters right."  "Really?"  So, he said, "Why don't you meet me tomorrow, and I'll show you how to read a meter," (laughter), "how to read, read meters."  And so, I met the next morning.  So, when he first get there, "You got to go through your book and get, familiarize yourself with it."  So, we spend about forty-five minutes that morning going through this book.  And I'm looking at him, wondering what he's talking about.  Then, he says, "You know, after you're done with that, you need to get a good breakfast 'cause, you know, you got to be healthy."  And, and so, you go, and he took me to a place where all the meter readers has breakfast, and that was another hour.  And he says, "You go there because they can tell you what's going on with the meters, you know," and so did that.  Then, so now, we're almost two hours before I've ever read another meter.  And then, we go out to the place to read.  And he said, "Before you start reading meters, drive around so you can understand how you lay out the route."  It's literally two and a half hours before I leave, and read a meter.  And then, we start reading meters, and then, he says, "Twelve o'clock, lunch.  Lunch is something that you earn, and you always should take it 'cause if you don't take your lunch, you know, you're giving that money back to the company."  And then, at, so we have lunch, and then, for forty-five minutes.  And then, we go back and read some more.  And then, at 2:30, he said, "Stop, 'cause now, you need to go through your book to make sure you marked it right," (laughter).  And then, then, "Don't ever take your book in after you're done.  Take in the next morning," because he didn't want anyone to know that you could (unclear) read faster, and it was unbelievable.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you didn't have to take it back that evening--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --or report back?  You can make it the next morning.
Speaker 1: You could do in the next morning.  You, 'cause, see, sometimes you could say, it's so hard, you didn't finish 'til 5:00, or you know, and so, therefore, you couldn't get because the company was closed.  It was unbelievable.  And I always said, the meter readers have the best golf team.  And there were more meter readers who had other jobs (laughter) than any other place, but I learned my lesson, so I read meters for a while.  And then, I decided that the other side of me reading meters at that time, there were only two African American meter readers in the whole City of Seattle, uh, Denver.  And being a black guy with a flashlight in your hand (laughter), and a meter package in your back, walking through people's backyards, was not necessarily the best thing that could have happened to you as you (unclear).  I remember once coming out of reading meters in the apartment house, and there were three officers with guns drawn because they thought I was a burglar 'cause we didn't have uniforms back then.  And so, it was--
Speaker 2: You had your regular street clothes, was that--
Speaker 1: About--you know, like Levis and both, you know, but you figure since you had the book and the flashlight, people would know that's a meter read but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: --it was, it was rich.
Story_ID: 536388
Speaker 1: So, after that, I moved in--and, just kept moving up the ladder [at the Public Service Company of Colorado], but then I realized that I wanted to make a little more money.  And IBM Boulder moved, IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] moved to Boulder, Colorado, and I applied for a job as an engineer's assistant in Boulder.  And I think it was '63 [1963] and, at that time, that was a really fairly well paying job.  I think there were some people who were probably my age, and if they weren't back in college might have stayed at IBM and retired from there, you know, after getting in there.  But I realized as an engineer's assistant, I was doing everything that the engineer was doing, except getting his pay (laughter).  We used to have to make presentations and draw up charts, and add up things for cost of engineering.  And I used to look and say, I just did for this engineer, but he goes in the room and he gets to make the presentation and I don't, so what's the difference--the degree.  So, that started me back to thinking about needing to get my act together.  And so, I started thinking about how I could get back to school, and thinking about what were those avenues.  And then, my extracurricular life, I started doing a little theatre, and acting with some little theatre groups in Denver [Colorado].  And I, this story is well told, but I got a part in 'Raisin in the Sun,' and I played the African [Joseph Asagai] who's in love with Beneatha [Beneatha Younger] in the, in the play.  And while I was--we were performing 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry] that's when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.  And it's a wonderful story--
Speaker 2: This is in 1968.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, since you were, you were at IBM five years (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963], no, '65 [1965], I guess it was probably.  I might have misspoke on my chronology (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Maybe '65 [1965], okay, so you were there about three years, '68 [1968]? Okay.
Speaker 1: (Coughs) Yep.
Story_ID: 536389
Speaker 1: So 1968, you're in this play, 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, in April, and April, 'Raisin in the Sun.' It was playing at one of the major theatres in Denver [Colorado].  And I'll never forget--my boss [at the International Business Machines Corporation] came up to me to tell me that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had been assassinated.  And he was actually a wonderful boss.  He said, "You know, if you want to go home, you can," you know, which I thought was kind of astounding for somebody to be that sensitive.  And I did.  And I got in the car, and I was living in Boulder [Colorado], and I was acting in Denver.  And it was like--I can't remember, but I guess, it must have been mid-afternoon or just mid-morning.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: For Colorado time, vis-a-vis when he was shot.  And I didn't know where to go.  And I felt this kind of emptiness, loneliness, wondering where to go, and, finally, I decided I'd go to the theater.  That's kind of home 'cause the cast is sort of like a family.  And when I got there, most of the cast was there.  And we were trying to figure out what to do, and there was a big debate about some people called and said, "You ought not put that show on," you know what I mean, because out of respect to Martin Luther King.  And we took a vote and decided to go on with the show.  And we did a pretty good job until we got to that scene where, you know, when the mother [Lena Younger] says, "It seems like God gives the black man--God--," I can't, I didn't even remember the quote, but, "nothing but dreams, nothing but dreams."  And we all started crying on the stage, not uncontrollably, but crying 'cause the dream maker died, you know, look what had happened to our lives so, boy, this is profound.  We--
Speaker 1: In the whole poem ['Harlem,' Langston Hughes] that the name of the play comes from--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --"What happens to a dream deferred?"
Speaker 2: Deferred, and so, it's kind of that point in time, I realized that I wasn't going to dream anymore.  I'd better get my act together, and that dreaming wasn't going to fulfill what I wanted to get done.  I'd better get to do what I need to do, and so, kind of from--
Speaker 1: So, what did you think you should, should have done?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Go back to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Get an education and make a contribution.  So, I had a cousin who lived in Tacoma [Washington] who said, "If you're interested in going back to school, why don't you come out here and go back to school?"  And I said, "You know what?  I think that's what I'm going to do."
Story_ID: 536390
Speaker 1: I came out here in May, right after the, the following month, looked at Seattle [Washington] and Tacoma [Washington], and said, I think I could live here, and went back and told my boss [at the International Business Machines, Corporation] I was leaving, and packed up everything I owned in my VW [Volkswagen] Bug (laughter), and drove out here in September with nothing but $150 in my pocket, and had no idea where I was even go to school.  And then, I got a job as a stock person at the J.C. Penney's [J.C. Penney Company] because it offered me split hours to go to school.  So, I used to come in at--I think it was like five in the morning, load stock, put merchandise on the floor 'til 9:30, 10:00.  Then, I'd go to school from 10:00 to--I think it was like 6:00.  And then from 6:00, we would load purchases on trucks, you know, then 'til 10:00, and then studied for what I need to do, or studied during that, you know, 9:00 to 6:00 time.  And then, at, had a 3 point--probably maybe a 3.2 [grade point average] during that time, you know what I mean.  And I got a scholarship to the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] in journalism.
Speaker 2: So, you went to a junior college first, right, to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I went to, it went, I went to Highline community college [Highline College, Des Moines, Washington], south of Seattle, Washington--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --for a year.  I, I came into the University of Washington on what they call the forgiveness policy (laughter).  That is, they would accept me as long as I did not try to transfer any credits that I earned at University of Washington so the slate was--
Speaker 2: University of Colorado [University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado] then, yeah (unclear).
Speaker 1: --the Colorado, and the slate was wiped clean.  So, I said, fine (laughter), you know.  I--there wasn't that many credits that I needed to transfer, and have a slate wiped clean gave me a new start, and I just never turned back.  I think the whole time, I don't think I ever was below a 3 point after I was going to undergraduate school.  And then, I, I looked at journalism, and acting, and social studies, the things that I like, and that led me toward communications journalism.  And I was really fortunate to, to get the journalism scholarship, and so I, I moved into the school of communications.
Story_ID: 536391
Speaker 1: And while I was there, God takes care of fools and babies--it was right during the Kerner Commission report [National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders] after '68 [1968], and the riots.  And so, a lot of television stations, radio stations were looking to recruit African Americans to show that they were a little more objective for the news.  Remember the Kerner Commission had a very scathing report on the performance of the electronic media, you know, as it relates to that.  I got a job at a radio station called KIXI, K-I-X-I [KIXI Radio, Seattle, Washington].
Speaker 2: Yeah, and part of that was that there were no blacks--
Speaker 1: In, in any position of relative influence at all (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so they couldn't report in the black community 'cause they didn't know the black community.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They weren't being represented in the black community.  They didn't know who was who.
Speaker 1: Although I still sometimes find out that, that, that doesn't make you more objective (laughter).  It just means you have people of color there, but sometimes the, the, the shape of a newsroom doesn't allow you to be socially responsible, you know, in the sense that they go after the headlines and they get, and I'll get back to that.  But anyway--
Speaker 2: So, it's, at K- K-X-I--
Speaker 1: K- K-I-X-I--
Speaker 2: K-I-X-I.
Speaker 1: --radio.
Speaker 2: Were you the first black person?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I was more of an intern, but God takes care of fools and maybe--something beautiful happened.  The beat reporter, who covered the city--they only had one, you know, who was a, and he covered city hall and the county.  He got stuck on a trial, which was a major police payoff scandal, and it was, ran for a long time, so he was mainly there.  They, uh, so, they just sent me out to cover the rest of the stuff with not a lot of experience, but it was really the breakthrough thing.  So, I was covering city hall, city council [Seattle City Council], mayors, county executives, county council [King County Council].  I was making contacts and relationships with the press that I would never have had if I, if he hadn't been on that trial.  So, it really gave me a lot of exposure and, and taught me a lot.  And so, I really had on the job training.  And so, it happened that, as I was doing all that, my boss was starting to use me on the air, but since I was out in the field, I didn't know he was using it.  And I'd have all these people come in and say to me, "I heard on KIXI, that's really great."  And I said, "I don't think I was."  And so, I went in to him, and he said, "Yeah, we've been using it."  And I said, "Well, are you going to pay me more?"  And he said, "I can't do that."  I said, "Duh."  He said, "No, but if you want to pad your hours, I'll let you do that."  And I said, "Well, are you going--if I get in trouble for padding my hours, are you going to support me?"  "No."  So, I quit.
Story_ID: 536392
Speaker 1: I stayed out of work for about a quarter, which actually helped me 'cause it kept me on track with school [University of Washington, Seattle, Washington].  And then, I got a job at KOMO-TV [Seattle, Washington] writing news and editing film for the eleven o'clock news, and also keeping track of the film library, taking the news and, and documenting it.  Had some amazing days when it used to have tape--makes you go look for tape--I, I mean, film, rather--and you go look for a roll to use, and the film would emulsify, you know what I mean, it just, oh, it was fun.  But, anyway, I worked there, had a very interesting time to, uh, and learning experience also.  The most profound time was when, at the time, there were a lot of the black contractors, and the whole issue was getting high about hiring blacks on construction type sites.  And I remember once the--I looked at a show.  I was editing the film, and they were showing the white contractors fighting black contractors, and I kept saying, "That's not the story."  I kept saying, "Why don't you go down to the union hall and say, 'Why aren't you hiring African American, you know, workers?'"  And the guy, who was writing the story said, "That's not the story."  And it was kind of at that point, I realized that, you know, I don't think I'll be a reporter because that's what the editor is going to tell me, you know, that when the truth of what you want to get to as a reporter, may not ever manifest itself in, in a news story.  And the news story's always going to be for this moment and this time.
Speaker 2: The sensational aspect (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yep, and unless you're in control, as the editor or you're--own the station, you're not going to make change.  And I realized that if I was going to come into that station, I would either--gonna  be spending all my time arguing with my colleagues for why they aren't telling the truth, or I need to do something else.
Story_ID: 536393
Speaker 1: So it was right at the point I was going to graduate [from the University of Washington, Seattle, Washington].  And I literally was walking across campus--this school was in another place--and decided that maybe I ought to look at public affairs as a, as a station of what I ought to do.  And I walked in the public affairs school [Graduate School of Public Affairs; Daniel J. Evans School of Public Policy and Governance, Seattle, Washington] and I said, "What does it take to get in here?"  And they said, "You have two weeks to get your application in."  And I said, "Do you have any aid?"  And they said, "You have two weeks to apply for this scholarship," (laughter).  In two weeks, I put everything together and applied, and I got accepted, and got a fellowship, and the rest is kind of history.  But coming full circle to journalism, what happened is when I got into the Evans School.  The Urban League had been tasked and chosen to be one of the, the agency with the office of civil rights [Civil Rights Division] in the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] to assess the performance of the electronic media.  And I was on the Urban League board [Urban League of Metropolitan Seattle, Seattle, Washington] when they're under thirty-five.  You may not remember, but at the time, the Urban League did a one fourth, one fourth kind of rule, so one quarter of the board had to be under thirty-five.  Another quarter had to be white, you know what I mean.  They tried to be fair and equal.  So, I was on the board and I, when they got the project, I quit the board and said, "You know, this job was made for me.  I'm in public affairs.  I can do this analysis.  I have a journalism background that really can help me."  And so, I wrote my master's thesis on minority access to electronic media, which was the basis of the report for the Urban League.  So, I got paid to do my master's thesis, got paid by the Urban League, and it was a wonderful experience.  And it gave me exposure to those who owned the presidents of those stations, 'cause in order to get access to the records and all, we had to form a relationship with the chairmen and presidents of the major networks.  And so, I got to be identified in that process, and that was--when you talk about legitimacy, when you can run, and you're going to be in places, it makes a big difference.
Story_ID: 536394
Speaker 1: Is that when you were working as the assistant director of the Urban- Urban League [Urban League of Metropolitan Seattle, Seattle, Washington]?
Speaker 2: What happened is I, I got that job as the media action monitor, and then after I finished my work, I was promoted to the assistant director of the Urban League (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, media action monitor.
Speaker 2: I had always thought of the Urban League as another place to, before, if it wasn't politics, to be.  I, I think you may recall that the head of the Urban League was sometimes always a revered person in communities, and very much networked, and very much healing, very much social entrepreneurs, you know what I mean, in the sense of jobs.  And the whole mission of the Urban League kind of fit my mantra of what I cared about.  And so, I, I thought that one day I would like to be Urban League director.
Speaker 1: So, were you impressed by Whitney Young, back in the day--
Speaker 2: Not as much.  I was a little distant when he died.  I was actually at the Urban League when Vernon [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] made his first maiden speech.  So, my active involvement with the Urban League came almost at the same time Vernon Jordan took over [of the National Urban League].
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: Matter of fact, I was in St. Louis [Missouri] when he made his first speech as Urban League president.  (Unclear), then he was executive director, but, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I was impressed with Vernon.  And I was impressed with his acumen and his facility of being able to network and move, and then to watch him grow as a human being because, you know, he was not as all that polished when he first started, when he started moving.  And then, he, I was impressed with him and, and his skills, and his coordination, and all the kinds of things he did.  And I think he, he and I--I will call us, si- friends, but I know that he--one time I was, when I told him I was going to run for the city council [Seattle City Council], he told me, "Why would you do that?  Stay at the bank, move up the bank [Rainier National Bank, Seattle, Washington]," would be a, you know what I mean.  He always wanted you to leverage here, your marketability in the, in the private sector, rather than the public sector.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Urban League and Seattle [Washington] had just--now, how long was it--there was a group of--well, you worked for Jerome Page--
Speaker 2: Jerome Page.
Speaker 1: --at the Urban League.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And he replaced a man by the name of Pratt [Edwin T. Pratt]--
Speaker 2: Assassinated.
Speaker 1: --actually gunned down at his door?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, but he, Pratt was part of--Mr. Page was telling me that Mr.--
Speaker 2: Central Area [Central Area Civil Rights Committee], I think it was a civil rights organization, there was a cadre of--
Speaker 1: There was a cadre of black men that were working on civil rights issues.
Speaker 2: --ministers, Urban League, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], Model Cities people, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were kind of the cadre of leadership for the African American community, as it relates to social change and, and then, investment in the, in the city.  And although I didn't belong, belong of that meeting that well.  Actually, ironically, my wife [Constance Williams Rice] was more involved with them than me because she was more of a civil rights activist than I was.
Story_ID: 536395
Speaker 1: Now, when did you meet your, your wife, now?
Speaker 2: I met, met my wife at the Urban League [Urban League of Metropolitan Seattle, Seattle, Washington].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My wife is on the board of the Urban League.  She was vice chairman or vice president of the board, and I was--
Speaker 1: Now, this is while you were writing your--
Speaker 2: Right, while I was writing my thesis--
Speaker 1: Okay, thesis, okay--
Speaker 2: --as a media action manager.  And that, matter of fact, that was one of the reasons I left the league 'cause she was on the board.  And I realized that, you know, a staffer and a board member having a romantic relationship probably wasn't the best thing to happen.  But anyway, so from there, I kind of met her, and we got to talking, and I fell in love.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your wife's name is--
Speaker 2: Constance W. Rice, Williams Rice [Constance Williams Rice].  She's from Brooklyn [New York].  She came here in Seattle [Washington] in '67 [1967].  She was married previously, and then, she went, and she received her master's [degree] from the University of Washington Evans School [Graduate School of Public Affairs; Daniel J. Evans School of Public Policy and Governance, Seattle, Washington] before I did.  I always tell everybody I followed my wife.  And then, she got her Ph.D. in higher education administration from here [University of Washington, Seattle, Washington], so she's a doctor.  And she was born in Brownsville in Brooklyn.
Story_ID: 536396
Speaker 1: Edwin T. Pratt is killed, in--
Speaker 2: I think it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's in '73 [sic.].  That's like ten years before--I mean that's something (unclear).
Speaker 2: You say it's '70 [1970]?
Speaker 1: Was it, was it in '70 [1970]?
Speaker 2: I think it was '70 [1970] because--
Speaker 1: No, no, '70 [1970], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was almost--I remember, I can't--well, no, it must have been, I'm sorry, I keep thinking it's '69 [1969], but I, I may be wrong.  I came to Seattle [Washington] in '68 [1968], and I've got to believe it was the winter, somewhere between December and January of '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At the beginning of '69 [1969], but it was a stunning kind of a death.  I didn't personally get as involved.  I mostly followed it 'cause I was living in Tacoma [Washington], but it was stunning.  And it, it broke up a little bit of this (unclear) civil rights, you know, association [Central Area Civil Rights Committee].  The, the--a lot of people were worried about their life, their safety, you know, and everything else.  And John Adams [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams], who was the, the bishop of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal], was a member.  Another outstanding human being here, Walter Hundley [Walter R. Hundley].  There were just some wonderful men who helped negotiate change and activism in, in Seattle.
Speaker 1: What was the key issue with the Urban League [Urban League of Metropolitan Seattle, Seattle, Washington] in those days?
Speaker 2: I think that--
Speaker 1: I know there--
Speaker 2: --open housing--
Speaker 1: Open housing?
Speaker 2: --predominantly, open housing.  But then, then when, when the OEO [Office of Economic Opportunity] started, you know what I mean, economic opportunity in Johnson's [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] Great Society, the shepherding of those dollars, you know what I mean, in, in creating the infrastructure to help distribute that in the community.
Speaker 1: Now, I've read in the material that we had that Seattle came up with a, the prototype that was used to develop Model Cities.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: And this was and not, and just to maybe, just go back a little further, the black community in Seattle, they called a Central District, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But that was what it was when you got here.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And black folks call the CD--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --or the colored district, right?  Is that--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So tell us a little bit, something about that.
Speaker 2: Well, since they, there was a investment to be made from one of the Great Society in Seattle, and it was directed toward the Central Area.  And so, there was a whole demand to create a structure to manage that, and Model Cities became the structure.  And the, the de facto board was the central, the civil rights group behind it.  And the architect (unclear) moving was a man by the name of Walter Hundley, who was (unclear) who, at one time, was a field organizer for CORE [Congress of Racial Equality].  But he put a structure together to a administrator that was bar none, and was probably the prototype of one of the best run Model Cities with the least amount of graft of problems of any Model Cities in the, in the United States, and empowered people and organized it, so people could make change.  I, I--he was masterful, if there ever was anybody who'd I pattern a part of my life, he was one of them.
Speaker 1: Okay, Walter Hundley (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We weren't close, but he was very good, very good.  He died of kidney failure maybe four years ago, five years ago, but he moved in from Model Cities when it kind of died to head up the Office of Management and Budget for the mayor [Wesley C. Uhlman], so that's how good he was.  He was able to transition and then he moved from there to head up the parks department for the City of Seattle until he retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he was like, was he in like a, like the classic CORE organizer back in the day with the citizens and that sort of thing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He had a, he had some traits that were very interesting.  He was a Unitarian minister and a CORE activist, so he was just brilliant--that's all.  Every time I, I think if you ever talk to anybody you interview about it, he would one that people would say he is a brilliant individual.
Story_ID: 536397
Speaker 1: We thought about some things during the break that we probably should, should talk about.
Speaker 2: No problem (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But the atmosphere of Seattle [Washington] when you came out here to school, you said the Vietnam War was a big deal then and--
Speaker 2: Well, there were three things that kind of got me about Seattle when I got here from Denver [Colorado].  First of all, Seattle wasn't as entrepreneurial.  I didn't see as many people who owned their own things or businesses and all.  There was a strong professional lawyer, doctor kind of cadre, and some teachers, but not that, what I call that strong entrepreneurial spirit.  But since I was a student, I didn't pay a lot of attention.  But, clearly, the Vietnam War was at--starting to rise at its height, and there were demonstrations all over the campus.  Some days, you could even smell tear gas, you know, from the fumes of what was going on, and then, the bombs.  They bombed the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] building here while I was on campus and not a graduate.  They bombed the courthouse.  They had one of the more famous--there was a Chicago Seven.  They had the Seattle Seven conspiracy trials.  There were issues around those kinds of issues.  A lot of racial tensions--the head football coach was considered to be racist [Jim Owens], and the several athletes rebelled against his leadership over the issue of the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] playing, play, playing BYU [Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And those--
Speaker 1: What was the issue there with Brigham Young and who--
Speaker 2: Well, just the Mormons didn't accept blacks, you know, as equals or superiors.  And the BYU was the epitome of a Mormon school and the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think, in those days, they said they didn't have, we didn't have souls, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  We couldn't go to heaven.  Then, one day, they had an amazing, you know, epiphany in '86 [1986].  I always wondered--I have a joke about that saying.  They were sitting around the table.  Somebody said, "Profits are low, what's happening?"  And they said, "Well, you know, black consumers aren't buying our products."  "Oh, I have a vision," (laughter).  Anyway, the--so those were those, those big issues, and those were some courageous athletes who decided not to play at the expense of their careers and where they were.
Speaker 1: Speaking of the football team, we were just mentioning off camera, too, that, that there'd been a number of diverse quarterbacks here in Washington State.
Speaker 2: American Indian [Native American] Sonny Sixkiller, Warren Moon, who, his story, alone, his amazing story, because it wasn't necessarily all accepted, you know.  It was a tough road, but he persevered, you know, but--
Speaker 1: Jack Thompson, the Throwin' Samoan in Washington.
Speaker 2: He was over at, he was a Cougar [Washington State Cougars], rather than a Huskie [University of Washington Huskies]--
Speaker 1: Okay, he's Washington State [Washington State University, Pullman, Washington]--
Speaker 2: --so we don't, we don't necessarily claim him, we Huskies, but yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's some stellar athletes.  Charles Mitchell [Charles H. Mitchell], who just retired as the chancellor of the Seattle community colleges district [Seattle Colleges, Seattle, Washington], played for the Broncos [Denver Broncos]--just a lot of, a lot of depth.
Story_ID: 536398
Speaker 1: We talked about the Urban League [Urban League of Metropolitan Seattle, Seattle, Washington].  We're still going to follow up with some more about the Urban League, but the Black Panther Party, I think, was a, was a major faction to deal with here in Seattle [Washington], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I didn't know a lot about the Panthers.  When I, what I did is I covered them more as a reporter.  And I, I think I was telling you earlier, they looked at me with suspicion.  Any reporter was still the establishment rather than, even if he was black.  But, yes, they created the feeding programs, Carolyn Downs Clinic [Sidney Miller Free Medical Clinic; Carolyn Downs Family Medical Center, Seattle, Washington].  They did, they did a lot of wonderful, wonderful programs that still have their roots here today.  I think the ominous image of the Panthers--we forget sometimes the social change that they did, but they played a role, and they were very dominant.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you know any of them individually?
Speaker 2: I knew the Dixon brothers [HistoryMaker Aaron Dixon, Elmer Dixon III, and Michael Dixon] a little bit.  I know them better now as I move through, as I became a city council [Seattle City Council] member, and as I became a mayor.  Then I began to know them more, but I didn't know them as well, other than as a reporter covering them.
Story_ID: 536399
Speaker 1: Back to the Urban League [Urban League of Metropolitan Seattle, Seattle, Washington], and we were talking about, you know, getting, you were getting ready to get your master's degree [from the Graduate School of Public Affairs; Daniel J. Evans School of Public Policy and Governance, Seattle, Washington] and you wrote the paper about the--
Speaker 2: Performance of the electronic media--
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.
Speaker 2: --as it relates to, to African Americans.  And the thesis in my program was two ways--one, the hiring lack of really dominant positions or, or blacks in any kind of dominant position to make change or authority.  That was one.  Number two, the--back then, that was the fairness doctrine and equal time, and how much were they using at, as we called the Sunday ghetto back then, to (unclear) for a public affairs program.  What was the distribution of shows that recap (unclear)?
Speaker 1: So, all the public affair shows that come on Sunday mornings.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's Sunday, yeah.  They used to call it the Sunday ghetto.  And really recognizing that, that wasn't going to make change as much as people owning and having jobs and more reporters.  We created an organization called Northwest Minority Communications Association [ph.], kind of precursor of the black media association, and started getting places where African Americans could come to kind of talk about their experiences.  We, the, the, at the time I was writing my paper, I thought that cable was going to be the panacea to free people and to communities, and all because the wired city and the whole idea of wiring cable in communities would give them access, more access to programming that could teach and help.  Unfortunately, now that I'm older, I realize that the one thing that interferes with that is the commercialism of all the new advents of, of electronic technology.  And what I mean by that, radio went commercial, although radio was sold as going to be the communications to educate and empower and move people forward.  But the commercials have specs over when TV, same thing, cable, same thing, pay-per-view, the, the kinds of things that we want to use cable for isn't happening.  And even with the Internet and like, it's more commercial, but that doesn't mean you can't use it for positive change.  It's just that it can't--don't ever look at it as the panacea.
Speaker 1: Or the federal government back in the day through their CC [Regulation CC] used to actually mandate that stations, usually sometime for public affairs, right?
Speaker 2: And then, they kind of moved away from that.  And so now, we don't have that as much, used to be a certain time, your records used to be reviewed.  They used to be license renewal processes.  They used to be ways to intervene, asked for that, and it's not as much.  You're getting a little bit of that as it relates to renewing cable TV franchises, but even that's starting to change because with cable, you probably will never deny or, or not renew a franchise 'cause how do you pass on that asset to somebody else if you deny the franchise and who owns that asset?  And, you know, then you'd have a lot of legal ramifications.  So, I think what happens is that the, the process allows you to negotiate for new programming, but it probably, there's a whole legal structure that I think is very complicated to even figure out what to do if you deny that franchise.
Story_ID: 536400
Speaker 1: After grad school [Graduate School of Public Affairs; Daniel J. Evans School of Public Policy and Governance, Seattle, Washington], you worked for Urban League [Urban League of Metropolitan Seattle, Seattle, Washington] as a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I worked for the Urban League and then--
Speaker 1: --you were the associate director, right?
Speaker 2: --and, and kind of the assistant, kind of, if, for nowadays, like ops [operations], the ops guy, and then I got--
Speaker 1: Now, now--okay.  Oh, you got, okay, go, go ahead, right.
Speaker 2: Then I got married, and I moved to the--I decided to switch jobs, and went to work for a regional government, Puget Sound Regional Council [Puget Sound Council of Governments; Puget Sound Regional Council].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you know, Jerome Page was telling us that you hosted a radio show [sic. television show] for [KCTS-TV, Seattle, Washington] Urban League, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  I don't like to think about that.  What, that's how I got back in the Urban League.  The Urban League was looking for somebody to be the moderator of the 'Thursday Forum.'  'Thursday Forum' was another one of those public television slots where the Municipal League [Municipal League of Seattle and King County; Municipal League of King County], the League of Women Voters [League of Women Voters of Seattle-King County], and the Urban League (unclear) on, of that day.  They alternated every month, every week of the month, and I hosted their show.  I was terrible.  I remember my first show--I was so embarrassed.  I started sweating, and remember that scene in 'Broadcast News'?  (Laughter) I just started dripping.  They had to do pads because of the, if you got any closer, you'd see me, just, I was nervous.  I was bad.  I looked at the tape and said, "I'll never be talent," (laughter), you know, so I, I got away from it.  But, then, I told Jerome I'd rather be more than just a moderator, and that's what when they looked for me to have a different role, and became assistant director.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, he thought you were good actually (unclear).
Speaker 2: And a lot of other people did--I didn't.  I was my worst critic, as I should be, but I just decided.  It wasn't a role I was comfortable with.  I probably could do it now with as much facility at ease as anybody could, but at the time, I couldn't.
Story_ID: 536401
Speaker 1: Okay so, you got married in what, what year was it now?
Speaker 2: I got married in 1975, February 15th.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you just, you felt you should change jobs at that point (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I just thought that working at the Urban League [Urban League of Metropolitan Seattle, Seattle, Washington] and my wife [Constance Williams Rice] on the board were--there were other options that I had.  And I also was there, beginning to try to make myself more rounded, and so working for a regional government that was revolving around land use, transportation, housing policy, and intergovernmental relations was a nice fit.  So, I headed up the intergovernmental relations portion of the Puget Sound Regional Council [Puget Sound Council of Governments; Puget Sound Regional Council], which is a four county organization for that, and my job was to provide it and be liaison to the elected officials in each one of those sub-regions.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And--
Speaker 2: And then, I worked there for a while.  And then, as I, I also became president of my community council, and by then, I also ran to be a freeholder.  That's a person who helps to restore and change the--not restore--but to rewrite the city charter.  And he had to run for that position, even though it wasn't a major campaign.  I got elected to be one of those freeholders for my position.  And so, the idea of electability, the idea of service reintroduced itself through that process.  And then, my name started getting, you know, belted around for--, "Maybe you ought to run for city council [Seattle City Council]."  Maybe I can do this and so, I always like to say, then I started to become a player, you know, in the sense of the, the community civic environment, and my name was kind of associated in those areas.
Story_ID: 536402
Speaker 1: So, while I was at, since I was a liaison at the Council of Governments [Puget Sound Council of Governments; Puget Sound Regional Council], some of the people I was a liaison with might have been people I'd run against.  So, I decided I'd better leave that area 'cause I could run into conflicts, and I went to Rainier Bank.  Rainier Bank [Rainier National Bank, Seattle, Washington] recruited me to be the corporate contributions manager and social policy direction for the, the bank.  And it was there that I developed and drafted the social policy for Rainier Bank, and helped distribute contributions to local groups and non-profits.  So, I got to spend the bank's money.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I was at the bank for a year and a half, and I decided that maybe I should become a real banker.  And I just got into banking credit training.  And the vacancy came up on the city council [Seattle City Council], and I said, "I think I got to do this, so"--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, the vacancy was created when Sam Smith [Samuel J. Smith]--
Speaker 1: No, no--
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't.
Speaker 1: --Sam Smith was on the council.
Speaker 2: You're still on--
Speaker 1: This was a, a woman by the name of Phyllis Lamphere [Phyllis Hagmoe Lamphere] got appointment to head, become the Region 10 EDA [Economic Development Administration] administrator and so, she had to resign.  And when she resigned, there was a special election to fill her position.
Speaker 2: Now, how many black folks were on city council?
Speaker 1: One.
Speaker 2: Just one.  That was--
Speaker 1: Sam Smith.
Speaker 2: Well, tell us something about Sam Smith.  He's no longer with us but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sam Smith was the lion of political leaders in the city.  He got elected to the city council--I think, somewhere around '65 [1965], '67 [1967].  He was a state legislator.  He was an active Mason and strong leader in the Baptist church, was seen as a very strong leader.  And people urged him to run for the city council kind of during the Civil Rights Movement.  And he ran, and he became a very powerful city council member, president of the council.  A lot of people felt that Seattle [Washington] wasn't going to elect two blacks to the city council.  The city council doesn't run by districts.  It runs at large, citywide.  So, I came from an area called Mount Baker [Seattle, Washington] and I decide to run.  And I ran against a former city council member, who had run for mayor, who was also a firefighter and a fireman.  And he had run for mayor and raised the most money in the mayor's race, but he came in third, and then he decided he wanted to go back on the council.  And so, it was just a nice timing.
Story_ID: 536403
Speaker 1: It was an interesting race when I decided to do that because there were three big issues that were in everybody's mind during the time.  There was a repeal of busing on the statewide constitutional change.  And then, there was an initiative to give the police more discretionary power to shoot.  And then, there was the repeal of gay rights.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The repeal of gay rights?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we had--
Speaker 2: This was in 1978?
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: That was a--
Speaker 1: We had on the ordinance a non-discrimination against gays, and people wanted to repeal it.  So, I jumped in the race and, ironically, people didn't ask me what I thought about those issues.  They kind of almost knew just by the nature of what they were.  So, I got to talk about the broader issues, and people really wanted to know how I thought about other things and those things.  And so I--it was actually an asset so that, and my opponent had to speak to those because he was a white guy, older.  And he was weird 'cause he supported the repeal of busing, supported the initiative to give police more discretionary power, and was neutral on the gay rights issue.  And everybody kind of said, "Why is this?" That, so he just didn't resonate, and his legitimacy, you know, at the time.  And I won that race almost by the same margin I won my mayoral race about 50 something, 57 percent.
Speaker 2: Now, that was a race to take the seat of--
Speaker 1: Take the seat of this--
Speaker 2: --Ms. Lamphere [Phyllis Hagmoe Lamphere].
Speaker 1: --of this, of Ms. Lamphere.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And then I had to run the following year for my own term, which was once you got elected, it was pretty easy.
Speaker 2: That's at large is that, you really, you just, you know, okay.
Speaker 1: Yep.  But I came from a very strong neighborhood.  I was president of the community college.  Mount Baker [Seattle, Washington] was a very active neighborhood, and a lot of political leadership came out of that area.  Because now, if you flash back to my career, having a journalistic background was very advantageous and having good press relations, you know what I mean, as a candidate.  Most of the journalists know me.  Most of them like me, and I didn't have any baggage.  Having the Urban League [Urban League of Metropolitan Seattle, Seattle, Washington] and having that the outreach that the Urban League had and being associated with that, gave me another cadre of people.  And then being president in my community club, another cadre, so that I really had a base bigger than even what I thought when I decided to run, and a very positive feeling, although there are, I had some detractors who used to say, "How did Norm Rice [HistoryMaker Norman Rice] come to Seattle [Washington] in '68 [1968], and in 1978, he's elected to the city council [Seattle City Council]?  And how did he move through these chairs without making many enemies?"  And I always tell everybody, that's because I was trained to do that when you think about my career, growing up, the brothers, sisters, my job was to do just that.  And I did it well.  And so, I was elected and I got on the city council and it was a wonderful, wonderful experience.
Story_ID: 536404
Speaker 1: I was fortunate to be elected chair of the finance committee after my second year, and there was some joking going around saying, "How did Norm Rice [HistoryMaker Norman Rice] chair the powerful finance committee?"  And the guy who appointed me, who was president of the council [Seattle City Council], said, "You know why I made Norm Rice, finance chair?"  Somebody said "Why?"  He said, "When he doesn't know, he says no," (laughter).  So, I was pretty tight.  I was always a very fiscally responsible person, not because I wanted to get the votes, but if you aren't fiscally responsible, you can't, don't have the resources to pay for the things I want.  So, you need to be judicious in that.  And so, I learned a lot, got a lot of exposure in that process in being finance chair and that.  And I was finance chair, I think, almost four years, which was also unprecedented.  At the time, a new mayor came in, Charlie Royer [Charles T. Royer], just before I got elected.  He and I were not friendly, and we sometimes fought, and he had a rugged first year.  And I thought he was vulnerable, and thought I could run against him.  And to my chagrin, I got whipped by him.  And in retrospect, I think I got beaten because we were--there wasn't--people couldn't see the differences.  And I ran as a manager and, you know, I can manage and know the, the budget, and I can do all these things.  And I'll always remember after I lost, this one guy came up to me and said, "Norm, you hire managers, you elect leaders," and that I didn't display or articulate a leadership persona.  Now, that could differentiate me from him, and it was a good learning experience.  Four years later, I ran for [U.S.] Congress and in '85 [1985], 19--what was it--'85 [1985], '86 [1986], I'm sorry, '86 [1986], and lost that race to the present congressman [Jim McDermott], who's been there since then.  That was a different race, but it was also a learning experience because when I realized that the persona that people, or how people, saw me wasn't really who I was.  And they were never able to see who I was, and I needed to tell the story, so to speak, that people couldn't relate to me 'cause they made judgments that were wrong, thinking that I was some silver spoon African American, who never had a hard day in his life, you know what I mean.  And, and that's not the case, as you know from the story I told you.  And so, I realized that I needed to weave into my political philosophy, my bio- my biography.  And I think from that, I, I grew.  I always tell everybody losing is by far the best teacher, providing you learn something (laughter) from losing.  And what I mean by that is that I, I always tell everybody, when you lose, sit down, and ask yourself what you could have done to win.  And if you get more than, than three, you got some work to do (laughter).  And it's about you--it's not about anything else.  If there's only one, then you might be able to blame somebody else, but at the end of the day, trying to blame somebody else for losing, never was, and never will help you win 'cause that's how, what makes you bitter.  So, I really looked at these as winning.  Now, I, I always tell everybody, I could tell you that story because I finally won (laughter), but at the time, losing takes, is a bitter, bitter pill.  So, I lost that race.
Story_ID: 536405
Speaker 1: I kind of figured that maybe I wasn't ever going to run again.  I had two starts.  It didn't work and so, I just kind of quirked.  I was on the energy committee.  I was on the personnel committee.  I was on every committee.  I was president of the council [Seattle City Council], and other kinds of things, so I, but then, I realized that maybe I didn't want to do that, so I wrote a letter.  I think it was in April of 1989 saying that I wasn't going to run, and that I was just going to devote my time to regional issues, and some kind of stuff that I wrote.  If they can't read, probably got in something, and that's what I said I would do and then, this issue of busing came, cropped up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's where the mayoral career takes out.  What, what happened was a guy, who was actually on my steering committee when I ran for the city council, decided to run for mayor, and he was going to run on the initiative of busing.  And, again, and to repeal busing in the City of Seattle [Washington], and that if he, if they didn't repeal busing--the, the school board--he would withhold all city funds that were directed to the school district [Seattle Public Schools].
Speaker 2: Now, that was Mr. Jewett, right?
Speaker 1: Yep, Doug Jewett [Douglas N. Jewett].
Speaker 2: Doug Jewett.
Speaker 1: He was city attorney.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And his initiative called Initiative 34, is that now?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I can't remember if it's 34 or 37, yeah.
Speaker 2: Thirty- oh, maybe, okay.
Speaker 1: Yep.  And I, and I opposed it.  I didn't like it, thought it was the wrong thing to do, thought we weren't talking about the right issues.  And there were almost ten candidates, I think, running for mayor, and none of them would take him on.  I think what happened is the polls all showed that the voters were--for repealing busing.  They felt that you weren't going to win by supporting it and so, the best way to get, reach supporting repealing busing, so the best way to get it off the table is to say schools have nothing to do with running the city, you know, because you don't have any jurisdiction or any control.  So, there was this kind of strange silence, and he was just running on this issue, you know, a wedge issue.   And I kept waiting for somebody to step up, step up.  Nobody would step up, and I started getting angrier and angrier.  And I remember one day, one of my colleagues, who was running for mayor, came in my office and said, "We got to take this busing off the table.  We got to put it somewhere else, so we can concentrate on the race.  And we really need to select somebody to head a taskforce to talk about this issue.  Who could that be?"  And I was sitting there listening to him.  And he said, "Well, it can't be you 'cause you're black," you know.  And I, I don't think he even knew what he said.  And I knew right then, I got very angry, not with him, but and said, "If I can't lead this taskforce because I'm black, then what can I lead, and what does this say?"  And then, when I kept waiting for these other candidates to speak, I realized that if someone didn't step in the breach and redefine the issue, or the value proposition, we would have something very negative.  So, I, an hour, I probably decided to run for mayor maybe three days before I announced, but I started talking to friends.  And then, I reached the point where I said, "I got to do this," and so went to dinner with our best friends and my wife [Constance Williams Rice], and said, "I think I got to do this."  And they all said, "I think you got to, too."  So, I announced for mayor, saying there--, "We've let this thing lead to a very shrill and divisive issue.  It's about quality education.  It's not about the bus ride, and until we come back to that, let's not have anybody lead us into this whole area."  I think what happened and my--were (unclear) in the race is that people were buoyed by the notion that there was, somebody was bringing reason to the debate, rather than anger.  And so, they were happy to hear somebody saying, I want to tackle this, and put my arms around it and solve it.  But at the same time, they still felt very strongly about repealing busing, and 'cause what happened, the irony of ironies, I won the election, but the initiative passed to repeal.  So, luckily, the school board decided that they would not repeal it.  And they just lived without the money, and then I called for a citywide education summit.  And we brought the committee together to help redefine the goals of education and the things that we wanted, and that seemed to create a positive effort around education (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let me go back a little bit.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Story_ID: 536406
Speaker 1: First of all, was, was--how was busing being played out here, and did it work?
Speaker 2: Well, boy, the reason why we have busing--had busing--in the City of Seattle [Washington], the City of Seattle was one of the few cities to introduce mandatory, voluntary busing.  That is, they decided to do this without a court order because they felt this was something we needed to do, so we did it.  It wasn't necessarily as positive as it went, 'cause a lot of people moved out of Seattle when they went to mandatory busing.  I think this was like in '75 [1975], you know, '76 [1976], '77 [1977].  And I would say that it was okay.  If you asked me today--is busing the right thing?  No.  Has busing gained what you wanted to gain?  No.  It is about quality education.  It is about the investments you make in the classroom, and sometimes the separate, but equal, aspects of what busing was designed to cure, is not the same in urban schools today, you know what I mean.  It's, it's a different kind of investment.
Speaker 1: And did they--
Speaker 2: And I really think what is--so, no, I don't think it's as good as what it is, but I refuse to give up busing until somebody gives me that dollar to put some place else.  Do you follow me, and so that I can, that the tradeoff ensures that I'm going to get better education rather than less?
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it's leverage on some level (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is, but it isn't anymore.  I, I mean, I'm telling you that, but I don't ever want to be the person that says, I want to repeal it.  I want to be the person that says, I'm adding betterments to schools for students.  And if busing goes, fine, but I'd want to concentrate my energies on making the classroom and the environment to learn better, and regardless what the circumstance is.
Speaker 1: Now, did Seattle basically do what a lot of cities did?  I mean, the, the white residents of Seattle, did they send their children to private schools or Catholic schools (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Seattle has the highest percentage of private school students than, than, than any place around, and, and for that very reason.  And especially parochial schools and like, now some people know how to gain the system.  Some people pull their kids out from K through nine [kindergarten through ninth grade], then put them back in high school, so they can be more competitive for SATs and Merit Scholars [National Merit Scholars], and other kind of things but, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: So, I kind of became the education mayor.  I called for education summit, brought the community together.
Story_ID: 536407
Speaker 1: Before we get into that, too, I just want to go back a little bit and ask you about some of the coalition building you had, had put together to become--
Speaker 2: When I ran, because there are already candidates out there, and a lot of people had endorsed, I didn't have a cadre of people.  So, luckily, because the busing was out there, issue, there were a lot of people who, of color, who had not endorsed it anymore.  My cadre was the most effective group that was around the city was a Rainbow Coalition that support Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] in his run in '86 [sic.].  That was my nucleus, so we had a very good field organization.  We had a, a wonderful program that was called the matching contributions issue, which fueled my campaign.  And what it was is that after the first fifty thousand dollars that you raised, which you needed to raise among--I think it was something like one thousand people or so, in that, in that construct, I was able to jump in the race, raise fifty, and then the city would give you one for one dollar for every dollar raised.
Story_ID: 536408
Speaker 1: So, the Rainbow Coalition was the nucleus of my campaign, and it, it played a pivotal role in orga- organizing.  The whole essence of community organizing like came to play, so we were able to get up and running with matching contributions.  We were able to be competitive in the fundraising aspect.  The matching contribution was such that after the fifty thousand [dollars] we raised, the city match you one for one, but you could not raise more than $250,000 for the whole campaign.  And if you did, you have to give back the money over 250.  Kind of constraining because, actually, I started doing better than what I wanted to do.  My opponent [Douglas N. Jewett] didn't take that contract, so we had a little more money.  But I think it's safe to say that the public, what--really wanted to vote their hopes and their fears.  So, they defeated the, endorsed the idea of repealing busing, but they elected Norm Rice [HistoryMaker Norman Rice], and go figure.  And we kind of say that what they did is they said, "Okay, repeal busing, and let Norm fix it," (laughter).  And so, that was kind of the guiding underpinning of my [mayoral] administration was the notion of civic engagement, how to bring the community together to get on the right course to positively look at education in a different light, and that's what we did.  We called for a summit.  Over two thousand plus people came together to redefine the goals and objectives of education.  And we used that summit as a way in which to review money to pay for education.  And we passed a levy called the Family and Education Levy [sic. Families and Education Levy], which would help us supplant the lost dollars that were on the table because the school board didn't repeal busing.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I just want to ask you some questions about--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --the Rainbow Coalition.  You were--I think it's important what you had to say about that when we were breaking that it--and just tell us about who was in the Rainbow Coalition and--
Speaker 1: Well, the Rainbow Coalition were those idealists who believed in Jesse Jackson's [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] message as a presidential candidate of hope, economic opportunity empowerment, and the like, refreshed in a whole large number of people, who've never been really involved in campaigns before, but felt that this was a compelling story that he was dealing with.  And so, their activism, their passion was so strong it was infectious.  And so, we had that because, needless to say, they weren't going to support anybody who was for repealing busing.  They weren't going to support people who, kind of neutral on that issue, so they were looking for a candidate.
Speaker 2: So, they, that's the group that was organized for his presidential run--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --in 1990.
Speaker 1: They were organized random.  They were mine, but they, when I decided to stand up to him, I was a natural draw for them to come.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it probably--
Speaker 2: And it included different kinds.  It was a different--Rainbow Coalition (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was made of--oh, yeah, it was made up of Asians, and Hispanics, and African Americans, and, and white activists.  It was very much the Rainbow Coalition and, and that's what kind of defined my administration and, and my leadership in the city [Seattle, Washington] from, from thereon.  And the whole notion that we could go out and talk to the community about their values, and find the value proposition, and create processes that, of inclusion is the cornerstone of the Rice legacy.  It's why I'm here at the university [University of Washington, Seattle, Washington], for civic engagement.  How do you create successful coalitions around critical issues, and come up with an action plan to solve it?
Story_ID: 536409
Speaker 1: There's also, I know--we're told that there are three factions in the white power structure that you had to really convince--
Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that you were the right per-, person.  And how did you do that?  They're like the Municipal League--
Speaker 2: Well, I--Municipal League [Municipal League of King County], the chamber [Seattle Metropolitan Chamber of Commerce], the rotary [Rotary Club of Seattle, Seattle, Washington].  I, I just think the natural evolution of my development helped to do that--working for the bank [Rainier National Bank, Seattle, Washington].  One of the premiere banks in the city gave me a lot of legitimacy among the business community.  I'm one of them--Urban League [Urban League of Metropolitan Seattle, Seattle, Washington], community council, elected freeholder, who knows about government to meet with the Muni League.  So, at every one of those forums, I had an experience and a relationship to be able to speak to them on their terms--not tell them any differently, each group something different, but therefore, to work for that way.  So, the president of the bank is a leading supporter of mine.  The, the people involved in the Council of Governments [Puget Sound Council of Governments; Puget Sound Regional Council] are supporters.  The community people--everybody had a very positive experience of working with me, and a good story to tell.  So, it wasn't too hard to get it.  And then, the editorial reviews and the endorsements, I don't say that I, but having familiarity with the press, familiarity as a journalist allowed me to have a comfort, and an access that was different than what other candidates would have.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  That tells, that paint, that paint, paints a picture.
Story_ID: 536410
Speaker 1: You were talking about the educational summit, then, the--now how, how soon after you were elected [mayor of Seattle, Washington] that you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The--we assembled, we, the summit came about--I, I took, like office in, how we say, '90 [1990], January '90 [1990].  The summit took place in April of '90 [1990].  We planned for, on a wonderful day in April, we assembled some two thousand people.  What we did is we asked them to state for us, if you could look five years beyond today, what kind of, what would be a positive educational system?  And we took those values that they used.  We hooked up thirty-six sites with computers, inputted all their information into a single computer, calibrated that, and collated that, and came back the next day with, here's what we think you said.  And then, we got validation that people agreed that's what they said.  And then, we developed action plans where we got people involved on task forces to come up with three recommendations to achieve those goals.  So, it was interactive, it was dynamic, it was a process that said, we asked you to tell us what you want.  We came back and said, showed you that we had listened.  And then, we asked you to come back, and be involved in the solution, rather than walking away.  And that really set the tone for my administration on everything I did.  And so, that was the civic engagement and the openness of the Rice [HistoryMaker Norman Rice] administration.  And I think, made us so successful, so that by the time, I ran for reelection, I think I got elected with 60 something, plus percent.
Story_ID: 536411
Speaker 1: How did that like, set a tone for future mayors?
Speaker 2: It could, and it couldn't.  I, I am teaching this whole notion of civic engagement now [at the Daniel J. Evans School of Public Affairs; Daniel J. Evans School of Public Policy and Governance, Seattle, Washington], and there's a downside to it.  Engagement takes a little longer time.  Some politicians want to be more forceful in action.  Engagement also means that you're going to do or try to influence what the community says, not what you think they should have.  So, that means that you don't always get to set the tone.  You got to listen and sometimes what they want is differently than what you have, and you got to be able to accept that.  Not everybody does that 'cause, you know, we talked about different cities.  Some politics is raw, you know, raw power, and a lot of people don't want to do that.
Speaker 1: Well, it's a, you know, that's one of the dilemmas of organizing, I guess, is that when you ask people what they want, they often don't--
Speaker 2: You don't do that.  And then, there is a betrayal.  And then, there's a lack of trust in government, and you've got to deliver on the promise.  And I maintain it's very simple.  If you're smart enough, you can get what you want, and you can get what they want.  Give a little, get a lot.  That's kind of what I say, and I think you can get there, but it's a little longer.  And it sometimes can be a little tedious, but it's the best thing to do.
Story_ID: 536412
Speaker 1: In terms of education, did you, you were able to put something together that people--
Speaker 2: We created the--out of that [education summit], we came up with making every child safe, healthy, and ready to learn, which we thought was the ideal responsibility for a city, so that the city no longer--everybody wants school districts to be mother and father, police, doctor, nurse and the like; we created a construct that allowed for the city [Seattle, Washington] to reassume responsibilities that it should have--daycare centers, health clinics, after school programs, those kinds of things.  And so, we then asked the voters to approve a levy [Families and Education Levy], for, for a seven year levy to--which was a tax, property tax levy to pay for that.  And we got 57 percent of the voters to support this, and we have supported that and done it for three elections of seven years, so it's been very successful and very positive.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Meanwhile, the busing stopped, right, and the--
Speaker 2: No, busing wasn't repealed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Busing has changed drastically now.  And I think we're now in a place in time where I think we need to start to look at what are the right investments we need to make in all neighborhood schools, so people don't have to bus.  And I think people are more ready for that now.  And I'm hoping that, in my capacity at the U [University of Washington, Seattle, Washington], I'll be able to reengage in that whole area, but we'll see.
Story_ID: 536413
Speaker 1: Seattle [Washington] was highly competitive with the strong strength and return of Boeing [The Boeing Company], and Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation], and Nintendo [Nintendo Company, Ltd.].  And so, it was in the top ten of cities, best cities to do business.  And so, I had the honor of being able to get my picture taken with those great giants of industry, and it was a very good boom for the economic health and vitality of the city.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Awesome, next.
Speaker 1: Well, needless to say, that's November 8th, 1978 when I got elected to the city council [Seattle City Council].  The--around the issue of busing, the issue of gay rights, and the, of the initiative on shooting.  And that shows a picture of me looking at the returns but--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Say it over again or--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Can we move to the next one?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) This is by far one of the most exciting times of my life.  I was president of the U.S. Conference of Mayors, and we got invited to the state dinner for Nelson Mandela as president of South Africa.  My wife [Constance Williams Rice] and I were ecstatic and to be invited.  There were only about 280 people invited, and we were one of them.  It was a thrill.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Excellent, got it, next.
Speaker 2: I never dreamed that, I never dreamed that I would see, and touch Rosa Parks, but she came to the City of Seattle for a speech.  And, as mayor, I was to greet her, and it was one of the most thrilling honors I ever had.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Great, next.  Try and give us a rough timeframe (unclear).
Speaker 2: This was probably in the mid to late '90s [1990s], about maybe '96 [1996] of my term as mayor.  The Dalai Lama had come to town.  He had wanted to find a place to give a news conference, so a lot of people shut their doors to him because he wasn't a recognized leader.  And I opened up the office of the mayor for him to have his news conference, and he gave me a hour of his time to just chat.  It was the most dynamic, wonderful time in my life.  If you've ever wanted to understand the notion of charisma, the Dalai Lama has it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good.
Speaker 2: He's a kind of a funny man.
Speaker 1: This was right, taking place right in this room, right where the staff (laughter) is taking his picture.  There's a picture of Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] speaking about the progress and progressive, the elements, along with our former governor Daniel Evans [Daniel J. Evans], which this school [Daniel J. Evans School of Public Affairs; Daniel J. Evans School of Public Policy and Governance, Seattle, Washington] is named after, and a former Dean, so Jimmy Carter, Dan Evans, Marc Lindenberg, and me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: This was at the White House [Washington, D.C.] for a meeting with the mayors, the U.S. Conference of Mayors, and I was on stage with the president [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton].  We're listening to one of our--the vice president, introducing, getting ready to introduce him.  And, needless to say, to be at the White House, and to be in a leadership position with your fellow mayors, and with the president.  Nothing beats that.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, got it, next.
Speaker 2: This is one of the most memorable ones, needless to say, with Ron Brown and I in the middle.  It was taken and probably the, the Asian Pacific Economic conference [Asian Pacific Economic Cooperation] was here.  And Ron Brown has stopped by the Seattle Vocational Institute [Seattle, Washington].  This was probably about a year before he died.  As the vice president, Al Gore, was involved in re-amending government, this was the meeting before we went in with the president to talk about his reinvention of government, and what we should be investing in and doing as citizens.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me at my, my graduation picture [from Manual High School, Denver, Colorado].  Norm Rice [HistoryMaker Norman Rice] was a skinny guy with the big glasses (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, good.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's a picture of going from--how should I say it for you and the camera--from left to right, or right to left?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Viewers left.  The viewers are right.
Speaker 1: Viewers, so (laughter), okay.  On your left is my sister [Audrey Rice Oliver].  That's my wife.  In front of my wife is my [maternal] grandmother [Susie Whitman], and then me, and my mother [Irene Johnson Powell] and my father [Otha Rice, Sr.].  I didn't realize I had everybody, all of us in the same picture, so it was nice to have to go back and find these (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a early picture of my dad, probably almost maybe two years after he got to, to Denver [Colorado], probably in the, probably late '20s [1920s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.
Speaker 1: That's another picture--I think it was the inauguration which is a picture of my--there's me, my mother, and my father.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Got it.
Speaker 1: And that was '89 [1989].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's a picture of Mayor Webb [HistoryMaker Wellington Webb], the mayor of Denver; Al Gore, vice president; and I, announcing an initiative in Austin, Texas for the U.S. Conference of Mayors, probably in about 1995.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Got it.
Speaker 1: That's my son [Mian Rice] and I, the joy of my wife and I's heart, on election night, talking about winning (laughter).
