Story_ID: 277776
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Neculai Burghelea.  Observing is [HistoryMaker] Mr. Paul Brock.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Barbara A. Reynolds.  Barbara, B-A-R-B-A-R-A, A. Reynolds, R-E-Y-N-O-L-D-S [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Barbara Reynolds].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, can you tell us what the A stands for?
Speaker 2: Ann.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Eight, seventeen, forty-two [August 17, 1942], and that's in Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I should say Reverend Dr. Barbara Reynolds because that's, those titles, I earned every one of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a minister/journalist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is June 30, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  And you don't have to give your address.
Speaker 2: We're at my home in Suitland, Maryland.
Story_ID: 277777
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions we always ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food, and what is it?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, did you ask me that?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Popcorn.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I would say red.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I would say fall, when it's not too cold and not too hot.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Cruises.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Trust in the Lord.
Story_ID: 277778
Speaker 1: Now I'm going ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Harvey Reynolds] side.  But first I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Elizabeth, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, Henderson, H-E-N-D-E-R-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: Let me see.  She's eighty-eight, and I think she was born in Columbus, Ohio, I think.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, 1917, or '16 [1916]?  Nineteen sixteen [1916] I guess, I believe, in Columbus.  Okay, now is Henderson her maiden name?
Speaker 1: Yes [sic.].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace her ancestors?
Speaker 1: I can't trace very far at all.  I do remember meeting her mother, and I remember hearing that they were from, they had originated in Old Virginia.  And that's all I can tell you.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, they don't give a place, but in Virginia?
Speaker 1: Old Virginia.
Speaker 2: Old Virginia.
Speaker 1: So, it was before Virginia separated into West Virginia.
Speaker 2: I know there are a lot of stories of Ohio--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --of black people coming out of Virginia.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They're the slaves of John Randolph, who were freed en masse, and who came across and settled in Piqua, Ohio and Chillicothe [Ohio] and other places.  Thomas Jefferson's family did the same thing.  The Hemmings settled in Chillicothe, I think.
Speaker 1: I do know that they were from some of the more--in rural Ohio.  Because I had a great-uncle that was a woodcarver, and I remember he said that they had their roots in rural Ohio, and somehow connecting to Old Virginia.  But I don't know that much.
Speaker 2: So, are there any stories passed down in your family about how they got, how they came out of Virginia to Ohio?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Or what the circumstances were?
Speaker 1: I don't hear any of those stories.
Speaker 2: Were any of them associated with black institutions in Ohio, like the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, or--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio], or--
Speaker 1: I don't know.  It's a long story, but just to answer your question just matter-of-factly, no, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, so what did your parents' parents do for a living?  I mean what did your mother's parents do for a living?
Speaker 1: I have no idea.
Story_ID: 277779
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, if you ever want me to tell you why, I'll tell you.  But to answer your question, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Well, the why is what makes this an important subject (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, all right, if you want to know why.
Speaker 1: Well, no doesn't tell us that much, you know.  So--
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Elizabeth Henderson] left me when I was two.  And she left me, and I stayed with my grandfather [Milton Stewart] and my step-grandmother [Mae Stewart].  And I never, we have just now connected, re-connected, I'd say in the last ten years.  So, I don't know anything of my roots.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your mother left when you were two?
Speaker 2: She left me with my step-grandmother and my grandfather.  And he died when I was eighteen.  And I was never close to my mother's family.  So, there's just nothing I would know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is this--is this your grandfather on your mother's side, or on your father's [Harvey Reynolds] side?
Speaker 2: This is my grandfather on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her father.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, he never really talked about the family history at all?
Speaker 2: Nope, never did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was, they called him a messenger boy at a bank in Columbus [Ohio].  That's what he did.
Story_ID: 277780
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he was--all right.  So, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Harvey Reynolds.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in the home of the [Ku Klux] Klan, the KKK.
Speaker 1: Oh, Pulaski, Tennessee?
Speaker 2: Pulaski, Tennessee.  And let me see, he's, he just had, I think he just had his eighty-sixth birthday.
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighteen [1918], yeah.
Speaker 2: So, he would be what?
Speaker 1: That's 1918, he's the same age as my father.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, I know a little bit more about, you know, the fact that the Reynolds did have land in Pulaski, Tennessee.  And as I understand it, they were run out of Pulaski, Tennessee by the KKK, and went to live around Decatur, Alabama and some parts of Georgia.  And I do know that my father was a sharecropper.  They all lived on a plantation around Tennessee, somewhere in Tennessee.  And my aunt, Ida Alexander, somehow came north.  And she worked and saved her money, and came back and got all of her brothers and sisters off the plantation.  No. You know, it was, what do you call the plantation?  They were like sharecroppers, but that was where you never--you toiled the land, but you never benefitted from the land.
Speaker 1: In fact, you were always owed money.
Speaker 2: Always owed money.  So she got, let me see.  She got my father; she got Robert; she got Aunt Boos [ph.]; she had, I think there were five of them.  And she, somehow they all moved, they migrated to Columbus, Ohio.  I do know that Smith Reynolds fought in the Civil War.  In fact we learned that at our family reunion, that he was, you know, very much of a brave soldier during the Civil War.
Speaker 1: Now who was Smith Reynolds?
Speaker 2: He was my father's grandfather, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he would be your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a family record about what unit he fought in, and where he was?
Speaker 2: I think some people do know that.  In fact, I was looking at sort of a family tree.  We do have a historian in the family who's now turning up all of this information.  So, that exists somewhere.
Story_ID: 277781
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Harvey Reynolds] talk about growing up?  Now, he grew up partially in the South, and I guess--was it Alabama and Georgia?
Speaker 2: Well, he talked about, you know, just growing up as a sharecropper.  But he didn't tell a lot, you know.  They didn't talk about the old days, and for some reason I didn't solicit that much from them.  It's just now something that we're talking about.  So, there's not much more that I know about how he grew up.  You know, I just know that his mother [Ida Reynolds] died soon after childbirth, after he was--he was the last child, and I know she died soon afterwards.  And I don't know very much, I never heard him talk about his father [Harry Reynolds].
Speaker 1: So, your Aunt Ida [Alexander] really was the pillar of strength in the family?
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact she just died, I believe it was last year.  And she was the pillar of strength.  She's the one who came to Columbus [Ohio].  And she didn't have a lot of education, but she knew what to do with what she had.  She started one of the largest daycare centers on the West Side of Columbus called the Busy Bee Nursery [Alexander's Busy Bee Nursery, Columbus, Ohio].  And she would make clothes, she was a seamstress.  She would make clothes, she would make hats.  You know, whatever it was that she could do, she knew how to turn it into a business, and something to help people.  For my sixtieth birthday, she came to my sixtieth birthday party not too long ago.  And she was, she was now in a wheelchair, and that was the last time I saw her.  And then I went to her funeral the next year.
Speaker 1: She sounds like quite a woman.
Speaker 2: She was quite a woman.  I was actually her first child before she could have children.  She thought she couldn't have children, so she took a lot, invested a lot of time trying to tell my grandmother [Reynolds' maternal step-grandmother, Mae Stewart] how to raise me.  I used to hear them arguing all the time about me, because they had different ideas about, you know, how I should be raised and who should raise me.  But I did know that she loved me very much.  And she was a tough and very, very, religious woman.
Story_ID: 277782
Speaker 1: Considering your situation, what were your parents' [Elizabeth Henderson and Harvey Reynolds] personalities like?  And what were the personalities of Aunt Ida [Alexander] and your grandmother like?  I mean in terms your-- of the influences on you, who do you take after, or learned more from?
Speaker 2: I think I really took after my grandmother [maternal step-grandmother], Mrs. Mae Stewart, who was no kin at all, but she was the only mother that I knew.  She raised me from a baby after my mother left me and went on to California.  But my grandmother, Mae, and my grandfather [Milton Stewart]--you know, in Columbus [Ohio], it was a very middle class existence that I grew up in.  The governor [Frank Lausche] lived on the street that I grew up on.  So, you know, it couldn't have been too bad, because he was our neighbor.
Speaker 1: What street was this?
Speaker 2: This was on Governors Place.  It was--and so, you know, I grew up in a pretty--I think a fourteen or fifteen room house on Governors Place.  I had the best of everything--ballet lessons, violin lessons, music lessons.  And my grandfather and grandmother were working class, you know, my grandfather.  And the reason I say--you know, he was fifty or sixty, but they still called him the messenger boy, that's what they, how they termed him.  And my grandmother was a maid and a cook.  And of course in those days, men, some men, felt that their wives shouldn't work.  So I remember my grandmother was, she stopped working, and she catered now and then.  But they--I mean, one of the reasons that, you know, that I'm much of what I am today is because of my grandmother.  Because she, you know, taught me how to struggle through stuff.  She really taught me to always invest in real estate, and that's something I've always done.  I didn't realize what it would turn out to be, but I've done it.  And so now at sixty-two, I don't have to worry about poverty, because I always did what she showed me to do; I always invested in real estate.  And she was a strong person.  I remember how she used to fight for me in school.  The teachers wanted me to study home economics.  And I remember her just marching over to the school and saying, "My daughter will learn to type, you know.  I'll teach her how to cook.  You teach her to type."  I mean I saw her challenge authority.  I saw her stand up to white people, and that always made me really respect her.  And I wanted to be like her in every way, except being a servant. Because she took me to work once with her, and I remember it was in Bexley, Ohio.  And I remember that the blacks and Jews couldn't live in Bexley.  So when I got there, we had to go in the back door.  And that was my first introduction to a separate society.  Because I said, "Why would we have to go in through the back door?"  And so when we sat down to eat, you know, she fixed the food for everybody who was at the table.  And I went to sit down with everybody else, and she said, "You can't eat with them.  You have to eat in the kitchen with me."  And I began to have a sense of indignity, of something's not right here.  And I remember the white lady asked her could she go up and scrub the tub out.  And I remember saying, "No, I'll do it."  And I went up there, because I didn't want her to do it.  And I went up there and I scrubbed the tub out.  And I said, "Why would anybody want somebody else to scrub their tub, you know?  Why would anybody do this?"  And so, I must have been about twelve or thirteen.  But you know, that was my introduction to what I later would learn would be white folk.  I went to a predominantly black school in Columbus.  And you know, we didn't have a lot of racial hostility.  You know, it wasn't like we were at each other's throat.  I mean, most things were just subtle.  And it was a mostly black school.  Most of my teachers were white.  But you know, back to my grandmother.  I just loved her so much.  In fact, to this very day, her death is probably the worst thing that ever happened to me in my whole life, and she died in the '70s [1970s].
Story_ID: 277783
Speaker 1: She was your [maternal] step-grandmother actually?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, no kin to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No blood.
Speaker 1: And her last name was?
Speaker 2: Stewart.
Speaker 1: Stewart.  Mae Stewart?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But she taught me to be tough and to stand up for what I believed in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She used to say "You can fall, but you don't have to wallow.  You know, always get up."  And she fought for me.  And--
Speaker 1: Now what was--I think it's worth asking.  Now, what was her background?  What made her as strong as she was?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Was she from, originally from Columbus [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: She, I know she was from Macon, Georgia.
Speaker 1: From Macon, Georgia, okay.
Speaker 2: And that's about all I know.
Speaker 1: Did she have a chance to go to school there?  Or did she--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Somehow it's in my head that maybe she had an eighth grade education.  But I know she was not educated, but she was smart.  And she kept, you know, telling me, she said, "You know, [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Barbara [Reynolds], I want you to get an education, because you don't have common sense."  (Laughter) And so, I took her advice.
Speaker 1: There are so many people that are--
Speaker 2: Right, I mean they call it mother wit.  They had, you know, like for example when I was sick, she'd go out in the backyard and dig around and get whatever it was, a root or something.  And she--I would, you know, I'd be well before the doctors got there.  I remember I stuck a, I stepped on a rusty nail, and she beat my foot with something.  I mean, she, you know, got the blood out.  I mean they knew what to do with--you know, they had, you know, something else that I guess God equipped them with, to survive and to make it, that just required logic and common sense.  But it wasn't like street sense that they talk about now.  It was some kind of, other kind of--maybe it was just a spirituality.
Speaker 1: Well, wasn't that knowledge passed down?  I mean, didn't she know what to get?  I mean somebody--
Speaker 2: She had to get it from someplace.  And she was from Georgia, so, you know, whatever they had--you know, the pharmacological experience--you know, they eventually--this knowledge was eventually taken.  And now you have to pay big bucks for what they somehow knew.  But she knew I had to get an education.  And she said, "You just get all the education you can, because you don't have mother wit."  And so I mean it did work out.  I did get all the education I could get.  But she, she could do so much with so little.  You know, I still don't know if I'm as smart as she was (laughter).
Story_ID: 277784
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story that's passed down about how your parents [Elizabeth Henderson and Harvey Reynolds] actually met?
Speaker 2: My parents met--it's a vague story, you know.  My father just said he was standing on the porch or something, and she walked by.  I don't know where she came from.  And he fell in love with her, you know.  It's, you know, I don't know any more than that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, do you know where your mother went after she left?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, she went to California.  Her first house was in Pasadena, California.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your father stayed in Columbus [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he remarried.  He married a woman named Mary Reynolds, who was a psychiatric nurse.  And he had two children.  And my mother had four children when she went to California.  So, I was the first child that they had together.
Story_ID: 277785
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest?
Speaker 1: Yeah, like the first thing you remember in life.
Speaker 2: I remember my mother [Elizabeth Henderson] not being there.  I remember at one point I had this mother, and then I remember not having her.  I remember wanting her to come to--I was a very smart child, and I thought maybe she would come to a play I would have been in, or maybe she would have come to a recital.  Or if I got in trouble she would have come.  Or when I had surgery she would have come.  I remember that, as well as I remember the grandmother [Reynolds' maternal step-mother, Mae Stewart] who was there, you know.
Story_ID: 277786
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Elizabeth Henderson] ever discuss--I know you've seen her since, you know, but does she ever talk about, you know, what she was thinking when she left?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's part of my new book, 'Out of Hell & Living Well' [Reverend Dr. Barbara A. Reynolds].  That's the whole story--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of why she left and how we came back together.  It's all there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, I don't know how much you want me to talk about it.
Speaker 1: Well, is there I guess an abridged version of what she was thinking when she left?
Speaker 2: Well, she wanted--the era when she left, it was in the '40s [1940s].  And this was when Lena Horne was the pin-up model.  And a lot of women thought that they could go to Hollywood and they could become movie stars.  And so my mother was a very beautiful woman, and she wanted to become a movie star.  So she did not want a child at this time.  And she, her story is she said she would send for me when she could.  So she went out there, but she became pregnant by someone she met on the train, in fact.  He was of a Pullman porter, and she married him and had four children.  And I went to see her finally when I was seventeen, and I never will forget that moment.  Because she played the piano, and there were four pictures on the piano of her children, where she lived in Pasadena [California].  I said, you know, "Mother, where is my picture?  You don't have my picture."  And she says, "You know, would you mind not telling anybody that you're my daughter?  Because I don't want anybody to know how old I am."  And that was a very heartbreaking thing for me to try to deal with, when your own mother rejects you.  It's, it's something that can hurt you for the whole, the rest of your life.  But I did return to Columbus, Ohio after going out to California, very disheartened about our relationship, but still ready to go forward and go on to college.  But you know, I don't think people really understand the heartbreak of someone who grows up wondering why their mother abandoned them.
Speaker 1: Well, that's a question I think would puzzle a lot of people.  I mean, mothers usually don't--you know, fathers you hear about doing that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But mothers being so close to the birth--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and the child, usually it's a tougher--you know, it's a tougher--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's something, because--
Speaker 1: You know, it's a puzzle to a lot of people as to why that might happen.
Speaker 2: But she, she also abandoned my sister, who was raised by an aunt most of the time, and was in something like Girls Town [ph.].  But she had--
Speaker 1: You had a sister in Columbus, too?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  This was her daughter that she had when she went to California.  She raised the boys, but somehow the girls ended up somewhere else, the two girls she had.  But, you know, as we get on in the interview, you'll see how it all works out, because it does work out.
Story_ID: 277787
Speaker 1: Can you describe your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Oh, there is one other thing--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that I think is important.  Because it's very important why I wanted to become a writer.  When I was a little girl, I must have been eight or nine or ten, I saw a book in the bookcase.  I don't know how it got there, but it was by a woman named Barbara Reynolds, and it was about horses.  And I remember looking at that book and saying, "I can't believe that you actually have your name on a book."  And I said, "Gee, I really wish I could have my own name on a book."  And I just had that in my soul for years, you know.  And I never thought it could happen, but I always wanted it to happen.
Story_ID: 277788
Speaker 1: Now we were, I was getting ready to ask you about your neighborhood, and we always ask this question.  Can you describe for us the neighborhood you lived in, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [on Governors Place in Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My neighborhood was very upscale.  As I said, the governor lived on the corner.
Speaker 1: Was that his private residence?  Or was it the official residence?
Speaker 2: No, that was where he lived; that was where he lived.  And they think his--
Speaker 1: Was that the state residence for the governor, or was it--
Speaker 2: It was, it was where he lived.  Now, I don't remember whether it was official or unofficial, or what.
Speaker 1: In some states, there is an official governor's mansion.
Speaker 2: They used to say this is the governor's mansion.  And his name was Frank Lausche.
Speaker 1: Lausche, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  I remember we used to go there and get candy apples on Halloween.  It was a neighborhood where everybody knew everybody else.  And you know, I remember how going to school, sometimes we would duck in the neighbor's front door and go out the neighbor's back door, you know, ducking in and out of homes.  I mean people didn't leave their doors locked.  I mean, we didn't know about folks coming in and robbing you and stealing things.  And so, I remember walking to the movie theater.  It must have been three miles, you know, on Sundays.  And when I went home and I saw where the movie theater was, I couldn't believe it.  Because we walked there and walked back, and thought nothing of it.
Story_ID: 277789
Speaker 1: But there was an interesting house next door to me [on Governors Place in Columbus, Ohio].  See, we all had big homes, and we had roomers in them.  So, the home next door, I guess it looked very ordinary in the daytime.  But at night, it turned into something else.  It was like a silk stocking situation.  I'm trying to think of a euphemism for what they were doing.  You know, I'll describe what they were doing; they were having sex parties.  And they were doing the kinds of things people do when they're having a sex party, okay.  And I would look in the window at night and see everything that was going on; I was about twelve.  And then I had, my mother [Elizabeth Henderson] had given me a diary, a little diary with a lock on it.  And so, I would write what I saw.  And I started this diary, as a little girl might do.  I was very interested in Hopalong Cassidy, and Dale Evans, and Gene Autry, and all those.  And I used to, you know, just write little stories about that.  But then I'd see that, what was going on next door, and it was so interesting about what I'd see grown folks doing.  And so I wrote that, and I wrote it in the first person, because I found that that was so interesting.  And then I wrote about what some of the older men were trying to do me, as a young girl.
Speaker 2: The men that stayed in the rooming house?
Speaker 1: No, this was in my own house, we had roomers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I mean, in your house--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, yeah, we had roomers.
Speaker 2: --which was a rooming house, yeah.
Speaker 1: And some of these men in my house were fondling me.  And so, I wrote that.  And I also wrote an early incident about what my father [Harvey Reynolds] was doing with me, and I wrote that.  But the unfortunate thing was I mixed it all up in a child's imagination.  Some of it was the real truth, and some of it was just fantasy.
Story_ID: 277790
Speaker 1: And so, my mother [Elizabeth Henderson] somehow found it; my grandmother [Reynolds' maternal step-grandmother, Mae Stewart] who raised me found the little diary.  And she thought that was something was terribly wrong with me.  And so she took me to a doctor, and the doctor said, "This child is a virgin.  She's making all this stuff up."  And so, what should have been believed was not believed, because it just seemed like it was all fantasy, and some of it was and some of it wasn't.  But what happened, she talked to a social worker who thought that I should be put into an institution for evaluation.  And so I went into this institution, and they misdiagnosed me as mentally ill.  And I ended up as one of the early, one of the youngest persons in a mental institution, which was one of those big warehouses they used to have in Ohio.  And--
Speaker 2: So this was--you were about twelve then?
Speaker 1: I was about twelve.  I couldn't have been, I wasn't a teenager yet.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is 1954 or around that time?
Speaker 1: Around that age.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: And they, they had done some diagnosis to show that I was insane.  And actually, all that was was the making of a writer. But anyway, they put me in this mental institution.  And there were horrible stories.  There was just... there was this big white woman with blonde hair that fondled me once as I tried to go down these, this winding staircases.  I remember a mouse being in my shoe, somebody had put it there.  I remember bats flying ahead, overhead.  It was, I remember all of us being served food out in the middle of this thing, you know.  I remember people screaming at night.  And I remember being injected with some kind of drugs.  And this was my first experience that showed me that you could change your reality by using drugs.  And somehow my grandmother, when she visited me, she could understand what she had really done, you know, and she worked to get me out of there.  I can't even remember how long I was there.  It seemed like maybe it couldn't have been over a couple of months.  But it was a horrible, horrible, experience to think that my first experience with writing made me end up in a mental institution.  So, you know, for years I never, ever wrote.  I went to poetry, but I never did any kind of self-examination again, or I never put myself in stories again, because I just had this very bad experience of what could happen.  It would take me maybe forty years again to write anything personal.  But it was a horrible experience.  It taught me, you know, not to trust, you know.  But I worshipped my grandmother so much that I just forgave her for that, and just went on with life as far as I could understand it.
Story_ID: 277791
Speaker 1: Wow, that's quite a story.  But I want to take you back a little bit before that happened.  Now, what grade school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I remember attending St. Cyprian Catholic Elementary School [St. Cyprian School, Columbus, Ohio].  And I remember a very disciplined ethic that the nuns enforced.  If we did not have our schoolwork, they would beat us with rulers.  I remember them throwing some of the guys against the blackboard, you know.  But it did teach me respect for being on time and having my work.  And I'm still like that.  You know, if I have a deadline--  I'm very task-oriented, I always meet my deadlines.  I think the nerv- the nuns drummed it into us by, I guess, by brutality.  (Laughter) But still, in a sense, I still, you know, was glad that I had that kind of strict early education.
Speaker 1: Now, were your parents [Elizabeth Henderson and Harvey Reynolds], was your grandmother [Reynolds' maternal step-grandmother, Mae Stewart] Catholic?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: They were sending you there to get a better education? Basically, uh--
Speaker 2: It was so funny, because you know, when we were kids we didn't examine what our parents were.  We just did what we were told, you know.  I went to Catholic schools, and I went to Sunday school and church [St. Cyprian Church, Columbus, Ohio], and I never did really think about it--that nobody else in the house went but me.  My grandfather [Milton Stewart] didn't go.  I think in the later years my grandmother started going to church.  But I went.
Speaker 1: So, was it a Catholic church?
Speaker 2: I went to Catholic church I think up until I was maybe in junior high [Franklin Junior High School, Columbus, Ohio], and then I insisted upon going to public schools.
Speaker 1: Okay, but they would send you--
Speaker 2: They would send me--
Speaker 1: --to church and to school?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, a lot of schools put pressure on all the parents or guardians to attend the church, too.
Speaker 2: I never remember them going.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Never.
Speaker 1: But they made sure that you went?
Speaker 2: They made sure I went.  And you know, we never thought to ask, "Well, why don't you go?"
Speaker 1: This is St. Cyprian Catholic Church?
Speaker 2: St. Cyprian Catholic Church, and St. Cyprian Catholic School.
Story_ID: 277792
Speaker 1: Now, were there any teachers there that you would consider like a--
Speaker 2: Not there [St. Cyprian School, Columbus, Ohio].  I don't remember, you know, any of them standing out that early.  There was a later teacher who I remember standing out in my mind, but not in the elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there any mentors or role models other than your--
Speaker 2: Well, there was one.  And his name was Waldo Tyler.  In fact, he was the owner of the drugstore, the black drugstore in my hometown.  And he used to have a little--well, I was an early teenager, maybe twelve or thirteen or something like that.  He would have a book club for us, and we had to read all the great books like 'Mein Kampf,' [Adolf Hitler] you know.  He--
Speaker 1: Really, 'Mein Kampf,' really, in junior high school [Franklin Junior High School, Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah.  He was--and I remember his taking me to [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] one day.  He took a bunch of us to Ohio State, and he took us on the campus and he said, "Look, one day you can come here."  And that was something to us, because nobody in my family had ever gone to college.  You know, it wasn't even something that anybody was talking about.  You know, my [maternal] grandfather [Milton Stewart], you know, I'm not sure what he did other than unskilled work.  And my father [Harvey Reynolds], I know worked in a factory.  And my mother [Elizabeth Henderson], you know, was a secretary, you know, and she worked for Wright-Patterson Air Force Base [Dayton, Ohio].  She was a secretary/typist.  But nobody had gone to college that--I think we had an uncle that maybe had gone to engineering school, but I'm not sure if he graduated.  So, this wasn't something that people were talking about.  But it stuck that, the college stuck.
Story_ID: 277793
Speaker 1: So, in your school, was your school all black, St. Cyprian [School, Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was all black.  I was always a top student, always.  And I think that worked very well for me until Franklin Junior High [School, Columbus, Ohio].  It came over the PC system, the PA system, that Barbara Reynolds [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Barbara Reynolds] has the highest IQ of anyone in the school.  And I remember from then on trying not to get good grades, of actually (laughter) going out in the park and hanging out, and just doing everything I could not to stand out like that.
Speaker 1: So, was it un-cool to be smart then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was just un-cool to be--
Speaker 1: I mean, you know, now they say that--you know, in the hip-hop generation--
Speaker 2: Right, it was still--
Speaker 1: --it's, you know--
Speaker 2: I guess it depends on who you was trying to hang with.  And I was trying to hang with the coolest people, and the coolest people were probably the wrong people.  And so, this was like a putdown.  And so, the only way I couldn't get good grades was just not to go to school at all.  So, I started hanging out in Franklin Park [Conservatory and Botanical Gardens, Columbus, Ohio], you know, during the day, just roaming around with the kids.  And--
Speaker 1: So, all of this is counter-intuitive to the kind of behavior that you really--I mean you really liked school, didn't you?
Speaker 2: I liked school, I've always liked to learn.  I've always been a bookworm, always liked school.  But I just didn't want that reputation of being the smartest, because I didn't have any--you know, people got jealous of me because some thought they were the smartest.  People wanted to fight me, you know.  It was just, just, that wasn't really--you know, you stood out.  Playing basketball, you--you know, you just--that wasn't--maybe it was me, because there were some kids that would have been impressed by that.  But the kids that I was hanging out with, I don't think they would have been impressed by that.  But my grandmother [Reynolds' maternal step-grandmother, Mae Stewart], I never will forget.  She heard I was hanging out in the park.  And one day she, I don't know where she came from, but they um, she came and found me and marched me back to school.  And I was so embarrassed because, you know, in those days when a parent came to school, the whole school would buzz.  And to have her actually bring me back to school, it was just, you know, so humiliating.  She was, you know, very tough.  And so, I eventually got back on track.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was this prior to you being institutionalized, or was it afterwards?
Speaker 2: It was much afterwards--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when--
Speaker 1: You had some rough experiences.  Now, I mean--
Speaker 2: Right, of course, I've had many of them.
Speaker 1: This whole thing of being institutionalized, now that's really a horrible thing.
Speaker 2: Well, I think, I think--and I can tell you why later.  Because when we picked the story up of why this institutionalization really was a very bad thing--because it made me understand about the effect of drugs--that I could take a drug and ease pain.  And that was something I should have never learned.
Story_ID: 277794
Speaker 1: Did St. Cyprian [School, Columbus, Ohio] have a junior high school?
Speaker 2: No, I went on to Franklin Junior High [School, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is public school, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember that I would get mad at my [maternal] grandparents [Mae Stewart and Milton Stewart] and run away from home, and stay with my Aunt Ida [Alexander] or stay with my father [Harvey Reynolds].  And my aunt used to make my clothes to go to Franklin Junior High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you like Franklin Junior High better than St. Cyprian?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because they weren't as strict.  I actually was trying to run from the nuns, and just the strictness of what they were doing.
Speaker 1: Now, were the sexes separated at St. Cyprian?  Was it all girls?
Speaker 2: No, it was all, it was still boys and girls.  But they were very strict on us, and I noticed that I was not acting up pretty much at--probably I should have stayed at the Catholic school, because I didn't really begin to act out until I got out of there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Franklin is a lot more freedom.
Speaker 2: A lot more freedom.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I don't remember much of what I did at Franklin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you really got turned loose at Franklin (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And whatever you started doing is a blur (laughter).
Speaker 2: And it continued at East High School [Columbus, Ohio] and just became even, you know, worse because now here comes the boys back into it.  And you know, I stayed a virgin in high school, but I still, you know, was very taken by, you know, guys who thought I was beautiful and pretty.  And so--
Speaker 1: Now that seems to be something that most girls are taken in by, you know, at that age.
Speaker 2: Right.  And so, you know, that was an influence.  But I was in--
Speaker 1: Now, what high school--I'm sorry, what high school?
Speaker 2: This was East High School.
Speaker 1: Oh, Cleveland East.
Speaker 2: No, East.
Speaker 1: I mean, I'm sorry, not Cleveland.
Speaker 2: East High School.
Speaker 1: Columbus East.
Speaker 2: Columbus East.
Speaker 1: Columbus East
Story_ID: 277795
Speaker 1: And then I started, I played in the band.  And I just loved that, because I played trumpet.  And I would go to all of the football games.  And we would march down the football field, and we would be playing and doing the high-stepping moves.  And I had a lot of friends, and we traveled.  I really loved being in the band.  And I kept my grades up, because if I didn't, I knew I couldn't be in the band.  Then--
Speaker 2: East [High School, Columbus, Ohio] had great teams, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Being from Dayton [Ohio], I always heard about, you know, Columbus East's basketball team.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were very good, you know, orange and black, you know.  And I learned to play the violin, and eventually had a music scholarship for music.  And I was in the drama club, you know, they saw, I used to go down in the basement and throw snowballs in the hall.  And the teacher, Sara Searcy [ph.], pulled me out of that into drama, and that sort of helped me act out.  You know, I sort of had a rage inside of me.  Because in my family, you know, you would think that when your mother leaves you, other people in the family would be supportive.  But, you know, I felt that my mother's relatives didn't seem to like her.  She felt, my mother [Elizabeth Henderson] felt she was the black sheep of the family, which helped her leave.  And now here I am.  And I just felt that they, they didn't like me.
Speaker 2: Now, you didn't get in trouble in school, did you?
Speaker 1: I was always in trouble.
Speaker 2: Were you?  Okay.  But you were still a very bright student?
Speaker 1: A very bright student, but still always in trouble.
Speaker 2: What things did you do to get in trouble?
Speaker 1: Just, there was like a little sandwich shop not too far from my house.  And they had a jukebox and they had something like, what is it?  Pinwheels, where you pull the lever, and then you--you know, those--what do you call it?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Pinball machines.
Speaker 1: Pinball machines.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I loved to stay there and play pinball and just hang out with the kids, you know, and just would stop going to school.  And so--
Speaker 2: So you would get in trouble for taking a little hiatus from school?
Speaker 1: Right, and then I started drinking at an early age too.  Because I would go to my father's [Harvey Reynolds] house and they drank all the time and partied, so I started picking up drinking.  I'd say maybe about fifteen or sixteen I was starting, tried to learn how to drink, with beer.  And then, you know, I kept on going until it really became a problem later on in life.  It became a serious problem
Speaker 2: Okay.  But was it a problem in high school, or was it just later?
Speaker 1: Well, it became a problem.  See, it seems like I always had two personalities working--one good, one bad.  And it was always a struggle to see which would win.  Because here was this smart woman, smart girl, but then I actually got kicked out of high school for drinking, drinking at the--I think it was the last week school.  I was driving my [maternal] grandfather's [Milton Stewart] car, and I was drinking at the party.  And I was, I said I couldn't walk across the stage because of either being intoxicated or drinking too much.
Story_ID: 277796
Speaker 1: And so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is before graduation?
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is the week of graduation, which in that day it just, I just made my mother so--my grandmother [Reynolds' maternal step-grandmother, Mae Stewart] just weep so badly.  And I just said to myself, I've got to go to college.  This is the only thing that I can do to just make her feel better.  And I can't, I just, you know--
Speaker 2: Now, did--
Speaker 1: Well, let me see how that happened.  Let me see.  It was high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio], and then I left high school and went to California to meet my mother [Elizabeth Henderson].  And I was trying to get away from what I done.  And--
Speaker 2: Now, did they let you graduate?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but they handed me my diploma.  I couldn't walk across the stage with all the other children.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, that made your grandmother feel bad?
Speaker 1: Oh, she felt miserable, because--
Speaker 2: Now, did you graduate with honors?
Speaker 1: Well, not now.  Because they just handed me my diploma.
Speaker 2: Okay, but you would have been--
Speaker 1: I would have been, right.
Speaker 2: --an honor student?
Speaker 1: Right, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it was very terrible to see her cry.  And then I knew what the other relatives were saying, "You see, you shouldn't have taken her in, because look how she's turning out."  And so all of that was--training you know, was I going to be this nothing person that some of the relatives had predicted, or was I going to be something that they weren't?  I just had two different persuasions.  I don't think I even knew which way I was going to go.
Speaker 2: So, did you kind of doubt yourself as to what you were--
Speaker 1: I always doubted--
Speaker 2: --which way you were going to go, because of the--
Speaker 1: I didn't know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I really didn't know.  I knew that on one hand, I had just little dream hidden inside of me about this writer.  But on the other hand, I saw what hell it got me into when I really did write.  And I saw that I was smart, but then I saw I didn't want to be smart.  So, it was just, you know, these two different kinds of thoughts tugging at me.  And I really didn't know what I wanted to do.  But when I went out to California and met my mother, really got to see my mother, I disliked her so much that I really wanted to come home and please my grandmother.
Story_ID: 277797
Speaker 1: But that didn't work out right, because the first school I went to was Central State [College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  The first college I went to--
Speaker 2: Now, how did you wind up at Central State?  I mean, what happened?  I mean, it seems like a logical place for somebody to go, you know, in Ohio.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, it was just, it was just not too far from our house.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it's a black college [HBCU]--
Speaker 1: It's an all-black college, right.
Speaker 2: --created for the black residents of Ohio.
Speaker 1: Right.  I remember my grandmother [Reynolds' maternal step-grandmother, Mae Stewart] and grandfather [Milton Stewart] driving me to Central State.  I remember--
Speaker 2: This is 1960 I guess?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it must have been.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I remember that my grandmother took--although the money, you know, was a thousand dollars, she counted out like maybe one, two, three, ten, fifteen (laughter).  And when I got there, I could not believe what happened.  I mean I hardly went to school, because they were always having parties.  I was always having a date.  You know, the men worshipped me.  I just loved all this attention, and I couldn't go to school.  So I ended up with a D average.  I couldn't believe it.  Because I mean, I wasn't really used to Ds.  And so, I just said, the heck with this.  I'll go--that's when it happened.  I said, "I'll go live with my mother [Elizabeth Henderson]."  This is after, okay, I graduated from high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio].  I wanted to prove to my grandmother that she made the right choice, by taking me and being my mother.  So, just to make her happy more so than anything else, I said I would go to Central State.  So she took me to Central State, and this turned out to be just chaos cause I couldn't focus.  And I said, the heck with this.  I'll go and just live with my mother.  And that's when I went out to California to live with her, and it's a horrible experience.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, you had that experience and then you came back to Columbus [Ohio]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I came back to Columbus.
Story_ID: 277798
Speaker 1: And what did you--I mean what were your prospects then?  Were you going to go back to school?
Speaker 2: In California, you know, I ended up working at a factory.  It was a greeting card factory, and it was in East L.A. [Los Angeles, California], where Mexicans really were the majority.  And so I was working for Mexicans.  And I remember that there was a little, I guess, chow wagon that they would bring in at lunchtime.  And it was all enchiladas, and tacos, and food like that.  And I remember I had to stack those boxes.  And you know, I'm just stacking those boxes and I say, "You know, am I really supposed to be here stacking boxes?  You know, isn't there something... you know, maybe I can do better than this."  And I just, I just said, you know, "I don't think I'm supposed to just be here stacking boxes."  And it was working for Mexicans, and I was told that you had to be pretty down on your luck to work for Mexicans.  Of course, it didn't matter to me, but this is what I was told.  And my mother [Elizabeth Henderson] was just unkind to me.  She had married a preacher by now.  This was her third husband.  And he was always talking about this helicopter he would have to have to go to all of his churches.  And my brothers and sisters refused to go to his church, and I refused to go to his church.  So I remember my brothers one night jumped on him and beat him with brooms, because they just didn't get along.
Speaker 1: What was it about him that was so irritating?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) What was so--why didn't we like Pastor Henderson?  I didn't like him, I mean, because he used to say unkind things to me like, "You're here taking up my space and eating up my food," you know.  He never treated me like I had any kind of value, and it made me even not like Christian people.
Story_ID: 277312
Speaker 1: All right.  Now tell us about Reverend [Curtis] Henderson.  What type of reverend was he?
Speaker 2: He was a jackleg preacher.
Speaker 1: And was that his denomination, basically?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know what his denomination was, but I can remember him as a jackleg.  He had a bus that would break down all the time.  And I remember he used to call my mother [Elizabeth Henderson] saint, and she used to call him pastor.  And they were just too sickening kind of people, in my opinion.  The best sermon you can preach is how you live your life.  And he was not kind, he was not nice.  So my four, my three brothers and myself refused to go to his church.  And so he said, "As long as we were in his house, we have to go."  So I remember once my brothers ambushing him and beating him with brooms.  And then I had to leave, you know, they put me out.
Speaker 1: Was he physically abusive to them?
Speaker 2: No, they seemed to be more abusive to him.  I mean, they, my brothers are pretty tough little guys.  And they used to, you know, "lay in the cut," I guess they say, for him.  And he would try to beat them, but they would gang up on him.  Because they were about, they weren't any more than, I'd say nine, ten, eleven or so.  But they could, they were big guys, they were very strong kids.  But I remember, you know, soon wanting to come back to Columbus [Ohio] because, you know, they were not kind to me; they did not make me feel at home.  They always wanted money from me, and I got a very cynical view of Christians.  I didn't want anything to do with people who were sanctified, because I thought they were hypocritical people.  They talked about God, but I didn't see anything Godly about them.  And so I had a very bad impression of--he was the first preacher that I met, and he was really, not very--I didn't hold him in high esteem at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was his message more fire and brimstone type of--
Speaker 2: I don't know, because none of us would go to his church.  We didn't want to hear anything he had to say.
Speaker 1: But around the house did he talk like that, about being saved and--
Speaker 2: No, I just heard him talk about his dreams, you know, what he was going to do, and the churches he was going to have.  I mean, nobody really listened to him, because who cared about what he had to say.  They just didn't like him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: And that was my mother's third husband.  The second husband that she had, Curtis Henderson, was from my brothers' and sisters' father.  He was half Japanese, and he was just a--
Speaker 1: Now, was his name Henderson?  Now, was there, okay, you described two of them as being Henderson.  I mean was it Reverend Henderson?
Speaker 2: No, no.  No, his name, I'm sorry, the third husband was Reverend Taylor.  Because that's how my mother became Elizabeth Taylor, and ironically, you know, finally becoming the--having the movie star aura that she had really come to California searching for.  So, it was finally Elizabeth Taylor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So her, did you meet her second husband too?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I met him.
Speaker 1: Because he was the father of the boys?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a nice guy, a nice quiet guy, very Japanese looking, very oriental looking.  And he must have died in the '80s [1980s]; he died in a car accident.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But I had a sister named June who was a beautiful person with long, sort of orange-reddish hair, always a size 8 or 10.  Then I had Curtis, who was my next to oldest brother.  Then Butch, and then the youngest one was named Alfred.  And I was close to 'em in a way to some of them, and not close to others, you know.  But that situation is changing rapidly.
Story_ID: 277313
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how long did you stay in California?
Speaker 2: I must have stayed out there maybe six months or so.  But it just changed my perspective.  Because you know, I just thought of what a wonderful grandmother [Reynolds' maternal step-grandmother, Mae Stewart] I had, what a wonderful mother I really had, you know, after seeing this one [Reynolds' mother, Elizabeth Henderson] which I had longed to be with.  And you know, I thought that everything would be so wonderful if I could only get to her.  And then after getting to her, you know, her rejection of me was so overwhelming to me that I just wanted to get home.  And when I did get home, I had this experience.  Was I supposed to pack boxes, you know?  And I remember the vision of this pharmacist [Waldo Tyler] taking me to [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio].  And I said, yeah, I just want to go there.  And I didn't know anything to be, because I didn't have any college educated people in my family.  So, I said I guess I'll be what he is; I guess I'll be a pharmacist.  I had no idea that these little stories I had been writing since the childhood, putting them under my bed--you know, that this was something that actually people did, you know.  I mean I had read Mark Twain, and [James] Thurber, but I hadn't read about--
Speaker 1: Now, Thurber was from Columbus [Ohio], yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  I hadn't read black folks' writing.  We didn't have black history in our school.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have any [Paul Laurence] Dunbar, coming up?  Because I know--
Speaker 2: I might have heard of Dunbar seems like, somewhere.  But that wasn't from school.  I remember my grandmother used to talk about Paul Laurence Dunbar.
Speaker 1: I know they have, they had a, I don't know if they had it when you were coming along, but I think they had a Paul Laurence Dunbar center on Nelson Road, in Columbus.
Speaker 2: Right.  But I didn't have any sense of black history, none, none.  So, you know, I loved to write little stories and poetry, but I didn't have any idea that this was something of value.  Because no one said--you know, my mother, my grandmother would see me writing, you know, and she didn't, she wasn't--she didn't sit around and talk about these kind of things.  The books she read--you know, I remember one day she had a book that she used to keep locked up in her drawer.  And I'd always see her--you know, when I'd go to my room she'd go to her drawer and pull this book out.  And I just knew it was something maybe, you know, some sex book or something that was so terrible.  And finally, I got the key and got in there to see what she was reading.  It was 'The Scottsboro Boys' ['The Scottsboro Boy,' Haywood Patterson and Earl Conrad].  You know, but in those days they didn't tell the children about things that were happening.  They just wanted them to grow up, you know, like everything is okay.  And you know, I'm sure my grandmother must have known much more than I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you get newspapers at home when you were growing up?  I mean, did black newspapers come to the house?
Speaker 2: There was a black newspaper.  In fact, thank God that there was a black newspaper, because it gave me my first newspaper job at seventeen, you know.  Or was that--I think, I think--I don't know if it was that early, or if it happened while I was in college.
Story_ID: 277314
Speaker 1: Because I remember when I went to school, to college, [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], Central State [College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio], I don't know what I was majoring in.  Because I don't even remember going to school that much.  (Laughter) But at Ohio State, I remember pharmacy.
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: And I couldn't cut it.  Because I just couldn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How did you--well, so you went--you just went and enrolled at Ohio State?  Did you have to save money to pay for it?  Or how did you--
Speaker 1: I worked now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because I was determined--
Speaker 2: So, you were working and you were going to school?
Speaker 1: I was determined that my mother [Elizabeth Henderson] was not going to plop down another thousand dollars for me to waste it.  And I was determined I was not going to be in a factory packing boxes.  So, I had a job in a supermarket, and I was working also for a psychiatrist doing little things.  So I had two jobs while I was in college.  I was determined I was going to go.  And pharmacy, you know, I loved chemistry.  Because I had a chemistry set when I was a child, but I couldn't do math.  I just, you know, I'd work, and I just couldn't get anything higher than a C in the math.  And I just said, "I don't want to be mediocre.  I don't want to do something the rest of my life that I'm going to be average at."  And I was just searching, what else can I do?  I tried education.  I looked.  I didn't want to be a teacher.  And something just led me to the journalism building.  I didn't really understand what journalism was, but I took two journalism courses.  And it was just like, um, music.  It was just like everything I ever wanted to hear or feel.  Because remember, I had, I was also a musician, and I understood the satisfaction of playing musical instruments.  And I said, "Oh, my God, I have to go back to the music," because I had got a music scholarship to Central State.  I think that helped, you know, because I played in these bands and things.  So that helped me get, to defray some of the expenses.  But when I came to Ohio State, while I was trying to study pharmacy, I tried out for the marching band.  And they said women could not march in the marching band.  So, I became so angry that I threw the trumpet away.  It was a beautiful trumpet, you know, and I hated it.  Because I said, you know, this is what I've always loved to do, and they're going to tell me that just because I'm a girl, I can't march.  And I just said the hell with it.  And for years, I didn't listen to music.  So, journalism was something--I'm still looking for now what I was going to do.  I wasn't going to study music, because they already said that there were some limits that they've already established. So I take these journalism courses, and God, it's just wonderful.  I actually saw my name on a newspaper column, and it reminded me of that name on that book when I was a girl.  I said, "God, this is it.  It feels so wonderful."  And I went and told the head of the department, Walter Seifert.  I said, "You know, I know now what I'm going to do with the rest of my life.  I want to be a journalist."  And he looked at me and said, "Why don't you be a schoolteacher like all the rest of them?  You're just not going to make it.  Negro women don't be journalists."  And I remember leaving him and just walking out in the rain and crying, and going over to the chemistry department and saying, "I don't want to be a pharmacist.  I want to be a journalist."  And so I came back, and I was determined--I didn't care what he said, I didn't care what he did--I was going to be a journalist.  Because I saw him take away my first love, which was music.  So now, if I can't be a journalist, what I'm going to do?  Go on welfare?  You know, so, you know, I was very good at it.  I got A's on most of the things, except what he taught.  And he taught public relations, so I didn't care anyway because that wasn't going to get my name in the papers.  I didn't care that he didn't give me good grades.
Story_ID: 277315
Speaker 1: But when I graduated with very good grades in journalism. I began to see racism because I would call ahead to different newspapers and say, the Cincinnati Enquirer, Akron Beacon Journal, "I'd like to come for an interview."  And they'd say-and I'd say,  "I'm a great student.  You know, I have good writing skills.  Here are some of my stories I've written for The Lantern."  And when I'd get there, some of them would say, "We just don't hire Negroes."  I mean The Columbus Dispatch just said, "We don't hire Negroes."  And you know, I said I can't believe this.  You know, they don't use women as--to become the musician I want to be.  And I've done all this, I've got my degree, and they're going to look at me and tell me they don't hire Negroes, you know.
Speaker 2: Now, now, what--
Speaker 1: What am I supposed to do?
Speaker 2: What year did you start back to, you know, start college at [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio]?  And what year did you graduate?
Speaker 1: I think I graduated from Ohio State about '67 [1967].  It could have been '68 [1968], but it's either '67 [1967] or '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: And when did you go back to school?
Speaker 1: That's when I graduated from Ohio State.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right.  But when did you initially go back?
Speaker 1: I think I went back somewhere, it must have been about '62 [1962] maybe.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So you were working and--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --taking classes?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So when you graduated in '67 [1967], was there any teacher that was a mentor, or tried to help you out during this period of time?
Speaker 1: None but the woman who kept me in drama, Sara Searcy [ph.].  There was a mentor who sort of got hold of me to help me write.  And this was a man named Amos Lynch who was the editor of the Call & Post newspaper.  Because while I was--in the summers, and when I could, I would come to the paper and write.  And he just let me write, and write, and write, all I wanted to write.  I didn't get any, much pay, but I still got my name in the paper.
Speaker 2: This is the editor of the Call & Post?
Speaker 1: Right.  He, he really did--
Speaker 2: Right, that's the black paper?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He did really encourage me. And it was very helpful.  Because in our community, they cared more about what was in the black paper than they did in the white paper.  Because they knew they couldn't believe what was in the white paper.  And unless you were a criminal or a thief, you weren't going to see anything in the white paper anyway.  So, they read that paper, you know.  And I really felt good, you know, having my name in the paper and people discussing what I was writing.  It really was so meaningful to me, to be there.  But so, but when I graduated, it was like--since the officials at Ohio State had said, "Don't be a journalist," now they're saying, "Well, since you're going to be a journalist, we're not going to help you.  You know, so if you ever get a job, it won't be with any help from us."  So, I went to Cleveland [Ohio] Cleveland as a social worker.  Because that's the only job I could get, because nobody would hire me as a journalist.  Because one thing, if you go back to that era, they weren't even hiring too many women unless you were--they were hiring white women on the society pages, okay.  So, they weren't hiring women, and they weren't hiring blacks.  You know, I think there had been one black guy who used to work for The Dispatch, and I don't know whatever happened.  Well, I think it was Waldo Tyler's father [Ralph Waldo Tyler], this pharmacist's father.  I think he had a column, or he did something there.  So I went to Cleveland and they hired me as a social worker, as a juvenile parole officer.
Speaker 2: Is this the state of--
Speaker 1: The State of Ohio.
Speaker 2: Ohio, okay.
Speaker 1: And I became so good at it, at helping the young people get their lives together, that they wanted to pay for me to get an MSW, master's in social work.  And I said, "I don't wanna do this.  I want to be a journalist."
Story_ID: 277316
Speaker 1: So I kept going to the Cleveland Press, and I kept going to the Cleveland Plain Dealer [The Plain Dealer].  And finally, to my surprise, the Cleveland Press hired me as their first black woman ever on that paper.  And I worked the police beat.
Speaker 2: Now, when was that?
Speaker 1: It must have around '68 [1968] or '69 [1969], I'm thinking.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because that was right after [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] died.  And that was right during the riots, because I covered--
Speaker 2: Now that's a, yeah, that's a milestone (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --in the history of black journalism.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Because I know other people who I've interviewed got their, got hired right after the riots--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --during the riots, to cover the black community.
Speaker 1: That's when I got hired.  And they put me on the police beat, which would be in the avenue, the path, of covering that kind of thing.  But the thing of it is, still being a young woman, I was scared of any kind of violence.  So, covering a riot was the last thing I wanted to do.  And because, you know, usually in those days police and reporters were friends.  You know, any time there was any violence, I'd tell the cops I knew, "Look, if you hear of anything that's happening, let me know, because I'm getting out of here."  And so, (laughter) they'd let me know.  Like, nobody knows when there's a riot, but they would think they knew.  And so I'd get in my car and head for home, back to Columbus [Ohio].  But this one time I was trying to get out of there, and I saw this huge mob that was coming down the street, and I couldn't get anywhere.  And they were climbing on the grates and pulling down the grates off the stores, and carrying away stuff.  I didn't know how to run or hide.  And something said, go hide in this phone booth.  So, I got down in the phone booth, because I really was scared.  I didn't want to see or hear or do anything.  And then I was in the phone booth, and then something said, "Well, you might as well call in the story while you're here."  (Laughter) And so, I called in the story about what I saw.  And you know, I had front-page, you know, from then on about it.  Because then I couldn't get out of town, so I started covering it.  (Laughter) And then to just have the thrill of knowing what it means to be on the front page.  And then I did some undercover work.  I went into nursing homes, opposed to somebody off the street that they hired.  And so I was giving old people medications, you know, and pills and injections.  And I wrote about how older people were treated and, you know, won several newspaper awards.  And I really, I really did pretty good as my first experience in newspapering.
Story_ID: 277317
Speaker 1: Got married while I was there.
Speaker 2: Now, how did you meet your husband?
Speaker 1: Well, he was a, he was the prosecuting attorney in one of the courtrooms I was assigned to.
Speaker 2: Now this is in Cleveland [Ohio]?
Speaker 1: In Cleveland.
Speaker 2: Okay, and this is what year?
Speaker 1: It must have been '68 [1968] or '69 [1969], something like that. Keeps sticking in my head
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So, you got married?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, how long did you stay with the Cleveland [Press]--?
Speaker 1: Not long, it was about a year.  Our marriage turned into a real tragedy and a real mess, and I came back to Columbus [Ohio].  I totally married the wrong man, and I left him and came back to Columbus.  And here I was without a job again.  And I read in the paper that [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett was coming to Capital University [Columbus, Ohio] to give a lecture.  And I said, "Oh, my goodness."  So I got all of my newspaper clippings from the Cleveland Press and The Lantern, and I took them and gave them to him.  And I said, "Please tell [HistoryMaker] Mr. [John H.] Johnson about me, I'm a good writer."  And so much to my surprise, about three months later, somebody called for John H. Johnson and asked if I would come to Chicago [Illinois] for an interview.  And Amos Lynch had told me that I should leave Columbus.  He said, "You'll never really be the kind of great writer you're supposed to be if you stay here."  And so, I jumped at it.  I mean, I was just very green, because when she said, "I'll send you a plane ticket," I wanted to say, "Would you mind sending me a bus ticket?"  Because I had never been on a plane.  And so, that day they flew me up and flew me back.  And so I had to be on a plane twice in one day.  It was very--because at that time, when you got on a plane and you were black, you didn't see any black people on the plane.  So now here I was with all these white people thirty thousand miles up, you know, going to a place I had never been, Chicago. And sure enough, he hired me.  And so I had to move to Chicago, which was away from my grandmother [Reynolds' maternal step-grandmother, Mae Stewart], away from everybody and anybody, and come to a place that was so full of excitement once I got there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is about 1970?
Speaker 1: Maybe around '70 [1970].
Story_ID: 277318
Speaker 1: I wanted to go back a little bit and ask you, where were you when you first heard that [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed?  And what happened?
Speaker 2: I think that I was at [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio], I think; I think I was there.
Speaker 1: It was '68 [1968] when he was killed.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's where I think I was.  But then again, I believe I graduated in '67 [1967], so it's not clear.  But what I believe that I know, it must--'63 [1963] must have been when [President John Fitzgerald] Kennedy was killed, because I remember everything stopping.  It's, it's so vague.
Speaker 1: Yeah, John Kennedy was killed in '63 [1963].  Then--
Speaker 2: Well, let me think.
Speaker 1: --Dr. King was killed in '68 [1968].  And then his brother later on--
Speaker 2: Because I went as a student at Ohio State--and I shouldn't have left this out, because I went south, and that was before Dr. King was killed.
Speaker 1: Now, when did you go south?
Speaker 2: It must have been, it must have been--maybe it was about '63 [1963] or '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: So, were you down there--
Speaker 2: I was--see--
Speaker 1: When did you go to--
Speaker 2: As soon as the Voting Rights Act passed in 1965--was that '64 [1964] or '65 [1965]?
Speaker 1: It was '64 [sic. 1965].
Speaker 2: Okay, I must have went in '65 [1965].  So, I was still was at Ohio State. And this was something, you know, very daunting.  Because, see, we were--in Columbus, Ohio, you have to understand that we were very protected.  You know, we didn't have, I never had black history courses.  You know, all I saw--I didn't know about the Civil Rights Movement, but I saw blacks being beat up in Selma [Alabama].  You know, and I remember watching it.  And I think Selma was '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: That was '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Was it '65 [1965]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  They had the march across the Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama] where they were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: That was '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Okay, so I went in '65 [1965].  Because I--just about that time, I heard about a group of church people going from the Unitarian church, going to Brownsville, Tennessee.  And so, I said, "I need to go."  And my grandmother [Reynolds' maternal step-grandmother, Mae Stewart] begged me not to go, because she knew the South.  But I said, "I want to go find Dr. King."  You know, and to us--I mean, we're in our twenties, and we've never been anywhere, never seen anything, and you know, Dr. King was just out there.  If we got on a bus and went somewhere, we'd find Dr. King.  So, I went looking for Dr. King, and ended up in Brownsville, Tennessee with a group of white people and one black guy from South America.  And I never will forget when we arrived in Brownsville, Tennessee.  We all went out to get a Coke [Coca-Cola] in the center of town.  And people came out of the stores and looked at us and was pointing at us, you know, like we were some people from the zoo.  I guess they had never seen blacks and whites walking down the street together, getting in cars together, and they were pointing at us.  And we didn't know any better; we were pointing at them, you know, "Look at them.  You know, what are they looking at?"  And we were told--we were all put up in homes of blacks, and we were told at night, "Just go to bed.  Do not venture out, ever."  Well, not really understanding, you know, we were tired of going home at night.  So, about the second night, we planned this outing.  We were going to wait until everybody went to sleep, and then we were going to go out and find a club and dance, yep.  And so, this night we had found this little roadside inn.  And so there were three white guys, myself, and a black guy, and a white woman.  And so, we walk into this roadside inn.  And I noticed that this guy is having trouble getting a drink.  I just thought maybe he was underage.  And they pulled the socket out of the plug for the jukebox and said, "Get them."  And somehow, somebody must have dragged me to the car, because I don't even remember running down the steps I got into the car so fast.  And they chased us.  And the guy who was driving had a souped-up jalopy, and we were going back and forth with lights on, lights off, all the way from Memphis [Tennessee].  And I was so scared.  And the next day we were on our way to church.  Because we would go to church and, you know, I would get up and speak, you know, get the people to get out and vote, because now they could.  We were on the way, and there was some kind of incident in front of us.  A car pulled out sort of in front of us as we was coming down the street.  And so we slowed down.  We got there, and these white men said, "Get them."  And once again, this guy stepped on his accelerator and zoomed past these people.  And we got to our home that night, and we just had dreams. We had Nervine, this stuff that you buy over the counter if you're nervous.  We got some of that Nervine, well, somebody had brought it.  And we just drank that stuff, because we didn't know if we'd ever get home again.  And then we really didn't understand that some of the people that we were telling to vote, when they did vote, they were being driven off their land.  The white folks were telling them to get out.  You know, they didn't have any place to live.  So, you know, we were very naive.  But some of the people were brave enough to vote, despite the fact that they would have no livelihood.
Story_ID: 347962
Speaker 1: We were talking about your adventure south in '65 [1965] as a volunteer, a voting rights volunteer with some Unitarians, right?
Speaker 2: Right, Unitarian church.
Speaker 1: Now, what church sponsored this trip?  Were they Unitarians from different churches?
Speaker 2: Well, as I remember, it was just from one church.  I think they talked about it on campus, that there was a group going, and I just called them.  Because after I saw Selma [Alabama] I didn't understand why people would be beat while they prayed with cattle prods.  I just, I just couldn't let it go.  And my mother [Elizabeth Henderson] said, "Just forget about it, it doesn't concern you."  I said, "I've got to go."  And I called The Lantern, and I said, "I want to write a piece about it."  So I went, and you know, to this day I respect those people who worked in the Civil Rights Movement because I could see what courage it took.  I didn't have that kind of courage.  I will never forget when I was down there, we did link up with a group who was protesting.  And these big, burly guys came up and they had these big sticks in their hand.  And this one, big burly guy, a redneck, said, "Dismiss."  And I said, "Okay."  And I ran to the car, you know.  (Laughter) The others stayed locked, you know.  But I could see what was my problem: I had not been used to disobeying authority.  I went to Catholic schools, you know, and we obeyed the nuns and the priest; I obeyed my grandmother [Reynolds' maternal step-grandmother, Mae Stewart].  So we get down here, you know, here's the cops telling us to do something, and we're not doing it.  You know, and plus they had dogs with them.  I was so afraid.  I knew that I couldn't survive down there.  That's why--
Speaker 1: You had no idea what you were getting into?
Speaker 2: No idea, none, not any.  Because I didn't understand, I didn't understand people hating you.  See, I never had been hated, and I'd never been hated for something I couldn't do anything about.  I was born a black person, but what about that would make you hate me?  So, I didn't understand.  So, I did get to know that these people not only hated you, but they would kill you, after they tried to chase us and get us, you know, when we left the roadside saloon.  And then when we finally got back to Columbus [Ohio] I had a roommate, and we slept in the same bed every night in this black person's house.  This was a white girl, who we drank out of the same Nervine bottle.  And we got back, and I remember calling her and saying, "You know, would you like to come visit me?"  And she said, "Well, I don't think I can." I said, "Well, I'll come visit you."  She says, "Well, I don't think we ever had Negroes come to our sorority house."  And then it just dawned on me that the same racism, that I had gone south to fight, was right here, right here.
Speaker 1: She wasn't willing to fight it in her sorority house.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  She went with us to fight in the South, but when I came home, "Oh, no, you can't come here."  So, I could see the different face of racism right there at [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio].  That really taught me a lot.
Speaker 1: Now, this is 1960, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And there was one group of white--
Speaker 1: You know, well, I wasn't--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Oh, go ahead.
Speaker 2: They had one group of white people that were blatant and ugly in their racism.  Then there was another group who were racist and had a liberal face, but they were still racist.
Speaker 1: Now, did you hear about the incident in 1960 when Jesse Owens' daughter [HistoryMaker Marlene Owens Rankin] was elected homecoming queen of Ohio State?  I know it's kind of, I don't know if it ever trickled down to--you were at Central [State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] I guess when this was going on.
Speaker 2: I wasn't there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was elected homecoming queen, and they created a crisis on campus, because the president [Novice Gail Fawcett] didn't want to kiss her on the fifty yard line, because that's what they traditionally do.  And they brought Jesse Owens in and dramatized it as an honor that he's going to kiss his daughter, because they didn't want to do it.  That was a story that she told us.
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't know that.  I wouldn't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Ohio State was far from perfect.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was not perfect at all.  It was a school with about, it was maybe thirty thousand blacks, whites and maybe five hundred or six hundred blacks when I went there.  It was not perfect and, you know, since then, they've gotten better to some degree.
Story_ID: 347963
Speaker 1: This is a digression sort of, about the trip south. But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that's very important.
Speaker 1: We were talking about you going to--yeah, it's important to bring up.  We had you in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in 1970 I suppose at Johnson--
Speaker 2: Just about '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: --Publishing.
Speaker 2: Now I'm at Johnson Publications [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Yeah, Johnson Publications.  And you're moving to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Where did you live at here in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well, I had an apartment on, I can't remember exactly where it was.  But it was not too far from Johnson Publications.  He [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] had not moved to his new building, you know, on North Lake Shore Drive, North Michigan Avenue.  He was on South Michigan Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I did learn to respect him for what he had to do, because he borrowed five hundred dollars on his mother's [Gertrude Johnson Williams] furniture to launch Negro Digest [Black World], and then Johnson Publications.  So, I respected him.  It was a good place to be, but it was not a place where I did my best work at.  It was not a perfect fit for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was your job?
Speaker 2: Well, I was an assistant editor at Ebony.  And one of my chores was to write [A] Date with a Dish.  And I couldn't figure out why I had to write that column, because I did not cook.  But because I was a woman, they assumed I should write Date with a Dish.  So I did the cooking column, and I got to write some other stories.  But I think I still needed more training because I think that--I needed more training in that job.  It was a bizarre place to me, still, to--I'm not going to put much of it on the record, but I will give you a sample of what was bizarre about it.  There's so much I could say, but I won't.  But what I will say--
Speaker 1: Well, this is a good time to say it.
Speaker 2: But I don't know if I should say it.  But one thing that I can say is that they, they took great pride in being big game hunters.  Era Bell Thompson and some more people, they used to go to Africa and they'd shoot animals.  And for some reason, they would bring these animal hides up there and lay them out in the office.  You know, I saw a beautiful gazelle there, some other kinds of animals that they would bring back.  And they'd lay them out there in the office, you know.  And I remember being so incensed, you know, "How dare you people?  These animals, they were in the jungle, they weren't bothering you.  And here you come laying them out in the office like you're some big game hunters.  How could you dare do that?"
Speaker 1: That also kind of raises some questions about, I mean, did they talk about Africa in any other context other than hunting for game?
Speaker 2: It was, I don't remember them writing those stories about the hunting.
Speaker 1: These are, these are black people going to Africa, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And coming back and with animal skins?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and there was also a famous doctor [T.R.M. Howard] in Chicago.  I can't remember his name now.  But he was supposed to be also an abortion doctor.  And I remember going to his home and he had all these animals, stuffed animals that he had killed.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a famous (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A famous doctor.
Speaker 1: --civil rights doctor.
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: He was from Mississippi, I believe.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: And he had moved to Chicago.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I know his name, but I can't think of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, maybe I don't need to think of his name.
Speaker 1: And anybody viewing this or looking at this will know that connection.  He was originally in Mississippi, and moved because of, there was some famous case down there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But he actually moved--he was down there I think during the Emmett Till--
Speaker 2: But anyway, at his home you would see all of these in the basement, all of these animals--bears with their arms extended, and all kinds of animals.  You wonder, why?  What's the point?  Why do you have these--?  So, you know, my colleagues were raving, "Oh, isn't this wonderful?  Look at this."  And I would say, "This is just a shame."
Story_ID: 347964
Speaker 1: And so you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now the person you were naming, I was trying to think of her name, Era Bell Thompson.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: From North Dakota.
Speaker 1: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: You know, she was the only black woman, I think in--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the only black person.
Speaker 2: She was an editor, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was the editor.
Speaker 2: Before you showed up--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And she was much older than you?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And what, describe her to us.
Speaker 1: I don't remember her, I really don't.  I remember Eunice Johnson, which was [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson's wife.
Speaker 2: But you didn't come into contact with Era Bell?
Speaker 1: Because she was an editor, and she had an office.  And I was, I didn't have an office; I was just a writer.  And the editors associated with editors; they did not hang with those of us who weren't on their level.  So--
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, she didn't try to mentor you at all, or anything beyond--
Speaker 1: I never met her.  You know I guess--
Speaker 2: Were there any other women working there?
Speaker 1: No, not that I remember.  And I'm sure I would have remembered them.  But a lot of times black women do not get mentored, you know, because if the men mentor them, too often that becomes a sexual thing.  And women, so many so often are too insecure to mentor other women.  So you end up un-mentored.
Speaker 2: Well, what about Eunice Johnson, the wife of John Johnson?
Speaker 1: Well, I mean, I remember, you know, she used to look over my shoulder as I was writing.  And I remember I couldn't take it, I couldn't stand it.  And I remember she was chewing gum when she was looking over my shoulder.  And I remember saying to her, "Would you please stop chewing that gum?"  Because this was just getting on my nerves.  And I remember she got insulted, and John H. Johnson called me in.  And he said, "I want you to apologize to my wife, because you hurt her feelings."  And he said--and I said, "What happens if I don't apologize?"  He said, "I'm going to fire you."  I said, "Well, in this case, I'm sorry."  Of course, I wasn't sorry, you know.  But I just did not end up as one of the bright moments in Ebony magazine, it was not a good fit.  There were other things that were going on there that I didn't fit into.  So, I'll let somebody else tell that story.
Speaker 2: Now, [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett--
Speaker 1: He was above that.  You know, he was always--whatever was going on that was unseemly at Johnson Publications [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois], he always--him and Hans Massaquoi--Hans Massaquoi is also a sort of heavy-set guy.  And Nip--Herb Nipson [Herbert Nipson] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Herb Nipson, yeah.
Speaker 1: They, they were pretty good guys.  But then there was another group of people that always had something tawdry going on.  But you know, I was the only woman there, and it was not a good fit.  Probably if I had been more experienced and had been other places, but I had never been anywhere but Columbus [Ohio] to there [Chicago, Illinois]. And so, me and [HistoryMaker] Donald Bogle, we both were fired.
Speaker 2: So, Donald Bogle was there.  Now, he's the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, me and him were--
Speaker 2: --author of books on black Hollywood.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was, me and him are still friends to this day, because we both became successful authors.  And we all laugh about our experiences there, because all the writers were miserable, all of us.  In fact, there was one guy who committed suicide while I was there.  Was his name David?  And there was not a happy person on the whole staff.  So, but we took it hard when we were dismissed.  But we often laugh about it now, you know.  You just couldn't, you almost had to be dysfunctional to even fit in.
Speaker 2: Now, was Hoyt [W.] Fuller and Carol Parks there at the time?
Speaker 1: Hoyt Fuller was there; Charles Saunders were there.
Story_ID: 347965
Speaker 1: Did you have any-- much interaction with the Negro Digest staff, or the Black World staff?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In fact, my first published poem, 'Notes on a Bullshit Revolution' was published by Hoyt [W.] Fuller of Negro Digest.
Speaker 1: Now, he was also one of the founders of OBAC.
Speaker 2: OBAC, right.
Speaker 1: The Organization of Black American Culture.
Speaker 2: Right, I was an OBAC poet.  I was also published by Gwen Brooks [Gwendolyn Brooks].  I was published by [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni when I used to be with--
Speaker 1: When she was with Broadside Press [Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And Nikki, I used to really admire her.  I named my nephew after her, I named him Giovanni.  So, I was very much a Kuumba player, and also an OBAC poet.  And I quit writing poetry after hearing something [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson said, which really made a lot of sense.  He said, "You don't teach what you don't know.  And you don't lead where you don't go."  So, I was writing all this poetry about kill the honkey, and let's have a revolution, but I really didn't mean it.  To me, it was a new way of using, technique with words.  How does this word play?  You know, this word, does this one go with this one? And do I--and is the rhythm correct?  I was just into hearing myself say these words.  And I started getting letters from the jails about, you know, men saying, "Right on, sister, we're with you, you know."  You know, I was talking about, "Kill them, let's off the pigs."  (Laughter) I mean--and I'm saying to myself, "I wouldn't hurt--I'm non-violent, I wouldn't hurt anybody."  And so I said, "I'm not going to write this anymore."  I've since quit writing poetry, because I didn't want people following me.  I mean, I didn't, I wasn't going anywhere.
Story_ID: 347966
Speaker 1: So I left Ebony and really got a wonderful job at Chicago Today newspaper, which later became Chicago Tribune.
Speaker 2: At the Chicago Today newspaper?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, it was a newspaper that existed right beside the [Chicago] Daily News and all the other Chicago [Illinois] newspapers.  It had another name [Chicago American] before it became Chicago Today.
Speaker 2: Now this is a, this is a full-scale newspaper, Chicago Today?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, this was very much a mainline--it was owned by the Tribune [Tribune Company; Tribune Media Company, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Oh, it was owned by the Tribune.
Speaker 1: Owned by the Tribune.
Speaker 2: Okay, because the Tribune--
Speaker 1: They had--
Speaker 2: Okay, the Tribune was there before?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and it just folded into the Tribune.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, it was like started by the Tribune and then it was absorbed by the Tribune?
Speaker 1: Right, right.  But it, you know, it was very much a mainline newspaper.  Because at that time Chicago had four newspapers--the [Chicago] Sun-Times, the Daily News, Chicago Today, and the Chicago Tribune.  And that whole experience was my first experience in mainstream journalism at a level--because I was the first black reporter they had ever hired.  And it was very different from today, because news was segregated.  Like, as a black person, I could only cover black news.  At that time it was Negro news, or colored news.  In other words, I was covering a lot of crime.  I was covering black aldermen like [Ralph] Metcalfe, you know, stories that were just about blacks.  That's how I started.  But then I began to see something.  I said, now wait a minute, something's wrong here.  Because when I am in this newsroom, I'm writing about one reality.  But when I leave here, you know, I'm seeing people like [HistoryMaker] Marva Collins; I'm seeing people who I'm having dinner and going to places with, like bank presidents.  You know, there was a great slew of banks that had opened there--Seaway [National Bank; Seaway Bank and Trust Company, Chicago, Illinois], and Independence [Independence Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and others.  I'm seeing, I'm hobnobbing with labor leaders, you know, the poets and writers and artists.  I said, now, wait a minute.  Why is it when I'm sitting at this desk I'm writing this reality, and when I leave this desk, I'm jumping into another reality?  I said, something's wrong here.  See, I'm green.  You know, I didn't really know how to articulate it.  I just knew that this was not comfortable.
Story_ID: 347967
Speaker 1: But in the middle of all this, there was a guy starting a, who had started a publication called the Black Book Directory.  And together, we started a new publication called Dollars & Sense magazine.
Speaker 2: Now, who was it that started this?
Speaker 1: This was Donald [C.] Walker.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was a protege of W. Clement Stone.  He had been in prison, and he became a protege of Stone.  He was a very smart marketing guy.  And so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, W. Clement Stone a white--
Speaker 1: Right, 'Think and Grow Rich,' I think it was.
Speaker 2: No, that's--
Speaker 1: No, that's Carnegie [sic. Napoleon Hill].  That's--
Speaker 2: That's another guy.
Speaker 1: Another guy.
Speaker 2: But W. Clement Stone writes books about how to be a success.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: He wears a bowtie.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he's a white man who--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --is a self-made millionaire.
Speaker 1: A self-made millionaire.
Speaker 2: Part of, it's a Chicago [Illinois] genre--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --of those kinds of businessmen--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --who wrote those books and stuff.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he's probably the leader of the pack.
Speaker 1: Right.  But I was--you know, I was dealing with seeing, you know, [HistoryMaker] Dempsey [J.] Travis, an investor banker, and [HistoryMaker Herman] Roberts, who owned the motel [Roberts Motel, Chicago, Illinois].  I mean, I was running in a crowd of people who were all successful.  And so I said, "Now, why do I know all these wonderful people, and I open up the business page and they never quote them?"  You know, I know artists, you know, and entertainers--[HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown, Jr. and all these people.  You know, where are they, you know?  And so, I couldn't really express myself in this newspaper.  So, I started expressing myself through founding, co-founding this magazine.  Then I started being on ABC as a commentator.
Speaker 2: So when did you, I mean, we need to go back and get some dates here.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, when did you leave Ebony?
Speaker 1: I was only there about nine months.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And so, pretty much 1971?
Speaker 1: It was '71 [1971] or so.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--
Speaker 1: Well, I know--let me see.  Yeah--
Speaker 2: And then you were at Chicago Today.  Did you stay at Chicago Today while you were putting together the Black Book Directory?
Speaker 1: Well, I started there, and then Chicago Today folded, and I became--I was hired, picked up by the Chicago Tribune.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But at Chicago Today--see, I'm forming my identity.  You know, I'm beginning to be a person who wants to fix things.  I can't just sit down and do the normal thing.  You know, I had to help start a magazine, and I wanted to say things that I couldn't say.  So I started, you know, in radio.  And I began to be very dissatisfied with what I was seeing in how Negro news was so--the news was so segregated.  Now, when it became national news, then the white reporters would take it.  But as I moved, before I moved to the Chicago Tribune--I think this was '69 [1969].  Because I think Fred Hampton was killed in '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: Yeah, it had to be '69 [1969] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  So, I'm--
Speaker 2: He was--
Speaker 1: -still at Chicago Today in '69 [1969], because I think it was December of '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: So you were at Ebony a little earlier, then?  I guess sixty--
Speaker 1: Maybe.
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969] or '70 [1970]?
Speaker 1: That's a blur.
Speaker 2: Well, that would be '69 [1969] when you were at Ebony, '68 [1968], or '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, I'm trying to think when I went to--yeah, that was Chicago Today.
Speaker 2: Fred Hampton was killed in December of '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Right, I was at Chicago Today in December of '69 [1969], I know that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep.
Story_ID: 347968
Speaker 1: And here's what happened.  When I got to Chicago Today, even though they hired me, they wanted somebody to cover the Negro news.  But they didn't want to let you do anything else.  And I would hear them say, "I've never seen a black who could write."  They would tell me that, even though I'm sitting there.  And to this day I don't know why I did this.  But I said, "Here's what I'm going to do.  I'm going to be on call twenty-four hours a day."  And they didn't know anybody who would work twenty-four hours a day.  But I had to think of some way to distance myself from their--what they thought.  And then nobody wanted to cover any news on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois] because they were white and they were afraid of them over there, there had been riots.  But for some reason, I wasn't afraid.  I mean, I had gone over there and I didn't see anything--that someone was going to bother me.  And I dated policemen, so I certainly felt empowered.  So, you know, pretty soon I learned something by--you know, and of course I had to work Saturdays and Sundays.  And you know, I'd say I worked twenty-four hours and didn't care, because I had all this energy.  But I learned something.  On Friday nights--on Saturdays I would have to be there with just two or three more reporters.  And over the wire service it would come in, "So and so got killed on 59th Street over a chicken sandwich."  "And so and so and so was run over by a car."  And we were supposed to just put this in a little side box.  But I started just pulling out the drama, you know.  "So and so would have been a lawyer if it had not been that he stopped for a chicken sandwich.  His mother cannot understand how his dreams were suddenly vanquished, all because of this fateful day that he just stopped to get a sandwich."  I pulled all the drama out.  And then on Sundays, I started having these stories on the front page.  And they started, you know, starting saying, "Well, you know, she's front-page Reynolds [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Barbara Reynolds]."  Because I began to understand I guess what I had heard--that during slavery, you know, the blacks would cook greens and the whites would eat the greens and leave the pot liquor.  But all the vitamins and good stuff was in the pot liquor.  So something in my brain--maybe I heard my grandmother [Reynolds' maternal step-grandmother, Mae Stewart] talk about it--was that there's a lot in the leftovers, if you know what to do with them.  So I could go into those stories and just mine them, get jewels out of them, you know.
Story_ID: 347969
Speaker 1: So one morning, it must have been about three o'clock, I got a call to go over on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].  It wasn't anything different, because I was the only one who would go on the West Side.  And they said, "I want you to go to Fred Hampton's apartment."  I said, "That's strange.  Why would I want to go to Fred Hampton's apartment?  It's three o'clock in the morning."  So I got over there, and it was a scene I had never seen.  I mean, there were just blue and white paddy wagons just all over the neighborhood, with all of these flashing lights.  And I showed them the press card, and they let me in his apartment.  And there was blood all over the carpet.  And there was a green blood-stained bedspread that someone told me they had covered Fred's body in, and had dragged him out of there into a paddy wagon before I got there.  And I was just dumbfounded, because there were about a hundred holes in the apartment.  And I called this guy I was dating who was a policeman.  And he said, he showed me how to find out whether it was coming from out or in.  And I said, "They're all coming from the same direction.  They're all splintering from the outside."  He said, "That's not a shootout, that's a shoot-in."  And he came flying over there, and he coached me.  And I remember that for a couple editions, the paper [Chicago Today] did say that this was a shoot-in.  But as the news gathered, by the next day the headlines were saying, shoot-out between the Panthers [Black Panther Party] and the police, when there was never a shoot-out, it was a shoot-in.  Now I had known Fred Hampton, and this really touched me, because he was a guy that I would see and joke with.  I mean, he was about as harmless as you are sitting here.  You know he, the Panthers were feeding people in the black community.  There were a group of blacks that were harmful.  That was Jeff Fort, and his P Stone Rangers [sic. Blackstone Rangers; Black P. Stone Nation].  But the white press just glorified them, and talked about what great guys they were.  And you know, they'd have parties for them, some of the white liberals, you know.  And these are just undeserving people that needed a chance.  But here's these Panthers who are actually doing something for us.  And they were talking bad, you know, off the pigs, but so were the white guys with the long hair.  Everybody was talking, but we were just talking, just like I was talking with my poetry, and meant none of it.  You know, so here's a guy who I talked to.  He used to wear his little black felt hat.  And he was gonna be a lawyer.  He was, that's what he said.  He even worked at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And so, you know, they shot him.  They also killed Mark Clark.  And Fred's girlfriend was pregnant at the time, and she survived all this.  But after I was there, I said surely the people who did this terrible thing--this is an assassination, they will pay.  But I was so wrong.
Story_ID: 278050
Speaker 1: We were talking about the murder of Fred Hampton, the coverage of Fred Hampton.  Did you cover it for Chicago Today?  I mean did you basically (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was--
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to--
Speaker 2: I was the reporter for that story.  And it was because of my reporting, that for some editions the headlines read, shoot-in, where the other reporters were reporting a shoot-out.  But that soon changed.  The establishment press decided that no matter what the evidence was, that it would be a shoot-out, where the public would be told that there was a barrage of bullets exchanged.  But later reports would show that Fred Hampton was drugged by some kind of drug that someone had administered to him before those cops even got there, and that there had been no exchange of bullets--that one shot was all that they could even surmise had been shot at the police, and that ninety-nine others came from the police.  So, what I witnessed at a young age was an assassination.  It was just what the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] could do; it was what any vigilante group could do.  But this was sanctioned by the State of Illinois.
Speaker 1: The City of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: And the City of Chicago.
Speaker 1: And to some extent the federal government (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the federal government.
Speaker 1: --that supported the Red Squad program of the city police.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and what I later learned was that there was a COINTELPRO [Counter Intelligence Program] to wipe out any black groups that would be a threat to society.  And then I watched cynically as the white establishment in Chicago bolstered the fortune of the Black P. Stone Nation, which was killing other blacks, but at the same time destroyed the Panthers [Black Panther Party].  And being green, you know, I watched this situation and I actually thought white people would go to jail for assassinating Mark Clark and Fred Hampton.  But it wasn't too long before I could see that whites don't have to go to jail if they murder or assassinate blacks.  And all of this was a learning tree for what would come afterwards.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this.  In light of recent news, as we sit here today, I think last week a jury in Mississippi convicted a man [Edgar Ray Killen] for killing, for leading the attack that led to the death of [Andrew] Goodman, [Michael] Schwerner, and [James] Chaney, the civil rights workers in Mississippi in 1964.  This is now like thirty-one years, no, forty-one years later.  And as you said, the prosecutor at that time, Edward Hanrahan, lost an election which seemed like--which he thought was tragic, you know, an unfair thing, you know, to happen to him.  But none of the officers were ever charged with a crime.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Though last week on Chicago television, they went over the murder of Fred Hampton.  And everything that you said was confirmed.  You know, it was a shoot-in, and the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, see, that's trying to say that then--
Speaker 1: And there was an FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] informant in the Panthers--
Speaker 2: Right, in the Panthers.
Speaker 1: --that fingered him--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --ahead of time, and it was an ambush.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: It was a--so I mean here's a man--a couple of men are dead, and others are wounded in this shoot-out, but there's been no prosecution of anybody.
Speaker 2: And this was my first taste of waiting for justice, and not seeing it.  But it prepared me for what we're seeing today.  Because when you look at the case in Mississippi--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --of this eighty-year old Klansman finally being sentenced, justice delayed is justice denied.  Because he had all of his life to go to the movies, to see his children grow up, to have grandchildren.  And Chaney et al. and all did not live to see their thirties.  So, that to me, that's not justice.
Story_ID: 278051
Speaker 1: The murder of Fred Hampton, though state sponsored, there's never been--
Speaker 2: Well, see that was an assassination.  That was a politically motivated murder which I think fits the definition, the depiction, of an assassination.  And he was assassinated for no reason.  If he was guilty of something, they never really pinned any crime on him.  I mean, what had he done?  You know, he talked smart?  Well, so were the white guys in those days.  We were all talking smart, this was the '60s [1960s].  You shoot us down for talking smart?  You know, for mouthing off?  You know, I mean and to this day I understand his son [Fred Hampton, Jr.] has also been jailed as a political prisoner.  So you know, it's a very tragic thing, that [J. Edgar] Hoover would--I only saw what was going on in Chicago [Illinois].  I wasn't looking at the rest of the country, where Hoover also had hit squads go after other Black Panthers [Black Panther Party].  So--
Speaker 1: And other black leaders.
Speaker 2: Right, and black leaders.
Speaker 1: Period, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, this was just one that I was a part of.  And it changed my life forever, because I would never trust the justice system again, because of what I had seen.  I would always be suspect, I would always be suspicious of the jurors when there were no blacks on the juries, and the fact that the penal institutions and the prisons are jammed with black men now, who some of them are innocent, and some of them need to be there.  And for those who need to be there, I want them there.  But still, the drug cases have made so many blacks end up in jail, even though the government has documented to dump the drugs in our community.
Speaker 1: And I guess the point I was making is do you think it's ironic that we re-visited these southern murders, but no one has re-visited the Fred Hampton murder, although it's still a murder; it's a murder.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's still--you know, as I have stated, you know, the police and the press participated in a scheme where the police fed misinformation to the press.  The press dutifully printed lies, and never tried to get to the truth.  And as the truth unfolded, they never got on the bandwagon to even have the responsible parties tried.  And even though it's late, it's still not too late.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's interesting, because what you just said is now considered public knowledge in Chicago--that the press is included in with the police department.  I mean, it's been on Chicago television.
Speaker 2: But, see, I was saying all this--see, I was seeing the press and the police work in collusion at the time.  You know, I was calling it an assassination at the time.  These are the kinds of things that were very difficult to do, because your editors begin to hate you because of what you were saying at the time.  You know, now you just look at the facts and look back.  And nobody's trying to fire you; nobody's telling you you can't have a good assignment.  You know, it was hell to say that then.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But does it feel good now to be vindicated by the press (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not until somebody pays.  That's when it will be vindication--
Story_ID: 278052
Speaker 1: So, this was in '69 [1969].  We're going to fast-forward again.  Because we had you starting the, co-founding Dollars & Sense magazine with Donald [C.] Walker.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: When was Dollars & Sense founded?
Speaker 2: I think that was founded around '69 [1969] or so [sic. 1974].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think.
Speaker 1: Were all of these at the same time?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm trying to think.  I was at Chicago Today in '69 [1969].  It could have been '69 [1969], it could have been '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, '69 [1969] or '70 [1970].  And--
Speaker 2: And in that magazine we would have award celebrations, where we would lift up those role models in the Chicago [Illinois] community that the very papers that I was working for, Today and the [Chicago] Tribune would not publicize, you know.  So, I felt very good about saying, "Okay, you won't write about them, but we have something over here that will write about them."  So, we brought another view.  And that publication stayed a publication, a viable publication, until a year or two ago, when the founder Donald Walker died. But you know, I want to re-visit something else, what happened while I was at the Chicago Tribune.  Because it was very difficult to balance myself, when I had so many people against me.  Typical of what happened, there was John H. Johnson Day at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And so I insisted that the paper, insisted that the paper cover that.  So, they did send me to Harvard to cover John H. Johnson Day.  And it was a very, you know, their first effort to laud a black man at that institution.  And I noticed that they had something on the board there, in the Harvard office, about a Nieman Fellow.  So, I saw that.  And then when I got back to Chicago, I saw that again, about a Nieman Fellow.  And I heard the Harvard president [Derek Bok] say to [HistoryMaker] Mr. [John H.] Johnson, "If there's anything I can ever do for you, let me know."  So, I began to think, you know, why couldn't I be a Nieman Fellow?  You know, I had book ['Jesse Jackson: the Man, the Movement, the Myth'; 'Jesse Jackson: America's David,' Barbara A. Reynolds] out about [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson by that time, my first book.
Speaker 1: Well, we need to talk about that, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I'm missing, I'm missing some years here.  Because that book I think didn't come out until '72 [1972] or '73 [sic. 1975], when I actually went to Harvard, I think.  Because I didn't go to Harvard until '76 [1976] or '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, John Johnson Day, what year was that?
Speaker 2: I don't really know [1975].  But it was after I was at the Tribune.
Speaker 1: It was after the Jesse Jackson book came out?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, very much later.  So, I'm getting ahead of my story--
Story_ID: 278053
Speaker 1: Right.  Maybe you should go back and pick up the Jesse Jackson book ['Jesse Jackson: the Man, the Movement, the Myth'; 'Jesse Jackson: America's David,' Barbara A. Reynolds].
Speaker 2: Yeah, because--
Speaker 1: Now, when did you first meet [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson?
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: He was in Chicago--
Speaker 1: --and he was the leader of Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition].
Speaker 2: He was in Chicago, and he had, he was, he had launched Operation Breadbasket.  And now, because of some illegal corporations he set up, he was now launching Operation PUSH.  In fact, I was--
Speaker 1: Now wait a minute, let's go back a little bit here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, were you, were you a part of Operation Breadbasket or anything?
Speaker 2: Never.
Speaker 1: Never, okay.
Speaker 2: Always a journalist, never a part of--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --his institution.
Speaker 1: So you said they launched some illegal--
Speaker 2: Corporations.
Speaker 1: --corporations.  What was the nature of these?  I mean--
Speaker 2: What happened, Angela Parker of the Chicago Tribune had found that Jesse Jackson had launched some corporations that were illegal for him to do, because he was part of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Council].  And so, that was a big scandal in the paper.  And so, I had been introduced to Jackson.  And you have to understand the climate of which I came into Chicago, now, okay.  [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had been killed April 4, 1968, okay.  So, I hear that there's a new King, and I didn't know--I heard it because there was a public relations specialist who was working to make sure that everybody heard it, and that there was pictures of King and Jesse together showing that one extended from the other.  I'm just walking into this as a reporter, a young reporter, and very uptight, because I never saw Dr. King close-up. Because when I went looking for him, I ended up in Brownsville, Tennessee almost losing my life, and came back and just finished college [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].  So now, I'm saying, "Oh, God, I got another chance to be with Dr. King, because here's the new King."  So I pitched in to cover Jesse Jackson, with all of my strength and all of my heart.  And for a while, we were best of buddies.  I mean here was this young, firebrand that could just make you believe almost anything.  You know, he was so good, and especially if you don't know any better--if you just come into this picture and everybody says he's the most important black leader who ever lived.  And people would introduce him at PUSH, you know, like he was almost Jesus, the Messiah, all of this, you know.  And here I was, [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Barbara Reynolds, I was able to report on him.  And I just thought it was, it was just wonderful.  And so, I did follow him.  I went to his hometown, Greensville, South Carolina [sic. Greenville, South Carolina].  I met his parents [Helen Burns and Noah Louis Robinson].  I lived around the corner from him.  He used to live on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], and I lived on Lake Shore Drive.  So if I wanted something, I'd just come in his house and even go up to his bedroom.  He'd be in bed, and I'd just sit there and talk with him.  We'd just--[HistoryMaker] Ramsey Lewis lived next door.  Sometimes we'd go over there and listen to Ramsey Lewis.
Story_ID: 278054
Speaker 1: And I reported on him so favorably.  I mean I was one of his biggest cheerleaders that a publishing company, Nelson-Hall, asked me to write his biography.  And I said "Sure.  I've got some nagging questions, and I'm sure these will be cleared up.  And um, sure."  So I ran over to Jesse's [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] house as usual.  He was standing there at the refrigerator drinking some orange juice.  And I said, "Reverend, guess what?  I've got an offer to write your biography."  He said, "Barbara [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Barbara Reynolds], don't do it."  He said, "I'm going to write my own biography.  Don't do it."  And so, all I had to do was just drop it, because he said don't do it.  But then, here's the publisher, and I've got a chance to write my first book.  And remember when I was a child, I had seen my name on a book.  How can I turn this down?  So, I said to the publisher, "He doesn't want me to do it, but he'll change his mind.  I'll just continue reporting."  And sooner or later--because I was--I had to get interviews for the newspaper [Chicago Tribune].  And I just took the interviews for the newspaper and just kept writing until it was part of the book ['Jesse Jackson: the Man, the Movement, the Myth'; 'Jesse Jackson: America's David,' Barbara A. Reynolds].  And I said, "There's a lot of things that I've heard, and all he has to do is clear them up, and I'll be fine."  Because I had now become an insider.  You know, I knew Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] I knew Ben Branch, I knew [Ralph] Abernathy, I knew all these guys; we talked all the time.  And off the record, they would say, "Don't be a fool.  He wasn't on the balcony with [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.].  That wasn't Dr. King's blood on his shirt.  He wasn't the last to speak to Dr. King."  And so, I would re-enact what happened in Memphis [Tennessee] through all the people who were there.  Because I had heard that he lied.  And I remember putting this piece together and saying, "How in the world can I ever tell the truth?"  And I set that aside.  Then there was always money missing.  And I said, "Well, he'll explain this to me."  Because remember, you know, I'm still, you know, captivated by this man.  We were about the same age, you know.  And you know, when you think about it, I either could identify with him, or the white people that I worked for, and they couldn't stand me.  And here was a guy who was loved by everybody, and he thought a lot of me.  Who are you going to identify with?  So I identified with Jackson.  So there was money missing all the time.  And so I said, sure enough, he'll tell me what happened to all this money that keeps being missing.
Speaker 2: Now was he living in the house in the Highlands then, you said?  It sounds like the house in the South Shore Highlands, the Jeffrey Highlands [sic. Jackson Park Highlands, Chicago, Illinois], next to [HistoryMaker] Ramsey Lewis.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's a pretty, a nice big house.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was a big house.  And the business--
Speaker 2: Did he have a salary then?
Speaker 1: Well, what happened was, see, he had--what I wrote about was the economic patronage system, where he would get contracts for the black businessmen.  And in return they would give to his organization, just like [Mayor Richard J.] Daley's political patronage system, only this was economic patronage.  I never saw anything wrong with it.  I just wondered, you know, how was it helping the poor?  Because he was always talking about the poor, but I never, I didn't see very much of anything going to the poor.  Because many of those contracts he signed with corporations--the milk companies and this--they may have hired a few blacks, but as soon as he turned his back they would fire them.  Or sometimes money passed to some of the ministers, and they wouldn't go on with some of the things they had said they would.  So, you know, I had that.  And so, the things that I thought would be cleared up were not cleared up, and I saw what I had here.
Story_ID: 278055
Speaker 1: And I never will forget the day--that's why the book ['Jesse Jackson: the Man, the Movement, the Myth'; 'Jesse Jackson: America's David,' Barbara A. Reynolds] is so big, because number one, I was afraid to finish the book because I had seen what happened to the only woman I ever knew who wrote the truth about [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L.] Jackson.  This was Angela Parker, who, she was my neighbor.  And she worked for the [Chicago] Tribune, and she wrote about those illegal corporations.  And she was boo-ed at PUSH [Operation PUSH; Rainbow PUSH Coalition], looked like a thousand voices booming at her.  Her life was threatened, and she, they picketed her apartment.  And I lived right next door to her.  So, I didn't want to finish this book because I said, you know, this is going to happen to me.  And so I just kept adding another chapter, hoping I would never have to finish it.  So, I got thirteen chapters with over five hundred pages.  And one day I was in my apartment.  I said, you know, Jackson had a PR [public relations] person to create an image of his being next to [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.].  I mean even before King was buried, he met with the PR person.  And I said, he told these lies about being on the balcony with King and being the last one he spoke to, and the money is not right.  How can I tell the people this?  And I remember I was crying this day because I was trying to write.  I was crying, and there was a knock on the door, a little soft knock, knocking. I could hardly hear it.  I opened the door, I looked straight ahead, and there wasn't anybody.  I looked down, and there was this six-year old neighbor's kid that had heard me make all this racket.  And she said, "Would you shut up, you big crybaby?"  (Laughter) And then she marched to her door and slammed it, you know.  And I had to laugh there for a minute, to stop crying, you know.  Then it just hit me.  What kind of journalist was I going to be?  I was either going to be a journalist that would tell the truth, not an insane truth, but certainly a truth that people needed to know.  Or, I had to just get out of journalism.  And I was going to decide today.  So, if I can walk out this room today and write this story and tell the truth, then I'll continue.  If not, I wasn't going to be a journalist, because I would never be a person who people couldn't depend upon for it to be honest.
Story_ID: 278056
Speaker 1: And so I wrote the book ['Jesse Jackson: the Man, the Movement, the Myth'; 'Jesse Jackson: America's David,' Barbara A. Reynolds], and all hell broke out when it came out.  It was picked up by the [Chicago] Tribune front page for the serialization rights, and then I noticed something strange started happening.  First of all, I got threatening phone calls.  And what the PUSH [Operation PUSH; Rainbow PUSH Coalition] people were trying to do was trying to run me out of town.  But, you know, I never said I was that brave.  But, you know, I was from Columbus, Ohio, you know, and nobody goes back home to Columbus.  I had no place else to go, so I wasn't going to go anywhere.  So, and I grew up in the media like they did.  So, every time I got the news, I'd find somebody's radio station to get on.  And I would say "When I covered the Mafia in this town, nobody threatened my life.  When I covered the street gangs, nobody threatened my life.  Now, I'm covering Christians, and my life is being threatened.  You know, how could this be?  You know, why am I not safe reporting on black Christians?"  And whoa, that just got around and around.  And [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett and [HistoryMaker Lutrelle] Lu [F.] Palmer [II] and some others stood up for me.  Not Lu Palmer, but Vernon Jarrett, Ethel Payne and others, they had a press conference.  And they said if anything happened to me, there wouldn't be any PUSH.  You know, because I had a right to write the truth as I saw it as a journalist.  So, I didn't leave, but it was really hot around there for a while.  I had to have bodyguards because of the threats.  And I refused to not go anywhere I felt like going.  And sometimes the City [of Chicago, Illinois] would give me bodyguards, and sometimes the state would.  Because people--you know, it just became a terrible thing that I--you know, sometimes I don't--I wonder myself how I lived through it.
Speaker 2: Now, what was Lu Palmer's position on it, you know?
Speaker 1: I think after a while he sided with [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L.] Jackson, I think.  He did not come to my defense, but Vernon Jarrett did, and Ethel Payne, and that's good enough.  And Walter [M.] Morrison, and most of the black reporters did come, you know.  So it was really, you know, it's one thing to be able to report on the others, if the others are white America or the KKK [Ku Klux Klan], our enemies.  That's one thing.  But when you have to report on your own group, that's when it really becomes tough, because you have to say, those who look like me and talk like me aren't right.  And I made the decision then that I would not be guided by being afraid, or somebody could buy me off.  That would never be me, and that was the first test.  There would be many, many, other tests, but this was the first one, and the toughest.  Because the strange matter of it--I always liked Jesse.  You know, he was a friend, I mean, I liked him.  So, but the facts didn't lead up to his being what he said he was.  Now, if you look at it, if you look at him in the context of [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton, you know, of [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry who was disgraced for drugs, and Clinton who was disgraced for adultery--in that context of other political leaders, he's probably pretty high.  But if you relate to him as a moral leader, and a reverend, he doesn't rate so high, but he could have been.
Story_ID: 278057
Speaker 1: So, you think that a lot of what he did--and he's pretty well-known.  I mean, I think it's pretty much acknowledged in the black community that if there's a crisis that gets a lot of public attention, he'll be there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he will be there.
Speaker 1: And that he will cut the issue in a way that people--it excites people and gets them agitated and creates, you know, political opinions about certain things, that may not have--where they may not have been a solid, clear opinion before he showed up.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: He--
Speaker 1: --you were saying that a lot of the economic pressure he put on corporations and stuff--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  I followed up the contracts--
Speaker 1: --resulted in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I followed up as a reporter.  I went to the companies, and I tried to find the people.  I said, "This contract said you hired 150 blacks.  Could I see them, please?"  "What?  You want to see them?"  I said, "Yeah, the contracts say you've got them, just show them to me."  And they said, "We can't do that."  I said, "Well, show me some of them."  "Well, we can't do that."  "Well, how do you know that this is true?"  "Well, go to [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson]."  You know, I could tell that what he said was not documented.  He was just making up--
Speaker 1: So, he would report that these things were taking place?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But he wasn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: --he had not really followed up on them?
Speaker 2: And some of it was a shakedown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As long as these companies would give to [Operation] PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition], they would be left alone.
Speaker 1: They stopped talking about it?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  But if they didn't, then they would be talked about.  There was another book that come down about--that came out called 'Shakedown[: Exposing the Real Jesse Jackson,' Kenneth R. Timmerman]. And this writer only wrote, updated, what I had said.  I had talked about his inability to keep his marriage vows to his wife, Jackie [Jacqueline Brown Jackson].  You know, if you're going to be a moral leader, you know, my whole point is just quit saying you're a moral leader.  You know, if you're a politician, you can be like [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton, you can be like [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry--you can do almost anything you want to, and somebody will vote for you.  But if you say you're a moral leader, then this puts on you the side of Jesus and [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and others who showed us character, and were not bought off.  And you knew where they stood and you wouldn't have wondered or you're lying or telling the truth.  So just don't say you're a moral leader, and go on and do all these terrible things you're doing.
Story_ID: 278187
Speaker 1: We were just discussing off-camera the accusations against [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] in terms of his sexual infidelities, you know, alleged sexual infidelity.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, you know, I was at my desk once at the Chicago--no, this is USA Today.  And a person from the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] called me and said that some of that was not true.  And there's tapes, but you know, what I really did understand--if you understand what people can do with tapes, you know, they can splice them to make things sound like they can.  They can take a picture of you and put somebody else's head on it.  I mean there's all these things that they can do technologically.  And I don't know how long they've had this technical understanding.  Now, I personally don't believe that Dr. King was a womanizer.  I haven't been able to trace down anyone who would make those claims that I trust.  You know, [Ralph] Abernathy, I think he claimed that Dr. King had some kind of sexual encounter, I think it was the night before he got the Nobel Peace Prize.  But I talked to Coretta [Scott] King about it, and she said she was there with him, you know.  And I listened to what Coretta King says, and she said that she does not believe that he did these things.  You know, she would know.  And I just, I don't believe it.  So I mean maybe others do believe it, but I don't believe it.  But I do know what was happening with [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson], because I was there watching it.  You know, he did have a romantic affair with Roberta Flack.  It's in my book ['Jesse Jackson: the Man, the Movement, the Myth'; 'Jesse Jackson: America's David,' Barbara A. Reynolds], it's no secret.  Roberta Flack did an album ["Killing Me Softly"] where she wrote, one song was, there was the lyrics, "Jesse, there's a hole in the bed where you lay" ['Jesse'].  And the violins were going--melancholy, you know.  And there was another one with a more suggestive title on that album.  And they were a couple, and it was just common knowledge, it was public knowledge.  And there was an affair with Kim Weston that was talked about, I didn't see that one.  But I mean, I don't think anyone who knows Jesse would be surprised to think that he had affairs--that when he was advising [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton on spirituality that he had his own mistress at the White House [Washington, D.C.].  I mean, you know, some of these guys think they're above reproach--that there's a law for, you know, the little people, and then there's a law for them.  And that's when they write their own political obituary, as Clinton did.  You know, look what a great leader he could have stayed if he hadn't felt that he could get away with having sex with a young girl in the White House.  And Jackson, this was just common knowledge.  You know, I'm just saying, you know, if he's a politician, you know, they do these kinds of things, and somehow get re-elected.  But just take the reverend off your name, and go do whatever you want to.  But I'm personally offended, you know, when you are a reverend in the highest standard--you know, God's representative to man, and man's representative to God--and you do these things unrepentively, and you're not repentive [ph.] of these things, you know.  But you know, these days we don't really ask much from our African American leaders.  You know we don't, we seem to just go along with whatever they say.  We don't dialogue about what they're doing, or dialogue too much where we're going.  So, and he still is one of the smartest--political savvy,  brightest politicians that we have today.  And my only thing is just stay in your category, you know.  There's nothing, I mean there's a lot wrong.  If you're committing adultery as a politician, you're not going to be the first one.  But if you're committing adultery as a preacher, I just find something wrong with that.
Story_ID: 278188
Speaker 1: Okay, you said that when the book ['Jesse Jackson: the Man, the Movement, the Myth'; 'Jesse Jackson: America's David,' Barbara A. Reynolds] came out, you had to have bodyguards?
Speaker 2: I had to have bodyguards, because I had threats (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How long did those kinds of stress last, you know?
Speaker 2: It went on for--well, the book came out in '72 [sic. 1975].  I think it came out, let's see, I don't know whether it was '72 [1972] or '73 [1973].  But it was quite a hot time for a couple of years.  I think the pressure was when I went away to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I think in '76 [1976] or '77 [1977].  But--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were leading up to the Nieman--
Speaker 2: The Nieman Fellowship by Harvard.
Speaker 1: --Fellowship of Harvard.  So, you--
Speaker 2: But that, that was in a very hostile institution that was hostile to me.  And even when I was awarded the Nieman Fellowship, which is the second highest honor in journalism other than the Pulitzer [Prize], the Chicago Tribune ran my award notification on the obituary page.  (Laughter)  But it didn't stop the fact that I still was the second black woman to be nominated as a Nieman Fellow.  And I do have to thank [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson for that great honor, because he was the one who recommended me.  I had heard the president [Derek Bok] of Harvard say, "If there's anything you can ever do for me, call on me."  So I said, "Mr. Johnson, would you use your clout to get me in there?"  And he did, you know, and I always will thank him for that.  Because being a Nieman Fellow did two things for me.  First, it made me understand that with all the abuse I had taken, I was still a very good writer and reporter, once I matched my skills and met with reporters and politicians from around the world, you know.  As a black woman, I hadn't had much to validate me.  You know, my family didn't do very much validation, except my grandmother [Reynolds' maternal step-grandmother, Mae Stewart].  You know, I looked at TV in those days in the '60s [1960s] and '50s [1950s], you know, and Nat King Cole was on there for a minute.  You know, black women weren't on TV at all doing anything, you know, too much, except maybe Lena Horne.  I had no validation of hardly anything to ever tell me that I was worthy, that I was wonderful, you know, or good.  You know, the most I ever heard was, you know, "You're black, and you don't have any business being a journalist."  "You're a woman and you don't have any business being a musician, you know."  But once I got to Harvard, I saw some strange things happening.  Once the school, their writing department, wanted somebody to come and give a lecture on feature writing.  So, the Nieman Fellows said, "Well, send Barbara [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Barbara Reynolds]."  So, I said, "Okay."  So, I go to make this lecture.  And I'm sitting on the front row, and everybody's sitting there, and we're all waiting.  And the person who was in charge of the program said, "Well, I'm sorry, but Miss Reynolds did not come."  And I said, "No," I raised my hand.  I said, "I'm here.  I've been waiting for twenty-five minutes to be introduced."  (Laughter) And so, they just never assumed that the person from the Nieman House would be a black woman.  So, I gave my lecture, and they gave me a standing ovation, which they said was very, very rare for those people to do.  And I left, you know, with my understanding that even as a black woman, you know, I was still bright and competent, and I still should have a good future.  I had gone to school, and I had done other things, so why shouldn't I rise with the best of them?
Story_ID: 278189
Speaker 1: While at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I went to The Boston Globe.  I went to several newspapers and I said, "If I worked for you, would you promote me?"  And they said, "Sure, yeah.  If you work for us, we sure would promote you."  I said, "I want to go be a Washington [D.C.] correspondent."  They said, "Sure, we'll send you right there, with your kind of qualifications."  So I went back to the Chicago Tribune and I said, "I've talked to several newspapers.  They said my qualifications would earn me a promotion if I worked for them.  Now, I'm here, would you promote me?"  So, they muttered and carried on, and the next thing I know they had promoted me.  So, I became the first black woman to be, black person, to be a Washington correspondent from the Chicago Tribune.
Speaker 2: So, is this in '77 [1977]?
Speaker 1: This is was about '77 [1977] or '78 [1978], around there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so once I got to Washington, I found out that there was only one other black woman that was a Washington correspondent, from another paper.  There were just two of us in this whole city trying to do this work from--
Speaker 2: Who was the other one?
Speaker 1: I can't remember her name right now.  But what happened was so horrible.  I was in the newsroom with twelve white men, and they did not want me there.  They didn't think I deserved to be there, and they did everything that they could to destroy me.  And it almost worked.  The first thing that they did was to not help me become acclimated to the environment.  In other words, I got there from Chicago [Illinois].  And I didn't know where the different federal agencies were, you know.  I'd ask for directions, and they'd say, "Well, you're a reporter.  Find out yourself."  You know, I would--they would all go out to lunch together and they never would--they'd pass right by my desk and they wouldn't invite me.  Then they would say things humiliating, like, "I'll sure be glad when they have a woman in this bureau," and I'm sitting there.  And I became very hostile to them, very angry, you know, because of the way I was treated.  And it got to the point that I felt so dry inside that my words no longer made sense, because I felt like I was dying inside.  And I had just--every kind of creative energy, every kind of flow, just left me.  And I would work, take the work home to try to do it at night--I wouldn't sleep--to have the work in fresh in the morning.  But I was trying to go to an empty well.  And then I started to drink, because I was, I couldn't find my way, I was just totally lost.  That was the only thing that, you know, I could remember from the mental institution, you know, that I did learn that alcohol or some type of drugs would help me.  So I depended on alcohol, which absolutely was what a whole lot of folks were doing.  I fit right in, because most people in journalism at that time were heavy drinkers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it seems like the stereotypical (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The stereotypical--
Speaker 2: --model of a journalist.
Speaker 1: --model of a journalist.  And so, you know, that helped me, I thought.  But it actually--then I had a problem that would later be a problem.  But it was very--you know, I think Countee Cullen wrote, you know, "How do you make a poet black and bid him to sing?" [Yet Do I Marvel']. You know, and it was how do you put a black woman in a situation with twelve white people who tell her, you know, every day in some way, "We don't want you here.  We'll be glad when you leave, and we'll be glad when a woman gets here, and we mean white.  Because that's the only kind of woman we're going to ever call a woman."
Story_ID: 278190
Speaker 1: So, just the incident with [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory brought the whole thing to an end.  This was during the hostage crisis [Iran Hostage Crisis], when Ayatollah Khomeini [Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini] had held hostages, you know.  And this brought Ted Koppel to the forefront.  And the paper was looking for anybody who could go talk to the ayatollah and try to get some sense talked to him, through non diplo- diplomatic means, and out of the view of the state department [U.S. Department of State], because he certainly wasn't going to talk to any of the state department people.  So, I found out that Dick Gregory was in Iran.  And so I got word to him, found out where he was staying, and called him.  So he reported to me that he was going to visit the ayatollah, and he would give me the story.  So I wrote the story about his going to meet the Ayatollah Khomeini, and all about what he was going to tell him, in the hopes that what Gregory had was something.  And so I looked in the paper the next day.  And it only ran in one issue, and they snatched it.  And I said, "But everybody in the City of Washington [D.C.] is looking for somebody to talk to the ayatollah."  And they said, "Well, we didn't mean him."  And so I really got incensed because I know what they meant.  They meant that they wanted somebody white to talk to the ayatollah.  But at a point when hostages' lives were on the line, you ought to be able to use anybody.  So I wrote the story, the cover story--I still have it--for Playboy magazine, and I wrote it with Gregory.  And the money I got for that story, I gave it back to him for his family.  Because he was there, and his family was really suffering while he was there in Iran.  And after, you know, seeing what they had done with Fred Hampton, and now after seeing that they had asked to find anybody who could talk to ayatollah--and because it was a black man, they didn't want him to get that kind of publicity.  They wanted to bury that.  They didn't want people to know that the ayatollah would talk to a black man, when he had refused to talk to all of the white representatives.  So, I left the [Chicago] Tribune. And I'll never forget what I told them.  I said, "You know, although I'm not a success in your eyes, I certainly leave this institution feeling very much a success in my own eyes."  And so, I left the Tribune.
Story_ID: 278191
Speaker 1: I'm trying to think of--what did I do from there [Chicago Tribune]?  Oh, yeah, I had, I was, I had--by now I had bought me, had purchased a townhouse in Falls Church [Virginia].  And it wasn't too many months after that, that somebody told me there was a new newspaper starting.  And Karen [A.] Howze, H-O-W-Z-E, H-O-W-Z-E told me about it, and took me to meet John Seigenthaler, S-E-I-G-E-N-T-H-A-L-E-R, I think.  And at that time, they were in just one floor.  And I brought, you know, my qualifications to Seigenthaler, and he said, "I want to take you out to dinner."  Because they were just getting the editorial page group together.  "And I want you to meet my staff."  And so, I remember that night at dinner.  I wouldn't--they all had cocktails, and I refused a cocktail.  They all were talking about different issues, and I almost had no opinions, even though I was being tried.  (Laughter) I mean, because I felt whatever I said, white men wouldn't like it.  So, why even say it?  So, I didn't say anything.  But then John Seigenthaler let me know that he had worked for Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], and he had been on the Freedom Rides.  And he had been hit himself, and beaten.  And so, I could see that this was a different kind of white person, and I was very interested in him.  And so he said to me, he said, "Well, I'm sorry, you wanted a job as a reporter."  He said, "But I don't have any, so I just have to make you an editor."  And I said, "What?"  And so he hired me on the editorial page for USA Today.  And I was the one who actually formed the op-ed page, the page that they have now, where you have opposing views.  I was the one that set that up and started it.  I was to go across the country with Aaron Newhoff [ph.], because we all had this--we were all formulating the paper, step by step, stage by stage.  So, I was the interviewer for USA Today.  I did what you do.  I went across the country and I interviewed all of the politicians, all of the governors, cabinet members.  Whoever was somebody, they sent me to interview them.  It was really a wonderful life, the year that I did that.  I mean, I met Erma Bombeck, somebody I've always wanted to meet.  I went to meet [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton, you know, when he was still a governor, and Governor [Mario] Cuomo and [Governor Michael] Dukakis, and whatever person in whatever state was important.  And then one day--I didn't believe it.  Newhoff decided he was going someplace else.  So, he sent me back to the office in his private plane.  And so, I'm sitting up there--because we went to our assignments by limousine.  Because, you know, I'm traveling with Newhoff now, and well, he doesn't do anything small.  So, here I am at a new newspaper.  And everywhere I go for a whole year, I go by limousine and private jet.  And so, one day I was sitting up there, and he said, "Barbara [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Barbara Reynolds], you take my jet to the office."  And so I had a stewardess, a steward, you know, to bring me the shrimp, because he just liked shrimp; and another steward to bring me white wine and strawberries covered with chocolate.  So I'm sitting up there, and I remember writing myself a note on his stationery, "Well done, Barbara, I applaud you."  (Laughter) You know, that's what he would have said, you know.  But I just thought to myself, you know, I had an appreciation of here I was, a woman from, an African American woman from Columbus, Ohio who they told, don't even think about becoming a journalist, to a person that was abused in the Chicago Tribune and told, you're only a token and we really don't want you here.  Now, a year later, I've interviewed almost every governor in America, and I'm flying by private jet, and my opinions are valuable.  And that's how it went.
Story_ID: 278192
Speaker 1: I mean I had run-ins with some editors of course.  But while John Seigenthaler was there, they couldn't mess with me but so much.  And he selected me. Because in the '80s [1980s], now, here we come with a new move.  Okay, we had the '60s [1960s] where they didn't want blacks in.  Then the riots came, and they said, "Oh, God, we've got to have a few in here."  You know, here we come.  In the '70s [1970s], we suffered.  Here comes the '80s [1980s], and somebody had discovered diversity.  Somebody had said, "Oh, it might be good to have people of other colors and other races."  Because you know, we were looking at America as a global village, and we had products to sell in countries where people don't speak English.  And you know, we have a billion people in Africa, you know.  And we could sell newspapers in all these countries, but all we have are people who are white males.  And some people began to get this message.  So now, the thoughts I wasn't supposed to think--the things I wasn't supposed to say--Seigenthaler said, "You can write your opinion, that's your opinion."  And so while I was there, he would challenge me to even be a better Christian.  He challenged me to be a better person, period.  He was a mentor.  And really, I'm glad I had a white man who mentored me finally.  Because I didn't want to think that all white men were racist and mean and evil, which I was beginning to think because that's what I had seen.  Now I saw a different group of white men.  I saw Aaron Newhoff [ph.], who I thought was very fair, and now John Seigenthaler--a whole group of people that weren't racists, they were fair.  If I made a mistake and got cussed out, it was because I made a mistake; it wasn't because I was black, I just made a mistake.  And so, for--let me see, I guess I was hired in '82 [1982] or '83 [1983] at USA Today, and on until maybe ten years; it was wonderful.  You know, it was worth all the pain and suffering and abuse, because I got to write my opinions every Friday.  I was the interviewer for the paper, and anybody who was to be interviewed, they would send me.  Because not only could I interview them, I could type them up and get them in the paper quickly, you know.  And so, everything was fine.
Story_ID: 278193
Speaker 1: But then in the '90s [1990s], I'd say, let me see, about '93 [1993], a whole different thing started happening.  First of all, John Seigenthaler left [USA Today], and he went back to Tennessee and his own newspaper [The Tennessean].  And some of the other good guys, they just cleared out.  And I remember being told that the emphasis was on corporate America, that our major goal was to please corporate America, because we had to please the advertisers if we were going to stay viable.  And they wanted a certain group of demographics.  They wanted eighteen to forty-four year olds.  They wanted suburbanites, and mostly they wanted white people.  And that's the group that we were going to please.  And if we had something else that would anchor this demographic, we were going to be liked.  We weren't interested in Joe Six-Pack.  We weren't interested in bowlers.  We were after the golf crowd, and the business class of the airplanes.  So, the things that I cared about blew up.  I talked against the war, the Persian Gulf War.  I wrote about how it was an oil war, and land, not our--and why should we invade their land?  And oh, boy, it just got so hot, you know.  I got moved from the editorial page to the page on the comic strips.  And I was told to change your tune.  You know, I was writing about church burnings, of hate groups burning synagogues and churches.  "Will you stop writing about this stuff?"  I was writing about why affirmative action was important.  You know, why Atlanta [Georgia] got the [1996 Summer] Olympics because they were seen as a city where people could live together in harmony.  That was the last column I wrote.  I was called in one day and they said, "We're not firing you, but we're taking your column.  And we just, and since we don't have your column, we don't have a need for you."  And they didn't have a cause, and they never said they had a cause.  You know, they didn't--
Speaker 2: So, this is nineteen--
Speaker 1: Nineteen, July 1, I think, 1996.  So, I just looked at my experience.  At first, you know, I tried to be a journalist, and they said I couldn't be one.  So, now, I'm thrown out because I'm really, you know, a good one, but not their kind.  And so when I was dismissed, I got calls from all across the country, "Barbara [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Barbara Reynolds], you're a good writer.  We want a black woman.  You've just got to be conservative."  And I said, "I am conservative as far as moral values.  But I'm a liberal, you know.  I'm not, I'm not a right-wing Republican."  They said, "If you write that way, you can write your own ticket."  I said, "But yeah, but I got to live with me."  And so, I took the firing harder than I thought I ever would.  The night after I was let go, I had, calls were coming from all across the country, you know.  "Well, tell us what happened."  And I said--you know, I tried to play it down.  And I said, "I can handle this, you know."  By this time, I was in the seminary [at Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.].  I had graduated from the seminary.
Speaker 2: Oh, you started going to the seminary?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I started--
Speaker 2: While you were--
Speaker 1: I started, the first day I started in the seminary I think--was it '88 [1988], '88 [1988]?  Yeah, I think it was '88 [1988] when I started at the seminary.  And that's one of the things--I guess I should digress--
Speaker 2: Yeah, what was the--
Speaker 1: --that was getting me in trouble.  Or maybe, or do you--where do you want me to start?
Story_ID: 277814
Speaker 1: Tell us about your spiritual evolution, you know.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: When did you really--because you seemed to be kind of turned off by--
Speaker 2: I was turned off.
Speaker 1: --ministers and churches.
Speaker 2: I was turned off by my stepfather.
Speaker 1: And you were a big critic of [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was turned off by the first reverend that I really studied.  But when I was at the Chicago Tribune, I was in such emotional pain about how I was treated.  And it probably stemmed from a carryover from the pain I felt from rejection from my mother [Elizabeth Henderson], and the issue of incest with my father [Harvey Reynolds], that I found great relief by just drinking.  But while I was in Chicago [Illinois], I went to the doctor for a medical examination.  And the doctor pressed on my abdomen, and he says "Young lady, how much do you drink?"  I said, "I only drink a few beers now and then."  He says, "Well, your liver is changing to cirrhosis, cirrhosis, a cirrhosis of the liver, and that is a fatal condition.  In other words, if you don't stop drinking, you're gonna die."  But I was only in my thirties.  And I said to myself, I said how could I die?  I know people who drink all the time.  So that night I went to the bartender, and I told him what the doctor had said.  He said, "Oh, have another drink.  They don't know what they're talking about."  You know, so I had another drink and just dismissed it, and just kept drinking even more.  You know, what does he know?  Because I would drink every night.  You know, every night, beer or something, you know.  But one night I was in bed, and I felt something like gears turning on the inside of me.  And before I knew it, I was flying over my bed.  I was flying and soaring.  And I tried to scream, and I couldn't get any words out.  And I tried to put on brakes, but I didn't have any feet.  And I tried to stop it.  You know, I was just soaring over my bedspread and over the chest of drawers and the drapes.  And I was coming to a crack in the wall, and a fly could have gotten through that crack, and so could I.  And I felt the presence of something so evil and so terrible on that other side of the wall.  I felt that the hands of Satan were just waiting for me, to just grab me if I moved any farther.  And I just screamed, "Jesus."  And I woke back up, got back up.  I was sweating and alarmed, out of my mind.  And so, I began to think.  I said, "I'm not afraid to die," because my grandmother [Reynolds' maternal step-grandmother, Mae Stewart] had died, the one who raised me.  And I had been terribly depressed anyway.  But I said, I never thought that I might go to hell; I'm afraid of that.
Story_ID: 277815
Speaker 1: So I had a girlfriend in Chicago [Illinois] named Herma Ross [sic. Hernia Ross].  I said, "Herma, you're always trying to get me to go to church.  But I do go to church, but this time I want to get--is there a church where people don't care about the designer suit you have on?"  You know, "I don't even want to go to a black church.  I want to go to a church where all kinds of people are there--white people and black people, Indians and everything.  I want a church like that, because I just don't want to be one thing.  Because, you know, God is the God of all of us."  So she took me to church, and there were all kinds of people there.  It was some place on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois].  And there were Native Americans, and white folks, and black folks, and Hispanics.  And there was this preacher named Jumping Bob.  He'd just jump and down, you know.  He was a white guy.  So he called for an altar call.  And he said, "If there are people here today that want to surrender their life to Christ, would you please step forward?"  And I was tired of my life.  I was tired of being promiscuous; I was tired of drinking; I was tired of being out of control.  And I was going nowhere.  And so, I stepped forward.  And I felt a cool, alpine wind blow through my body.  And it felt like all the impurities that I ever had were being blown out.  And I felt so different, so transformed.  So after that, I went to a restaurant with my friends.  And I said, "Look at the fruit on the table, it's glowing."  And they looked at the fruit, and it wasn't glowing.  But I saw it glowing.  And I really felt different.  And usually, I was a three pack a day smoker.  So, I didn't reach for a cigarette that day.  And I hadn't been able ever to make any progress, you know, with cigarettes.  But I knew something was different in my life.  And after that, years later I would read in John where this powerful Pharisee named Nicodemus talked to Jesus about being born again.  "What does it take to enter the kingdom of Heaven?"  And Jesus said, "You must be born again."  Then Jesus says, "Sometimes the wind blows where it would," but that's the way it is when people are born again.  So, I knew that this wind had blown through me, and it was the sign of the Holy Spirit coming into my life.  And gradually I saw my life change.  You know, I started with those cigarettes; I hated those cigarettes.  I was smoking three packs a day; I was coughing; my clothes were smelling like cigarettes.  I didn't have the power.  But after I had this born again experience, I was able to put down, I was able to just smoke one cigarette a day.  And so I walked into this TV studio one day.  And this receptionist I knew was smoking.  I said, "Girl, give me a drag of that cigarette."  I took one drag, and I fainted on the floor.  They had to pick me up.  I call it the holy zap where God just touched me.  And from then on I had such an intolerance for cigarettes.  I can't even be in a room with a smoker, even if it comes in their clothes.  Because I'll begin to cough, and my skin itches.  And God just removed that from me.  But I still had the problem of drinking.  And for a while, you know, I was able to stop.  And thank God, when I was at the USA Today, for the most part I didn't drink because I stopped drinking during the day.  There were a few times there that I drank too much, but I was really fighting in my spirit, you know, to quit drinking.  And I noticed that I was interested in more religious things, you know. For example, I had joined, in '70 [1970]--as soon as I got--moved from Chicago to Washington [D.C.], I had asked the pastor there, I said, "What church should I go to?  I need a church."  So he sent me to Evangel Temple [sic. Evangel Cathedral, Upper Marlboro, Maryland], which was also run by a white guy [Bishop John L. Meares] with a black congregation.
Story_ID: 277816
Speaker 1: So I was there for a while, and then I interviewed Shirley Caesar for a story.  And she told me about a man named [Bishop] Alfred [A.] Owens [Jr.] who was going to buy the place, that Evangel Temple [sic. Evangel Cathedral, Upper Marlboro, Maryland], was holding their services, which was at 610 Rhode Island Avenue.  And I went to Bishop Owens, I started going to his church.  And I began to become fascinated by his preaching, so I joined the church.  And I think it was, I'm trying to think when it was when I--maybe it was eighty,  I'm trying to think of exactly when I joined.  But anyway, I started going to the church; I started attending Greater Mt. Calvary [Holy Church, Washington, D.C.]. And then my writing began to change.  I had gone to Ethiopia, I think it was about '84 [1984], with Jackie Jackson [Jacqueline Brown Jackson], Jesse's [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] wife, on a fact-finding tour of why there was a famine; she led that tour.  [HistoryMaker] Kim Fields went, some businesswomen from Chicago [Illinois] went.  And when I did that article, it was the first article where I actually wrote about God in a journalism piece.  Because I had been trained that journalism is over here, and God is over there.  And whatever you think about God, you keep it to yourself; it doesn't belong in journalism.  That's how I was trained.  But I wrote this piece for Dollars & Sense magazine, not for any mainstream--but I began to explore, put religion and God and faith into the articles.  That was the first one.  Then when I'm at USA Today, I tried to get religious leaders to come to the paper.  So I invited Billy Graham to come to the paper and have lunch with the editors.  And I could do that, you know.  And so Billy Graham came, driving his own car.  He drove up in a Volkswagen, not like the preachers, many of the black preachers, who come with entourages and agitants, and assistants to the assistants.  He just came in a little Volkswagen with a Sherlock Holmes hat, and had lunch with the editors.  We became friends.  In fact when I wanted to go to divinity school, he wrote the letter of recommendation for me to go to Howard [University] School of Divinity [Washington, D.C.].  But my writing, I began to incorporate people's faith experiences into my columns.  I began to see that people weren't just motivated by politics and social concerns--that they were motivated by faith.  And so, I would write that.  And I got some flak from it--, "That don't belong in the paper, keep that out of there."  And I'd fight for it, you know, like the guy [Jan Scruggs] who had designed [sic.] the Vietnam [Veterans] Memorial [Washington, D.C.].  He said that he was wounded on the battlefield, and he told God if he would just heal him and help him from a wound, that he would try to do everything he could to raise this issue.  And so, the editors got angry with me because I insisted upon putting this in the story.  I said, "But you can't tell a person what's important to them."  You know, then I began to see why people wouldn't tell reporters their faith experience, because they knew they were too cynical.  But I fought for them, and sometimes I'd win.  So, some of my columns became more religious.
Story_ID: 277817
Speaker 1: And then I got an editor who was an atheist.  So now, we have a big problem.  The newspaper [USA Today] has now gone more corporate.  You know, they just want us to do whatever we can to ingratiate ourselves to corporate America.  You know, don't have problems; don't be writing stories about how workers are getting a bad deal.  Don't be writing a story about affirmative action, because corporations don't want that.  You know, let's be good for business.  Now, I'm writing against the [Persian Gulf] War.  Now, war is good for business.  You go back and you look at any newspaper or publication.  Those publications soar during war.  TV time, advertisers, you know, really buy more advertising.  The products are, are, are incorporated into patriotism.  Everybody waves the flags, and the business coffers get filled, and everybody is happy.  And here comes this black woman saying, "No.  It's not our oil, it's not our land, it's not our business.  [President George Herbert Walker] Bush should get out of there."  And I continued to say it week after week, and they continued to pressure me.  And I wouldn't budge.  I said, "You know, that's what a columnist is supposed to be about, to write their opinion, not your opinion.  You know, you guys are white men with money.  Maybe if I was a white man with money, I'd write your opinion.  But I'm a black woman with no money.  That's not my opinion.  In fact, that's a moral issue to me."
Story_ID: 277818
Speaker 1: So, you know, while I'm being, I guess on my way out, I was at Howard University School of Divinity [Washington, D.C.].  And I was meeting--I had black professors for the first time in my life.  I hadn't been taught by blacks.  All my professors had been white, except maybe one, who I don't remember.
Speaker 2: Well, let me ask you--
Speaker 1: Except at Central State [College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio], I had had black professors.  But I wasn't involved at Central State, I just showed up and partied and left.  But here, I had people like Cain Hope Felder.  I had people like Dr. Delores Carpenter.  I had people like Kelly Brown Douglas, I mean, role models who were teaching me womanist theology and feminist theology and liberation theology, and black theology.  And they were also empowering me as a black perspective minister.  And at the Howard School of Divinity, I'm at a beautiful campus over there on Taylor Avenue with just meaningful experiences to study under these people.  And so, you know, while my fortunes are declining at USA Today, I'm finding that another piece of me is coming out; I'm beginning to preach a little bit.  I preached my first sermon at Dr. Delores Carpenter's church [Michigan Park Christian Church, Washington, D.C.].  I'm going traveling, and I'm preaching now.  But I still had a problem, because I had started drinking again, okay.  I still had a problem.  I'm a student at Howard School of Divinity studying to be a minister, but I was still drinking.  And to me, that was a terrible problem.
Story_ID: 277819
Speaker 1: So after I graduated from Howard [University] School of Divinity [Washington, D.C.], I was, you know, I graduated at the top of my class, even though I worked every day.  I think I was 3.8, 3.9, a really, really, very good student.  I could be ordained as a minister now.  All I had to do was tell Bishop [Alfred A.] Owens [Jr.], you know, I've graduated, and I'd like to be ordained.  But I couldn't say anything, because I said I'll never be a hypocrite.  You know, if I'm going to be a minister, I'm not gonna drink.  If I'm gonna drink, I'm not gonna be a minister.  So, I just said--I knew God was calling me, you know, to be a minister.  Because, you know, he'd spoken in my spirit, you know, "If I had wanted you to be a plumber, I would have sent you to plumber's school.  If I had wanted you to be secretary, you'd go to secretary school.  This is a school for ministers, so what do you think you're supposed to do?"  I just sat there.  I said, "Unless I stop drinking, and you help me, I'm not gonna do anything."  So, a situation happened that was sort of funny.  Some African American leaders were invited to go to Senegal with Louis Sullivan [sic. Reverend Leon Sullivan], the OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers] president.  So, I was invited to go.  So [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory and Barbara Stringer [ph.]--just all kinds of black leaders went on this trip--from doctors, lawyers, to Indian chiefs.  And I told Dick Gregory, I said, "You know, I got this problem.  I want to be a minister, but I'm still drinking."  And so he and some other folks I knew said, "We'll help you.  They have some people out in the bush that can help you get rid of anything.  So, we'll set up a meeting where you can go out and there, and nobody will know, and they'll help you."  So I got some of my girlfriends and we said, "We'll go out there."  So they took us out to the village.  And there were about twelve woman sitting around this priestess.  And she had blessed them, and they would go with something in their bowls, you know, out to the rest of the village.  And then she dealt with me.  She said, "I've been told you have a problem.  I can help you.  We will slay a bull for you, and that will be three hundred dollars."  And I starting thinking, "Slay a bull?  I don't want no bull slain.  What's that?"  And then I said, "Well, I don't have three hundred dollars."  I thought that would be the end of it.  She said, "Do you have thirty?  What we'll do, we can kill two chickens, a red one and a white one.  And I'll blow my breath into the red chicken, and all your sins will run out to the white chicken."  Finally I'm saying, "Jesus was the last sacrifice, and that was sacrifice was free.  No, thank you."  She gave me a root anyway, and when I got out I threw it away.  And I knew that I had just done something pretty silly, you know.  I should have called on Jesus.  You know, I had been calling on Jesus, but nothing had happened.  So the next day we went to Goree Island [Dakar, Senegal].  And this is where millions of blacks go through this passage where the slave masters had captured them and put them on these boats.  And they showed the sheds where some of the children had to be fattened up, and the shackles where they had been chained.  And I go through this door called The Door of No Return.  Because once you go through that door, you become one of the thousands and thousands who are packed into these slave ships.  Some of the slaves, of course, jumped overboard rather than go to such a terrible fate.  And so I'm there meditating on the waters.  And the Lord seemed to speak to me.  He says, "Barbara [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Barbara Reynolds]," he says, "There was a time when blacks had to get on slave ships.  But now that time has passed, but they're still on slave ships because of drugs and alcohol."  And I felt him setting me free.  I just felt a release inside of me.  And I went back to my church [Greater Mt. Calvary Holy Church, Washington, D.C.].  And I knew then, because I had been praying all along, "Lord, please help me to stop.  I don't want to die.  I want to be a minister.  I don't have the strength to stop."  And so, I felt a release.  And I knew in my mind, in my heart that this was it, I would not drink another drop.  And so I went back and I told my bishop, Bishop Owens, I said, "I'm really ready to be ordained as a minister."  And so I was ordained as an elder of the church, which is one of the highest officers, offices that you could be, other than a pastor.
Story_ID: 277820
Speaker 1: And I really thought that that was the end of it.  You know, I stopped drinking, and I'm a minister now.  But then something else happened.  I've got a notice that they were starting this, these classes at the United Theological center [sic.] in Dayton [Ohio]--seminary [United Theological Seminary] in Dayton.  So I went up there to investigate about getting my doctorate.  And [Reverend Dr.] Claudette [A.] Copeland was the professor.  And she wanted twelve black women to study under her, to learn how to build models of care for women in America.  And so twelve of us came to study under her.  And my assignment was to build a model of care for women struggling with alcohol and drugs.  Another woman's assignment was to deal with depression.  Another one was to, how to help people struggle through sexual abuse or domestic abuse.  But mine came out of my spiritual autobiography that they had us write.  And I named my project Harriet's Children in honor of Harriet Tubman who delivered over three hundred blacks from slavery and bondage.  So, I named the program after her.  Then I began to understand that I had to do more than just come out of bondage of, to cigarettes, drugs, and alcohol myself.  And when I say drugs, I used prescription drugs, but they were still drugs.  I had to go back, and I had to get women who were still in bondage to drugs and alcohol.  Because I looked around in my community, and I saw the fact that so many African American men had abandoned the children.  You know, the breakup of the black family is devastating.  Black men either are in prison, out there on drugs.  The children are not protected, no guidance.  And now the woman who you could always count on to be there when they weren't--the woman, black woman is going to jail at record rates.  They are the fastest growing statistic in jails, and also a victim of HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome].  So now what's going to happen to the children if the daddy's gone and the momma's gone?  There's something I used to call zero parents population.
Speaker 2: Population growth, right, right.
Speaker 1: No, what I'm saying is zero parent.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Meaning that parents are being reduced to zero; there's no parents there.  The children are being passed to foster homes or grandparents, or somebody.  But there's nobody there for them.  And so, I said I have to work with women, I have to do something.  So I started a ministry.
Story_ID: 277821
Speaker 1: I have about thirty women that work with me, who--we do mentoring.  We do worship service; we do step programs.  And we're getting ready now to go into the prisons and help some of the women who have been trapped in the prisons through drugs.  Because I felt that God called me, not to just be set free myself, but to go back and get others who need to be set free, so that they can be good mothers and good parents and good citizens, and be productive and meaningful, and lead purposeful lives.  So, that is part of my religious experience.  But my true religious experience would just fill volumes.  That's why I just finished the book, 'Out of Hell & Living Well' [Reverend Dr. Barbara A. Reynolds].  That's my spiritual autobiography.  But it gets richer every day that I live.  There's something that God and I, that we do together that is very meaningful, if it's nothing but getting up and encouraging people on the phone, "Hey, have a good day.  You can make it."  You know, so doing God's work is very fulfilling.  I've just been appointed a professor at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] to teach religion in the communications department, which I think is a great honor.  And in November, I'll be the convocation keynote speaker for Howard [University] School of Divinity [Washington, D.C.].  So, I can see that, you know, that the love for religion in journalism is coming together now in one body.  But you know, I also want to talk about my son.  Because I adopted a son.  And that happened, and that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When were you ordained?
Speaker 1: Let me see, '93 [1993], maybe about, let me see, maybe about '93 [1993] or so I was ordained.
Speaker 2: Okay, 1993.  That's right after the trip to Senegal?
Speaker 1: Right after the trip to Senegal.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And you finished your Ph.D. at United Theological [Seminary, Dayton, Ohio]--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, Doctor of Minister, D.Min., Doctor of Ministry.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: D.Min.
Speaker 2: Okay, Doctor of Ministry.  Okay, and that was finished in--?
Speaker 1: I think it was, I think '97 [1997]; I think it was '97 [1997].
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-seven [1997], okay.
Story_ID: 278044
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell us about your adopted son.
Speaker 2: Well, he is the joy of my life.  And this happened in 1983, I believe it was.  I had, when I was unemployed with the Chicago Tribune, I used to do a lot of meditation.  And I asked the Lord to let me know what he wanted me to do with my life.  And in our meditations he said, "Adopt a son and name him John, as well as go to school and learn of me," which eventually resulted in my getting a doctorate in ministry.  Well, let's just deal with John [Eric Reynolds].  I didn't have the children I should have had.  So I was always heartbroken when I would see children, and think about the children I didn't have.  So, it just came in my spirit that I should adopt.  And so I was a single woman, but in Virginia a single woman could adopt.  And so they brought me out to a state agency, and they showed me this little boy.  He was two years old.  He had on too high pants, and a very befuddled look on his face.  And I fell in love with him, and I took him home for a visit.  The state agency said, "Well, you have to bring him back.  This is just a visit."  And I said, "If you want him, you're going to have to come get him, because I'm not bringing him back."  And so they never came and got him.  I never asked for a penny of state help.  And I just wanted him and loved him.  And he very much helped me, because that's one of the reasons I wanted so hard not to drink.  Because I said to myself, he does not deserve an alcoholic for a mother.  And by having him and loving him, it helped me to call on God to please stop me from drinking so I could be a good mother.  And, you know, coming up with him brought me into this contact with the family that I'm a part of now.  I had him, and a friend of mine, Norlishia Jackson, her mother saw me struggling with him alone.  And she said, "You know, you need help with this child."  Because I was trying to run around the country, trying to take him--trying to hold on to him, trying to keep my job, trying to be a good mother by myself.  It wasn't working.  So, she helped me.  And she started--Janie Jackson, who was about in her seventies, late seventies, she began to help me with him.  And then she had her daughter, who is Norlishia Jackson.  And Norlishia Jackson had two children, and I had Eric and a niece that was living with me.  So, we decided let's get a home together.  So we bought a home together in Washington [D.C.].  And we got tired of Washington, and then we moved to this home.  And Granny had been the head of our household, but she passed in '96 [1996].  And so, Alicia now has three grandchildren, and she has also eight or nine brothers and sisters.  So the whole family adopted me as the next sister.  So I'm surrounded by people who are no kin to me.  But my mother [Elizabeth Henderson] was no kin to me, so I don't have that issue.  My son is no kin to me, but there's a bond of love that surpasses blood.  So, but, he is now, he's a senior in college.  He's a good son, and I've never regretted adopting him.  In fact, you know, I'm just stating the facts, because I don't look at him as an adopted son.  I look at him as my son.  But he's a very important part of my life.
Story_ID: 278045
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, my concern is that the African American culture is non-productive.  It's destructive.  I'm talking about the hip-hop culture.  I'm talking about the songs that glorify death and misogynism, hate of women.  And folks have just let it grow until it has become a cancer in our community.  There's never a day in Washington, D.C. that I pick up a paper and we're not talking about a young African American person who's been killed, or a young person usually being shot, or shooting somebody else.  And we do not seem to take the destruction of ourselves as important as when the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] was killing us, and when lynching was the unwritten law of the land.  But murder of our own selves, disrespect of young people for elders, a misunderstanding of business.  I go to so many institutions where blacks have no understanding, our children, of why they should have a business.  You know, they treat the customers as if they are interlopers, you know.  And we don't have--too many, so many African American men are not in the home.  They're out somewhere else, they're not taking care of their families.  Now, there are good, you know, African American men who are doing this.  But I'm talking about--if African American men who have had these children would come home and get a job and take of them, many problems that we have would dissipate.  So I think our culture is alien to a group of people who want to prosper.  So, I'm very concerned about--I live in Prince George['s] County [Maryland], you know, and robberies are increasing.  This is supposed to be the most wealthy community in America that's inhabited by blacks.  And I heard the county executive [Jack B. Johnson] talk about, "It's a great place to live, except for the crime."  Well, if you're talking about getting shot and killed or your house broken into--except for that?  You know, that's everything.  So, you know, I think that we should march in our own communities. We had great civil rights marches.  You know, march to change this culture.  You know, march to say that we need respect for our elders and for ourselves.  You know, raise up a standard against self-hate.  Because you know, how can you look at someone and take a gun and shoot them if you had love for yourself or love for other people?  So we need, you know, hate to be replaced with love.
Story_ID: 278046
Speaker 1: We need a culture that produces a productive--you know, we need people with a sense of respect and entrepreneurship.  I'm very disappointed with our culture.  I'm inspired by what churches are doing.  Because I see the works of churches, and I'm part of that.  I have respect for pastors who work hard in the community to feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, and to be role models themselves.  So, it's a dual--you know, [W.E.B.] Du Bois talked about the duality of the African American character, where you're two people.  And I think there is a two-ness you know, that I feel, I I I applaud, you know, many of the churches and the pastors.  But I know that that's not enough.  Our jails are filled with young black men with, with, with forty and fifty year sentences, because of drugs.  The drugs were put into our community by the United States government, according to Maxine Walters [sic. HistoryMaker Maxine Waters].  But we don't have to take them, but somehow, we do.  So I think, I'm very dismayed at the funerals that we're attending, and the lives that we have lost.  I'm dismayed at HIV [human immunodeficiency virus], as it becomes a scourge in our community.  I mean, black women are the leading victims of this.  Black women are going to jail at record rates, you know.  So, these things are very worrisome.  But I do know that God has rescued and led us, you know, out of every situation.  And that's my only faith.  It's not what man will do, but actually what God will do, because of our faith and obedience to Him.
Story_ID: 278047
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done up to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I think that I would have liked to get a second husband, you know.  I was married once, and it was a disaster.  I would have liked to have married again.  And I hope that that's something that I may do.  I can't think of anything I would do differently, because God has even used my mistakes to help other people.  Even every pain I have went through has helped somebody.  Every misery I've had has become a ministry.  Every sad story I can tell you, I can see victory in it.  So, the devil had thought he was going to use it for evil, God made it into good.  So, you know, I don't have a sad story.  I like myself, I enjoy what God has made me.  And if I could do it all over again, I would just embrace God at a early age.
Story_ID: 278048
Speaker 1: Now, likewise, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what do you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy is my ministry.  My legacy are the students I teach.  My legacy is the ability to touch lives early, and to be the mentor for them that I didn't have.  I didn't have too many mentors in journalism.  I wanted desperately to have women mentor me as a minister, but I didn't find mentors.  So, I try to be to other people what I didn't have.  I try to deposit the best of [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Barbara Reynolds as a journalist and a writer into people, young people.  I'm doing it at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  I do it to people who just call me on the telephone.  You know, I mentor women who are struggling with problems of anger and resentment, of not having a mother.  You know, my story turned around, because my mother's [Elizabeth Henderson] back in my life after forty years of being away.  Because of forgiveness, she's back in my life.  And my family that was apart, away from me, they're back in my life.  So I try to help people through my books and through my speeches to forgive and to embrace God, and to have meaning and purpose.  And I'm doing that.  God is allowing me to deposit the best of Barbara Reynolds through my sermons, and through my speeches, and through mentoring.
Story_ID: 278049
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a woman who God used to help others through the gifts that God gave me, through journalism and through ministry.  I'd like to be known as an imperfect person that God still used to do mighty works of God.  Because, you know, I'm not through yet.  The best of me is yet to come.  So, eyes have not seen and ears have not heard what could still come from [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Barbara Reynolds.  I can't even write my future, because God is writing it.  And he reveals new ways of blessing people, you know.  Every day I'm at a wonderful church [Greater Mt. Calvary Holy Church, Washington, D.C.].  I have a great pastor, Bishop Alfred [A.] Owens [Jr.], and I am now writing his biography.  And it is my hope that through writing his biography, and people understanding what a great man he is and what a great church we have, that more people will discover him.  Because it's not about me anymore.  It's about using my gifts for the glory of God.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
