Story_ID: 90339
Speaker 1: [This] is Aretha Franklin--she was down at Soldier Field for the Democratic Convention in 1967 with Reverend [Elmer L.] Fowler.  And it's--went to work for her in 1959.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  When you're ready.  And tell us a little bit about that photograph.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is the-[HM] Willie Wilson.  I'm coming--they were playing for him today.  I've been playing for him about 11 years.  We on channel 9 every Sunday Morning at 6:30.  And this is a group that--we went on the Caribbean cruise; that's where this was--last year.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Oh, and could you name the people in the photograph?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  This is Mr. Wilson--Jeanette Wilson's sister and nephews.  The one on the end is Jason.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  On the far left?
Speaker 1: On the left. OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Mmhm.
Speaker 2: Then Sam is--Mr. Wilson's wife's sister--brother-in-law, this is her sister, then me, this is her sister, then that Jeanette, and Mr. Wilson and his son.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  And was the cruise for pleasure or were you working?
Speaker 2: No. Not working.  It's a vacation.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Oh.  Excellent.  Okay.  Are you ready?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Oh, this picture is--we made in 1965, we went to Washington to work for President [Lyndon B.] Johnson.  We weas working.  Mahalia Jackson, and from left to right we got Mahalia pianist, Mary Fall (ph.); her husband Minters [Sigmund] Galloway; the Mrs. Lady Bird Johnson; Mahalia Jackson; President Johnson, Lyndon Baines Johnson; and Edward Robinson, the organist for Mahalia Jackson.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Ready?
Speaker 2: Okay.  [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was over on the West Side in the early sixties [1960s] with the poor people of Chicago [Illinois] doing their living in the abandoned buildings.  And that's me.  This is me and Dr. King placing a window frame up to a window in the early sixties [1960s] when they came to Chicago for a workshop.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  And how did you meet him?
Speaker 2: Dr King?
Speaker 1: Mmhm.
Speaker 2: Oh, we were doing freedom rallies all around the country.  Connecticut--from Connecticut to New York, Buffalo, New York; Brooklyn, New York; all the way out to California.  When anytime he would call Mahalia, I would be playing for the rallies.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Oh, this was just published.
Speaker 2: Mm?
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  This page was just published this year.  Right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  It's reading March 2003 at the top.
Speaker 2: Through the eyes of Tony Rhoden.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Okay.  Tell us about this.
Speaker 2: This was a Chicago Sun-Times profile on Monday, August 12th, 1991, a friend of mine, Barbara Howard, had her friend to do this for me of a Chicago Sun-Times paper.  And this last part is Edward Robinson St. Andrew Temple Baptist Church, Family and Friends, "I feel like going on."
Story_ID: 90340
Speaker 1: This is Tuesday.  The interviewer is Adele Hodge.  The camera person is Matthew Hickey.  And we are talking with Edward Robinson. Musician, accompanist to Mahalia Jackson and many other well-known--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --entertainers, vocalists, etcetera.  Mr. Robinson, can you give me your full name and spell it.
Speaker 2: Edward Charles Robinson.  E-D-W-A-R-D, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we located today?
Speaker 2: 4835 King Drive, Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is the date today?
Speaker 2: Today is April 29, '03 [2003].
Speaker 1: And can you give me your birth date?
Speaker 2: May 10, 1933.
Speaker 1: And the place?
Speaker 2: Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And would you give me your mom's full name and birthplace?
Speaker 2: Althea Saddlefield (ph.); born, Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Do you know her birth date?
Speaker 2: Not right off.
Speaker 1: It's Althea?  Would you spell it?
Speaker 2: A-L-T-H-E-A; Robinson, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And your dad?
Speaker 2: My dad is Gilbert Robinson.  G-I-L-B-E-R-T, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And his birth place?
Speaker 2: I know his birthdate, but his--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Montgomery, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And you don't know his birth date?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 90341
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to open up with what we call our "People" questions.  Just a little (unclear)--some few (unclear) questions to get us started.  What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I think red (laughs).
Speaker 1: And your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well, fish, greens; I love greens.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Honolulu [Hawaii] (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your favorite verse or saying?
Speaker 2: Oh, verse.  I have so many, I'm trying to get something real nice, though.
Speaker 1: Well, if it comes up, you can tell us later.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 90342
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Here we go.  Can you give me--tell me, what do you remember of your grandparents?
Speaker 2: I'd never seen them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On either side.
Speaker 1: Oh.  How is that so?  They were both dead?
Speaker 2: I guess they both passed.
Speaker 1: Oh.  Okay.  Before you were born?
Speaker 2: Mmhm.  Mmhm.
Speaker 1: Oh.  Okay.  And your mother [Althea Saddlefield Robinson] is from Alabama?
Speaker 2: Birmingham.
Speaker 1: Birmingham, Alabama?
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: What do you remember most about your relationship with your mom?
Speaker 2: Well, she was a hardworking person.  And she had six kids.  I am the baby of the boys.  She had four boys, two girls.  I guess she had two girls after I was six years old.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what do you--what one story or do you have to illustrate for us, the relationship you had with your mom?  Any favorite stories come to mind?
Speaker 2: Not to mind right now.  Meaning what now?
Speaker 1: Like, you know--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Oh, go ahead.
Speaker 2: A favorite story?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  A relationship that you had with your mom.  Like, what--like, one day, Mom and I were in the garden doing....
Speaker 2: Oh.  Well, I--she was--like I was the youngest of the boys, she would always have me to go with her.  She loved people in the--well, she was a nurse, and we had a small community named Ereckel (ph.), so everybody depended on my mother; what day or night, she would always wake me up to go with her.  Yeah, we were very close; me and my mother were very close.
Speaker 1: How old were you when she passed?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was '68 [1968].  She died in '67 [1967].  I was a pretty good age then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so do you remember anything special about those trips today?
Speaker 2: Trips?
Speaker 1: Trips to make the house calls with your mom?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was just like--well, like I said, a lot of times she would go and she would go and--I would have to--she would cook for the people that she was nursing, seeing about; and I'd have to go and carry food to them, you know.  And once they passed, I guess, being a kid, I always liked to smell coffee.  And then she would cook food for them, the wake and everything; and she--my mother was just a people person.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You say you like to smell coffee.  What other kind of smells stand out for you when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Banana puddings, apple; she loved pastry; you know, she cooked pastry.  She would cook pies and I would have to cream the butter for her to cakes (laughs).  I would get tired.  My wrist and--I wish then they had electric (laughs).  I wish I hadn't been, you know.  Well, I enjoyed just being with her, you know.
Story_ID: 90343
Speaker 1: What do you remember of your father [Gilbert Robinson]?  What kind of stories stick out for you?
Speaker 2: Well, my father was hard-working.  He was almost (unclear) and my mother [Althea Robinson] ran the house.  He would go to work.  A hard-working man though.  He would go to work in a steel mill in TC and I [Tennessee Coal and Iron Ensley] in Birmingham [Alabama].  And he worked the steel mill there.  He'll come home from the steel mill and he just quiet, you know, sleep and rest, you know, like in the evenings after he get through eating.  And he was never much of a house person.  He would just sleep and then he'd get up and go out and visit his friends and come back in, relax and get ready to go to work again.  He was a hard-working man.
Speaker 1: So did you ever have any, you know, conversations and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --how was that (unclear)
Speaker 2: Well, you know, Dad was--he never could even chastise us, you know, he--like I say, he was like one of us, you know--in the house, you know, and hard-working man.  That's all I can say about dad.
Speaker 1: So he was very mild-mannered.
Speaker 2: Mild-mannered person.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 90344
Speaker 1: What was it like growing in the Robinson household?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, like, my mother [Althea Robinson] was very religious.  In Birmingham [Alabama], she brought us up in the Church of God in Christ; Bishop [C.H.] Mason in Memphis, Tennessee.  And she was a really religious woman.  And I remember the time my older brother, he wanted to kind of get loose; smoking a cigarette, he always--he see Mama coming, and would swallow the cigarette (laughs).  Oh, man.  Mama was very tight with us.  Kids--what the kids doing today, it would never happen with my mom, you know.
Speaker 1: So on a day-to-day basis, between the four boys and the six [sic, two] girls, I bet you still probably created a few nice stories in between.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (laughs).  Oh, yeah
Speaker 1: Can you remember any of them?
Speaker 2: Oh, we used to go wrestling, and when we got to high school--my main thing was I love being around gospel music.  I met Mahalia [Jackson] when I was about 11 years old.  She would come to Birmingham, and Mama would let me even go to the auditorium where she was.  All the singers, you know.  And in '45 [1945]--yeah, about 11--I would go over to the auditorium and see Mahalia, see the regular--rest of the gospel singers; you know.  She would let me go there, you know.
Story_ID: 90345
Speaker 1: How old were you when you started taking to music?
Speaker 2: You know, I never read music.  It was a God-given gift.  My mother [Althea Robinson] had my second--her second oldest, William, taking--well, he was taking music, and I would hear what he was doing and go to the piano and just start playing.  Yeah.  And that went on around 'bout two or three years before we came to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: How old were you when you just started playing?
Speaker 2: I was around 'bout--around 'bout 12; 12 or 13.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what you were thinking of your ability to just go and play?  What did they think?
Speaker 2: Well, I experienced--the Lord woke me up early that morning around about 5:00.  My mother was cooking breakfast for my daddy [Gilbert Mason] to go to the steel mill.  And I slid out of the bed, and I went up--and she had bought an upright piano for my brother, not for me, my brother.  I slid out the bed, I went to the piano and started playing "Does Jesus Care?"  And my mother walked--she had--making biscuits; she was making biscuits.  She walked up and she said, "Oh, William, where you learn that from?"  She called me my brother William, 'cause she had him--"Where you learn--that sound heavenly."  And then I say, "Mama, this not William.  This Edward."  And she turned the lights on.  I was getting to the piano so fast, I was playing in the dark.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did that surprise you?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess it was happening so fast.  I mean, now, even with the early years, I just had to marvel over myself what God has done.  No music lesson, no nothing.  I just went and started playing.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's something.
Speaker 2: It was unbelievable.
Story_ID: 90346
Speaker 1: Well, we're going to come back to your music in a minute.  Let's start with elementary school.  What was the name of the elementary school?
Speaker 2: Eureka School.  Eureka School.  Then we went on--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Would you spell it for us?
Speaker 2: E-U-R-E-K-A.  Eureka Elementary School.  Right next door to my house (laughs).
Speaker 1: That was something.
Speaker 2: I was always late (laughs).  I was always late going to school 'cause it look like you could run out the backdoor into the schoolhouse, you know.
Speaker 1: What do you remember most about your--do you remember your first day of school?
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.  I remember Miss Simmons (ph.) was my first-grade teacher.  And she always had us going with our coats, putting our hat in our coats; and I remember that, and our gloves.  And she had a switch--I mean a strap and she would whip us (laughs), you know.  Then schoolteachers could do things, you know.  And then we had a tough principal, name is Shepard (ph.).  And she was our--the principal of the school.
Speaker 1: Were you a good student?
Speaker 2: No.  I was not.  No.  Not good.  Not real good.
Speaker 1: Did you have any teachers in elementary school that stand out as a mentor or--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, Miss--like I said, Miss Simmons and Miss Shepard, who we had.  I remember them in elementary school, but I would really know of the teachers in high school, you know.  In high school.
Speaker 1: So, did your school go from elementary to middle school or did it go directly--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: It went from elementary to--we went to Lincoln--we had a Lincoln [Middle] School--to complete the eighth grade.  Then we went on to Parker High--it's A. H. Parker High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any other favorite teachers in--that were--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, a lot of them.  Oh, yes.  Miss Burnett (ph.); Mrs. Wertherton (ph.); Miss Truells (ph.), who went on to be another name, but--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Why do these names stand out?  Tell me.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, they was good teachers.  A lot of teachers then, they would get the smartest kids in the school to teach us, and they would just, you know, stand out, and--but, in high school, I know in high school, they would get the brightest kids to teach us, you know, and then they would just--I guess, they'd be, you know, up and down the hall, maybe.  You know.  But those teachers I called, they was teachers.  They was actually really teachers, you know.
Story_ID: 90347
Speaker 1: So when you graduated from [A. H. Parker] High School [Birmingham, Alabama], were you, like, into your music then?
Speaker 2: Always.  Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: You were playing for the church and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Playing for the churches, playing for groups.  But we had a girl that stood out named Evelyn Hardy.  She was with the Gospel Harmonettes.  And she would--I would always go and sit around her (unclear).  She had a music store in Birmingham [Alabama] on Fourth Avenue.  And I would be around her all the time, you know, 'cause I had loved her touch and the way she played, and she was really a good pianist; good pianist.  And that's where I got the style from.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me, those years you were, like, in school, and you were also doing, you know, playing--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: We had a plan.
Speaker 1: --working.  Tell me what kind of stories stick out in your memory about those years?
Speaker 2: You mean comparison my music, what, in school and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Well, just like when you were saying that you, the young woman, that you liked her style and that kind of thing, and you adopted a lot of her style.
Speaker 2: Yeah, her style.
Speaker 1: Tell me stories like that that help me understand how--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --how you developed the musically.
Speaker 2: --musically.  Oh, I would go by her house, and she lived 'bout two blocks from my high school.  And I'd just sit down, and I'll be--she would sit down from me and start playing.  And even now, as late up here--I mean, I've been here now about 54 years.  She go back, and still plays the same way.  Yeah.  Yes.  Beautiful home and everything.  She top flight.  Yeah.  I was there about two years.  And she just stood out.  She was--she had something about herself that whenever you met her, you'd never met her dirty or--she was grand.  She was a grand lady.
Speaker 1: And her name again?
Speaker 2: Evelyn Hardy.  Evelyn Hardy.
Speaker 1: And she was in Montgomery [Alabama]--Birmingham?
Speaker 2: She was in Birmingham.  But see--yeah.  This was--I was coming up then, and she would, like, let me fill in for her.  I was just playing when I got here about two keys.  Now I play in all of them.
Speaker 1: Oh.  You learned all that?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Because I learned them about playing for the sanctified church.  If you sung a song in the back of the church, well, you had to pick it up.  And I can pick it up.  That's where I learned the different keys even before I got here in the Holiness Church.
Speaker 1: Right after morning that you went in and then you started playing William [Robinson]'s piano--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Laughs)
Speaker 1: (Laughs)--how long was it before you actually started doing it at the church and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: At the community--yes.  Oh, it stands out (laughs).  It was the next Sunday.  The people in the community couldn't believe it.  They said, "Miss Robinson," they asked my mother [Althea Robinson], "what happened to Edward?  What happened to William?  You were giving William music."  You know, everybody knew everybody; you didn't know any different.  "But Edward is playing the piano now.  What happened?"  She said, "The Lord touched him."  And it's unbelievable.
Speaker 1: And you started it.
Speaker 2: I just started playing from there, and started playing for the church choir, and it's picked up from there, you know.
Speaker 1: And everybody wanted Edward to play.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Play.
Story_ID: 90348
Speaker 1: What happened to William [Robinson]?
Speaker 2: William came to Chicago [Illinois] and went to working in the steel mill.  Then I came here [Chicago] in 1949.  I went down to Reverend [Clarence Henry] Cobbs's 'cause we could hear Reverend Cobbs program in Birmingham [Alabama] on the radio.  So we used to wait up every Sunday night to hear Cobbs 'cause the singing was good.  I went in--that Sunday morning I got off the train, I went down to Cobbs's church [First Church of Deliverance], but they were turning out.  So I went in and I introduced myself.  I was always, you know, could meet people, you know.  And I had a conversation with him, and Cobbs said, "(Unclear)."  I said, "I'm from Birmingham.  I heard your program and we--my mother [Althea Robinson] came to Chicago.  I was going to--supposed to be going to Detroit [Michigan], though."  And he said, "You want a job?"  He said, "I don't think I can handle you right now."  He said, "But I'm going to send you to a friend of mine's, Reverend Louis Boddie.  So I went down to Reverend Boddie, and Reverend Boddie hired me.  In 1949, I had a job at $40 a week at the church.  Then he got me on--one of the Deacons sent me out to Reverend [Elmer L.] Fowler's (ph.).  I went working for Fowler for eight years.
Speaker 1: You were rolling (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was rolling (laughs).  My mother--I had to take care of my mother and two sisters.
Speaker 1: When you met Mahalia Jackson, you were what?  How old you say, 11?
Speaker 2: Oh, I met--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: --at 11--yeah, '45 [1945].  She was in a concert.
Speaker 1: When was the next time you saw her after that?
Speaker 2: Well, they--I think they call them the Big Three.  They would book up there almost every year.  So she knew me when I got to Chicago.  I was-like I said, I could meet people, you know.  And I would go up and see her and talk to her.  And when I got to Chicago, she had all different doors were open to me.  She would come to the church I was playing for.  And Reverend Louis Boddie (unclear) we had broadcast every Sunday at 3:00 o'clock.  And she would come there.  But she--that's when she really heard me play, 'cause I was going to her.  She didn't know I could play in '45 [1945].  She didn't know I could play.  But when I got here, she knew me from Birmingham, just coming to the dressing room talking to her, you know.  And this girl Evelyn, [Hardy] every time any group would come from Chicago or to other cities, she would always go and I would go up with her, you know.
Story_ID: 90349
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we're in Chicago [Illinois] and you've hooked up with Mahalia Jackson.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Trace for me how that all unfolded and how you became her accompanist.
Speaker 2: Well, Mahalia was--I was playing for Reverend [Louis] Boddie.  She would go there every Sunday evening at 3:00.  And she said, "Edward?"  I said, "Yes, Miss Jackson."  "Would you like to go to California?  I just want a different sound on my records.  You can come back to the house and we'll rehearse numbers and I'll carry you out to Hollywood," and I said, "Fine."  Well, we just know each other like, you know, close, close, close friends, 'cause I would go to her house on Prairie.  She would do hair.  She was fixing hair then in the early '50s [1950s].  She was fixing hair, had a beauty shop.  And she didn't know that she was going to be that big, you know.  So she--I went out there and we rehearsed the numbers.  And I played the numbers on--we went to California; Hollywood, California.  We done the album that she wanted to do.  I was on my way back to Chicago.  She paid us all, and on the way back to Chicago, the man--the president, the vice-president--said, "Mahalia, who is that boy playing for you?"  He said, "If I was a singer, I have him playing for me."  She looked for me all over Chicago--all over Los Angeles [California].  All over Los Angeles.  And then one of the gospel singers out there said, "Edward, Mahalia looking for you."  I said, "Well, I'm catching a plane tonight."  "She looking for you, boy."  I said, "Well, I'll go out to the hotel."  I went out to her hotel.  She said, "You know, I made a second thought about you going to Chicago.  You got to stay with me.  I'm going six weeks out here."  "But see, when I get--I told Reverend Boddie I would be back.  He depending on me."  (Laughs).  So she say, "I'll call Boddie.  I'll call him and get you off the hook.  And you stay here with me."  So she called him and I talked to him and we went all over, then this is when I started playing for her then, you know.
Speaker 1: And her name again?
Speaker 2: Who?  Mahalia?
Speaker 1: Oh.  That was Mahalia.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: She was staying out there?  Oh, she.  Okay.
Speaker 2: She was working back to Chicago after her after her recording session.  She was going to work six weeks coming back to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So the man told her said, "I would have him working for me."  He wasn't no singer, though.  He was just a vice president of Columbia Records.  And she took it up--took him up at his word and hired me for her personal musician.  And I worked for her about 16 years.
Speaker 1: What year was it when she took you in?
Speaker 2: That was 'round '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: So you never went back to Reverend Boddie?
Speaker 2: No.  I come back and he had let me come back to the choir.  Oh, yeah.  You come back, we'd have days that we'd be off and after that, I started working for Reverend [C.L.] Franklin, Aretha [Franklin]'s daddy.  They was good friends.  [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], all them tie in together with Mahalia, 'cause we would go over to Martin Luther King to do freedom rallies.  New York all the way back out to California, again.
Story_ID: 90350
Speaker 1: So when you started, what was the average work week like working with Mahalia [Jackson]?
Speaker 2: We'd be in a car rolling from 8--you know, 800 miles a day from another set to another set anoth-every night, every day.  That's when she--when I first started in '48 [1948]--'58 [1958] I mean.  And she toned it down to around 'bout two days a week when she had the heart attack in St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 1: 'Cause she was--the period you were with her was when she was getting more and more popular.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She got--moved up a little higher in 1950.  So I've--from that time, it was 'bout seven or eight years before I started working with her, you know, when she got popular; starting going to the White House and over in Europe.
Speaker 1: You made all those steps.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: What kind of things stand out for you from that period?
Speaker 2: Well, she was a box office attraction, you know.
Speaker 1: Mmhm.
Speaker 2: And, well, with [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], there were some beautiful years in the sixties [1960s].
Speaker 1: But I mean, what stories do you have about those years?
Speaker 2: Oh, about--okay.
Speaker 1: Mmhm.
Speaker 2: She (laughs)--we was up in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] one night, the place was packed and jammed.  And she walked and she said--the little girl came up, said, "Mahalia, I don't have a program."  She said, "Baby, I am the program."  (Laughs)  "I am the program."  And we went in, and we was, like, in traffic and trying to get to this hall, and she was trying to say, "I'm Mahalia.  I'm Mahalia, baby."  (Laughs)  And she was comical.  We went to Madison Square Garden, and she had promised this man that she was going to--she was just coming word of mouth without a contract or they would be friends for so long without a contract.  So he didn't send the money like she was supposed to be working on a contract.  So I had the suitcase, we walked in Madison Square Garden, and she just went in and I said, "Mahalia, you don't want your robe?"  She says, "No.  Just give me my house shoes."  She walked all around through Madison, "Hey, Baby.  Hey Baby."  Everybody was hollering at her.  Then she--but she knew her work 'cause she came up through the ropes.  So she says--she get--they got a chant going after so long, they kept introducing everybody else.  "We want Mahalia.  We want Mahalia."  So the man had the money, but--$40,000.  He had to send her her $40,000 before she go on (laughs).  But they were friends though.  But he--you know how people get--can get money on your name, you know.  It was something else.
Story_ID: 90351
Speaker 1: Now, your music style, was it changing and you were coming into your own?  Was it changing in those years also?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  It has changed growing up.  I listened to other musicians like--after I got here, I was in tune with Robert Anderson and Willie Webb.  Willie Webb was a musician--born musician.  And I just could pick up--I could pick up, you know.  I was getting into chords, different chording, but kept the same touch.  Yeah.  Music is something else.  It's universal.
Speaker 1: So you were getting into chords and being influenced by other styles--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but you kept your same touch?
Speaker 2: I kept my same touch.
Speaker 1: How did you do that?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess the touch was in me.  That what sold me.  But I was getting into chords.  You know, you get progressive chords and all kinds of chords.  And I was exposed to it.  Being around Little Lucy Smith [Lucy Smith Collier], her mother had a church down there on Vincennes; and Willie Webb and Robert Anderson and--everybody was playing, you know, trying not to outplay each other; just playing, you know.  And it exposed me a great deal, it exposed me to.
Speaker 1: And the Spirit hit you on some of those?
Speaker 2: Oh, God.
Speaker 1: (Laughs)
Speaker 2: Like with some of that stuff, you'll get cold.  You get cold feet, you know.  Being with Mahalia Jackson, here you almost (unclear) out (laughs).  Almost, like cotton, it was picking cotton and be coming to Mahalia Jackson and Aretha Franklin, and they good singers, you know.
Story_ID: 90352
Speaker 1: And you worked with Aretha [Franklin]?
Speaker 2: I worked with Aretha when she was going with her daddy.  He was Reverend C.L. Franklin.  And he had his own style of preaching.  And he had--already had the record, a popular record out, "The Eagle Stirreth Her Nest" And Aretha would sing, the Clara Ward Singers would sing, and they had a midget; she could really sing.  She was outsinging Aretha then--back then, 'cause Aretha was very young then, you know.
Speaker 1: And so what was the difference for you in working with Mahalia [Jackson] and Aretha?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, Aretha had her own style, like we going back to musicians.  They have their own style, their own beat.  Aretha had her own style, Mahalia had her own style.  And both of them complement each other.
Speaker 1: But I mean, you as a musician, making your adjustment to each artist, how does that--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, Mahalia was different, because Aretha didn't stay in gospel music that long, you know.  She stayed in--when she--her daddy had got ill and then she started singing pop.  I got into the Regal Theater, me and Mavis Staples, the Staples Singers.  But Mahalia, well she stuck with what I knew and what I felt.  So I was--I have to say Mahalia.  And I'm still doing it.
Story_ID: 90353
Speaker 1: Tell me about what you're doing--bring me up to date, from the Mahalia [Jackson] years up to date, what you've been doing professionally?
Speaker 2: Okay.  From Mahalia, I went back in the church.  I left Reverend [Louis] Boddie and went out to Third Baptist Church with Reverend [Elmer L.] Fowler.  Then we--after Mahalia died [1972], I went--in music with the [Chicago] Park District.  I played for the Park District.  I left the foundry alone.  I went in the Park District in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: What did you do with the Park District?
Speaker 2: Taught music.  I just--well, I had a choir.  I had a choir.  And I worked for Washington Park and Columbus Park for 12 years over on the West Side.
Speaker 1: And tell me something about those years.
Speaker 2: Well, that was just cultivating the people's voices, you know.  I bought--carried my own piano in the Park District and cultivating singing voices.  I didn't teach music per se.  I just gave them what I got out of working for Mahalia.  And they was--a lot of kids were from the churches around the neighborhood, and they'll come in and want to see what I could do with the voice.  And I would sit down at the piano and play for them.
Speaker 1: Did any of the kids you taught, did they go on to professional work?
Speaker 2: No.  Not the ones I had, 'cause it was very few.  I mean, it wasn't like coming and going into the gym and playing ball and stuff like that or Ping Pong.  They come in, you know.  There'd be a select group.
Story_ID: 90354
Speaker 1: And today, tell me about your work schedule today.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, today, I'm working for A.R. Leak Funeral Home [Leak & Sons Funeral Homes].  I play for my church [St. Andrews Temple] and I'm--we just came in from Dallas, Texas.  I play for [HM] Willie Wilson.  That television show, I'm on every Sunday morning at 6:30 on Channel 9.
Speaker 1: How long you been with Willie Wilson?
Speaker 2: About 12 years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you like doing television studio?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I love that.  I love it.
Speaker 1: Is there any different approach to your music from doing concert work and studio work?
Speaker 2: Well, it's--it's a difference, 'cause when you're doing concert work, you don't have no stops.  You sing and sing until you get the feeling, and until you fall out or whatever (laughs), you know.  But studio work, you know, you're just there, and if you make a mistake, you got time to stop, you know, and get it right, you know.  But all of it is good, though.  All of it's good.
Speaker 1: Do you have any favorite stories over the years that stick out in your mind about your work and about the people you work with or worked with?
Speaker 2: Well, Mahalia was always comical.  Mahalia was a big dame.  She--it's just the way she phrases things, you know.  We was working one time for--out in California, again, and they had a mixed group.  They weren't, you know, they weren't completely integrated, what I'm saying.  She said--she told them, "Well, you know, ya'll got to get it together, 'cause I don't sing to a segregated crowd.  They have--you have to integrate."  So she said, "Rev. Steele (ph.), I tell you what.  I'll just go on out in the park.  I'll go in the park and everybody stand together and I'll sing."  Those types of things she'd do.  You know, with [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] working real hard.
Speaker 1: What would you like--what do you think people will remember of you professionally?  What do you think will stand out in their mind?
Speaker 2: Well, I hope they would say I, with the style of playing I've played, you know, I think that would stand out.
Speaker 1: And you--do you have some of your music for us?
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: CD or some of your music--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: --today?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Give me an idea of--since you're in music, and that's certainly is-you've been touched by the Spirit musically--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: --what kinds of sounds stand out for you career-wise?  You know, just close your eyes for a minute and hear your professional life, and then tell me the story related to the sound that stands out.
Speaker 2: Well, Mahalia had a deep voice, a contralto voice.  It sound like harps was in it.  We was walking on stage and Mahalia was there.  So rehearsal, I had to go back to the dressing room, and the stage man said, "This woman give me goose pimples."  Said her voice was so rich.  Said she sound like a horn.  And she could just go into a beat that would electrify you if you were sitting there, you know, just sitting in her concerts.  She'd go into a beat with that big voice, studio work; unbelievable.  It's unbelievable.
Story_ID: 90355
Speaker 1: Now, let's trace your personal life a little bit.  After you left school, did you marry?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I married.
Speaker 1: And you have sons and daughters?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't have any kids.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your wife's name?
Speaker 2: She passed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was her name?
Speaker 2: Luella.
Speaker 1: Luella.
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: How many years did you spend--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: We stayed together about nine years.  But we weren't together when she passed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And spell her name for me.
Speaker 2: Lu--I forget.  Luella it's--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is it, L-U-E-L-L-A?
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So then, all your--the personal side is the professional side also?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You didn't have anything, you know, like, (unclear) when you took your favorite vacations and whatever.  I'm just trying to find out a little more about you as an individual--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: --as the man Edward Robinson.
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: What can you tell me about him?
Speaker 2: Meaning what?  I'm trying to get.
Speaker 1: About you, separate from--I mean, even though you're blessed with music, you're still an individual.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: So I'm just trying to find out a little more about you as an individual, also.  What can you tell me about Edward Robinson, the person?
Speaker 2: What do I like?
Speaker 1: What do you like, what do you do--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: What kind of things move you?
Speaker 2: Oh.  I like basketball.  I like football.  I like to cook.  I admire cooking.  You know, like I say, with Mom [Althea Robinson].  I never had a job cooking, now, but I can cook, if I got to cook.  She taught all the boys, say, "You ain't got no wife, I mean, you ain't got no wife right now, but you (unclear).  Listen, go in and iron."  I would go in and--like, Mahalia [Jackson], they never--her robes, I would press them out, 'cause I had to press my mother's dresses 'cause she was nursing, and the then--those nurses, they would wear their uniform, and we got to starch them and have them together, you know.  But me as a person, I like sports, you know, I like.  But my main thing is I like people.  I love folk.  I don't care how bad they get, you know some good in them.  And I like them.  No--Michael Jordan or Jackson might like the snakes.  No.  But it's some good in everybody.  And it says that on that thing.  I want to know the good in people, man or woman.  I like to know the good in them.
Speaker 1: Reverend Boddie, what was Reverend Boddie's first name?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Reverend Boddie.  What was his first name?
Speaker 2: Louis Boddie.  Louis Boddie.
Story_ID: 90356
Speaker 1: Is there, musically and professional speaking, what are the things would you like to accomplish professionally?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm trying to slow down my pace now.  I'm 70 years old and I got three jobs right now.  It's three of them.  I work for--I'm the main musician at Leak's Funeral Home [Leak & Sons Funeral Home] right now.  As we talk, they doing my funerals.  Willie Wilson, he is--I'm the only musician that he got that know his music.  So I have to move with him.  I was out last night with my church choir [St. Andrews Temple Choir].  So I stay busy, real busy.  So I don't think--I think I've done about all.  And at 70 years old, there ain't too much more you can do (laughs).
Speaker 1: Do you have anyone in your life you're mentoring?  Any students or--
Speaker 2: No.  I don't have time--
Story_ID: 90357
Speaker 1: Is there anything that I didn't ask you today that I should have asked you about you or your life as a musician?
Speaker 2: Well, going back to entertainment, we hit on the things that [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was--didn't accomplish, you know, that maybe [Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson, HM] will accomplish, you know.  Maybe Al Sampson (sic)[Reverend Albert Richard Sampson, HM] out of New York (sic) will accomplish, you know.
Speaker 1: When did you first meet Dr. King?  How old were you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I met Dr. King in the '60s [1960s].  When he came to Chicago [Illinois], I met Dr. King.  And he was in Mahalia's living room.  I don't know, she just took a liking to him, and--as a person, trying to do something; love people, you know.  And I met her at her house, and we became good friends; very good friends.  And then when we started doing the freedom rally, 'cause he just came here for a set and then we was--he hadn't really got into it.  He didn't know what he was going to do himself.  This is how it came around, you know.  And he started doing freedom rallies, then Mahalia started going with him, 'cause she was a name, and we did the March on Washington [1963].  And like I said, we went to Connecticut with him; like, New York, go to Los Angeles [California]; lot of places we went (unclear).
Speaker 1: What was your impression of Dr. King?
Speaker 2: Dr. King, to me, was somebody that--he was a person of a kind.  He was--you would think he was being funny at one time, you know.  He enjoyed laugh.  And then (finger snap), right sitting with you at that moment, he would get serious with something he had to do.  And he was--I don't know which--I don't know how to phrase it.  I don't know.  It's--he was spiritual.  He was spiritual. He was beyond his time.
Speaker 1: How--you were with Mahalia Jackson until she stopped touring and singing and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --until she got sick?
Speaker 2: Until he died.  We played for the funeral.  She was at his funeral.  Some person (unclear) down in Atlanta [Georgia].  Had he been going--had she been still living, she'd been doing some things with him now as of today.
Story_ID: 90358
Speaker 1: When Mahalia [Jackson] got sick the last time, were you still with her?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me something about the period when she was winding down her career.
Speaker 2: Well, she knew that she was--we went to (unclear) University.  That's when I found out that she was afraid after she had the heart attack.  I put her--we were coming out of St. Louis, Missouri, and I was at 95th Street.  I was driving the car.  I was at 95th and Western, and I turned.  I said, "Why I'm passing the house?"  She told me to go on to Billings Hospital.  That was Bernard Mitchell now.  Billings Hospital.  I said, "No.  Where I'm going?"  I said.  And she had turned white.  Anyway, we carried her back to Little Company of Mary Hospital, which she (unclear) down, and she had that heart attack--she went to Billings, they said, "We can't operate."  She went to Michael Reese [Hospital].  No operation.  This where she died at, Little Company of Little Mary [sic, Little Company of Mary Hospital], 'cause she had obstruction of the bowel.  So that's what--.
Speaker 1: What year was that that she died?
Speaker 2: '72 (1972), 1972.
Speaker 1: And she married twice during her career.
Speaker 2: Yes.  She had.  Ike Hockenhull [Isaac Lanes Grey Hockenhull] and Minters Galloway [Minters Sigmund Galloway].  Ike was her first husband.  She was from New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Did she have any kids?
Speaker 2: No.  Just adopted one kid, and that was her last husband's baby.
Story_ID: 90359
Speaker 1: We're coming up on the end of this second half-hour tape.  Is there anything else that you know you want to share with us about yourself, about your travels?
Speaker 2: Well, I was just thinking about how the Lord has took me, gave me a gift that I could magnify and edify his people.  And I'm just grateful for his blessings, because had I not been doing this, I would had have to do something else.  And this, to me, was most--one of the most glorious experiences I ever had in life.
Story_ID: 90360
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were tracing for us Nat King Cole and how you knew him--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --through his sister [Evelyn Cole].  Would you start that story for us?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Well, I went to work for Reverend [Elmer L.] Fowler.  Rev. Fowler--the church, when I went to Reverend [Louis] Boddie, Reverend Fowler was his secretary.  So we were tight.  And then when Fowler went--got the call to go preaching, and he founded Third Baptist Church, 938 West 69th Street.  Then Evelyn Cole came in to the church, and she got to be his Pastor Aide--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Evelyn--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --President Evelyn.  That's Nat King Cole's sister.  So this brought us into the Cole family.  Like, when we--they would go up to North Chicago [Illinois] when his mother died.  Evelyn was going.  A lot of people went with her because she was there and Nat was there.  Ike Cole was there, and Ike is a musician, too; singer, you know.  Then Natalie [Cole] was there.  She was very young then.  And we would go to California.  I would go by (unclear) Street to see him.  He would stand out and talk to us, and he know I was playing for Mahalia [Jackson].  So he just took us in like we been knowing, you know--'cause I had to pass Mahalia--I mean, I had to pass his house to go over to Mahalia's hotel.  And then sometime I see him standing out and I holler at him, you know, and we talking.  Nat King Cole.  And then one time, they booked Mahalia at Coconut Grove at his 25th Anniversary.  Yeah.  And we had time to sit down and talk.  Sammy Davis Jr., all of them.  I met a lot of stars.  Yeah.  And so we went up to North Chicago when Evelyn--when his mother died.  And we got a chance to see the family, you know.
Speaker 1: Which one--of all the stars you met, which one stands out in your memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, Sammy Davis, Jr.  We was at the White House with [President] Lyndon Baines Johnson.  Gregory Peck was there.  Pearl Bailey.  I love Pearl (laughs), 'cause she was so comical.  And we on television shows, we done met a lot of stars; on the Ed Sullivan Show, Dean Martin Show, the Hollywood Palace, Telephone Hour, Red Skelton [Show].  Lot of stars.  Met a lot of them.  Met a lot of them during the [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] freedom rally, too.  A lot of stars come to him, support him, give him money.  Real nice.
Speaker 1: That's very good.  What was it like?  Did Mahalia have her own bus?
Speaker 2: No.  It was just four of us.
Speaker 1: It was just four.  Oh.
Speaker 2: Four of us.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Didn't need no bus.
Speaker 1: Not a band or anything like that?
Speaker 2: We would just fly different places.  And then, she just get in the Cadillac and we'd ride.  You were doing one nighters then.  Like, if we wanted to go to Detroit [Michigan] or St. Louis [Missouri], you know, we're going to night that.
Speaker 1: So you still--you were just saying, you still know any of the Cole family?  Any of the Cole family still--(unclear)?
Speaker 2: We know Natalie.  Natalie come here.  Marie [Maria Cole].  Marie went to--I think she moved to Boston [Massachusetts] from Los Angeles [California] when Nat died.
Speaker 1: That was one of the sisters?
Speaker 2: No.  The wife.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Nat's wife.  Marie Cole.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So is it anything else we want to add to this tape before we--?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  You didn't work with Martin Luther King.  You were actually--outside of being a musician, you participated more in his activities.  Right?  I saw that photograph of you helping put in a window.
Speaker 1: Well, I was playing for Mahalia, but I would just work on shows on his freedom rally for Mahalia.
