Story_ID: 626655
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers archive.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Rodney Joseph Reed: R-O-D-N-E-Y, J-O-S-E-P-H, R-E-E-D [HistoryMaker Rodney Reed].
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 16th, 1932, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a professor emeritus of the University of California, Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley Graduate School of Education, Berkeley, California].  And dean and professor emeritus at Pennsylvania State University [University Park, Pennsylvania].  I'm retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 8th, 2011.  Today is known as Fat Tuesday in Louisiana.  It's the day of Mardi Gras.
Speaker 1: All right.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Oakland, California sitting in the rumpus room of my home.
Story_ID: 626656
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone and they only require a short answer, each question.  The first question is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, Louisiana seafood gumbo.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Autumn.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: It's a tossup between Jamaica, Negril and Italy, Florence.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  There's one that was coined many years ago by Eleanor Roosevelt and it says that, "The future belongs to those who believe in the beauty of their dreams."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 626657
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Ursul, U-R-S-U-L, Charlotte, C-H-A-R-L-O-T-T-E, Desvignes, D-E-S-V as in victory, I-G-N-E-S, Reed, R-E-E-D [Ursul Desvignes Reed].
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in New Orleans [Louisiana].  I don't have at my fingertips the date of her birth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I have a note here, 1910, does that sound about right?
Speaker 2: That sounds right.  I can give you the exact date.  I'd have to look it up.  I just don't know it offhand.
Speaker 1: I, I have here December 4th, 1910.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But it's--okay.  In New Orleans?
Speaker 2: In New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Right.  What can you tell us about her side of the family?  How far back first of all can you go on that side?
Speaker 2: Only to her parents.  Her father [Felix Desvignes] was a Pullman porter, her mother [Salome Neuvier Desvignes] was a housewife.  Her mother's mother [Florence Perkins Neuvier] had a grandmother whose name was Ellen Casanave who was unmarried, and I think she had a relative who at one time was the archbishop of New Orleans.  We got into these mixtures of colors.  And she also had a relative that she used to mention who had lived in France and had made some major contribution to the profession of embalming folks.  But we had no written verification of any of this at the time that we heard the stories.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, on your mother's side, they--would they be called Creoles?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And they, as far as you know had, did they have a long history in the City of New Orleans?
Speaker 2: We, we haven't been able to trace our family roots you know that far back.  I don't know how long they were in New Orleans and from whence they had come.  We have heard rumors that some of their relatives may have come from the Domingo and the Caribbean, but we don't have any verification of that.
Speaker 1: Santo Domingo [Dominican Republic]--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: Would that be--have anything to do with the Haitian Revolution or anything?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'd like to think so, but I really don't know.
Speaker 1: And what--how do you pronounce that family name again?
Speaker 2: Desvignes.
Speaker 1: Desvignes, okay, all right.  All right.  Now did your--are there any stories on that side of the family about, about life in New Orleans or--?
Speaker 2: Not, not that I'm aware of.  There was a, there was person named Sidney Desvigne who was a well known musician back in the, I guess the '30s [1930s], but as you, you know, go through the archives or the records you don't really come across his name that much.  But I am aware of the fact that he had a band in New Orleans and he was very much in demand.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that would be back in the days when King Oliver and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Louis Armstrong--
Speaker 2: But he was of course overshadowed by Louis Armstrong and King Oliver and, and folks like that.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he had his own band, and it was (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes he had his own band and he made a living at it so he must have been fairly, fairly good.
Speaker 1: Now what did he play, do you know?
Speaker 2: I think that he played piano and, and saxophone.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 626658
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Ursul Desvignes Reed] talk about growing up and what it was like?
Speaker 2: Not really.  She had two sisters [Delcina Desvignes Cazenave and Salome Desvignes] and two brothers [Robert Desvignes and Charles Desvignes] and they were all very close, but I don't recall them ever talking extensively about what life was like when they grew up.  It was a fairly tight knit family.  They all lived in a fairly small home.  Obviously they were close to each other and enjoyed each other, but we really don't have any inkling about what life was really like for them growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My impression is that while they were not wealthy by any stretch of the imagination, they lived comfortably and really didn't want for a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Her father [Felix Desvignes] being a railroad man.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was he a porter or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was a Pullman porter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, I never knew him that much.  I used to--you know he'd come in off the road and come home and eat, sleep and socialize with his buddies and then he was gone again.  So I never really got to know him that well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did--do you know if he made the run from New Orleans [Louisiana] to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I think, I think, I think it was a New Orleans-Chicago run, yeah.
Speaker 1: What they called the City of New Orleans train?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did, did her family--now those of us who are not from Louisiana or don't know anything about Creole lifestyle or that much about it, just the stuff we read, is there a special status afforded the class of people called Creole (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well historically you know Louisiana has always had this sort of distinctions based on, on color.  Lighter complexioned folks were seen as being a little higher up socially than darker complexioned folks.  There were some very strict codes for attending social functions.  There was something called the brown paper bag test that if you were darker than a paper bag then you were not looked upon with favor at some social events.  There were something called the comb test; if you couldn't pass a comb through your hair (laughter) easily, you again were not considered to be part of that little upper class group.  That was--I think a lot of people have written about that.  They were not--they were light complexioned, but I'm not sure that they enjoyed any special privileges that I was aware of.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would you consider them a part of the society that would--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --you know--
Speaker 2: They, they--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: None of my family were at that point you know society types, individuals that you'd read about, see photographs of and places like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So now did she--now where did she go to school in New Orleans?
Speaker 2: She went to the public schools and then she went to--there was a college in New Orleans called Straight College, which was a forerunner of Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana].  And she attended Straight College, she never graduated from Straight College.
Speaker 1: Do you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I'm not sure what she studied.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I think at that point you know it was just the general curriculum.  There was no real specialization taking place.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she talk about what were aspirations were growing up?
Speaker 2: No, because after she and my father [Edgar Reed] married you know they had six kids fairly close together.  So she was a housewife so she didn't really have much time to think about doing anything else.  In those days you know times were hard and she spent most of her time taking care of us as we came along.  And my father, we'll talk about him later, spent a lot of time you know trying to make ends meet.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this was the Great Depression as they call it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was born in 1932, so we're talking about now the years, oh, let's say 1935 to 1941, time of World War II [WWII].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 626659
Speaker 1: Let's go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Edgar, E-D-G-A-R, Joseph, J-O-S-E-P-H, Reed, R-E-E-D [Edgar Reed].
Speaker 1: All right, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in New Orleans [Louisiana].  I don't have his exact date before me.  I'm sure that I provided it for you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we have September the 20th, but we don't have a year.
Speaker 2: I'll have to give you that year.  I don't know it offhand.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was he about the same age as your mother [Ursul Desvignes Reed]?
Speaker 2: He was older than my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: By about ten years, at least ten years older than my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, so about 1900 then, roughly?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he was born in New Orleans?
Speaker 2: He was born in New Orleans, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about the Reed side of the family?  How far back can you trace your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Only, only to his parents.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we have tried but we have been unsuccessful.  Unfortunately, my father really never talked much about his background and so there're just blocks that we don't know anything about.  And we've tried to go through the census data to see if we could trace the family history, and we have not been successful.  At one point some of my family spelled the name Reid, R-E-I-D, and some spelled it R-E-E-D, so it gets a little confusing going back in the records.  But at any rate, my father was one of five children.  One of his siblings died shortly after birth.  His father [Joseph Reed] was a longshoreman, he worked on the riverfront in New Orleans, and his mother [Amelia Joseph Reed] was a housewife.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were three boys and two girls.  Interesting thing about my father's side of the family is that the two girls, my aunts, they're all deceased now, became schoolteachers.  And they went to a normal school in New Orleans for their education and got a job teaching in New Orleans, saved their money and then one went to New York [New York] to Columbia, and I think she got a degree from Columbia University.  And the other one who became my mentor from age two (laughter) on used to take me to school with her when she was teaching third grade.  Hence, I got an early start in school which is why you know I graduated from high school [Gilbert Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana] at roughly you know fifteen years, plus one month because of that--her insistence on making me do my homework and working with me every day and taking me to school with her and interacting when I was four years old with third grade students and doing the work that the third grade students were doing.  So I owe a lot to my aunt.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Louise, L-O-U-I- L-O-U-I-S-E, Reed [Louise Reed] and the other one's named Beatrice, B-E-A-T-R-I-C-E [Beatrice Reed].  My Aunt Louise never married.  My Aunt Beatrice married but the marriage didn't last, and out of that marriage there was one son who lives in North Carolina someplace.
Story_ID: 626660
Speaker 1: My father [Edgar Reed] was a druggist, pharmacist.  And what I remember about the early years is when I was you know one year or two years old--and I have some photographs of me when I was three or four years old so--that you may be interested in seeing.  But my father--this was the Depression era [Great Depression], so he worked in, at various jobs.  He, at one time he worked a little bit at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service].  Another time he sold insurance policies.  And then being a pharmacist, he worked part time in a variety of drugstores in New Orleans [Louisiana] relieving some of the folks who were the regular pharmacists there.  Eventually he got his own drugstore that was called Guichard's Pharmacy [New Orleans, Louisiana].  It was located on Claiborne Avenue on the corner of Dumaine [Street].
Speaker 2: How do you spell that, Guichard?
Speaker 1: Claiborne?
Speaker 2: No, no--
Speaker 1: Guichard?
Speaker 2: Guichard.
Speaker 1: G-U-I-C-H-A-R-D, Guichard's Pharmacy.  Old Man Guichard died, and my father acquired the pharmacy, but he kept the name.  Finally when that building was sold, I mean the family owned the building continuously and they sold it and unfortunately he was not able to buy it.  So then he moved his drugstore to a block away in an insurance company's building.  It was an insurance--called Venus Insurance Company and they had lopped off a whole big section of the building for him to put his drugstore there which was then named Reed's Pharmacy [ph.], Reed's Drugstore [ph.].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: And he worked around the clock.  We used to, we used to pack--my mother [Ursul Desvignes Reed] would pack a basket with his dinner and we would walk to the drug store to take it to him because he didn't have anyone to relieve him.  So if he'd open the store at 8:30 in the morning he was there 'til 8:30 or 9:00 at night.  The walk from our home to the store was at least two miles but we walked.  Took him his dinner, he ate there and he was a very, very hard worker, very, very dedicated and highly respected in New Orleans.  Interestingly, after he finally retired and sold the drugstore, he went back to work as a pharmacist at Flint-Goodridge Hospital, which was in New Orleans and was up and running at that time.  It is, it is no longer in operation.
Story_ID: 626661
Speaker 1: When he [Reed's father, Edgar Reed] was in his eighties, he went to Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England] to get a degree in theology because he had always been interested in theology (laughter).
Speaker 2: He went to Oxford in England to--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he went--well he came out here--he didn't get his degree from Oxford.  He went to Oxford to study for a summer.  He came out to Berkeley [California] for some special workshop, and from Berkeley he went to England to study theology.  He finally got a theology degree from a theological seminary in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And as children we used to, we used to chuckle because we always had to say--listen to him bless the food before we ate, and in his blessing he would give us a whole sermon.  So we would--you know (laughter) my brothers and sisters you know we'd sit there you know chuckling under our breath and then of course when he finished his sermonette, we all had to say a bi- bible verse and so you know that was a ritual in our family.  It was--I think it did a lot for us morally to do that, but he took great pride in doing it, and he--I, I'm pretty sure that he actually prepared for it.  This was not just extemporaneously done.  You know he get--gave some thoughts of the message he wanted us to hear and we had to sit there and listen to it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now did--do you--did he go to school at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 1: You know it's interesting, he did not go to Xavier.  We thought he had gone to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], but it turns out he didn't go to Meharry either.  We think that there, there was was a special program at Flint-Goodridge [Flint-Goodridge Hospital, New Orleans, Louisiana] to prepare individuals in the health fields, and we think that he was in that program to get his degree.  As I said earlier my father never (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a hospital right, Flint-Goodridge?
Speaker 1: Flint, F-L-I-N-T, Goodridge, G-O-O-D-R-I-D-G-E Hospital.  It's a land- it was a landmark in New Orleans.  It's no longer operational.  At one time it, it was connected with Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana], the School of Nursing.  But it was a black hospital in New Orleans.  It was the only predominantly black hospital in the City of New Orleans.  So his- historically it's you know fairly well known if you, you know are interested in any of that sort of history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But anyway we think that he went to this special program there, but we know that, that following that he spent some time in New York [New York].  So he may have gone to the school in New York as well.  Another time in his life he was in Ala- some place in Alabama around Montgomery, but he never talked about it.  And by the time we started, that is my siblings and I started thinking about you know our heritage and our background, he was deceased.  And there was no one in the family--all--he was the oldest one, and all of his other siblings had left, and there was no one who could give us the real story.  So we, we've been trying to piece it together for years and we simply can't.  We don't have--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --the leads to know exactly you know the different schools that he went to, the year that he got his degree.  We do know that his marriage to my mother [Ursul Desvignes Reed] was his second marriage and his first marriage was to a lady in New Orleans who lived in New Iberia, Louisiana, which is where they make Tabasco sauce, so.  And that he worked as a pharmacist in New Iberia, but that's all we know.  We don't know you know names, places, dates and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: So you don't know when his--have you ever seen his diploma for his and where his degree came from?
Speaker 1: No.  We, we've never seen his diploma, and he's gotten you know citations from the State of Louisiana pharmaceutical board [Louisiana Board of Pharmacy], the pharmacists being trained at Xavier University did their apprenticeships, internships you know in his drugstore.  And so he's, he had a close connection with Xavier's school of pharmacy [Xavier University of Louisiana College of Pharmacy, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But I've never ever seen his diploma.
Speaker 2: You know I ask about Xavier because of the school of pharmacy being--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --one of the strongest schools in the country.
Speaker 1: Right, well that's what I'm saying.  The students at--from Xavier did their sort of internship at his drugstore, so he knew a lot of them and he was you know closely involved with their, with their ongoing program.  He wasn't a professor there but he was you know like a field mentor, but he was never formally on the faculty of Xavier.
Story_ID: 626662
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about--that's told about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: No.  We, we tried to find that out too (laughter).  I don't know if--as far as I know it was like some enchanted evening you know.  He was working in New Orleans [Louisiana] in a drugstore and she went in to buy something and their eyes met and he dated her and they got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's all I knew.  I wish I knew more.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you think about your, your parents' personalities and their talents and their--even their looks, their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well there are, there are a lot of people who say that I have some of the mannerisms of my father [Edgar Reed] and that as I age I begin to look more like my father.  Early on I thought I was more like my mother [Ursul Desvignes Reed] because she was much more caring, much more concerned about other people.  My father was always businesslike, and I won't say cold and calculating but the side of him being outgoing and warm was not revealed until later in his life.  So I think I'm really a good balance between both of them.  I have a considerable amount of objectivity about what I'm doing.  I'm goal oriented as, as he was.  I'm very concerned about people, particularly young people as my mother was.  The one thing that I'm perhaps not as close to what they were like, they were both very reli- very religious.  I'm not quite as religious as they were, although I like to believe that church resides in one's heart and not in the physical presence of going to, to church.  My father enjoyed belonging to groups.  He was a 33 Degree Mason, he was in Elks [Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks of the World], he was in the pharmaceutical association, Chi Delta Mu I think it was called, dentists and doctors and pharmacists.  He was in a couple of Mardi Gras carnival clubs, Original Men of Illinois [Original Illinois Club] and you know other kind of clubs, but so was my mother.  She was in a card, you know whist club and a church club of this and that and the other.  So, they were both people oriented but in--at--but at different ways--in different ways.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and I think I, you know some of that rubbed off on me.  I'm very active in two, three organizations or I have been you know over the span of my life, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now was there any, any conflict I guess presented with you know your mother being a Creole marrying someone who was not a Creole at all?
Speaker 2: There was no real conflict on the part of my mother's relatives that I could tell.  I think my father's sisters were a little miffed that my father married someone that was lighter than anyone on his side of the family to the extent that they weren't hostile, but I never got the feeling that they were really warm to my mother.  And I think it was because of the color situation.  I could be wrong.  But when, when you're young you get these kinds of impressions that may not be as accurate as they appear to be at the time that you experience that.
Story_ID: 626663
Speaker 1: Can you name your brothers and sisters and, and I guess tell us where you--are you the oldest (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.  My brother directly beneath me was about eighteen months younger than I was, was Langston Felix Reed [Langston Reed].  And let me say as I give you the whole names, we all had in our names the name of one of our relatives.  So I'm Rodney Joseph Reed [HistoryMaker Rodney Reed].  Joseph was the middle name of my father [Edgar Reed], it was also the name of my grandfather, my paternal grandfather [Joseph Reed].  Langston Felix Reed, Felix was the name of my mother's father [Felix Desvignes].  Langston followed my father's footsteps and became a pharmacist.  He left pharmacy to go to Howard--he got his degree at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  Then he went, after practicing pharmacy for a few years, he went to Howard [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.] and earned a DDS degree as a dentist and applied his trade in New Orleans [Louisiana].  He died last year.  Very well known and, and highly regarded in New Orleans.  And following him was a sister, Florence Amelia Reed [Florence Reed Smythe Macaulay].  Her middle name was the name of my paternal--I guess is there such a thing as a paternal grandmother?  My paternal grandmother, her name was Amelia [Amelia Joseph Reed].  My next sibling was Ruth Charlotte Reed [Ruth Reed Hodges] and Charlotte was my mother's [Ursul Desvignes Reed] middle name.  The next sibling was David Edgar Reed [David Reed], and Edgar was my father's name.  And my youngest sibling was Daniel Robert Reed [Daniel Reed] and Robert was the name of my mother's brother [Robert Desvignes].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we all, we all have these family connections and, and also to a great extent they were biblical names.
Story_ID: 626664
Speaker 1: Tell me about the neighborhood you lived in?  What, what, what--you know--
Speaker 2: That's a very interesting, very interesting story.  We lived in a lot of different places.  When I say a lot, I mean four or five different places.  Originally, we lived in a duplex in New Orleans [Louisiana] that was owned by my two aunts on my father's side, my father's sisters [Louise Reed and Beatrice Reed].  We lived on one side and they lived on the other side.  It was the--I can tell you the exact address.  It was 1969 North Rocheblave Street, which is down in the 7th Ward in New Orleans.  New Orleans is divided by wards.  And my two aunts lived in the, the next, the other side of the duplex at 1971, which was why I mentioned earlier that my aunt used to work with me on homework, take me to school with her 'cause we lived right next to each other.  So my brother Langston [Langston Reed], my--the sibling immediately next to me and I were born in New Orleans and lived there.  For some reason there was some tension between my two aunts and my father [Edgar Reed] and mother [Ursul Desvignes Reed].  I think it had to do with color but I'm not positive about that so we had to leave.  So we moved to live with my mother's parents [Salome Neuvier Desvignes and Felix Desvignes], very crowded situation, but it was at that time that my sisters [Florence Reed Smythe Macaulay and Ruth Reed Hodges] were born.  So we had you know four kids, my mother and father, her parents, her unmarried sister [Salome Desvignes], grandmother and at that point we lived at 1423 North Roman Street, which is still kind of in the 7th Ward, but more going toward, coming up toward the 6th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana].  It was at that point where I started going to elementary school, and I went to Joseph A. Craig Elementary School [Joseph A. Craig Charter School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and I would walk to school.  From there we moved to a home on St. Philip Street, 23- 2324 St. Philip Street, which was a home that my father rented and it was at that home that my fifth sibling [Daniel Reed] was born, and we all lived there.
Speaker 1: About how old were you at that point?
Speaker 2: Ten.  And then New Orleans like a lot of the cities got this federal money to build housing units, they were known as projects.  And as soon as these projects were built, my father applied to get one and he got one.  So from there we moved in the projects.  Now--
Speaker 1: What was the name of the project?
Speaker 2: Lafitte Projects [New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Lafitte.
Speaker 2: Lafitte Projects.  They are now--they have been demolished now, but I can tell you exactly where they were, and it's a little interesting story.  But any rate, we moved in the projects.  We lived there for you know two years.  By that time I was in high school [Gilbert Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana].  After two or three years, my father bought a home right below Canal Street in New Orleans on Rocheblave, and for the rest of his life, the rest of the time that I was in New Orleans, we lived there and all my siblings lived there 'til they went to college and, and left and after my mother died and my father you know left to live with my brother.  And any rate, the house is still there.  It's in--it's not in good shape but it's, but it's still there.
Story_ID: 626665
Speaker 1: But when we lived in, in the project [Lafitte Projects, New Orleans, Louisiana], which is what I found very unique and interesting about that, it was right across the street from Dooky Chase's Restaurant [New Orleans, Louisiana].  Everybody knows about Dooky Chase's Restaurant.  What they don't know about is we watched Dooky Chase's Restaurant grow.  It started out--Dooky's real name was Edgar, the same name as my father [Edgar Reed], was Edgar Chase and, and he was called Dooky--he wore a diamond ring on his little finger, his pinky finger and a straw hat.  And he had a barroom on one side of the street, on Orleans [Avenue] and Miro [Street], Orleans and--Miro, Tonti [Street], Mir- Ton- Miro--I think, it's either Miro or Tonti, I'm mixing up those streets now.  I think it was Miro.  It started out as a barroom and then it moved from the barroom across--directly across the street.  It was still a big barroom and in the back there was a little place that made sandwiches, and we used to go and get sandwiches.  There'd be oyster po' boys, shrimp po' boys, codfish ball sandwiches, hot sausage sandwiches and people you know really liked them and they would flock there and flock there and flock there, so they said, "Well we need a restaurant."  So they--this was also a duplex and they lived on one side and one side was the barroom, and the little place in the back was a, was the sandwich part.  So they moved out of that to the next house, and they made that the dining room.  So if you go to New Orleans [Louisiana] now, they bought the following house and they kind of connected.  But the barroom is still there, and that part of the house that was converted into the restaurant is still there.  But the part that was, that I wanted to mention was Edgar Chase, Jr. was a trumpet player and he had a band.  It was simply called Little Dooky's band or, or Edgar Chase's band [Dooky Chase Orchestra].  In his band there were people like Vernel Fournier who went on to play drums with Ahmad Jamal in, in Chicago [Illinois].  Benny Powell that played trombone, went on to play trombone with Count Basie.  Warren Bell played alto saxophone, went on to play with Lionel Hampton, and big Emery Thomas that played trumpet who also went on to play with Lionel Hampton.  So there was a little hotbed of, of budding musicians that lived right there in the neighborhood.  And, and I was playing saxophone at that time.  I was significantly younger than they were, but I had a little reputation coming up because at the elementary school that I went to, it was the same elementary school that they went to, and I was holding my own at that point.  So we had this informal kind of seasoning network emerging just in that little section of New Orleans.  It dissipated of course because Edgar Chase, Jr. [sic. Edgar Chase III], Little Dooky, who is still there, you know got, I won't say more interested, but, but assumed much more responsibility in the business than in music.  And his sister [Doris Chase Davis] was a singer that sang with him as well.  I don't remember her name offhand, but was quite good.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now Dooky Chase--is Dooky Chase in the 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: That's still in the 7th [7th Ward, New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 1: No, no, that's still--that's bordering on what might be known as the, you know the 5th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: 5th Ward, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But that's--it's--it was right on Orleans, you know right there on Orleans right across--the last time I was in New Orleans I--you know I always drive around just to see how things look.  But that whole section has been dem- demolished, I mean all the projects there have been demolished.  I don't know what they're going to do with the property but there's nothing there.
Speaker 2: Now did it all get caught in the flood?
Speaker 1: Oh no, this was before the--
Speaker 2: Before?
Speaker 1: I don't think that the flood did a lot of damage to that section of the city.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now did you, were you attending Craig Elementary [Joseph A. Craig Elementary School; Joseph A. Craig Charter School, New Orleans, Louisiana] at the time?
Speaker 1: I went to--I was attending Craig Elementary School.
Story_ID: 626666
Speaker 1: We always ask this question and it may seem redundant to you 'cause you described some of this already.  But what are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Good food (laughter), Mardi Gras.  At that time you know the Mardi Gras parades were I think, I would think more elaborate than they are today.  And they also were lighted by men carrying flame torches which was very unique at least in my estimation.  I mean now they don't have those now.  It's a safety hazard and all that.  But, but, but these actual kerosene burning torches you know lined the parade.  The second lines, the music, I mean you can't be in New Orleans [Louisiana] and not be affected by food and music.  So fortunately my mother [Ursul Desvignes Reed], my [maternal] grandmother [Salome Neuvier Desvignes] were gourmet cooks so I ate very well.  And they could use scraps.  You know you asked me about my favorite food, and I said seafood gumbo.  Well gumbo was, was something that people made in New Orleans where they put a lot of leftover stuff in it, I mean and scraps and all that.  So it was not an expensive dish.  But you know red beans and rice and you know these are inexpensive dishes, but they seasoned them so well that it just, you know it's just, it's--those are my favorite foods (laughter).  So growing up I, I, I you know I was very impressed with the quality of the food, not expensive food.  I mean they even make something called codfish balls.  I don't know if you've ever had one of those, but it's like a patty, like a, like a fish patty or something, but it's made with codfish and potatoes and stuff and then it's you know highly seasoned and fried and it's extremely tasteful.  I mean I don't know if they still make those, but.  Oysters were plentiful, shrimp were plentiful.  People would go right down to Lake Pontchartrain and fish and get fresh fish and shrimp and oysters.  And so we ate a lot of oysters and shrimp and fish, codfish, trout, what have you.  So my, my memories growing up were of you know having tasty food, well seasoned, being exposed to a lot of good music, the festive nature of parades.  And as the u- I think a unique thing about New Orleans is that people are so friendly, so it's easy to understand why it's known as the Big Easy because people were very outgoing.  And if you're invited to someone's home or to a social event, they never expect you to pay, not ever.  I mean you're their guest, and so it's that kind of atmosphere that you know it lingers with you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well New Orleans is a historic kind of a city too been, having been around so long.
Story_ID: 626667
Speaker 1: Now your school [Joseph A. Craig Elementary School; Joseph A. Craig Charter School] from what I understand from my notes here is in the Treme neighborho- neighborhood [New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, it was in the Trem- Treme section.  I used to walk to school.  In those days I would say that the schools were--I mean we didn't have the kind of discipline problems that you know you find in schools today.  We walked to school.  There was no problem in walking to school.  We brought our little peanut butter and jelly sandwich you know for lunch.  We didn't have you know huge cafeterias and you know food for sale at the school so we, we brought our lunch.  But at that--during those years I was very, very involved with music.  I mean I was just fascinated by--
Speaker 1: Now what was your introduction to music as a, as a (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well one Christmas, my two [paternal] aunts [Louise Reed and Beatrice Reed] that I mentioned earlier that we--lived next door to me, asked me--I must have been about seven years old, maybe six, six or seven, what would I like to have for Christmas?  And something just caused me to say a saxophone.  I didn't, I didn't know why I said saxophone.  And lo and behold they scraped their nickels and pennies together and they got me a saxophone.  It was not you know the greatest saxophone in the world.  I mean they have a lot of cheap model saxophones I've since discovered since that time.  This was one of the cheap saxophones, but anyway they got me a saxophone.  And I was so proud of that saxophone.  I used to polish it and practice and, and at school I, I don't--I won't say that I'm competitive by, by nature, but I wanted to be as good as I could be on it.  And so I'd practice a lot and played in the band and played solos.  And in fact, I got to the place where churches and special groups had programs, they would ask me to come and play a solo.  So I used to go around the city (laughter) playing solo- little--they called it Little Master Rodney Reed [HistoryMaker Rodney Reed] and you know plying these solos, sometimes unaccompanied and sometimes with piano accompaniment.  But I got to be pretty, pretty good at it actually.
Speaker 1: Well what were your favorite tunes?
Speaker 2: Well there were all kind of classical tunes, you know tunes like you know 'Ave Maria' and 'Songs Without Words.'  I'm not sure I had any favorite one, you know 'Beautiful Dreamer.'  It was stuff like that you know at elementary school, they weren't difficult, but I, but I you know I memorized them and, and they would you know instead of having somebody sing they would ask me to come and play.  Evidently they liked it because I kept getting asked (laughter) you know to play at these.  And I would go, I would take my little saxophone and get on a bus and go to these programs.  My parents didn't go with me.  I mean they were--my father [Edgar Reed] was busy working, my mother [Ursul Desvignes Reed] is you know babysitting with you know my siblings and stuff.  I didn't have anybody to take me to these so I would just go on my own.
Story_ID: 626668
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you something in this regard.  Now we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young and his brother.  And they both (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Walter [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Walter who is a dentist now in Atlanta [Georgia].  And they both talked about how tough their neighborhood was.  I don't know if you lived in the same neighborhood.
Speaker 2: I lived in the same neighborhood.  I know the neighborhood they lived in.  It wasn't--Andrew and his family lived on Cleveland Avenue near White Street which is above Canal Street.  I lived below Canal Street in a 300 block.  You know New Orleans [Louisiana] has Canal Street that divides uptown from downtown. So we lived--when we lived in the project [Lafitte Projects, New Orleans, Louisiana] we lived in the 600 block so that was six blocks lower; that was down there by Dooky [Dooky Chase's Restaurant, New Orleans, Louisiana].  When my father [Edgar Reed] bought the home farther up we lived three blocks below Canal Street.  They lived about four or five blocks above Canal Street.  Andrew's father [Andrew Young, Sr.] was a dentist.  His office was in the front of the house.  They lived in the back of the house.  I'd been to his house I mean when we were classmates at Gilbert [Gilbert Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana].  I knew his father, his mother [Daisy Fuller Young], his cousins, his brother.  I didn't find the neighborhood that tough.  Now maybe (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well they said they had to learn how to box, and--
Speaker 2: --maybe, maybe it was tough 'cause they lived there constantly.  I only visited there, but on my visits there I didn't think the neighborhood was as tough as when I lived in the housing project.  Now if you want to say tough, yeah, I mean there were little gangs.  You know we (laughter) we used to make little pop gun, shotguns, you know where you'd you know take a cane and put a rubber around it and a little trigger and shoot a little bead through it or something.  In fact, you know one of the guys shot in one of these little gangs from an uptown gang that came down and there was a big fight and you know with one of these homemade guns and he was injured.  I would say that nothing like what goes on today, but there were these little rivalries going on.  I didn't think it was that tough.
Speaker 1: They, well they said they had to fight, fight every day and--
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: --learn how to box to be able to defend themselves, and they always--
Speaker 2: Well it could be.  It might--the section that they, that they lived in, and, and I could be wrong, but it was a, it was a changing neighborhood.  It was, it was a neighborhood that had been predominantly white, and so they may have had to fight because the other group didn't want them to be there, I don't know.  Where I lived, there was no problem (laughter).  We were in an all-black neighborhood, so we didn't have those kind of scuffles going on.  As a matter of fact what was so good about it was that everybody was your guardian.  Everybody in the neighborhood was concerned about what you did, how you did it and any one in the neighborhood could discipline you if you were acting up, and they did.  So it was that kind of neighborhood that I was in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now one of the features of Treme I've been told is--now I knew about this but I didn't know it was in Treme, is Congo Square [New Orleans, Louisiana], the historic Congo Square (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I didn't know anything about Congo Square when I was growing up.  I mean it's something that I've read about you know since I've become grown and said oh yeah there was a Congo Square and it was right down there.  And Louis Armstrong played there and dah, dah, dah.  But as you know growing up as a, as a youngster, you don't think about all this.  You know I went to school, I did my work, I played my little saxophone, I went home; I wasn't really cognizant about the historical significance of the surroundings that I was in.
Story_ID: 626669
Speaker 1: At Craig Elementary School [Joseph A. Craig Elementary School; Joseph A. Craig Charter School, New Orleans, Louisiana] you said your [paternal] aunt [Louise Reed] really helped you.  She prepared you before you started and so you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but that was not--she was--my--when I was four years old my aunt used to take me to the school where she was teaching third grade.  That wasn't a--where I went to Craig is not where she taught.  At Craig School it was a whole different situation.  My favorite teacher of course was my music teacher, Mrs. Martin [Miriam D. Martin].  What else can I say about it?  It was a, you know it was a close knit school.  There was no huge discipline problems there that I am aware of.  I mean students came, did their work and left.  We didn't have any clubs other than the band that I was in, and it was a, it was an enjoyable experience.  It was not the same elementary school that the Youngs went to [Valena C. Jones Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana] that you asked me about earlier.  As a matter of fact I don't really remember a lot of my classmates.  That--maybe it was too long ago but I do remember that we didn't have any huge discipline problems.  I remember that once we were, we were preparing for a special program, I think it might have been a graduation, and a band was on the stage and the principal whose name was Dedeaux, Mrs. Dedeaux [Maude Dedeaux Crocker] had--was, was speaking and she said she wanted everybody to be quiet.  And I was fidgeting around with my saxophone and I, and I let out a little (makes sound) (laughter) and she called me up in front of this whole assembly and made me stick out my hand and with a ruler you know gave me you know six lifts for tooting on my horn when she was--had asked everybody to be quiet and not anyone to interrupt (laughter).  And I didn't do this intentionally.  I don't know, I just had my, you know was fooling around and (makes sound) and the sound came out.  That was an embarrassing moment for me, but it, but it also was indicative of the level of discipline that was maintained at the school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, but the work was pretty easy for you, you said--you were saying--
Speaker 2: Yeah I didn't have any problem with the work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was just a question of you know how hard I wanted to apply myself.  Some things I was you know interested in, and so- other things I wasn't.
Story_ID: 626670
Speaker 1: Now you went from--Craig [Joseph A. Craig Elementary School; Joseph A. Craig Charter School, New Orleans, Louisiana], which is a public school right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: To Gilbert Academy [New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How was that decision made?
Speaker 2: My parents [Ursul Desvignes Reed and Edgar Reed] made the decision.  As I men- mentioned, my father was very goal oriented and looked around and Gilbert Academy had the reputation of being the best high school available to people of color in New Orleans [Louisiana].  It was located up on St. Charles Avenue in an area surrounded by very beautiful, spacious, I would call them mansions, but homes.  Eventually the school was sold to the Catholic diocese [Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New Orleans] and it was torn down and replaced by a white Catholic school [De La Salle High School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  But at that time Gilbert was the school in New Orleans and there was a small tuition charge.  It wasn't really that much but in those days that much was probably a lot.  But it was a decision made by my parents, not by me.  I hadn't even heard of Gilbert before that and my father said, well, you know, "You need to go to Gilbert," so I went to Gilbert.
Speaker 1: Well how did you like it?
Speaker 2: It was outstanding.  The school, the faculty members, the principal, it was a highlight in my life.  It was like one big family or one small family.  The principal was Margaret Davis Bowen who I think at one time was a national president of AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] or The Links [The Links, Incorporated], or one of these groups.  Her husband was J.W.E. Bowen [John W.E. Bowen, Jr.] who became a bishop of the Methodist church and at one time was president of Gammon Theological Seminary [Atlanta, Georgia].  Their son, John W.E. Bowen, Jr. [sic. John W.E. Bowen III] became a lawyer and was an elected representative in the House of Representatives in Ohio [sic. Ohio Senate].  I think he lived in Cleveland [Ohio] or Columbus [Ohio], one of those areas.  I mention that because when I was at Gilbert I got really excited about mathematics.  I had a teacher whose name was Aaron Dutton.  He and his wife both taught at Dillard--I mean at, at Gilbert.  And he had the kind of personality that made you like him, but he also inspired us.  So I remember I had been messing around and we were doing factor analysis or something and one day I had solved this problem that nobody else in the class had solved, and he singled me out.  And from that moment on I mean I walked around with my chest sticking out and the motivation was just so intense that I wanted to do well in all my classes from that.  But, but before that I was really mainly interested in music because Gilbert you know had a fantastic band and it was there that I started playing clarinet.  Now I didn't have a clarinet.  Guess where I got the clarinet from?  The principal of the school, Mrs. Bowen had bought a clarinet for her son.  Her son didn't want to play it.  He had left, he had gone to law school, et cetera.  It was just sitting in her closet, she gave it to me.  So that was, that was how I got a clarinet.  It was a little metal clarinet (laughter), it wasn't anything you know fancy.  But I think we--as we were talking before the band was outstanding.  We went to competitions and we, we'd always come away with first place.  And when we'd play in solo competitions, I would win first place.  And in that band, [HistoryMaker] Harold Battiste was there and, and we used to have challenges.  And so periodically he would challenge me because I occupied the first chair in the band in--at least in the clarinet section.  And I would you know practice really hard (laughter) so that I would not be displaced, and I wasn't, so that was--.  Now there's another good thing about Gilbert.  The band director was a gentlemen named T.--I don't know what the T ever stood for, T. Leroy Davis.  T. Leroy Davis became the band director at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  When I went to work at Southern University, T. Leroy Davis was the band director.
Speaker 1: Now was he related to Margaret Davis Bowen?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: By chance?  Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As far as I know they were not related.  I'm pretty sure they were not related.
Story_ID: 626671
Speaker 1: You're a young teenager at this school, at Gilbert Academy [New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you're, you're playing the clarinet.  And I know at one point, unless I'm jumping the gun, you form a band.  I mean did you, did you, did you form it while you were at Gilbert?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, that came years later.
Speaker 1: Oh years later, all right.  All right.  All right, so, so I suppose at this juncture you're thinking you're going to be a professional musician?  I don't know.
Speaker 2: Well I was thinking a lot of different things at that time.  I really didn't have any guidance.  I knew my father [Edgar Reed] was a pharmacist.  I knew that from his friends that he, he really would have appreciated or liked me to have followed in his footsteps.  But pharmacy didn't turn me on.  And at that time when doctors wrote prescriptions the handwriting was quite bad (laughter), but I could read their writing.  And a lot of the prescriptions entailed moving stuff out of one bottle and putting it in another bottle and typing a label, so I used to do all that.  And when it called for mixing so many grams of this and so many of that and the other, I could do all that.  So I was, I had an actual apprenticeship of act- doing all this stuff.  And I'm saying well if this all that's, you know if this is what is pharmacy is all about, then I mean it didn't really excite me that much so I didn't follow in his footsteps.  So that was one option that I had thought about.  When I had, when I found out that I was fairly good at mathematics I was thinking that well you know maybe I'll become a mathematician, but I didn't you know I didn't have the necessary urging other than this one teacher [Aaron Dutton] in high school to push me in that direction.  And then I was very good at you know playing the clarinet and stuff, so I thought well I'll pursue a career in music.  And so when I graduated from, from high school I had no idea where I was going to go to college.  In hindsight I should have gone to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] because at that time Xavier had a very good music program.  It was a program that used some of the personnel out of the New Orleans Symphony Orchestra to do their te- to teach instruments there.  It was a program in which they gave, they put on a full scale opera every year, outstanding singers and stuff there.  But you know I wanted to get away from home.  I was fifteen, just made--turned sixteen and you know I wanted to go conquer the world.  I, I wanted to be on my own.
Story_ID: 626672
Speaker 1: What high school activities were you involved in besides band?
Speaker 2: Besides band?
Speaker 1: Anything else?
Speaker 2: Well I played intramural football basically and then we had a photography club which was another thing that I thought about being.  I was going to become a professional photographer and I used to take my little camera around taking photographs of people in the neighborhood and printing them.  I would go in a closet and load my little canister and I mixed up my developing fluids and I had a little contact printer and I'd print these little 5x7 things and I would sell in--sell them for twenty-five cents.  And so I, I, I, you know I made enough money to buy all of my equipment and to make a little profit.  So I said well I'm going to be a photographer because I was taking all these photographs and, and selling them.  Some of them came out pretty well actually.  So we had a photography club and, and that's what got me moving in the area of photography.  So it was intramural football.  Our football team didn't play anybody, it was just an intramural so I played guard on the team.  I, I was very active in, in music and the photography club.  Those were the three basic things in which I was involved.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there any honors when you graduated?  Did you--?
Speaker 2: No, I was just happy to get out of there [Gilbert Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana].  (Laughter) I, I, you know as I--I still have my high school graduation program and I don't think that there was any, any honors given to, to anyone.  There's nothing on a--the list of graduates that said something graduated with honors or with this, that or the other.  You know I had little certificates of having won first place in this or that musically, but I don't, I don't recall that there were any honors given to the graduating class.
Story_ID: 626673
Speaker 1: Well how would you describe yourself at this stage of your life, you're getting ready to graduate from high school [Gilbert Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Well I was, I was curious, I was young.  I thought I was a little overweight, so I was a little self conscious about that.  I was feeling a little unsure of myself I think because I was a lot younger than my classmates.  This became much more acute when I was in college, undergraduate college [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  I didn't feel that I belonged age wise with them.  School wise in terms of you know the requirements and all the thing--I was very comfortable with that.  I mean music wise I was very comfortable with that, in fact I excelled in music.  So--but any rate I had a certain amount of uncertainty about my relationships with others and, and my being accepted age wise.  I think I wasn't as mature as you would expect a graduating high school student to be.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well you were only fifteen right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  Well I was born in May, so the graduation was in late May or early June.  So May 16th you know I was sixteen, but for all intents and purposes I was still fifteen, you know.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 626674
Speaker 1: I know you said you wanted to get away from New Orleans [Louisiana], try to get out on your own.  But how did you choose Clark?
Speaker 2: It was chosen for me.  The church that I went to, I didn't say anything about our religious background.  But my mother [Ursul Desvignes Reed]--I was christened in a Methodist church, but for some reason my father [Edgar Reed] had a falling out with the minister of the Methodist church.  And so my father, my younger brother, the one next to me, and myself, we all became Congregationalist because my father became a Congregationalist and we went with my father.  When my sisters [Florence Reed Smythe Macaulay and Ruth Reed Hodges] came along my mother was a member of the Methodist church and they were baptized as Methodist and they remained in the Methodist church.  So we had my mother and my sisters in the Methodist church and my father and my brother nearest to me in the Congregational church.  Now the minister of the church that we went to, that is Langston [Langston Reed], myself and my daddy, went to Clark College [Clark Atlanta University] and he told my father, "You ought to send him to Clark College in Atlanta [Georgia]."  I had never heard of Clark College.  I mean we didn't have career days where we you know went around and visited colleges and looked at catalogs and had counselors to tell us you know what to do.  I didn't know Clark, anything about Clark College, never heard of it, had never been out of New Orleans.  But the minister, his name was John T. Enright [ph.], told my father, "Your son is good in music.  You ought to send him to Clark College.  Clark has a good music department."  And my father said okay, so I went to Clark College.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 626675
Speaker 1: So what was it like when you--did they have a good music depart- department?
Speaker 2: I think they had some good musicians there.  At the time that I was introduced to it, I would say oh yeah this is great, this is fine.  As I really came to know the situation I was not convinced that it had as rigorous a music program as it should have had.  And in many respects I think I was more motivated musically before I went to Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] than after I got to Clark, in part because I was on my own.  I mean I'm sixteen, all the, all my classmates were significantly older.  The, the men, the boys, the males were returning veterans after World War II [WWII] and the Korean conflict [Korean War] so they were significantly older.  They all called me Junior (laughter).  So it was like you know I was their little baby I mean particularly the girls because now I'm interested in girls, right?  And they're saying, "Oh you know you're too young.  You're like you know my little baby brother," and stuff and so I was having a hard time.  And, and I could play and the edge that I had is I could read music very well.  And so I got a lot of job offers to play with bands in the city, and even then they wouldn't let me drink, they wouldn't let me smoke.  They, they all kind of protected me as being you know too young and being a baby and that sort of thing.  So, so I, so I had you know that kind of tension going on.  I was a fairly decent student.  I could have been much better.  I don't think I applied myself as I should have.  I had no one to force me to do anything or no one to, to tell me I should be doing this and I ought to be having these kind of goals or whatever.  I just kind of did what I wanted to do and I didn't always make the right decisions.  So it was a period in my life of uncertainty, a period where I, I craved acceptance but there was this age gap that stood in the way somewhat.  There was this feeling that I could you know slide by and you know do whatever I wanted.  I mean I made fairly decent grades without you know really putting forth a lot of effort and, and I probably didn't.
Speaker 1: So this is 1951 I believe?
Speaker 2: No, I graduated in 1951.
Speaker 1: You graduated in '51 [1951].  Okay, so this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was 1947--
Speaker 1: --nineteen forty-seven [1947], okay, '47 [1947].
Speaker 2: --when I was there, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was sixteen then.  I went through it all and at one point in my studies at Clark I decided that I really wanted to go into business and I thought well how could I combine my music interest and business interest?  And at that point I decided I wanted to have a music store and music studios where I would sell instruments and music and have stu- studios in which to teach students.  I would combine the two things that at that point in my life I was very interested in.  I was fairly decent in the business curriculum in fact at the time, you know even after graduation some of my classmates asked me, "Well did you pursue a master's in business?"  Because I lacked one course of having a major in, in, in business while I was there.  And they had a good business department at, at Clark.  I would say that the business department was stronger than the music department.  But my degree was in music and my minor was in business.  And I decided I would pursue the music end.  In hindsight I would have profited by having much stronger guidance than I had.  I'm on my own.  There's no one telling me what to do.  I did whatever I wanted to do, basically.  The expenses of attending Clark was not that expensive, but I'm sure that my parents [Ursul Desvignes Reed and Edgar Reed] made the great sacrifice you know to pay my tuition, and--to get me there every year.  My mother sent me a care package you know every month (laughter).  My roommates just went crazy (unclear) 'cause she packed all kinds of goodies in it.  So, so it was, it was a, it was a good experience but not an ideal experience.
Story_ID: 626676
Speaker 1: I imagine things got better as you got older in terms of--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --social life (unclear)--
Speaker 2: As I kind of knew myself better and knew what I wanted to do with my life, you know, you know I tend to be sort of goal oriented.  I started making better decisions.  But early on I really would have benefitted from having good counseling from someone--from someone.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That I didn't have.
Speaker 1: Who was the president of Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] in those days?
Speaker 2: James P. Brawley.
Speaker 1: Was that the Brawley that was a historian?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He wrote, I think he wrote something on a, on a church, or history of the church or something.  I'm not quite sure of all of his writings.  At that time I wasn't really aware of the scholarly as- aspects of the faculty members that we had.  They were faculty members that I liked.  In fact one of my favorite professors there was a woman who was professor of English literature named Stella Brewer Brookes.
Speaker 1: Stella Brewer?
Speaker 2: Brewer Brookes.  She was from Texas.  I'm not quite sure where in Texas, but she had a contagious laugh and smile.  She was a stimulating lecturer and I enjoyed her classes tremendously.  We read a lot, interpreted a lot and you know she made learning become alive, the English literature become alive.  And so I enjoyed her I think more than any other teacher or professor that I had at, at Clark.  Incidentally, one of the faculty members there was the mother [Irene Dobbs Jackson] of Maynard Jackson who became mayor of Atlanta [Georgia].  She taught French.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about fellow students, any memorable--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There were some, some naturally gifted musicians that were at Clark, but they weren't music majors.  There was a, there's--was a guy there who lived in Atlanta whose name was Horace Scott [ph.].  He was one of these folks that could listen to anything and then play it.  I mean he could listen to you know James Moody playing 'Moody's Mood for Love,' and the next day he would play it note for note.  But he was a biology major, he wasn't in music or one of the sciences, either chemistry or biology.  I'm, I'm sure he's deceased now.  There, there was a, another musician that played piano and organ named Levi, I can't think of his last name, I want to say Jackson [Levi Jackson (ph.)], who was very good.  And then there was a--most of these were musicians that came out of the Atlanta schools, and they weren't music majors but they were good musicians.  There was a guy there that was blind that played piano and he was--he played like Erroll Garner and I can't think of his name right now.  So there were folks like that.  Perhaps--I have a photograph of you know at least one or two of the bands that I played with when I was a student at Clark.  I might be able to identify some of those individuals.  In terms of being a music major, I bumped into a guy in Atlanta two or three years ago named Mason Johnson [ph.] that I think is still playing around Atlanta who was a music major.  He played trumpet and then he played piano and he sang and did a lot of things.  And then there was a classmate, not a classmate but a fellow student that came out of North Carolina named Marshall Smith [ph.] that played clarinet and saxophone who eventually after I relocated to California, I discovered that he had moved to San Francisco [California].  And during the days that I was actively engaged in playing music around the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California], he played in my band.  Yeah.  But, but no one else--there were, there were some singers.  Aretha Franklin had a younger sister that was at Clark that sang who was very good.  I don't think of her name right now.  Her last name was Franklin but I can't think of her first name [Erma Franklin].
Story_ID: 626677
Speaker 1: So there were some v- good singers, but the instrumentalists and the program there was really not geared the way it should be, the way you would expect it to be today if you went to a school that had a real fine music program.  I didn't expect it to be Juilliard [Juilliard School of Music; The Juilliard School, New York, New York].  I mean I didn't even know about Juilliard at that time.  But you would expect it--well, you would expect to have more specialists on instruments than Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] could afford.  I, I'm, I'm sure that's part of the problem there.
Speaker 2: Well were you, were you considered special by the music staff, I mean the chairman of the department or did they try to help guide you to a--
Speaker 1: Well went through the--
Speaker 2: --the next level?
Speaker 1: They had a, they had a curriculum that we followed the curriculum.  That was something that--at first was a small group.  There was a--the person that did all the instrumental music was a gentleman named Wayman Carver.  Wayman Carver was, was noted because he was the first person to play a jazz chorus on the flute and with one of the bands.  And I, I'm trying to remember the band.  It was like Lucky Millinder or Lionel Hampton, one of those kind of bands.  But Wayman Carver played saxophone, he did arranging and he played flute.  But he was noted because he was, he had recorded one of the first jazz flute solos.  But he was the instrumental music person period.  And then there was a gentleman named J. DeKoven Killingsworth that played piano and was a director of the choir.  Of course I had to sing in the choir as well.  And then there was a lady named Sykes [Marion English Sykes] that taught piano and we had to do something that was called sight singing, you know ear training and sight singing.  And so she taught just like a theory class and she taught that.  That was basically the music department.  So you know we didn't have someone that was a specialist on the clarinet, the saxophone or the trumpet or whatever so you were kind of like on your own.  And you know if you're really going to pursue something in music you know you need a specialist to really guide you and shepherd you along to make sure you get the technique and you get exposed to the kind of literature you should and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I didn't discover all of that until I went to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  But we'll--that's later on in the story.
Story_ID: 626678
Speaker 1: Now when you were at Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], did you pledge a fraternity or anything?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I pledged Omega Psi Phi Fraternity.  There were--all the fraternities were represented at the campus.  There were Sigmas [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity] and the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] and Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] and the Omegas.  As soon as I got to Clark, like all the other new students, we were I won't say pounced upon but we were--I won't even say bribed, but we were encouraged by members of different fraternities to be, to pledge into their fraternity.
Speaker 1: Recruited (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well recruited, sort of recruited, yeah.  And it turned out that two or three of the Omegas on the Clark campus were from New Orleans [Louisiana], and they really influenced me to pledge Omega.  I didn't know anything about fraternities; I had never even heard of a, you know a fraternity before that time.  The Omegas were not the largest group on campus, the Alphas were.  The Kappas were the smallest, the Sigmas were next.  But the New Orleans connection you know really got to me.  I have no regrets about that.  I enjoyed it you know immensely and it was just another period where--you know of acceptance and of growth.
Story_ID: 626679
Speaker 1: Now what happened between 1951 and '53 [1953]?  I don't have a note for what happened in there, but (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.  Well I graduated in 1951 from Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and I returned to New Orleans [Louisiana].  And I, well I didn't know what I was going to do.  Here, I'm nineteen years old now and you know there, there's you know some wars that are starting, you know the Korean conflict [Korean War] and that sort of thing.  So I'm wandering around New Orleans.  I didn't have a teaching credential.  I had gone to school in Georgia.  I didn't have a teaching credential in Georgia.  There was nothing in my training at Clark that led me to believe that I was going to be a public school teacher.  I really wanted to be--have a business in music and all that sort of stuff.  So I'm around New Orleans.  I'm you know working with--at my father's [Edgar Reed] drugstore and I'm hanging out and I didn't know quite what I wanted to do.  So I wasted you know about a year just kind of fooling around.  I finally discovered that there was such a thing called out of state tuition scholarships.  Because of segregation, the State of Louisiana was willing to give you a scholarship to go to school out of state to keep you from attending the state schools there because they weren't integrated.  Somehow I was able to get one of these scholarships the second year.  The first year I was just you know loafing around and stuff and somehow through a friend of my father's or whatever you know it got to be a little political thing, I got one of these scholarships.  It wasn't huge but that--with that scholarship I applied to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and I was accepted there and I flew off to Michigan.  I stayed there for a year.  I discovered at that time that if I wanted to be a music major and pursue a career in music that there was a lot of makeup stuff that I needed to, to do.  So after a year and my scholarship ran out, I either was going to go into the [U.S.] Army or, or--well not either.  I was eligible for the draft.  So I decided I'll just go ahead and rather than pursue all this make up stuff I needed to do at Michigan, I'd go to the Army and try to do as much while I was in the Army.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Fortunately I was assigned to Special Services, to a music unit.  And so I made up a lot of what I needed to had I stayed at Michigan.
Story_ID: 626680
Speaker 1: So after I got out the [U.S.] Army, from '53 [1953] to '55 [1955] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So did you to- did you tour in the Army?
Speaker 1: No, I was--I would--I went (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Stayed--
Speaker 1: I did basic training at Fort Jackson, South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina].  I think I--I stayed there.  I did basic training and I stayed there.  I was never assigned any place else.  I had my whole civilian wardrobe there.  Only thing we did, we got up in the morning and we played you know for the morning parade and in the afternoon we played for reveille or whatever.  And at--on the weekends we played at the NCO club [non-commissioned officer club] or the officers' club for dances.  The rest of the time, I could have been a college student 'cause I had you know my civilian clothes and I met a lot of folks in Columbia [South Carolina], went to a lot of parties, did a lot of socializing, had a good time.  So I'd just eat, sleep, slept, played music, socialized.  And by the time--I just wanted to get out.  I didn't, I didn't--you know I was so thankful I didn't have to go onto the firing line that I just stayed there, I wasn't reassigned.  I think it had something to do with I was a college graduate.  There weren't a lot of college graduates.  They wanted me to go to officers training school [Officer Candidate School].  I said no, because then I'd have to commit to a longer period of time and I didn't want to do that.  So I did what I needed to do and then I got out.  And then when I got out, then I went back to Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and spent a year and got my master's degree.
Speaker 2: Now did you meet any significant musicians in the Army?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah.  I wasn't in, in that unit, but there was a special unit that was flown around to entertrain--entertain the troops.  And in that unit was a guy that played string bass whose name was George Joyner [Jamil Nasser]; that was his real name.  He eventually became the bass player with Ahmad Jamal.  He changed his name, it was one of those Islamic names, but I don't remember what it was. But if you go back and look at Ahmad Jamal's musicians, the guy that played bass with him, was George Joyner, who was in that group.  And another guy was Edward Louis Smith [Louis Smith] who had been a graduate of Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] that played trumpet.  He played, he played something like Donald Byrd, but he played with Horace Silver when he got out of the Army.  He was quite good.  And also, I think he had several CDs [compact disc] that were recordings that were made in Europe so they weren't, were not widely circulated you know in this country.  But those, but two stand out as really being, you know I think two of the most outstanding musicians that I came across in, in those, in that group.
Story_ID: 626681
Speaker 1: Well you came out of the reserve, I mean the [U.S.] Army in '55 [1955] and that's when you went back to University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: I went back to the University of Michigan and--
Speaker 1: And you could go on the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], right?  Is that what the--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I had, I had the G.I. Bill.  But let me, let me back up to just say one thing about the first time I went to Michigan.  While I had this little out of state scholarship it wasn't that large.  So I lived in a rooming house and for one meal a day I used to clean up a restaurant, a small restaurant.  I'd go after they closed at like eight or eight o'clock at night. I'd be there like ten o'clock to midnight you know cleaning up, mopping the floor and all that and I, and my pay was one meal so I ate a dinner there.  And during the day I worked in the Michigan Union as a busboy.  Now I mention that because I can't tell you the feeling that you have when you look at all the other students who are sitting there enjoying conversation and meals and camaraderie and all that.  And these are students are color.  And you're there with your little white jacket on bussing dishes, feeling that you know you should be part of that group, but you aren't.  Financially you couldn't be part of the group.  I mean they came from families out of the, the Detroit [Michigan] area a lot of them whose families were professionals and who could afford to pay the tuition and stuff.  And I felt like an outsider in that situation.  So it was, I guess you might get the impression that I was also--always an outsider for a long part of my life.  I was an outsider when I was so young and at Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] I was you know a kind of outsider when I was in New Orleans [Louisiana] and I was still much younger than my so called peer group.  I get to Michigan and I'm a kind of outsider because I'm not able to be on the same level with those--that didn't deter me but it, but psychologically it did concern me a little bit.  One of the guys that--it was an old black man that worked at the Michigan, Michigan Union and he used to sit down and talk to me all the time about aspirations and goal setting.  It turned out that he had three or four sons, all of whom were very successful, one of whom was a musician that played trombone.  His name was Penn, P-E-N-N.  And as a matter of fact when I came to Oakland [California] I found out that one of this man's sons had taught at this high school in Oakland that I was supposed to teach at.  But he worked as a janitor and as a busboy and I always wondered why.  He was very philosophical.  He was obviously well educated.  He may have been self educated, but he sent all of his boys to college, they all were very successful but he continued to do what he was doing.  In many respects I think my life was preordained because I've met people along the way that unknowing to me, helped me in various ways.  And it was his counseling as I was working at Michigan that helped me to get over this hurdle that I was experiencing that I shouldn't have experienced but I was experiencing because I was working, cleaning up a restaurant at night for one meal, working in the student union you know bussing dishes when I really wanted to enjoy you know college life to its fullest.  But he was a settling force that came into my life at that time.
Story_ID: 626682
Speaker 1: Okay.  University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] the second time around.  So--
Speaker 2: Second time around was, was, was joyous because I, I had you know funds from the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].  I could devote myself to studying.  I had had this [U.S.] Army experience behind me where I had caught up you know stuff that I needed to catch up on and I'm, I did quite well.  I was in the marching band there at, at, at Michigan [University of Michigan Marching Band].  Well it was just a joyful experience.  I remember the first time when I returned there was a social event and I took my saxophone and sat in with the band and a lot of doors opened.  So the social life was you know was great.  And there weren't a whole lot of black students at Michigan at that time so we socialized with all of the black students.  So there were black students in medicine and in law and in music and in you know the variety of fields that you'd find at a major university.  So we knew everybody and I, and you know we formed a little, a little band and we played for you know little social events that you know black students had.  I mean we, we still weren't integrated into the thing so we had our own little social functions.  So it, you know it was pleasant and enjoyable.
Speaker 1: So what did you call your band?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: What was your band called?
Speaker 2: The Michigan band?
Speaker 1: No, the band that you formed and played at social events?
Speaker 2: At, while I was at University of Michigan?  I don't think we called ourselves anything.  We just, you know we were just the band, and I actually did a little singing with the band (laughter) which I never envisioned myself as being a singer.  But there were some little popular songs there and--that I could sing you know like 'Moody's Mood for Love.'  I would--I you know I could sing that.  I knew all the words and all that stuff.  So yeah, it, you know it went off you know very well.  I don't think that any of us were world class musicians.  I mean we wouldn't--I mean we couldn't compete with the greatest musicians around.  We would drive to Detroit [Michigan] on the weekend to hear Elvin Jones and Thad Jones and--I mean the Jones brothers.  They used to play--I remember Thad Jones playing at a place in Detroit called the Blue Bird [Blue Bird Inn].  So a big highlight for us was to find a way to get to Detroit and be--four or five of us would pile into a car and drive to Detroit and go to the Blue Bird to hear Thad Jones and Hank Jones play.  They were the, you know the bigwigs and musical wigs in Detroit at that time.  And I remember Thad Jones played a ballad on his cornet trumpet that had a woman sitting on the front row in tears.  I mean she was so moved by, by his playing.  Well--
Speaker 1: Was this in the old Paradise Valley section of Detroit or was that--?
Speaker 2: I really don't know what section it was.  It was--
Speaker 1: Near downtown?
Speaker 2: No, it was like John R [Street] and something and there was--I remember that the club was called the Blue Bird, something like that.  But I didn't know the geography of Detroit--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that well.  I'm sure that there was a name for that section, but I, I just didn't know it.
Story_ID: 626683
Speaker 1: So you gradated with a master's [degree] in 1956 [from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now during that part of the '50s [1950s], popular music was changing from more of an easy sound or a jazz sound to a rock and roll--.  Were you--?
Speaker 2: Well it was changing but I wasn't changing with it because it was also the time that Charlie Parker and Dizzy Gillespie and Miles Davis and Thelonious Monk and all those folks were coming around and we were more excited and turned on by what they were doing than you know the rock and roll and stuff like that.  When I was in--at Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University] in Atlanta [Georgia] you know I played with some of the local bands and then some of the local bands used to play some of these rhythm and blues shows.  There used to be, on Ashby Street [Joseph E. Lowery Boulevard] there used to be a theater.  I don't remember the name of this theater, that they would show the, you know the movie and then in between the movie and the next movie there would be a stage show and I was in the band that used to play for that.  And it was--these were always you know rhythm and blues, soul kind of shows and stuff.  And then there were some clubs that I played in that also did that.  So when the Charlie Parker stuff started coming around, I mean that was much more exciting and challenging.  So it wasn't--you know the rock and roll didn't you know didn't faze me that much.
Speaker 1: Now did you recognize--a lot of the rock and roll is dominated by New Orleans style music--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --with Fats Domino (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't really, I didn't really recognize that because see when I left New Orleans [Louisiana] at fifteen, I really hadn't been exposed to the New Orleans--in depth to the New Orleans sound that you know what, what's identified as the New Orleans sound now is basically a drum beat (makes sounds).  And you can hear--any drummer that comes out of New Orleans you can kind of hear that in their, in their beat which is unlike you know the majority of other drummers.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's a kind--I think Fats Domino and Allen Toussaint--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that kind of, what is, what do you call it, a hambone sound?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'm not sure--
Speaker 1: (Makes sounds).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it's all of that.  But, but, you know I came to appreciate that after the fact because when I was growing up you know I was doing all these little solos and you know reading music and all that stuff and I was too young going out to these clubs and stuff.  I mean my parents [Ursul Desvignes Reed and Edgar Reed] wouldn't let me go out (laughter) to--so I didn't have that kind of exposure, regretfully.  That, that might have made a big difference in my life had I been able to do that but I didn't.
Story_ID: 626684
Speaker 1: So at that time you were pra- looking at the jazz musicians or the cutting edge jazz musicians.
Speaker 2: Well--but--I was--
Speaker 1: Miles [Miles Davis] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah but I was still, you know I still had this urge to teach music.  And I had you know after coming out of Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] I really felt that I was well prepared to do that.  Earlier in my life--I did do some teaching actually.  When I was in high school [Gilbert Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana], I taught some of the younger students you know sort of like peer tutoring, mentoring, that sort of stuff.  And I, and I could teach them you know the basics in the beginning and how to hold it, how to blow, how to read music, how to count you know all that sort of stuff.  But after I came out of Michigan I really felt much more prepared to teach music, and that's what I wanted to do.  And I had really gotten excited about the Michigan band [University of Michigan Marching Band].  The Michigan band was head and shoulders over any band in the nation at that time.  I mean it had a sound that was simply marvelous.  I mean it, it was just lush.  You--I had not heard a band sound like that before.  And I've heard symphony orchestras, but the band sound really mes- was mesmerizing.  So I was interested in, in--
Speaker 1: I didn't ask this but what was it like being in the Michigan band in that, and the--what do they call the stadium there the--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) The Big House [Michigan Stadium, Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 1: The Big House?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What--you know what do they have, a hundred thousand seats (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I must tell you, I'm going to tell you what it's like.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I'm going to tell you exactly what it's like.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had practice--they had a practice field, the band practiced on the practice field and all that kind of stuff.  We hadn't seen the stadium.  There's a tunnel like in most stadiums where the football team comes out of that tunnel.  So the first time in my life I'm in the Michigan band.  I got on my spats and with gloves and plume on my cap and all that and we all lined up to come charging through this tunnel.  We come out single file.  When I hit (gesture)--we were coming up you know with high stepping and all that.  When I got through that tunnel and saw all of these people around, I almost fainted.
Speaker 1: Yeah there's a hundred thousand people sometimes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it's a hundred thousand now.  It wasn't a hundred thousand then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's more than a hundred, it's a hundred and ten thousand now.  But at that time it was probably like around eighty thousand.  But even then, you know I mean I had gone to Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] where, where the football stadium if you got two hundred people in it, you know that was a crowd.  So when, when, when, when we marched through the tunnel, single file coming to that stadium and the--all the crowd was roaring and cheering and I looked up, I almost fainted, man.  I mean I didn't know how I, I, I kept going.  But I had never seen anything like that before in my life.  I mean I--it was just, it was just amazing.  I mean it was a, one of those indescribable moments.  But it wasn't intimidating, but in a sense it was because it was--you know you saw all these people and you started thinking oh god, if I make a mistake every eye is on me, right, because you're coming out single file.
Speaker 1: Now in these days, now, I--
Speaker 2: And they only--there were only three of us in the band so if that, if that's the next question, there were only three blacks.  There was a guy that played trombone, I played clarinet and there was a guy that played saxophone--no, drums, who was from Ann Arbor [Michigan].  His name was Robert Elliott, he played drums.  In fact I met his son three or four years ago, I was at some place.  And he said, "Oh you went to Michigan?  You probably don't know me," and I said no, he said, "but maybe you know my father."  And he said--I said, "What was your father's name?"  He said, "Robert Elliott."  Well Robert Elliott was the drummer, the only black drummer in the band who lived in Ann Arbor.  And Joe Moore [ph.] played trombone who was from Detroit [Michigan], and myself.  We were the only three in this whole I don't know, 150, 160--in fact I got some photographs of the band over there.  It was a very large group, highly disciplined.  All of our routines were perfected and the sound that we made was just fantastic.
Story_ID: 626685
Speaker 1: Now the marching style was, you were saying before we started that the Big Ten [Big Ten Conference] had a certain kind of a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --style for the bands.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well it was a high step style.  I had played in the band at you know at Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and had seen the band, the only band that came through Atlanta [Georgia] at that time that was impressive was Florida A&M, Florida [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], and they  had that, that fast pace (gesture).  And it was a, it--Florida A&M [Marching 100] was always a kind of show band.  I mean it was unlike any of the other bands that I had seen in the black colleges [HBCUs].  We did have a little football team at Clark and so they were--we had a little band and you know we did a little, you know, we'd march out on the field but, eh, it wasn't much.  We thought it was but it wasn't.  The Big Ten, every Big Ten school had a, had a great band.  Some of them were more militaristic in their style, some of them were a little more showy.  Michigan [University of Michigan Marching Band] was a little more showy because the band members wore white gloves and spats, white spats on their shoes.  And so every step was very precise and, and our legs came up to a certain height.  Then we had a special way of turning around you know calling it about face but it was, I think I still know how to do it, but it's it was a very fancy maneuver.  And then we made all of these formations on the field.  Nothing has really changed.  When you look at bands now, they still make formations and stuff.  So, so we did that and it was, it was innovative at that time because most bands just marched out, played, marched back in and that was it.  But, but Michigan started doing these shows and these shows had themes and they made formations and then there was a narration going on by an announcer to, to keep the audience informed of what was going on.  So it was, it was great.  In fact, in fact I planned one of the shows that they used while I was there which was--
Speaker 1: What was it?  Can you remember what it was about?
Speaker 2: Yeah it had to do with the Olympics and it had to do with forming then, you know throwing the javelin and having the arm move and the javelin moving down the field and all that sort of stuff that they used.  So that was really rewarding for me to have planned a show that they used at that time.  And yeah I still remember that.  That's--in fact I have some photographs of these formations, some of the things that I planned.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  So I thought I'd have to ask about that because that has to be an exciting experience being a part of that big band (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it was.  It was very, very exciting.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And, and, and it paid off in a lot of ways.
Story_ID: 626686
Speaker 1: My advisor was--well first of all I, I had a, a professor that specialized on clarinet that I studied with.  I had one that specialized on oboe that I studied with.  I had one that specialized in bassoon that I studied with.  I had one that specialized in percussion instruments that I studied with.  So I studied with you know very highly talented individuals and I did exceptionally well in my studies with all of them.  When I graduated from Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and got the job at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College], all of these folks wro- wrote glowing letters of recommendations for me.  And then--
Speaker 2: Was Southern a job that you had really, you wanted to come back to New Orleans [Louisiana] then?
Speaker 1: This was in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  Well I wanted--
Speaker 2: Well Louisiana--
Speaker 1: --I wanted, I wanted to, I wanted to share my knowledge in a college setting, and, and I wanted to try to duplicate what I had learned at Michigan in one of our colleges [historically black colleges and universities, HBCUs].  I didn't have a particular college in mind, but it turned out that Southern was looking for someone and it came to the attention of the people that I had studied with, and one of whom was my advisor.  And he said, "Rod [HistoryMaker Rodney Reed], you ought to apply for this," and I did.  And they wrote all the letters of recommendation.  Then I really didn't know that my high school band director [T. Leroy Davis] was the band director at Southern.  I found that out you know after I applied for the position and of course you know I got it.  The fact that I grew up in New Orleans, which is you know ninety miles away made it attractive because I felt well you know I'm close to home.  I can drive home, get a ride.  I mean there were people who had cars that were driving back between New Orleans and Baton Rouge you know on a regular basis.  So--and then eventually I bought a car and I drove myself.  But it was like, well, this is great, you know.  I'm back to my roots more or less.  It wasn't really my roots.  And then my--it wasn't my wife at that time but the woman that I married, my wife [Vernell A. Reed] now, grew up in a little place called Opelousas [Louisiana], which is about fifty miles away from Baton Rouge.  I didn't know her at that time.  I got--I, I met her later on while I was at Southern, but, but that made it convenient as well.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 626687
Speaker 1: This is 1956 and--
Speaker 2: So now I'm at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] is reelected and I think in '56 [1956] Adlai Stevenson [Adlai Stevenson II] lost the election.  I think that's, isn't that right?  I think, I think so.  Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Eisenhower's second term, and it's the year of the Montgomery Bus Boycott, and a lot of things happened that year.
Speaker 2: In '56 [1956], yeah, all of that was going on, but it hadn't affected Baton Rouge [Louisiana] at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So you've been to Baton Rouge and you've been to Southern so you know that Southern is a kind of isolated campus.  You got to cross the railroad tracks to get there.  Now they have, they've put a little smoother street going over those tracks, but at that time it wasn't too smooth.  So, so Southern was sitting between the railroad tracks and the river [Mississippi River] so it was very isolated so there was no big conversation about what was going on in Alabama, Arkansas and other places.  I think everyone was aware of the resistance that had surfaced following the Bro- Brown decision in 1954 [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], the White Citizens' Councils that emerged, the Ku Klux Klan [KKK], the political shenanigans that went, went on about closing the public schools and making private schools and on and on.  We were aware of all of that, but there was no active--no activism going on in terms of demonstrations or that sort of thing at that time at Southern.  So we were, we were focused on you know doing what we went there to do which was you know to build a band [Southern University Marching Band].  And I must say that that was a great period for me because I was enthusiastic.  I'd, I'd, I had all this knowledge that I wanted to impart.
Story_ID: 626688
Speaker 1: What changes--what did you find and then what change did you institute with the Southern band [Southern University Marching Band]?
Speaker 2: Well first of all let me tell you about my position.  It, it was to be the assistant director of the university bands and to teach the woodwinds and percussion instruments.  So I taught clarinet and oboe and bassoon.  I taught the percussion instruments, and then I was the band director.  And in essence I was the band director in charge of the marching band.  So what I found when I got there was a group that had been doing stuff.  The band director, T. Leroy Davis who is an excellent musician, I have the utmost respect for, pushed them to, to read music, to get a good sound, to be disciplined and all that sorts.  So all of that was in place, but my charge was to develop this band in a style of the Big Ten [Big Ten Conference] bands; that's what I took as a personal charge.  So what did I have to do?  I had to start with the basics and the basics are measuring your steps.  We had to get--we had to create a practice field that had the same yard markers as a football, football field 'cause the way bands calculate what they do is so many steps per ten yards, or per five yards so we had to work on that.  We had to work on steps, picking up your feet, being sharp, being in alignment, as well as on the musical side of stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they weren't picking them up when you got there?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They were just kind of walking sort of?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean just military style is you don't (gesture) do all this in the military--kind of military band.  So, so, so we worked on all of these basic kinds of things and we practiced you know over and over and over.  And then I wrote the scripts, I arranged some of the music that we played because to get the sound that the Big Ten bands get, they had special arrangements that projected those instruments that, that carried best on the, on the field.  For example you can hardly hear a flute.  If you're in a marching band playing a flute you can't hardly hear a flute, right?  So at Michigan [University of Michigan Marching Band] they didn't use flutes.  Saxophones carry much louder than flutes.  So folks played clarinets and saxophones; they didn't play flutes and piccolos.  The drums you know the drumbeats had to be very precise, but it also had to be designed in such a way that, that the drum itself physically didn't get in the way and all that.  So some of them you know rolled out drums and all this kind of stuff you know timpani sets.  So we worked on all of those kind of basics.  It took a while because this was new.  And I remember I had worked out a whole show with formations and you know we used diagrams and coordinate the music with the diagrams and the script.  And I also was the announcer, so (laughter) I'd be up in the press box announcing: "And now ladies and gentlemen, with great pride we present the Southern University 100 Marching Band," or whatever the script called for.  And then we expected them to (makes sound) to come out, right.  And I remember the first show we did, it was at night, and I made this big announcement for them to come out and they came out and they got all mixed up (laughter), which, which showed that we hadn't practiced enough because it was at night, it was under the lights.  It was in a, in a stadium that you know held about twenty thousand people maybe, there were probably about ten thousand people there.  They got excited and they forgot all the stuff they were supposed to do, so it was like a big mess.  I mean I, I, I mean I wanted to go home and cry but that was the last time that that happened because we made sure that we practiced enough that the stuff was ingrained that they could get up in the middle of the night and make the maneuvers and do all that sort of stuff.  But it was, it was, it was great fun and we were able to accomplish it.  We didn't do it the first year, or the second year.  But by the third year, we sort of hit our stride.  We were doing you know quite well.
Story_ID: 626689
Speaker 1: As the years go by your, your, your roll increased right with the band [Southern University Marching Band]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Well I still had the same role with, with the Southern band, but my role increased with respect to teaching [at Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] because we were attracting more students that you know I was their primary mentor because we didn't get anybody else that taught the woodwind instruments and the percussion.  We got someone else that taught brass instruments you know trumpet, trombone and that sort of thing.  But for the woodwind instruments, clarinet and saxophone and oboe and flute and bassoon you know and the percussion instruments, I was the primary person so we got more students.  I formed a percussion ensemble that I directed and we gave concerts.  It was really quite exciting.  And we had a woodwind quartet.
Speaker 1: Was the percussion ensemble like a, kind of a precursor to the drum line things we see today?
Speaker 2: No, 'cause the drum line is all one--is snare drums and bass drum and cymbals.  Percussion ensemble has bells and whistles and chimes and xylophone and timpani and you know all of these percussion instruments.  And the literature is, is not huge but it's really very interesting.  I mean there's a, there's a whole literature for percussion ensembles and it's very exciting.  I mean you get all of these cross beats and accents going on and different sounds that are coming from these differences.  So it was you know a group of about, oh, six to eight percussionists, and everyone looked forward to doing it because they liked to perform.  I mean percussion is--percussionists always you know have an exhibitionist bent so they enjoy doing it and we enjoy doing it so we gave them a number of those concerts.  And then I played in a--we had a trio that we used to give concerts that consisted of a violin or viola, piano and oboe or clarinet and I played the oboe and clarinet.  So we'd go to schools and give concerts.  And then when we'd have recitals I would you know perform in recitals and stuff like that.  So there was more performance from me and more teaching, but the band stuff you know just, it got easier because the routines became easier and the high schools start picking it up.  And so as we got the graduates from the high schools, they already knew what the expect- what we expected of them.
Story_ID: 626690
Speaker 1: Describe you know, now I know this is--we discussed this in the beginning. But in 1960, Civil Rights Movement actually hit the campus in terms of the students--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --you know conducting sit-ins and that sort of thing in town.  I know we interviewed [HistoryMaker] D'Army Bailey, and he talked about it and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's just about the time that I was leaving Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  I left there in '61 [1961].  In '60s [1960s] you know the sit-ins had taken place in North Carolina and they were moving you know south and southwest and it hit the Southern campus.  There was resistance on the part of the administration of the students being involved.  My personal take on this was that you know this was something that had to happen.  I mean if we were going to move forward then we were going to have to fight to do it.  Was I personally involved?  No, it was a student movement; the faculty members were not involved.  Did we encourage the students to do it?  Not directly but indirectly that we you know assured them that if they asked and if they were, if they discussed it with us.  I think rather than discuss it with the music folks they were more inclined to discuss it with those faculty members who were in political science.  So we didn't--for the music side, the football season had already ended.  The band's performances stopped with the football season.  So when all of this, when the demonstrations started it was after the band [Southern University Marching Band] and of course the band was made up of students from all across the campus.  I mean we didn't, they weren't all music majors so we didn't have a huge number of music majors who were, as I recall, that intimately involved in the demonstrations as were the students who were in political science and in the humanities and other student groups who became more involved.  So was I personally involved?  No I wasn't out there demonstrating.  I don't--I can't remember any faculty member that was.  I could be wrong, but I don't remember.  And I know that the administration tried to stop them from doing it, and of course that was not successful.  But then the next year I left.  And so I'm not quite sure you know what happened you know beyond that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you decide to leave in--you just wanted to change venue I guess?
Speaker 2: Well it was, it was--the situation had become untenable for me and I wanted not necessarily a new opportunity but I wanted an opportunity that I thought would permit me to grow more and to assume a greater responsibility.  And while I'm fairly sure that Southern did not want me to leave, I felt that it was in my best interest to leave and I did.
Story_ID: 626691
Speaker 1: I just want to--so Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was I guess, one could generalize that the black college campuses [HBCUs]--during that time there was conflict between school administration and students on a lot of the black college campuses.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Especially the state campuses--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in the South, and it put pressure on administrators and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that sort of thing.  So, at any rate so you decide to move on.  And, and you called some of your mentors at University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Well the--right.  After you know the situation became untenable, and I had recently gotten married.  This, this is now August of 1961.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My wife [Vernell A. Reed] and I got married in August of 1961.  That means that we're celebrating our fiftieth anniversary this year.
Speaker 1: Now well tell us how you met and--
Speaker 2: How did we meet?  Well very--it was--(laughter) I want to say it was arranged but it really was arranged.  While I was at Southern there was a group of us that, that formed a sort of informal, I won't even call it a club.  We ate lunch together.  We discussed the issues of the day.  There were individuals from other fields.  There was someone from the English department, someone from the political science department, someone from the history department, I was in music.  We had a variety of people that we would sit together in the cafeteria every day and eat lunch.  And those become--became discussion sessions that we would talk about anything.  These guys were really sharp.  I mean I must tell you that at one time the faculty members at Southern could--would have been--I won't say they would have been welcome.  They were not welcome, but they would have held their own on any major college campus, and many of them did because they left Southern and went to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], University of Illinois, university of whatever, very brilliant guys.  One of them, a professor of law named Oliver Morse wanted to come to New Orleans [Louisiana] with me and--'cause they all knew I was from New Orleans.  And so we would drive down every now and then to New Orleans and he would spend a weekend at my parents' [Ursul Desvignes Reed and Edgar Reed] home.  He loved to eat and he loved my mother's cooking and so it was the home away from home.  Occasionally--he was from New York [New York].  One summer I went to New York and stayed with his family.  But at any rate, he dated a girl who happened to have been the first black, although she didn't look black, law--female law student to graduate from Loyola University school of law [Loyola University New Orleans College of Law] in New Orleans.  I don't know how he met her but he met her someplace and they dated.  And so one day we were sitting at the table talking at that lunch and I said, man, I said, "This lady that you have here is a stone--fox."  I mean she was beautiful.  She looked like a movie star.  And he said, "Oh, if you think she's pretty, you ought to see her little cousin."  And I said, "Well I don't know about that."  So he insisted, "Oh yeah you need to see her little cousin."  And then he told her that he had someone that he wanted her little cousin to meet.  Well her little cousin turns out to be my wife.  So eventually we met.  So I, when I say it was arranged it was arranged for us to meet although the first time we were supposed to have gotten together it didn't kind of work out the way we thought it would (laughter).  But we were persistent, we came back and one thing led to another.  But anyway that's how we met.  And we actually met in New Orleans.  She was graduating from Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and I was teaching at Southern and my buddy was dating her cousin and he insisted that I meet her and I did.  And so that's what started that.
Story_ID: 626692
Speaker 1: And in 1961, in August we got married.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I'm tempted to think that marriage may have had some, played some part in the decision too to do something else?  I mean if you saw things weren't going right there then--is--
Speaker 1: Not really because I had thought you know earlier that something else might have been better suited.  Now maybe not better suited but would have been in my best interests before I got married [to Vernell A. Reed].  But after--because when we got married I was already thinking about going someplace else.  We just didn't wind up going where I thought I was going to go.  And the question that you asked earlier about you know my advisor or something, it was a situation where I got married, I was intent on moving in one direction, but some hurdles were placed in my path.  And, and so to deal with those hurdles I decided that I needed to do something else anyway, and I called my advisor at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and said that I really want to leave and go someplace else, could he recommend any place in the country?  And in August, as you know how the school year works, it was very late in the year and he said, "Well you know all the good jobs are gone but we'll look and see."  And they found a position in Oakland [Oakland Unified School District] and called me back the next day and said, "There's an opening in Oakland, California [at Havenscourt Junior High School].  It's not a college level position but it's one that I think you'd like."  It was one that they knew about and they knew the situation and I said, "I don't care if it's college or not, I will take it."  I had never been to Oakland, California, didn't know anybody in Oakland, had never interviewed for the job, had never applied for the job, but I got it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--
Speaker 1: So that, that, that, that moved me from Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] (laughter) to, to Oakland.
Speaker 2: All right, so--
Speaker 1: But I was still in music though.  I was still you know teaching music, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 626693
Speaker 1: You were saying that by reputation the program here in Oakland [California] was decent.
Speaker 2: It was outstanding.  It was outstanding.  Oakland at that time, now we're talking about 1961, it had championship bands.  It had a whole music department.  It had a supervisor of instrumental music I mean for the whole city.  It had a supervisor of instrumental music for a whole city and then it had a head of the department of music for the whole, of all of Oakland schools [Oakland Unified School District].  Every school in Oakland had a music program, had a mu- a full time music teacher, director, both for instrumental music and for choral music, every school.  And it was, it was simply an outstanding, outstanding program with outstanding teachers.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was your school an integrated school, or?
Speaker 2: It was--it was integrated.  Oakland at that time was beginning to transition.  It--Oakland had been a predominantly white school system.  Blacks started moving in.  I mean they had come in you know the migration had caused a lot of blacks to leave the South to come here and work in the shipyards, particularly in, during World War II [WWII].  Well their kids now were you know school age.  I mean they stayed here and stuff.  So it was beginning to change, it was beginning to shift.  And a school that, that I taught at when I got there, it was primarily Italian, white and Irish.  Irish, Italians, Portuguese.
Speaker 1: This is Havenscourt Junior High School [Oakland, California] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Havenscourt.  Havenscourt Junior High School.  But then you know black families started moving in so it started shifting.  Now it was because of this shift that got me to move into a different direction because as the black students started coming into the school, the school had a predominance of white teachers and white administrators who were not as sensitive to the black students as we would have liked.  Not all of them, but, but by and large you know they, you know they hadn't seen you know black students, they hadn't worked with them.  They didn't know this was a, you know something they hadn't experienced before.  They didn't know quite how to deal with it so to speak.  I became so disturbed about how some of the students were being treated that I decided that I needed to become a school administrator so that I could ensure that the students were exposed to the right kinds of--right kind of environment, an environment that would be supportive and that I would have something to do with selecting the teachers who would be sensitive to their needs and that sort of thing.  So after teaching in Oakland for roughly five, five years, I decided I'd go back to school and get a teaching--an administrative credential to enable me to do this.
Story_ID: 626694
Speaker 1: But let me back up and say my experience in Oakland [California] in the music field [in the Oakland Unified School District] was extremely rewarding.  Not only did we have an outstanding band, I had outstanding students, all of--the majority of whom, I can't say all, became quite successful.  I bump into them every now and then and they are all, the ones I've bumped into have been, have had wonderful careers.  I got to be--I taught private lessons in--there was a store here called Sherman and Clay [Sherman, Clay and Company] which was a big music store and it had studios and I taught you know after school in those studios.  I became president of the Oakland music teachers association.  I became the conductor of the all-city orchestra.  I formed a dance band called the Ambassadors and we played for almost every major social event in the community, you know The Links [The Links, Incorporated] and the various sororities and fraternities and professional associations.  We played for political groups, we played for private parties.  We even played in a parade (laughter) with me being the drum major.  That was, I mean this--you know like a 4th of July parade that was sponsored by the musicians union.  So we did a lot.  We played at parks during the summer and all that sort of stuff.  And the way the union operated here was that the number of musicians required was based on the size of a facility, so if an organization had a big dance let's say at one of the major hotels, it might have called for a twenty piece band.  Or if it had you know a, you know a lounge, it might have called for just three or four.  So we did the whole thing.  You know we played you know three pieces, me, a drum and a bass, four pieces, five pieces, all the way up to twenty pieces, we assembled a band.  Our basic band was about twelve to thirteen pieces and we tried to do a kind of, sort of Count Basie-esque kind of a thing.  But that was very successful for you know a number of years and we were able to attract some of the best musicians around the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] and that sort of thing.  But at any rate, just to put a period on this, my experience in music in the Bay Area was quite rewarding, and that's not why I wanted to gravitate away from music, it was because I really wanted to be of greater service to the students that I saw coming into our schools.  So I went--I applied to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley Graduate School of Education, Berkeley, California] to get an administrative credential.  I earned an administrative credential, and I got a job as, the following year as a vice principal of a junior high school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then during the summer they had summer schools and they had to have principals at summer school, so I was principal in summer school but I was vice principal of this King Estates Junior High School [Oakland, California].  I thought it was, had been named after Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], but no it was named after a King family that had an estate here so it was King Estates Junior High School.  And I did that--
Speaker 2: Now this is--what year is this?
Speaker 1: So now we are in 1966, '67 [1967], somewhere around there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 626695
Speaker 1: I just want to go back a little bit and just kind of recap what's going on while you're--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --all this is happening and maybe this is why, I mean it might have something to do with, with your decision, but you know the death of John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] in '63 [1963], the March on Washington in '63 [1963], the Watts riots in six- I mean, well the passage of the Civil Rights Act in '64 [Civil Rights Act of 1964], Watts riots (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then '65 [1965], the voting acts rights in '65 [Voting Rights Act of 1965].
Speaker 1: Yeah, voting (unclear) in '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Yeah, all of that took place.
Speaker 1: The Watts riots in '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Rise of the Black Panther Party out here in Oakland [California]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --in '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Right, the black, the black--the, the Black Panthers came into being out in a section known as West Oakland [Oakland, California].  Havenscourt [Havenscourt Junior High School] was in East Oakland [Oakland, California], so there's a big difference in between.  But of course we were all affected by all of this stuff that was going on.  I mean this--the March on Washington you know we, I mean we didn't teach, we listened to the speeches and that sort of thing.  We knew what was going on in Watts [Los Angeles, California].  We were well aware that these were junior high school students so they weren't as plugged into all of these things as you would expect high school students to be.  I mean these were kids--these were youngsters basically who were focused on their immediate task of going to school.  We lived, my wife and I and our two daughters [Karen Reed and Ursula Reed] who had now been born, we lived right across the street from the school.  And so those were days that you know the students would stop by our house after school.  When I first started teaching at this school the teachers there thought I was crazy to live across the street from the school.  And I said well why do you think it's crazy?  "Oh you know this is just--the neighborhood--," the this, the that, and the other.  As it turned out that was the best thing that I could have done.  Why?  We bumped into the parents at the supermarket where they all shopped.  I got my haircut in the barbershop where the fathers got their haircut.  So I knew the fathers on an informal basis and you know during that time the barbershop was the social setting for black men.  And so on weekends you know Friday night, Saturday, I mean they all con- whether they wanted a haircut or not, they all congregated there to share their stories, have a little taste or whatever.  So I was in that environment where I got to know them, they got to know me.  They had high respect for me.  We shopped--my wife and I shopped at the food store where they shopped.  It turned out that because we lived so close we were integrated into the neighborhood that the other teachers started stopping by our house after school so that they could interact with the students informally as well.  So my wife would make coffee and cookies and stuff we'd do--so every day we'd have a group of teachers that'd come by and the students would come by and, "Oh Mr. Reed [HistoryMaker Rodney Reed], oh Mrs. Reed [Reed's wife, Vernell A. Reed]," blah, blah, blah.  So it was fine but I say that to say that this was a setting that was very supportive of students, and it was supportive because we lived in the community.  But it was also the case that as the civil rights struggles were being manifested in various ways that the students were sort of aware of it, but didn't feel that they were at that point ready to be part of it.  So we could share you know some of these experiences, we could make them aware of and we could direct them you know to read or to look, to see and that sort of thing. But they were not actively involved in any of this.  You know they were like you know thirteen, fourteen years old and so it was--the stuff was going on, but it wasn't, it didn't have an immediate impact because it was not physically right there in their immediate environment.
Story_ID: 626696
Speaker 1: Okay so you were principal of King Junior High School for--
Speaker 2: I was--junior, junior--vice principal of junior, of--
Speaker 1: Vice principal.
Speaker 2: --King Estates Junior High School [Oakland, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Great, great, great, great time.  I mean my life has been blessed in many ways.  This was a great experience.
Speaker 1: Now at the same time you're--are you working on your Ph.D. at University of California--
Speaker 2: I hadn't started working on my Ph.D. then.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: See now, remember now I'd been in music, decided that I really wanted to go in administration in order to have an effect on what was going on in the schools.  I went to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley Graduate School of Education, Berkeley, California] and I earned--you have to have in California something called an administrative services credential.  So I went to Berkeley and I earned this administrative service credential.  Said to the folks in Oakland [Oakland Unified School District], aha, I've got this administrative services credential.  I'm ready now for an administrative assignment.  So I got this assignment at King Estates Junior High School.  While I was at Berkeley working on my administrative services credential, one of the professors there [Glen Grant] said to me, he said, "Rodney [HistoryMaker Rodney Reed], you've been in my class," he said, "you've been one of the best students I've ever had."  He said, "You really ought to think about working on a doctorate."  And I said to him, "Well I really want to be an administrator, and I got this position in Oakland you know that I'm going to pursue."  He said, "Well you know let's keep in touch," so I did that.  The year later he called me and he said, "Well, let's talk," and I said okay.  He said, "I'm back to what I told you before; I think you ought to work on a doctorate in educational administration."  And I said, "Well I don't think I can afford to do that.  I don't have the money," I said, "I have two young kids [Karen Reed and Ursula Reed]."  At that time we had started building this house.  We actually built this house.  My brother, one of my brothers [David Reed] was a contractor in New Orleans [Louisiana], and he came out here.  We had an architect.  So I mean physically hammering nails, you know we built this house.  But any rate, and it got featured in the newspaper and all kinds of stuff.  It was--but that's another part of me being able to paint, build and cut and saw.
Speaker 1: So you're actually building the house?  (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You're not just saying you had it built, but you actually were out--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, we actually built, I mean built; we cut down trees and you know did the foundation and all this stuff.  We--a lot of special stuff we couldn't do and then I was you know--my brother had to go back 'cause his wife [Amanda Berrien Reed] was pregnant so we had a local contractor here that we knew whose license we had used to begin with who actually finished everything.  But you know plumbing, electrical work, the drywall I mean we--other folks did that.  But all the framing and stuff, you know we basically did.
Speaker 1: Well people can't see this, but it's a beautiful house.
Speaker 2: Yeah, thank you.  Well we're pleased with it.  And then the Oakland Tribune did a whole spread on it.  At any rate, I'll show it to you at some point.  It's--we feel good about it.  But any rate, so this guy calls me and I said, "Well you know I can't afford to do this because you know we're building this house.  I got two young kids."  My wife [Vernell A. Reed] is a medical technologist so she had a part time job when our kids were small.  So we didn't have a lot of income coming in.  And I said, "I can't just stop working to come to school."  So he said, "Well let's think about it."  He came here, sat at the table and said, "Look, if I give you a job, you can make X amount of dollars, and I say to you that you can take whatever time that you need to go to class as long as you put in X number of hours per week.  If I did that could you, could you come to school?"  I mean that's--basically that's what he was saying.  Could you make financial--could you make the--your finances meet your needs?  And he sat down and talked to my wife and I because my wife was working part time and she wasn't ready to go back--not go back, I mean to work full time because we had these two young kids.  So we said, well it's going to be tight but we figured--we slept on it.  We thought about it and stuff and we decided okay, we'll do it.
Story_ID: 626697
Speaker 1: So the next year Oakland [Oakland Unified School District] you know called and wanted to make me a full principal of a school.  I called this guy and I said, "Oakland is ready to make me a full principal."  He said, "Ask for a leave of absence.  Come to school and get your doctorate."  I did.  I went to Berkeley.  I worked for him.  It turned out that he was the executive assistant to the chancellor of Berkeley and he taught--he was a professor in the school of education [University of California, Berkeley Graduate School of Education, Berkeley, California] who taught personnel administration.  And had it not been for him, I never would have gotten a doctorate.
Speaker 2: Now what's his name?
Speaker 1: Glen Grant, G-R-A-N-T, Glen Grant.  He's no longer at Berkeley.  I'm not even sure if he's still living.  But at any rate, that was a turning point.
Speaker 2: Well that's something that--I think if there's any relatives of Glen Grant, they might want to know that he did that.
Speaker 1: Could be.  But at any rate, that's what got me to Berkeley.  So I went to Berkeley and started working on my doctorate.  So the first year you know was a struggle trying to make ends meet.  The next year I got a fellowship and that made things a lot easier because I still had this little part time job and the fellowship.  So things were a little easier.  At the end of my second year, now we're in 1971, 1970, '70 [1970], '71 [1971] year.  And opening occurred at Berkeley, a fac- for a faculty position and my classmates nominated me for the position.  At least they wrote a letter putting my name in the hat because they'd all have to go through these big searches for faculty positions at most universities.  But unbeknownst to me, they submitted my name as someone that, that the search committee needed to look at for the position.  Well the search committee did look at me and decided that I was the one they wanted to offer the position to.  Now I hadn't actually gotten my doctorate.  I mean I was still working on my dissertation at that time.  I mean when I look at my diploma, it says March 1971.  So this was 1970 when this position opened and I got selected to be a, an assistant professor of policy, planning and administration at the University of California, Berkeley.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now you're thirty-eight years old--
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: --at this time.
Story_ID: 626698
Speaker 1: Well go ahead.  I'll just (laughter)--I had (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well it's--I'm just saying how I transitioned from the Oakland schools [Oakland Unified School District] to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley Graduate School of Education, Berkeley, California].  In those early years I was still playing music on the side.  That would not last too many years beyond that because I couldn't serve two masters; I mean I couldn't do what was expected of me at Berkeley and do what was expected of me in music.  I mean I didn't have time to devote myself to practicing and doing those things.  So you know I, you know I played with some groups, I was with my own group [Ambassadors], I played with some other groups.  And I think some of the musicians who knew me sort of said, "Oh well you know Rodney [HistoryMaker Rodney Reed] hired us when--when, so maybe we'll hire him now," 'cause I could use--you know the money was still not, I mean assistant professor didn't make a lot of money.  In those days it was you know thirty thousand [dollars], you know low thirties or something like that.  But you know one day I was a student and the next day I was a faculty member.  And some of the faculty members there, we didn't have--we had only one black professor in the school of education at Berkeley at that time and he wasn't in the unit that I was in.  And so I didn't really know him that well.  So all of these professors that I had studied with, I had been in their classes, still looked at me as a student although I was a faculty member.  And their attitude was, aha, if you think you're good enough to be one of us, then you're going to have to prove it.  And we're not going to help you.  So I was out there floundering you know those first few years 'cause you know the--a major research university has a different set of expectations.  And unless you have been indoctrinated or exposed to what those expectations are, you're really at a loss to try to find your way around.  So I was floundering because I mean I didn't know what, I mean I knew my subject matter.  I mean I knew you know the courses that I had taken I had done you know very well in them.  But I didn't know, you know, how actually to do good research and that was a high expectation.  In fact there was a--higher expectations on research and publishing than it was on teaching, right.  And my forte was on teaching.  And having come out of you know Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and the school system in Oakland as--both as a teacher, as an administrator, I was looking at what the practical needs were for folks and going into education, while the university was looking at you know what theory can you generate or prove and what kind of research can you do to, to do that?  So there was, there was a little floundering on my part of not knowing what was expected and how to do what was expected.
Story_ID: 626699
Speaker 1: Let me ask you before we go further what your dissertation was about.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was, it was about out of school educational opportunities and the exposure of various ethnic groups to those out of school educational opportunities, as well as the distances involved from where they live to get to those.  So we called it out of school educational opportunities and propinquity and ethnicity.  And essentially what we were trying to do was to see whether or not there was a correlation between in school performance and out of school educational opportunities.  What we found was essentially what you would expect to find just from a commonsensical point of view but we were able to do this theoretically and statistically: that the students who had the highest grades in school were also the students that took advantage of out of school educational opportunities the most.  Those happened to have been Asian students.  Next in line were the white students.  Next in line were the Hispanic students and at the bottom were the ba- black students.  That's basically it.  That--
Speaker 1: So there--
Speaker 2: So, so, so now today we're saying students you know really to--ought to have mentoring hours in school.  They ought to be exposed to you know music lessons.  They ought to be exposed to travel.  They ought to be exposed to role models, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.  But this is all the way back there that we were able to show that those students who made the highest grades in school were the same students who had a greater exposure to out of school educational activities.  Notice I said educational activities 'cause a lot of our students, when I say our students, I mean black students, you might find them on the basketball corner, hanging on a corner, et cetera.  If you just think about it, you hardly ever see after school Asian students hanging on the corners.  And why?  Because they are in educational programs in their churches, in their community centers, and in other facilities that are in their neighborhoods.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're saying that there weren't enough educational opportunities in physical proximity in the black community for the students to utilize (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it's not only the physical proximity, it's also the desire to engage in activities that might be available, or, or insist on having those opportunities available.  We--I--during that time, we, I did some follow up work and looked at some churches and tried to see well, why couldn't the churches, I mean our churches have in--after school hours tutoring programs for students?  One of two of them tried to do it, but across the board there was no unified effort for the churches to open their doors after school to students who may not have been members of their church, but who lived in the neighborhood where the church was.  That I thought was a missed opportunity but it was also the case that had the parents I won't say insisted, but at least I guess approached the church--we didn't have a lot of community centers.  I mean that--in Oakland [California], they had only one or two community centers all over the whole city.  And we didn't have a lot of boys and girls clubs [Boys and Girls Clubs of America] and that sort of stuff.  So it's parents or people in the neighborhood coming together and said--and saying that we ought to have some after school programs or some programs on Saturdays or some programs during the summer for kids just for their enrichment and to grow.  What we find are, is during the summer students who fail are saying you got to go to summer school to make up some of these classes that you didn't do well in.  But what we were looking at was enrichment activities that would enhance the work that they were doing in schools, and we found those discrepancies you know way back then.  And, and now you know a lot of organizations are now you know talking about what we ought--we ought to have you know tutoring programs after school and special programs and on and on and on.
Story_ID: 626700
Speaker 1: You're an assistant professor at University of California, Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley Graduate School of Education, Berkeley, California].  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Well let me just, let me just talk about my experiences at Berkeley.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was assistant professor and as I said you know one day I was a student, the next day I was a faculty member.  It was a strange kind of transition because it wasn't--although I had gone through this whole search procedure and I had been selected by the search committee.  The search committees at Berkeley tend to be interdisciplinary.  So my area was in an area called policy planning and administration.  My advisor was in policy planning and administration.  He was you know very supportive but, but he also was an associate professor and so he was interested in doing his own work and not you know focusing on what I was going to do so I was trying to find myself.  Fortunately, I bumped into--I won't say bumped into, we didn't have that many black faculty members to begin with, I mean across the board.  You know, we would get together once a month and you know eat and talk about our common problems and that sort of thing.  One of the professors there was a professor in anthropology named William Shack [William A. Shack].  He was full professor.  He, he eventually became dean of the graduate school at Berkeley.  He is now deceased.  Showed me how to organize my materials 'cause you got reviewed--if you're a faculty member at Berkeley, a junior faculty member, your materials are reviewed every two years and--by an interdisciplinary committee.  And so before you're promoted or recommended for advancement you go through this rigorous review process.  I didn't even know how to put together my materials to present to a review committee.  And Bill Shack who I got to know pretty well sort of said, he said, "Well Rodney [HistoryMaker Rodney Reed] you know here's the way you need to do this," and showed me how to present my materials in order for them to be reviewed.  And then by that time I got to know the other black professor in the college of education.  It turned out that he was the second black professor hired at Berkeley to become a full professor.  Had been a football player on the Berkeley football team [California Golden Bears] and his area was in curriculum and instruction, which was another area.  His name was Staten Webster [Staten Wentford Webster].  And Staten you know says, "Well you know here are some things that you need to do you know in, in moving your research agenda and developing a line of research," and that sort of thing.  So I, so I had you know two black professors you know to kind of, to help me.
Story_ID: 626701
Speaker 1: And then there was another one that I really don't want to forget because when I did my--you know you got to do a--oral qualifying examinations for the doctorate.  When I did my oral qualifying exams, the committee of five professors, one of the members of the committee was a professor named [HistoryMaker] Troy Duster.  Troy was from Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's related--
Speaker 1: Is one of the HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: And is related to Ida B. Wells.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Troy Duster.  Troy Duster was in sociology, but Troy was on my dissertation committee, and he was also on my oral examination committee.  And I forgot that.  I need to point this out.  When I completed my oral examination committee, the committee for the first time that I'm aware of and anybody else in the school of education [University of California, Berkeley Graduate School of Education, Berkeley, California] was aware of elected to indicate that I had passed my oral examinations with distinction, which was a very high honor at that time because nobody else had gotten that kind of accolade about their oral examination.  And Troy said, "Rodney [HistoryMaker Rodney Reed]," you know, after the exam, he said, "let's get together and have lunch one day," and we did.  And he sat down, he said, "Well what are you going to do now?"  This was the oral exam.  This wasn't the defense of the dissertation, this was before the dissertation.  And I said, "Well, Troy," I said, "I've always been interested in what's going on in the schools, and I think I want to become a school superintendent."  And he said, "Well you know you ought to think about university teaching."  And I had never ever, I mean I had done Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] in music, but this was a whole new different ballgame for me.  And I said, "I don't know."  He said, "No, you know seriously," he said, "you know you really ought to think about university teaching."  Well this was before I was hired.  Then I got hired.  Troy was not on the search committee, but I'm sure that he wrote a letter of recommendation to the search committee when it became known that I was a candidate for it.  So he was extremely supportive and encouraging.  By the time I was finishing my doctoral dissertation, all these job offers were coming in.  I mean I had job offers coming from, from--I mean I could have just you know lined them up and just thrown something and any of them would have been outstanding.  There were assistant superintendents, there were vice presidents of community colleges, there were directors of federal program positions.  There were positions in the state university system.  They were all kind of administration positions.  Oakland [Oakland Unified School District] wanted me to come back and be an assistant superintendent.  I mean it just, it was kind of overwhelming and I--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: So I selected the one that was the most challenging one, (laughter) which was teaching at Berkeley.  And I needed to just you know to put that in because there--I mentioned earlier that there--that all along in my life people have come into my life at opportune times for me that have helped to steer me in certain directions.  And before Bill Shack [William A. Shack] showed me how to put together my sort of dossier of--to present to the review committees, it was Troy Duster who was on my dissertation committee and on my oral exam committee who was encouraging me to pursue a career in academia.  So I owe a lot to Troy and then after I was hired I owe a lot to you know Bill Shack and to Staten Webster [Staten Wentford Webster] for helping me travel that road that I needed to travel.
Story_ID: 626702
Speaker 1: My career at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley Graduate School of Education, Berkeley, California] was bifurcated in the fact--in this sense there was a special research center called the center for the study of higher education [Center for Studies in Higher Education].  And they asked me to become an assistant researcher at the center which was kind of like a halftime position.  So I was halftime you know teaching in the school of education and halftime at the center for the study of research in higher education.  While at the center for research in higher education we had a special program, project that we worked on that was called the new student, and how do we deal with the new student.  I've always been interested in equity all the way you know from day one.  And the new student was the student coming out of different ethnic backgrounds basically, different financial brackets, i.e., black students, Hispanic students, the black and brown students.  Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] is filled with you know white and Asian students so that was no, that was not new.  But the new student was the minority student.  And my particular focus at that time was to look at the effect of peer tutoring programs on the academic success of these students of concern.  And so I went around the country and looked at a lot of peer tutor programs, wrote about them, had a whole publication on peer tutoring programs.  One of the most outstanding programs was one at Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  So we know that they work and that they--it sort of built on my dissertation, which was looking at out of school opportunities which included tutoring and mentoring and role modeling and all that sort of stuff.  So that was a sort of extension and then my research then on was really on school effectiveness, expectations and effective management styles and skills.  So that's what I taught at.  I had I don't know, roughly over the period of twenty years at Berkeley, I probably had about thirty primary doctoral students who went off in the world and did great things.  And I served on a lot of campus committees.  I was a co-founder of something called the Professional Development Program, which was an outreach program from Berkeley that tried to pull in students from junior high school and senior high school and prepare them to have a successful academic career at Berkeley.  I was a co-chair of one of the academic senate committees.  Berkeley has a strong faculty governing system that starts with the faculty senate.  So to be chair or co-chair of one of the faculty senate committees is--at least during that time, we've had several minorities to become chair since that time.  But at that time, one, there weren't enough, a lot of minorities on campus to begin with, many top--tenured faculty members.  But to be selected for one of those positions was a quite, was a great honor.  And then I was a board member of the Young Musicians Program, which is an outstanding outreach program at Berkeley.  I founded something called the Institute for School Administrators, which was a summer program for practicing administrators that went on for a number of years.  It was one of the first things that, that Berkeley did that had a direct bearing on the practicing administrator, those people who were out there in the trenches who you know came together every summer in a--at--in this institute setting, which was you know quite rewarding.  I did a lot of consulting with the state department of education [California Department of Education] at that time and on and on and on.  By the time I was ready to leave Berkeley of course, I got you know several citations you know from the state assembly [California State Assembly], from the state senate [California State Senate], from the speaker of the house and you know the various kinds of things you get you know resolutions and on and on and on.
Story_ID: 626703
Speaker 1: It says here in '80 [1980] you were appointed to--the faculty assistant to the chancellor?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That, again you know I mentioned that the small group of black faculty members there, I don't know if we numbered twenty or twenty-five or something about that time.  I think there might be maybe forty by now, maybe more I don't know.  I haven't kept up with it.  But when we would eat lunch you know we would talk about the problems of faculty members at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], particularly those coming in who were minorities.  And we decided that what we needed was to have someone who would be an advocate for new students, I mean new faculty members, junior tenure track faculty members working at the chancellor's level and to develop programs and to find ways to be supportive of minority faculty members hired at Berkeley.  This became to be known as a position called the faculty assistant to the chancellor for academic affirmative action.  I was not the first person to hold that office because we wanted senior members to be in that position.  I'm trying to remember, Professor Olly Wilson [HistoryMaker Olly Wilson] who was in music, also is a HistoryMaker, I think was the first faculty assistant to the chancellor for academic affirmative action.  He was followed by Professor William Shack [William A. Shack] in anthropology who I mentioned earlier and then I followed Professor Shack.  I was associate professor ba- at that time.  They were full professors when they did it, and I did that for--actually I think I did it until I left to go to Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] because I was followed by Professor Reginald Jones [Reginald L. Jones], who was in African American studies and education.
Story_ID: 626704
Speaker 1: You were here through the earthquake right, in '89 [1989]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, right (laughter).  The 1989 earthquake?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: I remember it very well.  I was teaching a class--a lot of our classes were designed for individuals who worked, so that particular night that the earthquake struck, I had a class that met from seven to ten P.M.  And it was up on the fourth floor of this building, actually the same building that I had arranged for us to use on the Berkeley campus [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] for this interview, Tolman Hall, big concrete building.  And so I was teaching this class up on the fourth floor.  I had twenty students, maybe twenty-two students, about that number.  Many of them were principals or assistant superintendents, some from the state department of education [California Department of Education].  They were all mature students.  And when the earthquake hit, the building shook and I said, oh, just another little earthquake, and I kept teaching.  Then we took a break, went back and we stayed until (laughter) class was over.  Some of the students stayed to chat after class about you know things they were working on and you know sort of interaction.  We had a pretty close relationship 'cause we were all about the same age basically.  And when I left the building I started hearing the sirens all over and seeing fire flames all over.  Say what, what's going on?  Well this earthquake had hit and no one--there was no signal, no one had notified us that--we're up on the fourth floor that there had been this major earthquake.  And so it was on my way home that I'm hearing--I'm seeing flames and ambulance sirens and all this stuff going on.  And it wasn't 'til I got home that my wife [Vernell A. Reed] said, "Oh we've been so bothered about you," because they had this big earthquake and they were all sitting in front of the television looking at the news.  And I'm saying (laughter) well we taught--I kept my class going right through the earthquake, didn't know it was as serious as it was until after I came home.
Speaker 1: Now was your home damaged at all or?
Speaker 2: No.  This same house.  The house was designed--actually this house is built on poles, and it's designed like any skyscraper.  There--it's designed to give.  So it vibrates, and so with the earthquake it just vibrated, settled down.  We have no, no cracks in the walls you know, nothing.  It's been here since 1969, 1968.
Story_ID: 626705
Speaker 1: That, that was a, you know, foresight you know I guess--well I guess you knew you were coming out to an area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] that (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I really didn't know.  I really did not know but it was just fortuitous.  I keep saying that things happen to me, I think it's predestiny.  But I met this architect, young guy name Ken Leone [ph.] and you know we chatted and chatted and chatted.  I said, "Well look you know Ken, I, you know I bought this lot--."  This area was undeveloped.  If I had the money I would be a multimillionaire now because I could have bought all this property, you know it (audio disturbance) extended all the way out where (unclear)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: All this property was, was, was very reasonable.  For fifty thousand dollars, you could have bought all this land up here.  It was undeveloped.  But it was--they didn't have water or sewage or electricity.  So, so a lot you could have bought you know twelve hundred dollars, but you would have had to supply the water and the electricity and the sewage and I couldn't afford that.  I mean we were scuffling you know just to get this house going.  But any rate during that time I met this architect, Ken Leone who had been a graduate of Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California].  I had seen a home that he had designed and I called him and I said, "I really like this house that you designed," and I said, "I have this lot.  I'd like you to think about you know a design for us."  And he came over and we talked and we talked with his wife and stuff and we made an arrangement that I could pay him you know we used to call it on time, but I could pay him installments you know along you know for two or three years which was the only way we could afford him.  Not that he was that expensive, we just didn't have the extra money and he understood that.  And so we entered into this agreement and he insisted that we have the soil engineer, a civil engineer, as well as the architect.  So when he designed the house he made sure that the civil engineer and the soil engineers all were in sync about what the house needed to be built to withstand.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  That makes sense.  That's, that's good.  That's good.
Story_ID: 626706
Speaker 1: All right, in 1990, now you make a--now you retire from University of California--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --at--no?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now (laughter) all right now what happened then?  What happened?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I had, you know while at Berkeley I mentioned that I'd had all these experiences.  I was also head of our department in the school of education.  At Berkeley it's called the school of edu- the Graduate School of Education [University of California, Berkeley Graduate School of Education, Berkeley, California], so I was department head.  So I'd had this administrative experience working with the chancellor, in the school system, in the school of education.  I also had you know several elected offices in professional associations.  I was very active in a lot of different things.  Here in our community with the Urban League [National Urban League] and the United Negro College Fund.  I was head of the education unit for the Urban League and for the United Negro College Fund.  I was a western region parliamentarian.  I was with American Education Research Association [sic. American Educational Research Association], I was on their board.  I was, I mean I was on you know lots of editorial boards and other kinds of stuff.  Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] was looking for a dean and it was at--I didn't apply for the position there.  It was at an American Education Research Association meeting that a group of faculty members, three faculty members from Penn State University's College of Education buttoned me off one day and said, "We'd like to have lunch with you."  And we sat down for lunch and they said, "We're looking for a dean for our College of Education.  We'd be very delighted if you would consider applying for the position."  And I said, "Well I don't know," I mean Penn State, I mean I'd never heard of Penn State I mean to be honest with you.  And I said, "Well let me think about it," and I did.  And they contacted me again to see if I had made up my mind and then I said well you know what do I have to lose?  This is something that, it's an administrative position.  I've always been interested in administration and leadership positions, why not?  So I put together my papers and I sent it to them and their search committee went through this whole process.  And I flew up there to be interviewed a couple of times and met with the president [Graham Spanier] and some of the board members and on and on and on.  I mean they put me through a--not a rigorous process but it was clear that it was a serious undertaking for them.  I finally said yes.  They made me an offer that was quite attractive and also appointed me as a--they didn't have endowed chairs in the College of Education, but they had something called the Pennsylvania Professor of Education, which was the nearest thing they had to an endowed chair.  So they named me the Pennsylvania Professor of Education as well as the dean of the College of Education.  I was the first senior academic black administrator at Penn State.  There has not been one since I left.
Story_ID: 626707
Speaker 1: But at any rate, I was actually hired in the summer of 1989, but I, I, I, I told them that I couldn't just pick up and leave immediately.  I mean they didn't notify me that you know I'd been selected until midsummer.  And I said the earliest I can be there is January of 1990.  So I was actually hired summer of '89 [1989], but I didn't assume the position until January of 1990.  It was in fact January the 2nd 'cause I celebrated New Year's Day here and flew up there the next day.  I said to the chancellor at Berkeley and to the dean of our Graduate School of Education [University of California, Berkeley Graduate School of Education, Berkeley, California], I said you know I mean I let them know that I had been offered this position and they said, "Well we'll give you a leave of absence because you're not going to like it up there in Mich- in Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania].  I mean you, you know you're accustomed to this good living in California, mild temperatures," and on and on.  They said, "You know it's--it gets cold up there and it's isolated and blah, blah, blah.  So we'll give you a leave of absence."  So I said fine.  So they gave me a two year leave of absence.  At the end of that period Berkeley started calling, "You ready to come back?"  I said, "You know I just got here.  I'm doing some exciting things.  I'm really enthused about what I'm doing and the prospects.  I don't think I can leave 'em you know after just serving two years."  So they said, "We'll give you another leave--year leave of absence," so they did.  So at the end of the third year--I mean I'm still on the Berkeley faculty now, they were expecting me to come back to Berkeley.  At the end of the third year they called and said, "Are you ready to come--?"  Well by that time, I'm now well aware of the tight budgets universities operate under and have what we call an FTE, a full time teaching equivalent position means that you have to have the money for it, and the whole while that I was on leave of absence, my position was sacred.  That is, the money for my position was there for me to come back.  They couldn't give it to anybody else as long as I was there.  I didn't understand that when I was at Berkeley, but when I became a dean I fully understood what the financial commitment was to have a faculty member, a tenure track faculty member.  So at the end of the third year I said, "Look, I just can't leave now.  Things are going too well.  I'm really, I think I'm really having an impact.  I'm making a difference.  I'm getting into a lot of different situations that I, probably not, would not have had I stayed at Berkeley."  So I said, "I'll tell you what, let's--let me just release my position," and at that point I formally resigned and was accorded professor emeritus status.
Story_ID: 626708
Speaker 1: So it wasn't until 1993 that I, I, I formally severed my ties with Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley Graduate School of Education, Berkeley, California], '93 [1993], '94 [1994], somewhere in there and became professor emeritus at Berkeley.
Speaker 2: Okay.  They had you out of sequence, they had it at 1990, so I can change it here.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well I left Berkeley physically, but I was still on the faculty because I was on leave of absence.  You know Berkeley has a lot of professors who accept positions you know in the federal government and in other agencies and they're given leaves of absence.  And when they get tired of doing that or they use up the time that they're, of their leave then they just come back and teach.  The latest person was the woman [Christina Romer] who was head of President Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] economic advisory committee [Council of Economic Advisers] or something.  You remember she, she left after two years.  She had been a professor at Berkeley.  She had got a leave of absence.  She did that for two years, she went back to her professorship at Berkeley.  So I could have left Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] and gone right back to my professorship at Berkeley, but I, I was having, I mean I was really working very hard at Berk- at, at Penn State.  But I was seeing growth and progress in areas that I was interested in.
Story_ID: 626709
Speaker 1: Well tell us about what actually was, what's going on that was so exciting.
Speaker 2: Well first of all you know that Penn State [Pennsylvania State University] is located right in the middle of Pennsylvania.  (Laughter) It, I mean it is really isolated.
Speaker 1: In a town called State College [Pennsylvania] (unclear).
Speaker 2: At a--and the town is called State College.  The post office there is the State College post office.  It has its own postal zone.  Penn State has its own postal zone within State College.  But the school of education--actually it's called the College of Education.  The College of Education at Penn State is one of the largest in the nation.  It has roughly over three thousand you know--well actually over four thousand graduate and undergraduate students.  It's an undergraduate and graduate program.  We had well over you know 120 faculty members, about a hundred or so staff members.  We were spread over six different buildings on the Penn State campus.  And Penn State has a system wide organization called--they're like feeder campuses to Penn State so that you'll find a Penn State University in Erie, Pennsylvania [Pennsylvania State University Erie, The Behrend College], or a Penn State in McKeesport [Pennsylvania State University Greater Allegheny], or a Penn State in the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area.  I mean they're like about--it's sixteen or seventeen, eighteen of these campuses around the State of Pennsylvania.  Every one of those--any one of those that had a program that was a, what we called a pre-education major program was a program that had to be approved by me as dean of the College of Education, or through the College of Education.  So, so the span of, I won't call it control, but the span of influence that I had was not only on the Penn State campus, but it was also for the other campuses that had programs geared toward students who wanted to become teachers or administrators.  So that part was unusual and exciting.
Story_ID: 626710
Speaker 1: Secondly, it was my feeling that Pe- even though Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] was isolated, we needed to ensure that we prepared students to work in urban settings.  So I developed an urban education program primarily with those campuses that were nearest to, to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and that's where those branch campuses, I guess branch campus is a good word, became so important to what we were, what we wanted to do.  And we actually developed those programs and put them in place and had students who, who were interested in working in inner city communities and stuff which was very unusual to have a main campus right in the center of Pennsylvania which has no urban kind of environment around it to have these branch campuses doing it for us.  So that was exciting.  Thirdly, I was able to enhance the di- the diversity of our tenure track faculty members to the point that we had two tenure track Native American professors.  We had three or four Hispanic professors, and we had eight or nine black tenured professors, or tenure track professors.  So by the time I left Penn State, we had roughly nineteen minority tenure track faculty members which you know when I went there we had one or two.  So that was exciting to do that.  Next, I was, I mean I really was professionally engaged in a lot of stuff.  I was on the governor's sort of blue ribbon committee on the future of education.  I was president of a lot of different professional organizations.  I did a lot of international traveling.  I was invited to lecture in Australia and, and China and Taiwan and Beijing [China].  We tried to develop some international programs and linkages.  I got to be chair of the academic council, the academic council of deans, which on the Berk- on the Penn State campus is a very powerful organization because it is the organization that's composed of the deans of every college on that campus.  And so we're looking at you know twenty-five or thirty deans, you know the dean of education--I mean the dean of engineering, the dean of health and human services, the dean of business administration, the dean of the medical college [Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania], the dean of whatever.  Any one of these academic units had a dean and to be selected as chair of the Council of Academic Deans puts you right in the front line of the administration of the university.  So there's a president and a provost and some other junior officers but then for the faculty it's the Council of Academic Deans so that was an extremely important and influential committee because it meant that I was also on the strategic planning committee for the university.  I was also on the budget committee for the university.  I was on so many committees I don't even (laughter)--I don't remember.  But the main thing I was in the mainstream of the administration of Penn State at that time.  I had--was very pleased with diversifying our faculty members, our faculty staff.  Not staff because in the middle of Pennsylvania there's not a huge minority population so all of our secretaries and stuff were non-minority.  There were no minorities to hire.  But to get faculty members, we did insist that we bring in minority faculty members, and we were successful in doing that.  So at the state level, at the university level, internationally, at the professional level, writing, serving as edit- on editorial boards, on and on and on were activities that I found very exciting.
Story_ID: 626711
Speaker 1: Now I must tell you that not only was it exciting, it wore me out.  And I really had intended not to stay at Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] more than five years.  But five years came around and you know I said well I can try another year and then six years and that and then seven years.  And then, and I just got to the place that I was actually, literally just burnt out.  I mean I--I mean I could have kept doing all this but I started thinking about my health and, and, and the fact that I don't think my wife [Vernell A. Reed] was extremely happy with the--of course she's never said this, but I don't think she was extremely happy with the amount of time that it required for me to do all of this stuff while she didn't have a whole lot to do.  So you know she was traveling back to visit our daughters [Karen Reed and Ursula Reed] and traveling back to Louisiana to visit her relatives and you know she'd gotten involved with you know some exercise classes and stuff like that.  But, but she really wasn't intimately involved in the, the professional stuff that I was involved in.  And, and I'm sure that, I won't say it took a toll on her, but I'm, I, I don't--I'm--well I shouldn't say I'm sure, but my sense is she wasn't very happy with it, and I'm not sure that she understood how much time and involvement being a dean, being the first African American dean, well you don't want to fail.  And so you push a little harder because the expectation's a little higher.  And clearly, like President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], there are people who don't want you to succeed.  So you know you know you're dealing with all of these factors.  And so you know nine years is, gets to be a little stressful.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So that's my Penn State story.  I still love Penn State.  I'm a life member of their alumni association, as I'm a life member of University of California alumni association [Cal Alumni Association].  I'm a life member of Clark College alumni association.  I don't--you know these are the schools I went to.  I'm not a life member of the University of Michigan [Alumni Association of the University of Michigan], although they bugged me to death, but (laughter).  And so I stay abreast, you know I get all the magazines and the emails and all the requests for donations and everything else.
Speaker 2: So you're--
Speaker 1: I did set up a scholarship fund while I was at Penn State in my--in the name of my wife and myself [Rodney J. and Vernell A. Reed Graduate Scholarship in Urban Education].  It's an urban scholarship for students who are interested in going into urban teaching or administration.  And it's probably somewhere valued at now at around fifty thousand dollars and then it keeps growing.  I think it's over fifty thousand now.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you were there to 1998, was that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 626712
Speaker 1: Now this is the year that--you gave the commencement address for the, for Penn?
Speaker 2: No, not--19--1998?
Speaker 1: Ninety-eight [1998], yeah, that's what it says here.  I don't know if it's true or not.
Speaker 2: No, no.  I, I, well I gave the commencement address around 1990--1990 for, for the Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania], the main campus graduation.  I was a commencement speaker shortly after I got there.  So that was either '90 [1990]--
Speaker 1: Oh that's 1990.
Speaker 2: --or '91 [1991], right?
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: But then I was the commencement speaker at some of the branch campuses.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I don't remember the dates or the places, but, but I was a commencement speaker at, at least two or three of the branch campuses; and I was a commencement speaker at the Milton Hershey School in Hershey, Pennsylvania, which is a very elite private school.  So those dates may--the dates you have may refer to some of the other places.  But at--on the main campus it was unusual to have a dean to be a speaker because they usually brought in outside speakers.  But I was the new kid on the block and for some reason they had thought I had something to say and they asked me to be the commencement speaker and so I was this commencement speaker.
Story_ID: 626713
Speaker 1: Now you've published quite a bit over the years (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Not so much articles as book chapters and, and books and that sort of thing.  So you know all total you know papers and books and book chapters and stuff, I would say it's, it's in the neighborhood of a hundred at least, you know reviews and stuff.  Some stuff's got, you know some of the stuff that I did was published as reports, papers and so that went to associations rather than, rather than to wide (unclear) peer refereed journals.  But they were you know quality stuff that people (unclear).
Speaker 1: Is there a key thread that runs through your publications, or a message that (unclear)?
Speaker 2: If there's a--the key thread is my concern with equity and equality and social justice and educational opportunity.  Those are the threads that run through almost everything, going all the way back to my dissertation of looking at how students were serviced by out of school services, educational services, to my work at the center for the study of research [Center for Studies in Higher Education, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] looking at how peer tutoring helped to bring students up to par, to looking at how administrators interacted with faculty and students and how we prepare them, to my work with the state department of education [California Department of Education] that we had a whole program we called Improving the Human Environment of Schools, where we ran around the whole state doing workshops and actually published a whole big book ['Improving the Human Environment of Schools: Problems and Strategies'] on how to do all this stuff.  So, so I've always been interested in, in how do we do the practical things that are going to make a difference, and to me that comes in under the categories of equality of educational opportunity and equity and social justice because you know our students still don't perform at a level that they need to perform.  And so there are a lot of reasons for that, and we don't need to discuss that now.  But, but clearly it relates to equity and equality and, and that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 626714
Speaker 1: Was most of your--we were talking about travel before.  Looking around the room and there, there, there's lots of African and Caribbean art here.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And pieces from other places.  Is most your travel related to work, or was it vacation or?
Speaker 2: Well it's both.  It was both.  I would say maybe in equal doses.  But while I was at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley Graduate School of Education, Berkeley, California], one of the professors there got a large grant from I think it was AID [United States Agency for International Development], but it had to do with looking internationally at educational finance.  It was a, it was a program dealing with economics and finance.  And part of that still in, with my interest in equity and equality and stuff was to see whether or not there was something in, on the international front that could fit into this program, and so I was tapped to explore this.  So I got to go to at least five or six--I want- I was interested in Africa, so I said I want to go to Africa and look around.  So I went to about five or six countries at that time in Africa: Kenya, Tanzania, Ethiopia, Liberia and one other country I'm forgetting right now, to look to see how we could improve their educational system with this grant that we had on economics, economics and finance.  And what I concluded was that, that Liberia was perhaps the most ripe if I can use that word, place to try to do something and what I wanted to do and what I did was to scu- to study their school systems and to make recommendations of how they might improve the use of the resources that they had to elevate the quality of education.  They had a private school system.  They have a government run school system.  They have a church run school system.  They compete with each other, and then they have proprietary schools and all of these compete with each other.  So I studied their school system and made recommendations.  I'm not--well they, of course they had a coup since, after that and you know things are in upheaval.  I don't know if my reports are in their library or if they got thrown away or whatever.  I have copies here but we made some pretty solid recommendations of how they might improve and maximize the, the investment that they had in education because that was part of the grant.  But in going to these different countries you know I was able to meet with the ministers of education and you know indigenous people and spend some time in each place and so that's how I collected a lot of this stuff.
Story_ID: 626715
Speaker 1: It turned out that in Liberia a person that I had known at Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] who became a really brilliant physician was the personal physician to the president of Liberia.  And so not only did I decide to do my work in Liberia, I was there two or three times and one summer brought my wife [Vernell A. Reed] and my two daughters [Karen Reed and Ursula Reed] with me, and they spent like six weeks or so there.  But we got to know a lot of the people in Liberia and we collected a lot of stuff from Liberia while we were there.  And our friends, in fact one of them just called today who lives in Reston [Virginia].  One lives in Reston and there's another one of those kind of planned communities similar to Reston.  One lives in Reston and one lives in another place.  They're both in the United States and they both call us all the time so we, we stay in touch with them.  But they have given us stuff and they go back and forth to Liberia.  The daughter of one of these ladies is the wife of the ambassador from Liberia to the United States.  His name is Barnes [Nathaniel Barnes].  He ran for president last time.
Speaker 2: So, so we're talking about the last few years, I mean that (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Well I mean it goes all the way back but I'm saying currently--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --from our connections going way back, we have remained friends with these folks.  And, and while Nehemiah Cooper [Henry Nehemiah Cooper] was the president's first physician is no longer with us.  His--
Speaker 2: What president, was that--?
Speaker 1: Doe, Doe.
Speaker 2: Doe?
Speaker 1: Doe was the president.
Speaker 2: Oh, Samuel Kanyon Doe [Samuel Doe].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah, remember there was a big upheaval.
Speaker 2: Coup, right.
Speaker 1: And then there was a period where they lined people up on the beach and assassinated them and--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --beat up a lot of the folks.  So Nehemiah Cooper was severely beaten, but he got out and his family got out.  And his wife and a cousin of his live up in the Washington, D.C. area and we have remained friends with them and in touch with them and we speak to them.  We speak to one of them on a fairly regular basis.  But we picked up a lot of stuff and they got back and forth.  And when they go back they ask us is there anything they would like us--like them to bring us?  Well, the country is in such bad shape now there's not a whole lot they can bring now, but they would bring materials and dashikis and you know anything that we asked for that was within their means to get, we got.
Story_ID: 626716
Speaker 1: So our collection you know expanded not only from my travels there.  And then when I was at Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania], I went to Sudan because we had some former students from Sudan who invited me to come there to do a series of lectures at the University of Khartoum [Khartoum, Sudan].  And that was a great experience because they had a cruise for me on the Nile, you know there's a Blue Nile and a White Nile.  And they had a big banner for it, you know, "Welcome Dean Reed [HistoryMaker Rodney Reed]," floating down the Nile River from the white to the red.  Another exciting part of that was they wanted me to see more of the interior, and, and I didn't have the proper papers to do that.  And they said, "Put on this turban, put on this robe, sit in the back of the car and don't say a word."  And every three or four miles there was a guard post you know with sandbags and machine guns and all that.  I mean I've never been so scared in my life because the night before that, I had gone out for a walk and it was a curfew at nine o'clock.  I got lost.  It was after nine o'clock.  I was somewhere near some kind of military installation.  And one of these little fourteen year old kids with one of these AKA-57s or 47 [sic. AK-47] was in my face because I was out past the curfew.  I was an American, I didn't speak his language, he didn't speak my language.  I was making all kind of signs, praying and everything else that you know I wasn't about to be done in.  Finally somebody else came and they conferred and decided they would let me go.  But that was a scary moment.  And then the next day my host folks said, "Well we want you to see some of the interior of Sudan, and so you don't have a visa to do this.  You have a passport just to be in Khartoum [Sudan].  But you put on this robe and you put on this turban, you sit in the back seat of the car and don't open your mouth."  (Laughter) So strange land and you know I said okay I'm game.  So I did that, but those were scary times because you know Sudan has still been you know not the safest place in the world.  But, but I went there to do a series of lectures.
Story_ID: 626717
Speaker 1: My sister married a guy from Sierra Leone and her children, two of her three boys were born in Sierra Leone.  The other one was born in London [England].  And of course they're separated, I shouldn't say of course, but they're separated now, but her children retain their Sierra Leone citizenship, she does and they also have an American citizenship.  And the one that was born in London has a United Kingdom citizenship, as well as Sierra Leone as well as the United States.  So we've gone over there to visit them and so some of the stuff you know like that big mask there, I got when we were visiting in Sierra Leone.  One of her sons married a young lady from Costa Rica.  So we've gone to Costa Rica and we've collected some stuff from Costa Rica.  And our trips in the other Caribbean countries were just on our own vacation.  So in each place we--as you can see we like art and artifacts, so we've collected stuff from you know our travels around the world.  We have less stuff from Asia, although that vase up there was given to me from--I was invited to Korea, and that was a gift from them, and there's some other stuff in some display cases we have from many other countries that were either gifts or stuff that we collected.  But I've had the unusual--I shouldn't say unusual but, but the great opportunity to do a considerable amount of traveling internationally.
Story_ID: 626718
Speaker 1: Now you're a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the Urban League [National Urban League], Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] and you are currently the grand sire archon of the Sigma Pi Phi [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], or otherwise known as the Boule.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So tell us a little bit about the history of the Boule and how you got involved with the Boule.
Speaker 2: Well the Boule, Sigma Pi Phi is the oldest predominantly black letter--black Greek letter fraternity in the world.  It was founded in 1904 in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], it had six founding members.  From those six founding members it has grown to a membership of over five thousand and it has what many organizations call chapters.  We refer to them as member boules.  We now have 126 that are spread all over the United States, and in Nassau, the Bahamas.  One does not apply for membership in the Boule; you're invited into membership.  And when I was invited into membership, I really had to take a few days to think about it.  I had never heard of this organization.  It's been a very quiet organization.  It has shunned publicity, but it has invited into membership some of the most distinguished men in the country and they have become members.  So through the years I would say the membership reads like a who's who in this country, or actually throughout the world.  So when you say how did I become a member?  I was invited into membership by one of the members and you know accepted the invitation and was inducted into the fraternity.  Since I've been in the fraternity I've been you know quite active.  At one time I was chair of the--we have different sort of semi-administrative positions and committees that take care of the business of the organization.  I was chair of the growth and expansion committee.  I was chair of the history and archives committee.  Those were the two big committees that I was on before I was elected to the position that I now hold, and it's a position that you're elected as elect, I mean it's like being a vice president for two years before you actually assume the office.  So I was elected as we call it sire archon, sire archon elect, which I served for two years.  And now I'm serving as the sire ar- grand sire archon which is a two year period.  Our organization as I said has shunned publicity.  It does a lot of good things.  Our foundation [Boule Foundation], we have a separate foundation has given over 290 scholarships to graduating high school students who meet the criteria of the National Merit Scholars Program [National Merit Scholarship Program].  Our member boules are involved in we call social action programs.  Many of them give scholarships to high school students.  Many of them work with those students in various ways to ensure or to help ensure or to perpetuate their academic success.
Story_ID: 626719
Speaker 1: And currently we're in the process of implementing a program that we're--that I introduced that has been adopted by the fraternity [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], it's called the Boule Scholars Program.  And it's a program where we're going to cultivate and celebrate academic excellence of students across the nation.  And it's a program that, that will engage our members more directly in mentoring and role modeling and tutoring and enrichment programs that we believe will make a difference in the lives of, of our students.  We have a particular interest in focusing on black males because they are the most endangered species.  Black females are doing fairly well, but they could do a lot better than they are, on average.  But black males I think are--I don't think, I know--are really endangered.  And, and so as a fraternity it's incumbent upon us to have a focus on black males, and, and, and we do.  Not to the exclusion of females but we're, we're very, very interested in trying to improve the life chances for black males particularly in this global economy where you know education is really the key.  And if we don't ensure that our children are well educated they won't be able to compete, just that simple.  So it's, it's, it's a question of survival and for them and so we're dedicated to trying to make a difference.  We're not--we don't seek publicity in doing this but, but that's what--you asked me what we do, I mean that's what we do.
Story_ID: 626720
Speaker 1: Okay, anything else more about the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] before--?
Speaker 2: No, because it's such a private organization there's not a whole lot that I need to say about it other than you know how long it's been in existence, the quality of the numbers that it--that it has attracted.  You know men like W.E.B. Du Bois and Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and James Weldon Johnson and Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew] and Percy Julian [Percy Lavon Julian], and [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin and Maynard Jackson and, and I'm only calling those who are deceased because those that are living you know if you miss one of their names they're gonna say why didn't you say my name.  But it's been a very distinguished group of men and I would say when W.E.B. Du Bois--W.B.E. Du Bois [sic.] talked about the Talented Tenth, I would say that this group clearly represents what he had in mind when he said the Talented Tenth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you have a number of them who are history makers in various fields, in law, in music, in education and civic matters and the different categories that The HistoryMakers has.
Story_ID: 626721
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at some of the things you've done you know to this point and, and--what--is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: I think I would have gone to a different undergraduate school.  At that time given the interests that I had in music, I think that I would have--that my life would have taken a different direction had that happened.  I'm not sure, but now don't get me wrong, my experience at Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] was wonderful.  I mean I enjoyed you know my study there.  I enjoyed the people that I met.  I enjoyed the camaraderie and the closeness that existed at Clark.  But I, but I thought at that point in my life I needed more direction and I was a free spirit at, at you know at Clark.  I didn't have the kind of direction that I think I needed.  And so perhaps a different college that had a little more--I won't say rigorous but would have helped me to define who I was and what I had the potential to become, would have perhaps moved me in a different direction, I, I don't know.  But otherwise, no, I don't think that there are a lot of things that I would have done differently.  As I said earlier, I feel very fortunate to have had the opportunity to do the various things that I've done in music, in education, in administration and in service to the community.  I think these things are very important.  And I mention, and I have to believe this, that some things happen that you, you, you least expect and you don't know why they happen.  But there are people that you meet along the way that move you along, the influences that enter into your life that you aren't aware of, at every step of the way.  You know from my earliest days when my [paternal] aunt [Louise Reed] made me do my homework and took me to her third grade class when I was four years old, you know it was--I don't know what motivated her to do that.  She didn't have to do it.  I was clearly not of age, but she did it and she enjoyed doing it.  Working in my father's [Edgar Reed] drugstore gave me a different sense of you know chemistry and mixing of things and it probably, I guess moved me toward you know being enamored with mathematics when I got to high school [Gilbert Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana] after I found a teacher [Aaron Dutton] who could motivate me in that direction.  I remember when I went to my first time going to Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], one of the friends that I had met at Clark College was working in New York [New York] and in one month I mean I was really at the bottom of the barrel.  I mean I didn't know where my next meal was going to come from.  I mean I had this job working at the restaurant [Michigan Union], I got one meal a day.  But you know, you know I was like nineteen, twenty, twenty-one years old, you know you need more than one meal and I didn't have any money.  And working at this restaurant, I only got a meal, I didn't get money.  And a person that I had met, a fraternity brother [in Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] at Clark was working in New York and we had written each other.  And you know I happened to mention that you know things were really bleak and in the next couple of days he said, "I don't have a lot but here's twenty dollars.  Will this help?"  It made a big difference at that point in my life.  It was something he didn't have to do, didn't ask him to do it, but he did.
Story_ID: 626722
Speaker 1: Another time in my life when I went to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley Graduate School of Education, Berkeley, California], Dr. Grant, Professor Grant [Glen Grant], who came to my house and sat down and said, "Here's how you can come to school to work on your doctorate."  Didn't have to do it, didn't ask him to do it, he did it cause he wanted to do it, I guess, he saw something in me that I didn't see in myself obviously.  When my classmates submitted my name to be considered for a faculty position at Berkeley, didn't ask them to do it, didn't know they did it, and had no expectation that I would be selected, but they intervened and it did.  The group that traveled from Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] to the AERA [American Educational Research Association] convention which was meeting in San Francisco [California] at that time and approached me to become the dean, had never seen them before, didn't know them, didn't know--I guess I knew how they knew me, through my writings and that sort of stuff, but totally unexpected.  When I was invited to become a member of the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], totally unexpected.  So things have happened to me throughout my life because someone was in a place to move me along that I had no knowledge of prior to that time.  I mean I may have known them, but I didn't know that they were interested in moving me along the way that it happened.  So when I say that my life has been blessed in many ways, and I've been very fortunate because there have been people along the way that have moved me on to the next level.  And it was nothing that I planned.  It was just something that happened.  There are two other things that happened in my life that I can't overlook.  I almost drowned once.  In New Orleans [Louisiana] we didn't have swimming pools, you know public swimming pools when I was young, but then they opened something called Lincoln, Lincoln Park.  It was the first big, public swimming pool for black folks in New Orleans.  And on the opening day or the second day of the opening, I went there like everybody else and jumped in the pool and I got a cramp right in the middle of the pool.  I went down twice and I'm flapping around saying, "I got a cramp, I got a cramp, I got a cramp," and everybody thought I was playing and I almost drowned.  But somehow something pulled me away and I was able to move away from the center and get to a place where I could hop on one leg and get out of the, out of the pool.  Well somebody was watching over me because you know the third time I would have been gone.  And then another time I was driving, I don't know if I had--I was driving from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or someplace and I was one of these narrow roads.  I had picked up my sister.  Now where was she?  At any rate, it was my sister and I.  She was sleeping, it was a big trailer truck in front of me and I wanted to pass this truck, and I couldn't see what was coming on this two lane highway and I swung out past this trailer truck, there's a big 18-wheeler (makes sound), and right in front of me was another trailer car coming toward me.  And just at the very last minute I was able to swing in out of the traffic by--I mean as I thought about that, I could have been gone because it was like (gesture) that close.  So when I say I've been fortunate in that I've had people who have spurned me on, have helped me to move in the directions that I've moved, and my two skirmishes, close skirmishes I think with death leaves me to believe that there is a power that moves us all.  And I'm not quite sure where my life will go, where it will end, how it will end, but I know that, that everything that I've done and everything that I hope to do is because of not only my desire to do a lot of things, but because there are other forces at work that are moving me to do whatever I may do.
Story_ID: 626723
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well today my first concern is that we, we improve the educational performance of our students.  As I mentioned before, we're in a global economy where education is the currency.  And if we're, if our students, if our kids, if our children, if our youth are going to be competitive, they've got to perform at a higher level of education, and right now we're losing too many.  We have too many dropping out of school.  We have too many dropping out of college.  They will never get the economic wherewithal unless they have the educational foundation upon which to build.  Some of them will, I mean you know there are always exceptions.   But by and large college graduates make much more money than high school graduates.  And if you don't have a college degree, right now we have high unemployment and we have a lot of college students who are not employed.  But by and large, employers are looking for college graduates particularly in the fields of science and math and technology.  So we need to, we need to change the culture so that it's expected that we have realized expectations that the students will achieve at high levels.  I mean that's just fundamental.  If that happens then I think other things begin to fall in place.  We improve the economy, the economics within our communities.  We improve the possibility of strengthening our families because we start looking at marriages between peers.  You know right now we have a lot of black women who marry outside of the race because they don't find men who match them educationally.  So we start strengthening the family.  We start providing great opportunities for the children of the children we're talking about, but it all starts there.  So my big hope is that we start at the very fundamental level, improving the education that our kids receive.  And then secondly, we have to start looking at ways to, ourselves, build those structures that will strengthen our neighborhoods and our communities.  So that's structures in housing and businesses and in making opportunities where we can keep our kids motivated to do those thing- kind of things that they--we know that they're capable of doing but they've just not either had the opportunity to do or the will to do.  So we have to change mindsets.  We have to change expectations and I think it all starts with education.
Story_ID: 626724
Speaker 1: What today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well I'm not quite sure I can answer that because what one thinks (laughter) is his or her legacy is not necessarily what other people might think.  But I would say that if--just working backwards with the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], I would say that the establishment of the Boule Scholars Program, which is now underway.  It was an idea of mine that has now been embraced.  I would say that would be you know one legacy for the Boule.  Then working backwards at Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania], I would say that my legacy would be the establishment of an urban education program there.  In addition to demonstrating that it's possible to have a first rate College of Education and have a very diverse faculty.  I'm not sure others would see that way, but clearly I would.  And then you know moving back to, to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley Graduate School of Education, Berkeley, California], I would say that my legacy was establishing the Institute for School Administrators, co-founding the Professional Development Program and making sure that the college of education, or the school of education at Berkeley paid more attention to practitioners, that is the principals and superintendents, assistant superintendents, et cetera.  Berkeley is a research institution.  It does not necessarily place a big focus on practitioners as it does on theoreticians.  So you know whether or not other people would see that, I clearly see that as something that was necessary and occurred when I was there and I'm not so sure that it exists to the same extent--to this same extent now as it did then, I don't know.  And at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], you know continuing to work backwards, and Oakland [California], you know having a dance band [Ambassadors] that employed a lot of musicians and played for a lot of functions I think is part of a legacy.  In the--at Southern, introducing the Big Ten [Big Ten Conference] sound and steps and maneuvers is clearly a legacy because it, even now as I look at all of these bands, they're doing the same things in terms of the basic steps.  Now they--some of them do a lot more dance steps and (unclear) and that sort of stuff.  But for the basic maneuvers and steps, it's not very different from what it was back in the '50s [1950s].  So introducing that to Southern and seeing that it continues, you know makes me feel good.  Not many people know about this but a few do who are still around, who were around at that time.  So that's--I mean those are things that I feel very good about.  Whether other people will think of those as my legacy or not, I, I don't know.
Story_ID: 626725
Speaker 1: There was another thing that I didn't--we didn't talk about.  There's a, an organization in San Francisco [California] known, known as the Museum of the African Diaspora.  It's a fantastic place.  It's small, but everything is, is electronic in it.  And I was asked to serve in a capacity of designing their music display, which is all electronic.  And together with Professor Olly Wilson [HistoryMaker Olly Wilson], who was a professor at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] who is also retired now, professor emeritus, we worked on the music component of the organiza- of that museum.  That was extremely rewarding because we went all the way back to you know Africa and how the sounds were cultivated and merged into all of our music, all the way through the diaspora through Europe, through the current influences, through you know jazz and spirituals and rock and roll and gospel.  I mean the traces of music from Africa all the way through, we were able to do that and document it and put it in an electronic form that people can actually hear examples of the music.  So that was extremely gratifying, time consuming but very gratifying.  In addition, as that museum was being developed, I served on their, what was known then as their content committee which meant that we had to approve all of the script that's used in that museum.  And to, to authenticate some of the facts and figures, and that was extremely rewarding.  And that was not that long ago actually.  It's you know since I've retired from Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania].  I mean it happened, it took about two, to years of our life.  It's a great museum, not too large but if you ever have the opportunity I think it would be interesting to, to visit over there.
Story_ID: 626726
Speaker 1: How did your parents react to your career?
Speaker 2: My parents were quite proud of me actually.  I mean they--my father [Edgar Reed] was never a person to be overly demonstrative (laughter) as fathers tend not to be, many fathers tend not to be.  So it was, it wasn't anything that he would come up and say, "Oh son I'm really proud of you," or, "look at my son," and that sort of stuff.  But you could tell, I mean I could tell that he was you know quite pleased with my accomplishments.  And clearly my mother [Ursul Desvignes Reed] was always (laughter) you know dem- the demonstrative type.  So there was clearly no hesitation on her part.  But I think that they were not only satisfied with my career but with my siblings as well.  I think they took great pride in our accomplishments, particularly you know they didn't have the kind of opportunities that we had.  And of course we'd like to see our children have opportunities that we didn't have.  So there was a sort of unstated or understated pride but we knew it was there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we knew that their, their support was there.
Story_ID: 626727
Speaker 1: Now in terms of your--you've got two daughters [Karen Reed and Ursula Reed] right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you have any grandchildren yet?
Speaker 2: One, one grandchild who is now fourteen years old.
Speaker 1: I know you mentioned them before but I just thought you might want to--
Speaker 2: Well my daughters are now in their forties.  One has never been married and one has been married and divorced.  And she is now almost singlehandedly raising her son who is now in eighth grade.  He's very devoted to his mother.  He knows his father and he spends time with his father during the summer months, his father's in North Carolina.  And he's devoted to both of his parents.  He's turned out to be a very nice young man.  He's a gentleman and he does fairly well in school.  I tried to get him interested in music but that's not his forte.  He's more into technology and computers and that sort of stuff.  He's--he holds an elective office at his school.  He goes to a Catholic high school.  It's not a high school, but he goes to a Catholic school and he's now in the final year there in eighth grade.  He was elected to be--and I keep asking him what is the title and he keeps giving me this, all this long title.  But it has to do that they elect the person that's in charge of technology for the school.  And he ran for the office and he was elected.  So he has to take care of all the technological needs they have you know in assemblies.  He works with teachers on solving some of their problems with computers and occasionally with students who are there.  He's done some peer tutoring in mathematics, so he's coming along you know, you know quite well and of course my wife [Vernell A. Reed] is crazy about him, right (laughter).  And he knows it so I'm Papa to him and my wife is Nana.  So he knows that he can go to Nana for anything that he needs that he may not immediately have access to (laughter) at his home.  And my other daughter who is unmarried is a, again I'm not quite sure what her precise title is, but she works in the corporate headquarters of the Gap corporation [Gap, Inc.].  You know they have all the Gap stores and the Banana Republic and they got about six or seven different name brand stores and she works in their real estate division.  And in their real estate division she is re- probably responsible for making sure that all of the real estate that the Gap controls or rents or buys is in compliance with all of the local rules and regulations and accessibility for disability folks and all that kind of stuff.  So it's a big, it's a big operation because they have properties all over the world.  And I keep asking her, "Well do you want to be assigned someplace else in the world?"  And she doesn't--she's just crazy about California.  They were--you know she was born here and she has that opportunity but she doesn't want to travel.  But she's enjoying what she's doing so that's the main thing.  And she's surviving (laughter) as she--she has, she has enough to, to live comfortably.
Story_ID: 626728
Speaker 1: Now is there anything else I should ask about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: You know, like I just happened to remember about the museum [Museum of the African Diaspora, San Francisco, California].  I don't know.  Just ask your last question and if something comes to me, you know I'll say something about it.  But at the moment I can't--I think we've covered a fairly wide range of topics.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I really would like to be remembered as someone that tried to make a difference in the lives of those that he came in contact with, and in particular, students, regardless of age.  Because in, you know while at Berkeley, I had graduate students who had difficulties in some other places within the school of education [University of California, Berkeley Graduate School of Education, Berkeley, California], or in other places on the campus who used to come to my office and sit down and actually cry about some of their experiences, and you know we were able to counsel with them and work with them.  So it was clear that you know that they looked at me as someone that they could talk to and who was concerned about them and who made a small difference in their lives.  So I would I think just simply like to be remembered as someone who cared and who tried to make a difference in the lives of those that he came in contact with.
Story_ID: 626729
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Before we terminate our conversation there's, there's one area--you asked me if there was anything else that I'd like to share with you and at that moment I couldn't think of anything.  But there is one thing that I think would be worth noting, and that is that for two years while I was at Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] I hosted a television show.  It was kind of interesting the way that this came about.  There was a cable television service that was called Jones cable television service [ph.], and they had come to the campus at Penn State and wanted to do something in education.  So they interviewed me, being the dean of the College of Education, and talked about having a pilot of the program they had in mind that was going to be broadcast exclusively on the bro- Jones cable network [WPSX-TV; WPSU-TV, Clearfield, Pennsylvania].  And of course we did the, we did they pilot and they liked it and they said well we really would like you to do a whole series on education.  And what we've decided to do was to have a television program called 'Touching the Future' ['Touching the Future: Dialogues on Education'], and it was broadcast monthly for a period of two years.  I mean it was taped monthly for a period of two years and broadcast you know around the state and other places that they serviced.  But this was an opportunity that I had to interview individuals that I thought were on the cutting edge in education that were doing some interesting things.  They were either administrators or they were teaching someplace.  They were people in unions.  They were people in the federal government, and they all came to the Penn State campus.  I had a budget so we were able to do all of the research so that I had the right questions to ask them.  And this was a half an hour program that I was very proud of because we really were touching the future at that time because we were exploring topics about learning, about administration, about federal and state intervention into educational programs about how we motivate kids and on and on and on.  One of the--
Speaker 2: Who were some of the guests?
Speaker 1: I'm about to mention that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) okay.
Speaker 1: One that I thought was really quite outstanding is a lady who is a professor of education at Stanford University [Stanford, California] right now.  At that time she was at, in New York [New York], and her name is Linda Darling-Hammond, outstanding educator, one of the advisors to President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] when he was campaigning for the presidency.  But her, her outlook and her view was so refreshing and so well rounded that she was, I thought was, was just one of the outstanding people.  Another one was a gentleman whose name was Harold Hodgkinson [Harold L. Hodgkinson] who was a very well known Harvard [Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Massachusetts] educated sociologist.  Last year I was in Rochester, New York and there was a panel on education and the representative from the American Federation of Teachers, vice president was there and I'm blocking out his name, but he was one, you know he came to me and he said, "I know you.  You interviewed me on your program."  But he's very well known and I'm just blocking his name out at the moment.  Henry Giroux [Henry A. Giroux] was a contemporary of Michael Eric Dyson who--we didn't interview Dyson, but Giroux was one of Dyson's mentors who had the same sort of philosophy and outlook.  But those were some of the people.  I still have the tapes of all of them, and although I may have blocked out you know some of the names.  But it was a program that you know people would come up to me and say, "Oh I saw you on TV."  And, and I'd say, "But did you listen to the dialogue?"  And we just felt very good about it because--and Jones cable company did because we were really talking about issues that needed to be discussed and talked about.  And we had those individuals who around the country were doing some you know fairly interesting and exciting things.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So that was a, just another add on (laughter) that I had while being the dean at Penn State when I said I had all these different hats that I was wearing, that was a hat that I, you know I can hear--we selected a musical background so we would start this program and--with the 'Procession of the Nobles' ['Procession of Nobles'] by Rimsky-Korsakov [Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov] (makes sounds).  It was a big fanfare and then my voice would come in, "And now ladies and gentlemen, we are honored to present 'Touching the Future,'" or something.  I mean it was, it was, it was an interesting period, I'll put it that way.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Thank you.
Story_ID: 626730
Speaker 1: This photograph is a photograph that was published in the local paper in State College, Pennsylvania when Pennsylvania State University [University Park, Pennsylvania] had selected me to become the first African American dean for academics on that campus.  I was the first senor academic administrator at Penn State, and so this is an announcement of that appointment.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me when I had--hosted a television show called 'Touch-' 'Touching the Future' ['Touching the Future: Dialogues on Education'] at Penn State.  This is roughly 1991.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph taken in my office at Penn State in the College of Education.  This is a photograph at my retirement party when I left Penn State or when I was leaving Penn State.  It was one of a series of retirement parties.  This one, particular one was one that was given by the president of the university.  In that photograph is my wife and a graduate student.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph at a reception that--in which the coach at--the football coach at Penn State, Joe Paterno was in attendance.  It was probably at a university sponsored reception.
Speaker 1: At Penn State one year, President Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was the commencement speaker.  And backstage before and after his speech we had an opportunity as academic deans to interact with him and to chat with him.  And so this is me with him at that time.
Speaker 2: This again is at the retirement party given by the president of the university who is standing next to my wife on her left and the provost, the two senior most officers at Penn State University.  It was Graham Spanier was the president and--well he was the president.
Speaker 1: At Penn State, there--all of the academic deans were known as the Council of Academic Deans and this is a photograph of the Council of Academic Deans during the time that I served as chair of the Council of Academic Deans which is a very senior position because it is directly related to the administration of the university.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of a former president of the Penn State University, Joab Thomas when we had gotten funds to remodel a section of our building and we had a ribbon cutting ceremony that he attended.  He was an extremely supportive president of education.
Speaker 1: This is another photograph with Joe Paterno and his wife [Sue Pohland Paterno] along with me at, I don't remember the exact time of--when this was taken.  But as you look at the photograph you can see that Coach Paterno was a little younger than he appears to be now.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) wearing a Joe Paterno mask.  Have you heard--seen those on--?
Speaker 1: Yeah I've seen them, yeah.  This is a photograph that appears on the cover of the Boule Journal and is the Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity journal that was issued not too long ago actually.  It's dated the fall of 2010, but it really came out you know more like January.  It was a little late coming out.  But that's my wife and myself on the cover.
Speaker 2: That's a photograph of my wife, Vernell [Vernell A. Reed], that she gave me when I left to go to Penn State so that I could place it on my desk and be constantly reminded (laughter) that she would be there you know within the year.
Speaker 1: And that's roughly 1989.  That's my wife and my two daughters Karen [Karen Reed] and Ursula [Ursula Reed].  And those are the daughters alone, Karen and Ursula, Karen in the red and Ursula in the white.
Story_ID: 626731
Speaker 1: This is a photograph taken with members of our fraternity, the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], in San Francisco [California] at one of their Christmas parties.
Speaker 2: About what year?
Speaker 1: Probably around 19--hm, it would have to be early 2000s.  I'm looking at the faces there so it was probably after I returned from Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's a photograph when I was in high school in Gilbert Academy [New Orleans, Louisiana], and I was supposedly reading or doodling.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: This is a dance band that I played with when I was at Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: And this is--okay.
Speaker 1: This is me here on alto.  These are some photographs when I was at Clark in the choir and--
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Walter Mayes [ph.].  This is Marshall Smith [ph.] that I mentioned and this is me on alto.  So this is not, this is not a bad one.
Speaker 2: Okay, well the bottom.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Did I say something about this?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No.
Speaker 1: Did you take that one?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes I did.
Speaker 1: Well that--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You just didn't tell us what it was.
Speaker 1: This is a, this is just a photograph of me, I was a junior in college in this photograph.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Now which one?
Speaker 2: The one at the bottom.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  This is when I was at Clark and playing in the dance band in Atlanta [Georgia], Walter Mayes, W.M. I think was his name.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.  Those were my [U.S.] Army days back in the early '50s [1950s].  I was in Special Services and still tooting my clarinet and saxophone.
Speaker 2: You were at Fort Jackson at that point?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Fort Jackson, South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: --I was young those days (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is when I was a, assistant conductor of bands at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Those are my paternal grandparents.  My grandmother who was Amelia Reed [Amelia Joseph Reed] and my grandfather was Joseph Reed.  Amelia was a housewife and Joseph was a longshoreman and worked on the riverfront in New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: And they were a little more--which ones--you want that one?  This is a photograph of my mother and father, Ursul Reed [Ursul Desvignes Reed] and Edgar Reed.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This was a photograph taken in my office when I was at the University of California, Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley Graduate School of Education, Berkeley, California], so that's probably in the late '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: And the one on the bottom, on the plane.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph with Professor Leland Medsker [Leland L. Medsker] who was an authority on community colleges and who was director of the center for the study of higher education [Center for Studies in Higher Education] when I was at Penn S- at University of California, Berkeley.  We were coming back from somewhere back east.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Describe this one (unclear).
Speaker 1: That's a photograph that we were, we were honored as being men of the year by the Omega Fraternity [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity].  And that's Dr. Carlton Goodlett [Carlton Benjamin Goodlett] on the left and I'm on the right and the person in the center is presenting the plaques to us.
Speaker 2: Okay. This is your band.
Speaker 1: And this one, yeah.  This is a photograph of a dance band that I had in Oakland [California] that went from, I guess we were established in the early--the middle '60s [1960s] and existed for at least ten or fifteen years called the Ambassadors.  We, we could reduce the size or increase the size depending on the place where we played.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's a photograph taken when I was at UC Berkeley.  It's in the '70s [1970s].  I actually was in my office, but the photographer just you know blurred out the background.  But if you look real closely you can see some file cabinets (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is another photograph around the same period where we were at a symposium and I was explaining some points to those assembled.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: I was probably about two years old here.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph when I was three months old.
Speaker 2: Same period, I was three months, three or four months old there.
Speaker 1: I think it's kind of hard to tell who (unclear).
Speaker 2: Which one?
Speaker 1: I mean the two people--
Speaker 2: That's my brother.  That's my nearest brother who is now deceased.  That's a photograph when I was two years old on the right, and my brother who was eighteen months younger than I was on the left, Langston [Langston Reed].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of my mother and father who are seated in the center, my two sisters on either side of them, and my brothers in the background.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: There were six of us.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  We should probably name everybody.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And give us a year.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: I can give you the names, I can't give you the year.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: Starting on the left is my brother Daniel [Daniel Reed], next to him is my brother David [David Reed], next to him is my brother Langston and then there's me.  And then seated is my sister Florence [Florence Reed Smythe Macaulay], my mother Ursul, my father Edgar and my other sister Ruth [Ruth Reed Hodges].  There's one thing that I did--neglected to say, all of us went to college, all of us went to an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] and we all went to a different HBCU.
Speaker 1: Really?  Okay.  That is something.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Where did the rest of them go?
Speaker 2: Florence went to Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] (unclear).
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: Florence in the green went to Talladega.  Ruth on the other end went to Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana].  I went to Clark; Langston went to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]; David went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  And Daniel wanted to be a mortician, he went to some school in Houston, Texas.
Speaker 1: This is a--well it says, it's printed on it in 1954 I went to the Omega's Grand Conclave in Atlanta [Georgia], and this is a photograph of all the att- the brothers who were in attendance.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I don't know exactly where I am on here but I'm on here.
