Story_ID: 421744
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Neculai Burghelea.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, my name is Reverend Eugene F. Rivers III [HistoryMaker Reverend Eugene Rivers], E-U-G-E-N-E, F, as in Franklin, R-I-V-E-R-S, the third.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth.
Speaker 2: Okay, four, nine, fifty [April 9, 1950], Boston, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Now, you, you were born in Boston?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, born in Boston--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --raised in Chicago [Illinois] and Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, now is there a story--now, you're the third so there's three generations behind you that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --named--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, no, it's, it's an unusual--my [paternal] grandfather [Eugene Rivers, Sr.] was a high school principal, and my father [Eugene Rivers, Jr.] was an artist, who moved to Chicago from Boston where he had been a student at the Museum School of Fine Arts [School of the Museum of Fine Arts at Tufts] here in Boston and moved to Chicago, became an artist for the Chicago Crusader, and then joined the Nation of Islam in 1957, '58 [1958], and became the art director and chief illustrator for Muhammad Speaks [Muslim Journal].
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wanted to get the basic, you know--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --origin of the name and--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, let's see, what, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a pastor, ordained minister in the Church of God in Christ.  And I am involved with a number of non-profit organizations which have grown out of the ministry of the Azusa Christian Community [Azusa Christian Community Center, Boston, Massachusetts], which is the church that I'm the senior pastor.  There is the National TenPoint Leadership Foundation [Boston, Massachusetts], which organizes in the U.S. and other countries, focusing on the development of faith community law enforcement partnerships that focuses on gangs and gang violence.  There is a Seymour Institute [Seymour Institute for Black Church and Policy Studies, Boston, Massachusetts], which is a think tank that we are building to focus on public policy and questions of faith, targeting the black churches.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Seymour?
Speaker 2: S-E-Y-M-O-U-R--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --named after William J. Seymour, the patriarch of the Pentecostal revival that began in 1906 in Los Angeles [California].  And then there's the Ella J. Baker House [Boston, Massachusetts], which is a settlement house that services approximately two thousand, six hundred kids a year.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 9th, February 9th--
Speaker 1: This is the--
Speaker 2: Does that sound right?
Speaker 1: --12th, right?
Speaker 2: Is it the 12th?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The 11th.
Speaker 2: The 11th--
Speaker 1: February 11th, okay.
Speaker 2: Boy, I'm, ooh.
Speaker 1: I'm, I'm off too (laughter).  I thought it was--
Speaker 2: Ooh.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, February--
Speaker 2: So it's February 11th, 2007 [sic. February 12, 2007].
Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in the chapel of the Azusa Christian Community, which is located in the Ella J. Baker House at 411 Washington Street in Dorchester, an inner city neighborhood in Boston.
Story_ID: 421745
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --management requires me to ask, and they--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: First one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Mangoes, or--this is odd--corn chowder.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: Second-hand bookstore.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Pause) That's an interesting question.  I'm just trying to think; trying to think of a favorite phrase.  Well, actually no, that I can think of.  You know, obviously, to answer your question right, I'm a preacher so that means I talk a lot, so, and I talk frequently.  But there is not a favorite phrase that I can think of because, you know, they evolve.  I pick up a lot of my phrasing from young people, and so, and so it changes.  Yeah, it evolves, and so there is nothing I can think of that occurs to me because I'm always absorbing new phrases and language from young people, who I'm a student of and I'm always fascinated by.  So that's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 421746
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm gonna ask about your mother's [Mildred Bell Rivers] side of the family--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and, and then your father's side.  But--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --we'll start with your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name was Eugene Franklin Rivers, Jr. [Eugene Rivers, Jr.], E-U-G-E-N-E, F-R-A-N-K-L-I-N, R-I-V-E-R-S, junior.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, February 4th, 1924.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Spartanburg, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about that side of the family, and how far back can you trace them first of all?
Speaker 2: I go back to my great-grandfather, whose name was Mose Rivers.  He was the father of Eugene Sr. [Eugene Rivers, Sr.], my father's father.  And, and so my, so my, I know my, on my father's side there was an aunt, Anna Rivers Greenwich [ph.], and she was an educator like my grandfather, who had gone to South Carolina State [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], class of 1924, as had my father, who met my mother at South Carolina State.  They both, they met in college.  And what I remember is that they were middle class black families, Spartanburg, South Carolina.  What was fascinating is that my father was in one of those college black fraternities.
Speaker 1: Which one was he in?
Speaker 2: Oh, geez, you would ask.
Speaker 1: That's okay, you don't have to spend a lot of time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. And my, my grandmother on my mother's--on my father's side--was also in a, the sister sorority, and I believe it was the Alphas [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority].
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was AKA, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And so they, they were a teacher's family.  My grandfather, my grandmother had that one child, my father.  And they lived a respectable, peaceful life in Spartanburg.
Story_ID: 421747
Speaker 1: Now are there any stories that go all the way back to slavery?  Was Mose Rivers, was he born in slavery (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mose Rivers--
Speaker 1: --or Reconstruction?
Speaker 2: Well, Mose Rivers was a contractor.  He built the Silver Spring United [sic. Silver Hill Methodist Church; Silver Hill Memorial United Methodist Church, Spartanburg, South Carolina], or Colored Methodist Church at the time.  And Mose was, I imagine, born into slavery.  The vast majority of everyone from that part of the country originally comes into Charleston [South Carolina], which was obviously the port city where all of the slaves were brought, coming into the Carolinas.  And I guess that's particularly significant because South Carolina was the, one of the few states that had probably the largest slave population in the U.S., where the slave population outnumbered the slaveholders certainly and the white population in general.  And South Carolina is a fat- you know, you have the Gullah on the coast, and so there's a fairly unique history that comes out of South Carolina.  And so I, I'm just beginning to explore and, and go back as far as I can to identify Mose Rivers.  They were all buried in the Lincoln Cemetery [Lincoln Memorial Cemetery, Spartanburg, South Carolina], which is the name of the cemetery one would have in South Carolina at the end of--you know, in the black community in the South.  So it was Lincoln Cemetery.
Story_ID: 421748
Speaker 1: What did Eugene, Sr. [Rivers' paternal grandfather, Eugene Rivers, Sr.] do for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He, Eugene, Sr. was the high school principal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a high school principal and teacher, educated, as I said, at State [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], went on to get a master's degree from the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], and--
Speaker 1: That's a big deal for those days.
Speaker 2: I know, it an amazing--1924 and then the master's degree from University of Michigan.  And in fact, oh, what I know is that his name was Fess Rivers, short for Professor, Fess Rivers.  And that's what they called him.  And you know, he was the principal of the one black high school, which was the only high school for the blacks--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --during that period.
Speaker 1: Now did he go to University of Michigan, or becau- was it, was his education paid for by the State of South Carolina?  'Cause often they would pay you to go out of state to grad school 'cause they didn't want you to go to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Was, was it that kind (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That, that's an excellent--
Speaker 1: --of thing?
Speaker 2: --question.  I mean, I imagine that the public school system would have, have paid for advance training.  And so he went to get additional professional training at University of Michigan and was supported by the public school system--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he, he was a principal of the one school?
Speaker 2: The one black--Carver High School [Spartanburg High School, Spartanburg, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Carver, okay.  And that, does that cover grade school and high school?
Speaker 2: No, I think that was high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I know often they would name a school, a high school, and it would be everything.
Speaker 2: Right, that's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) True, but--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: I don't know, but, so, so--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --it was just high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, just high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 421749
Speaker 1: Your father [Eugene Rivers, Jr.] have any stories of growing up?
Speaker 2: My father was interesting, very solitary guy as an only child, very artistic, had a real interest in that.  And the impression that I get is he, he liked to party.  He, he tells a story of being on campus with his buddies, and they're hanging out drinking on campus [of the Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina].  And he'd see my mother [Mildred Bell Rivers], who was this really focused, very straight ahead, hardworking--she'd be--she went to college to become a registered nurse, and she was a caregiver.  And that was a big deal for her.  And so, they leave the South fairly early.  They go to college.  The World War [World War II, WWII]--both of my parents were in the [U.S.] military.  My mother was in the Nurse Corps [U.S. Army Nurse Corps]; my father was in the [U.S.] Army.  He was in Iwo Jima [Japan].  And they come back--
Speaker 1: Now that's Iwo, Iwo Jima is very popular, as we discussed, because of the movies--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --that Clint Eastwood made ['Letters from Iwo Jima'].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And a lot of these movies we get the impression that only white people were there, like in 'Saving Private Ryan' and beach at Normandy [France].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I know brothers have wrote, you know, and said, "Hey, we were there, too."
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  No, no, my broth- you know, my father was in Iwo Jima, and there were black men there who fought, were black men there who fought, and he was one of them.
Speaker 1: Do, do you know what unit he was in at all?
Speaker 2: No, it's interesting, I, you know, I--he just passed in 2005.  And we're adjusting.  You know, I'm the executor of the estate, so we're just down there looking at all that stuff now to collect.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so we're talking about Iwo Jima and your father being there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and so he served in the Army, came out on a G.I Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], and came to Boston [Massachusetts] to come to the Museum School of Fine Arts [School of the Museum of Fine Arts at Tufts, Boston, Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 421750
Speaker 1: You said your parents met at South Carolina State [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And by this time, when he [Rivers' father, Eugene Rivers, Jr.] came out [of the U.S. Army], I mean were they married already or did they--
Speaker 2: No, they married in 1948.  And my mother [Mildred Bell Rivers] began to work as a registered nurse.  And my father came up to the Museum School [Museum School of Fine Arts; School of the Museum of Fine Arts at Tufts, Boston, Massachusetts], and my mother was supporting him.  And she joined him up here.  And they were here for about two years and then left to go to Chicago [Illinois] where he tried to secure employment as an artist.
Story_ID: 421751
Speaker 1: Now I want to stop with him [Rivers' father, Eugene Rivers, Jr.] for a second and go back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --and pick your mother up.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, Mildred Bell Rivers, M-I-L-D-R-E-D, B-E-L-L, R-I-V-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 25th, 1922.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: Walterboro, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Walterboro?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is it B-U-R-O-U-G (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that's--
Speaker 1: --H?
Speaker 2: --W-A-L-T-E-R-B-O-R-O.
Speaker 1: R-O, okay; Walterboro, South Carolina, okay.  Now what, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: They were the Robinsons [ph.] and the Bells.  And the Robinsons were a mixture, or there was some intermarriage between blacks and Indians [Native Americans] on the Robinson side, and I'm, I'm not sure on the Bell side.  That's something I have to check out, to find out what the maiden name was of my grandfather's--my great-grandmother on the Bell side, what family was that that married into the Bells, because then we're, we're back into slavery--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --with the great-grandparents being born into slavery.
Speaker 1: Are there, there any stories about slavery that are passed down in that side, on, on that side of the family?
Speaker 2: It's interesting.  I do not recall any stories that I heard from my grandmother [Bertha Bell].  My grandfather died prematurely in a car accident in 1955.  And so I don't have significant recollections of Paris.  Judge, his name was Judge Paris Bell, Sr.  That was my grandfather's name Judge Paris Bell, Sr.
Speaker 1: Now was that a, that was his name or, or title?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That wasn't a title?  It wasn't--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or office (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, it wasn't a title.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Judge Paris Bell, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a story behind how he got the name Judge?
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm sure there is.  I've, you know, I've been hearing and that's the, that's the, that'll be the challenge for me, to go back and get all that information on the Bells.  In fact, it's funny.  I went on the Internet to some geni- genealogical site to look up the name Judge Paris Bell, and so I Googled it.  And so, I've got to do some more work to, you know, in, in Googling the Bells and the Robinsons just to find out how far back--I mean and I'm sure there's information I'll get from folk that still live in Walterboro and who are still around.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 421752
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Mildred Bell Rivers] talk about growing up and what it was like for her?
Speaker 2: My aunt talked more about it.  My mother was a fairly reserved individual, very hardworking, very reserved.  And I have images of them going to church.  They were, they were churchgoing people.  My [maternal] uncle, J.P. Bell, Jr., [Paris Bell, Jr.] became an ordained minister.  My sister--my, my aunts also went to South Carolina State [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], so everybody went to State.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, so your mother had aspired to be a nurse.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: She had had aspirations of being a nurse.  And, and she met your father [Eugene Rivers, Jr.] at South Carolina State.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They both served in the war [World War II, WWII].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: After the war they--when were they married, in?
Speaker 2: In 1948.
Speaker 1: Okay, '48 [1948].
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 421753
Speaker 1: And your father [Eugene Rivers, Jr.] was, attended the school of--
Speaker 2: Mu- Museum School (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Museum--
Speaker 2: --of Fine Arts.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's part of the Boston's--
Speaker 2: Boston [Massachusetts] story, right--
Speaker 1: --mu- museum (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Museum School; that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's right. The Museum School of Fine Arts [School of the Museum of Fine Arts at Tufts] in Boston.
Speaker 1: Had he always had a talent for art?
Speaker 2: Apparently.  Solitary--art's the thing you can do if you're not a gregarious person, and he was not particularly gregarious; nice guy, but pretty much kept to himself.  So he apparently exhibited an intellectual and artistic or aesthetic interest in art.
Speaker 1: And what was his major medium?  I mean what did, what did he concentrate on?
Speaker 2: He painted and watercolor, did a lot of illustrations.  There's a fairly interesting body of artwork which he produced that is now on display.  One can--(background noise). It's kids leaving.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (Laughter).
Speaker 2: He, there's a fairly substantial body of work that was compiled by people of the work that he'd done: lots of illustrations, painting, watercolor, black and white, ink drawings; yeah, fairly substantial body of work, illustrations, design, impressive, impressive body of work, impressive.
Speaker 1: Okay, were these representational period, or all, all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All representational--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --all representational stuff.  In fact, he became the lead illustrator for Muhammad Speaks [Muslim Journal] when the paper was founded and Malcolm X was at the top of his game within the Nation [Nation of Islam].
Speaker 1: So was he the illustrator of the famous, the hands reaching across the--
Speaker 2: That's him (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right--
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: That's right: the hands--
Speaker 1: That's right--
Speaker 2: --reaching across--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --with the brothers; that's right.
Speaker 1: Africa and--
Speaker 2: The African, black Ameri--
Speaker 1: --the African American Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln].
Speaker 2: They're you go; that's him.
Speaker 1: This is a--
Speaker 2: All of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this--
Speaker 2: All of that.
Speaker 1: --this goes back to Marcus Garvey (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's all, it's all Garvey's stuff, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, no, in fact, what's amazing is that he does the, the Africa black unity, neo-Garvey stuff.  That's him.  So all of that is him, all of the, "Do for self"; "We can do it"; "Stop making excuses"; "Learn and build."  All of that is him.
Speaker 1: What about, did he do the (unclear) and, and, and the disgrace?  Is that him too, that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's that--now, now the, now the, the downside of that, the illustration, you know, and this is tragic and ironic: the illustration for which he is best known is the illustration of Malcolm's head being decapitated, boun- bouncing down the hill when Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] called for the assassination of Malcolm in 1964.
Speaker 1: I know that's been republished over and over again in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everywhere in books.
Speaker 1: --books on the assassination, right.
Speaker 2: On book, you know, every book on the assassination of Malcolm, right, or on Malcolm in relationship to the Nation they've got that, right, image.  That was created by my father.
Story_ID: 421754
Speaker 1: Did he [Rivers' father, Eugene Rivers, Jr.] ever discuss how he felt about doing that one at the time?
Speaker 2: We've had, we had, before he passed, we had that conversation about what his relationship was, and what was going on in the Nation [Nation of Islam] when Malcolm [Malcolm X] is put out, and what kind of environment there was.  And at one level, my father says, "I knew that Malcolm had a problem as early as '61 [1961], and that there was enormous jealousy."  And so, once there was the split, one had to make the decision on whose side one was.  And living in Chicago [Illinois], I knew what the odds were.  And so I made a prudent decision, because for one to make a different decision was to toy with suicide.
Speaker 1: Not to mention financial problems I guess.
Speaker 2: Amazing.  Listen, you know, as my father had suggested, Philbert [Philbert Little; Abdul Aziz Omar] and Wilfred [Wilfred Little; Wilfred X], the two surviving brothers of Malcolm, they knew what to do.  There weren't really options.
Speaker 1: They spoke against their brother in public--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --read statements--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --verbatim.
Speaker 2: Yep.  That's how heavy it got.  So, my father explained that, as he put it, "Chicago had made decisions."  And things were so completely polarized that there was no--everyone had to declare.  And once you knew what the odds were, you understood that Malcolm was in an untenable position, right.  You had--he would, he was gonna win the argument and lose the war.
Story_ID: 421755
Speaker 1: Did your father [Eugene Rivers, Jr.] ever discuss how he--'cause he started off at the Chicago Crusader--
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you were saying.  How did he--was he invited by the Crusader to come to Chicago [Illinois]?  Is that how he--
Speaker 2: Well, I think that Chicago was a black town to which people from the South came.  It was a black city.  And if I'm a black person that comes from South Carolina, you know, Boston [Massachusetts] fifty, sixty years ago was a tough town.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was a white town.  It was a much whiter town than it is now.
Speaker 1: And somewhat of a West Indian town too, if you were black (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's West Indian.  That's right, West Indian town.  That's exactly correct.  And so you had West Indians, beiges and Jamaicans who were here.  And Chicago was up south.
Speaker 1: Now, but why not New York [New York]?  New York seems to be the South Carolina, you know, terminus, you know, but--
Speaker 2: Right.  I think there, there was the Crusader; there was the Defender [Chicago Defender].  What you would have in New York would be the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News], and that was the major paper.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my sense is that he have, may have had, more opportunities to explore.  And Chicago's a blacker town; it's a black, black town.  Black Chicago is a black town, and he may have felt more comfortable there.  My mother [Mildred Bell Rivers] may have felt more comfortable there.  And so he comes, he gets employed, and he's trying to make a go at it as an artist.  And so, you know, Chicago was fairly self-explanatory.  You have almost separate--well, actually you do.  You had a separate black world.
Story_ID: 421756
Speaker 1: Now did he [Rivers' father, Eugene Rivers, Jr.] mention some of the--I just, I'm tempted to ask this question 'cause there--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --there two other prominent cartoonist in those days, was, were George Lee and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Commodore [Chester Commodore]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --who did cartoons for the Defender [Chicago Defender].  Did--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --did he know them, or did they interact?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no.  I, I know as an artist, and there are so few of them, everybody knew everybody--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause you followed each other's work.  So I'm sure that as a professional everybody read everybody because you're monitoring each other's work, there's the Defender; there's the Crusader [Chicago Crusader].  And, and it's interesting now as I just think about it, right.  Those are two great names because the politics is implied in that very name of the paper: the Crusader and the Defender, right.  And so, he was, he was in demand.
Speaker 1: And you know, he heard about the Nation [Nation of Islam] in the black community.  You hear the message.  You know, he heard Malcolm--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I wondered if he was actually recruited by Malcolm X.
Speaker 1: Now I'll tell you what's interesting: he tells me this story of when Malcolm want to build the newspaper.  And Malcolm comes to him and says, "I want you to come edit, and illustrate, and design my paper in New York [New York]," because apparently Malcolm had launched a Muhammad Speaks [Muslim Journal], all right.  He had launched a Muhammad Speaks and brought it out to Chicago [Illinois].  Malcolm approaches my father about coming with him back to New York.  And my father understands that that decision would have, could have ominous political implications.  Consequently, he decided to, as he and I would jokingly say, to stay with the company, because already it was clear that Chicago was not thrilled with the notoriety, especially after the 1960 'The Hate That Produced Hate' [sic. 'The Hate That Hate Produced,' 1959] catapulted Malcolm into an international and national prominence in the media.  And he became essentially a political celebrity.  And my father understood that's a problem and avoided getting caught between the company and Malcolm.  So it was a survival decision for him.
Story_ID: 421757
Speaker 1: Now he was with the Nation [Nation of Islam] from how long?
Speaker 2: From '57 [1957], '58 [1958] until maybe '77 [1977].  He stayed with Warith Deen Mohammed when he took over after the death of the old man [Elijah Muhammad].  And then his father, my grandfather [Eugene Rivers, Sr.], got ill, and so he left Chicago [Illinois] to go home and take care of my grandfather, take (unclear) no, no, no, no, no, wrong--take care of my grandmother, paternal grandmother, because my paternal grandfather died in 1973.  And my paternal grandmother became ill, and my father went to take care of her back in Spartanburg [South Carolina], yeah.  And that's when he sort of actively left the struggle.
Speaker 1: Now did he have to--did he have a--was his name--what's his name in the Nation of Islam?
Speaker 2: Eugene Majied.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: M-A-J-I-E-D.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, I know it had to be different from Rivers, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Eugene Majied; that's right.
Speaker 1: And having an actual name, you know, speaks to status--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --'cause otherwise you'd have like a whole bunch of Xs, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 'cause he was initially Eugene 3X.  And then it went from Eugene 3X to Eugene Majied.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So anybody that wants to look back at the cartoons and stuff, they'd have to look for--
Speaker 2: Go right to Eugene Majied (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Eugene Majied.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you can get it under Eugene Rivers, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right, now.
Speaker 1: All right, so, so what did--now your, your parents, they, they both had to be in the Nation once your father joined, right?  So she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we now know that--
Speaker 1: --your, your mother [Mildred Bell Rivers] was a part--
Speaker 2: Well, see, my mother and father divorced in 1953 after coming to Chicago.  And--
Speaker 1: So he was actually in the Nation after he was divorced.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so, my mother was a devout Christian, and, and my father's behavior did nothing to motivate her to reconsider her theological and moral convictions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did she actually stayed in Chicago for a while--
Speaker 2: Yeah, left in 1959, after my father remarried, and then she left and came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Story_ID: 421758
Speaker 1: Can you describe her personality for us?  I think we, we described your father's [Eugene Rivers, Jr.] pretty well, but you know, what was your mother [Mildred Bell Rivers] like?
Speaker 2: My mother was a, a private person, into her family.  She was completely a family person, very disciplined, very focused, didn't understand laziness, didn't understand it, very hardworking, very devout, very devout woman, and very nationalistic, you know, black people in a Booker T. [Booker T. Washington], quiet Garvey [Marcus Garvey] way.  Black people should do what they're supposed to do, you know, just, you know, we don't want the man to bother us, but black people need to do what they need to do.  She was--I, I have images and recollections, 'cause I was four, of Emmett Till and the black newspapers' coverage of Emmett Till and his murder.  So the Emmett Till case was prominent I think in large part because of her interest in following the story.  And so she was very, a very serious person, and it was hard not to be serious because that was her, that was her way.
Speaker 1: When you look at your parents' personalities, what do you think that--what parts of their personalities do you take after?
Speaker 2: Someone said something interesting to me at my mother's funeral.  They said--this is my wife [Jacqueline Rivers]--said, "You're a Bell, not a Rivers," very interesting.  She said, "You're very focused, disciplined people.  There's an edge to you that has to do with the seriousness."  We're serious people, disciplined people, reserved, hardworking, tough.  Mildred Bell Rivers was tough.  In fact, between my mother and my father [Eugene Rivers, Jr.], she was the stronger one.  She had the, in a almost proverbial kind of black way, she was that old, that generation of southern black women that did what they had to do.  You know, I expect a man to do it, but if he doesn't, doesn't matter, you know.  If I gotta work twenty-one day cycles as a registered nurse to make provisions for the family, that's what I'm going to do.
Speaker 1: Now, now did she work at Provident, or did she--
Speaker 2: She worked at Provident; that's right.  And then there was Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].  There was a Walter Reed [Walter Reed Army Medical Center; Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Washington, D.C.], or is that Washington [D.C.]?
Speaker 1: Walter--I mean, talking about Michael Reese.
Speaker 2: Michael Reese.
Speaker 1: Michael Reese Hospital [Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in Chicago [Illinois], yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I get them mixed up sometimes myself (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right, right, that's right.
Speaker 1: --since I'm going back and forth to here and D.C.
Speaker 2: That's right; that's right.  So--
Speaker 1: Michael Reese.
Speaker 2: Right.  So it was Michael Reese, and I think she worked there too, and of--very devout.
Story_ID: 421759
Speaker 1: Do you know, and oftentimes offspring don't know, but do you have any idea why your parents split up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact, my father [Eugene Rivers, Jr.] told me the story.  He said, "Listen, I was a flake from the beginning.  Your mother [Mildred Bell Rivers] was serious.  She was a intense, care giving person," which is why she went into nursing.  "I had not been socialized to be serious like that."  So, my father comes up the Museum School of Fine Arts [School of the Museum of Fine Arts at Tufts, Boston, Massachusetts].  He rooms with a guy who was a music student at the New England Conservatory [New England Conservatory of Music, Boston, Massachusetts].  And he got involved with the wife of the music student.  My mother comes up.  The other woman reacts to my mother like she's the other woman.  My mother picks it up.  She forgives but does not forget.  They moved to Chicago [Illinois].  And one evening he comes home drunk and insults my mother's sister, and my mother tells him to get out.  He never comes back.  And my father said, "Your mother didn't play."  She was a serious person, morally, professionally, as a human being.  So, he--I mean it, it was an amazing story, because it's one of those stories which my father conducted himself in such a way that I said that the one thing in life I would never be would be like my father in this regard.  You know, so family has been at the center of my existence for all of my adult life.  I've been married twenty years and with my wife [Jacqueline Rivers] for twenty-five, and after, after God was the family, and that's what it's been, and kids.  And in an odd way my father performed a service, because his conduct in this area changed my life, because my commitment to kids and family and young people was, in part, intensified by my understanding of the damage, the absence of a father can do in the life of a child, you see.  So every day the, the significance and meaning of the absence of fathers in the lives of children and boys is, intrudes because of my understanding of what difference it's made in the development and evolution of the black community.
Story_ID: 421760
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: You know, it's interesting.  The earliest childhood memory, or one of the earliest childhood memories I have is of inadvertently starting a fire in the kitchen when I was three or four, and just playing around with matches, and having a campfire in the kitchen, and having this image of campfires and starting one, and playing this game where I was at camp taking a bunch of newspapers and starting a fire, and starting a whole big mess 'cause the thing got out of control, and getting tore up when I, when my parents [Mildred Bell Rivers and Eugene Rivers, Jr.] got home because I had been messing around.  So it was, it's, it's, that's--and then--
Speaker 1: So were you home--was, was somebody with you?
Speaker 2: Oh no, I think the parents, this, I think my mom was away.  She was at work, so I was at home with my two younger sisters, and we were playing.  And oh, I got tore up with they got--when she got home.  But the--so there are these early images of myself and my younger sisters, two younger sisters, and there's always the image of my mother working to make provision for us and making sure that we were okay.  That's only, that's, that's in, it's, it's a pervasive image, right, and it is in my mind from my earliest recollections of my childhood.
Story_ID: 421761
Speaker 1: You grew up in Chicago [Illinois].  You started off in Chicago--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois], I guess, right?  Is that, that where you were?
Speaker 2: You know, there's Woodlawn; there is--the images I have are South Park [South Parkway], lived at 63rd [Street] and what is now Martin Luther King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive].  It's, it's--what is it--6358 Parkway Gardens [Parkway Garden Homes, Chicago, Illinois].  It was a ten-story--it now looks like a project.  I mean it was a fairly decent housing development, Parkway Gardens, in 1957, '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: Okay, you like--
Speaker 2: Because prior to that I lived in Morgan Park [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: So that's way out in the hundred, hundreds I guess, out (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, I lived in Morgan Park.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then before that, I, I lived on University Place [sic. University Avenue].
Speaker 1: Oh, in, in--
Speaker 2: That ring a bell?
Speaker 1: --Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] or, or in Woodlawn?  I guess that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it probably be more Woodlawn.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think it was Hyde Park.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think you mentioned way back when you went to--
Speaker 2: James McCosh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, McCosh.
Speaker 2: Oh, and then there was James McCosh Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois] and then the Edmunds Elementary School [Edmund Burke Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  I went to Edmunds first.  I started elementary school at the Edmunds School and then went from the Edmunds School to James McCosh Elementary School before I left and moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now are they, are there--you, you moved back to Philadelphia when you were about, what, nine, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I moved to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nine years old?
Speaker 2: --to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] when I was nine, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 421762
Speaker 1: I guess in terms of the early years of growing up, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, it's, that's fascinating, because I took my family back to the Parkway Gardens [Parkway Garden Homes, Chicago, Illinois], showed them the little church I used to go to, as well as James McCosh Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois], and showed them where I went to school.  And I, and so when I moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], different sights and sounds, different kind of rhythm; Chicago [Illinois] has a southern drawl kind of a feel to it.
Speaker 1: Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Mississippi.  There's a Mississippi sound.  They, well, they say the -ississippi sound, right.  And Philadelphia had a different sound.  There was a kind of mid-Atlantic, more of a rhythm and blues kind of sound, because the, because the city was older.  The black community was older.  So you're dealing with a black population that has a regional accent that goes back to the 18th century, right, 'cause you got black communities that have been there for years.  So there's a different kind of a aesthetic.  The style was different.  It was more of an East Coast cool, which is different from your up south, Chicago style.  Chicago was more country sounding, whereas Philadelphia had a different feel.  Philadelphia was a boxing town; it was a fighting town.  Everybody put these up.  You know, when you were 10, 11, or 12, or 13, you pulled nickels and dimes, get a pair of boxing gloves so you could box.  So there was a, a, a cool boxing aesthetic.  You know, everybody's cool.  You put your hands up.  There was a whole cool boxing style.  There's a sort of a body language associated with the boxer, right, 'cause the whole way that he choreographs his use of the body, there's a certain kind of physical poetry associated, an aesthetic with that sensibility.  And that was more Philadelphia, right.  People thought about boxing.  Boxing was part of the style, right.  It was, you know, two guys are joking, talking trash, put your hands up, and so the ritual, right.  And the, the, the choreography of boxing was part of the adolescent sensibility.  It was very black; it was East Coast; it was smooth; it was, it was an old school--almost it's, it's, it's a mixture of East Coast cool.  It's, it's Ellingtonian [Duke Ellington] in a way, you know, but it's, it's this, right, so it's very manly.  So there's a different kind of--it's, it's a marshal sensibility; it's a marshal aesthetic; it's so man, you know; it's a man's man.  Men fight; men don't cry.  You hold your own, win, lose, or draw.  And that was part of the, this marshal, cool, aesthetic sensibility, and very different style.
Story_ID: 421763
Speaker 1: When you were living in Chicago [Illinois], did you, did you see very much of your father [Eugene Rivers, Jr.]?  Did he come around most of the, a lot--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --a lot?
Speaker 2: My father came around once in a while.  And I have these images, him coming by for visitation, but he's not the presence that my mother [Mildred Bell Rivers] was.  My mother is the presence.  My mother is the stability.  My mother is the consistency.  My mother's the strength.  My father was, as I would get older, for me, the moral equivalent of a bum.  He never, he was never there, there, because one of the striking features as a child is that you gotta fight the bullies, and you got to fight.  You're a little man, you're getting whipped on.  And so there's no father there to protect you when a bunch of boys want to beat you up and stomp you.  And as it--in fact, from the first week that I arrived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I'm dealing with the bullies; I'm dealing with the gangs; I'm dealing with the, the ritual, the, the, the, the male rituals of sort of dominance, style, tough guy, big man, little man.  I get to the Joseph Pennell Elementary School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and I accidentally step on the suede shoes of a young man by the name of James Wayne [ph.], a.k.a. Troubles, and he makes me shine his shoes, wipe his shoes off, 'cause he's tough man.  And I remember vividly the experience and not having recourse because there's no father.  And mom is not an option, because boys don't go home and cry to their mothers 'cause that's not what the male does.  So it's, it's a fascinating experience, just the nature of the youthful development, the socialization, the, the sexuality of young people who are improperly supervised, right, and the, the age at which promiscuity emerges as a consistent form of acceptable social behavior.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Amazing.
Story_ID: 421418
Speaker 1: What was your personality like--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --at age nine.
Speaker 2: Well, see, I'll tell you what's interesting is that at nine, I'm a solitary kid.  I liked to read.  I liked art, because my mother [Mildred Bell Rivers] had encouraged me to pursue artistic interests.  I like art.  I have these aesthetic interests, and in a funny way I just wanted to be left alone and be a nice guy, right.  But Chicago [Illinois] was tough.  You had to fight, and I'm not interested in fighting.  And I'm shy at the time.  I'm very shy.  I was sort of scared of girls because I was struck how fast girls were.
Speaker 1: In Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] as opposed to--
Speaker 2: Well, in, in, well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 2: --and, and, and in fact, to a lesser extent in Chicago.  I remember the first day of class being introduced to my fifth grade class [at Joseph Pennell Elementary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And some girls from the back of the room hollered come back and sit on my lap, and it completely blew my mind.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's, that's fast.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, part of the difficulty was that I was introduced as Eugene Franklin Rivers, III [HistoryMaker Reverend Eugene Rivers], and that tickled those girls to no end.  And I came in with a very proper coat and hat, dressed properly like a child of a middle-class college-educated woman, and so that was striking.  And I remember getting into fights with kids whose class and status background was visibly different from mine.  But I didn't understand exactly the nature of the difference, but I knew that it fostered certain kinds of responses.  And perhaps the clothes as a class statement provoked a negative reaction because throughout my childhood there was always this, just beneath the surface, recognition of a substantial difference between myself and the working class, lower middle class, and poor kids in the neighborhood.  And that was always interesting to me because they detected it in my speech patterns.  I didn't have the kind of rhythm and blues drawl.  And the use of profanity as an all-purpose, you know, all-explaining patois suggested that I came from a different reality.
Story_ID: 421419
Speaker 1: So, that was always interesting to me because throughout my youth my personality was shaped by, obviously, my socialization.  My mother [Mildred Bell Rivers] was a reader, so basic things, Life magazine, Jet, Ebony, a 33 inch and 78 inch Blue Note [Blue Note Records], albums of Charlie Parker, you know, and Dizzy Gillespie.  And I remember vividly a collection of 78 inch jazz records.  And in my mother's library there were first editions of Chester Himes, 'If He Hollers Let Him Go,' right, and other black novelists.  So it was a different world.  There were the college textbooks for American government that my mother used at State [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina].  I remember editions of Harry Barnes [Harry Elmer Barnes] histories, who was a big, essentially, revisionist historian of World War I [WWI].  They were all in my mother's library.  So, my personality was shaped by a environment that had a certain amount of intellectual and cultural capital, which was class-based.
Speaker 2: Now did you have anybody to talk to about these, these things?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No.  That was the, that was the big challenge, that I led a solitary life because I led a double life because I adapted to the street.  I learned how to fight.  I started boxing at the Police Athletic League [Police Athletic League of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And I got--I developed an interest in gymnastics, in tumbling.  And that was a significant development because that gave me a cultural outlet, especially the gymnastics, 'cause that was not a working-class sport.  My working-class sport was box, because that gave me a--boxing was a common ground with the working class, right, and gave you a, a--it was a form itself--discipline, character development, status.  If you were a good boxer, you could hold your own.  If you were a good boxer, you can fight.  If you can fight, you're respected, all right.  So, although I may have had peculiar artistic interests that didn't make a lot of sense to people, it assisted me in negotiating the tensions between these conflicting class realities and the conflicting demands of these very different realities, very interesting, you know--
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Story_ID: 421420
Speaker 1: Now there was a gang element in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], right, that wasn't present in Chicago [Illinois] when you left it, right?  Is that true (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Nods head) Yeah, no, the gangs were not as pervasive in Chicago for a nine-year-old living at 63rd [Street] and Martin--63rd and South Parkway [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive].  I learned about gangs in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] because of their existence among working-class white boys, because the neighborhood into which I moved was in transition.  The whites, Jews, and Irish were leaving, and the blacks were coming.  And there was a gang in Philadelphia called the Summersville gang [ph.], and many of the kids that would become involved in the Summersville gang were associated with the elementary and junior high school that I attended.  And in fact, in eighth grade I was drafted into the Summersville gang, and it was an amazing experience.
Speaker 1: Now what was, what were the consequences if you, you know, didn't want to be, if you, if you didn't want to be in there.  If you, could you say I, I don't want to be a part of this organization at this time or--
Speaker 2: Well, well--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the, the, the circumstances under which I'd become a member of the gang are relevant autobiographical details because I, I meet James "Troubles" Waynes [ph.] when I accidentally step on his shoes leaving an assembly in my elementary school [Joseph Pennell Elementary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  He graduates, goes on to Wagner Junior High School [General Louis Wagner Junior High School; General Louis Wagner Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  We're renting, and we buy a home and get a mortgage.  We move to another part of the neighborhood.  I encounter Mr. Waynes again when I go to Wagner Junior High.  At that point he's a significant leader in the gang called Summersville.  And I see him after school in an altercation with a little black dude from another part of the city, who came to Wagner Junior High School from North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], walked up to Troubles and a group of young men, grabbed him by the collar, threw him on the fence, and said, "My name is Little Oscar [ph.] from 9th [Street] and Diamond [Street]. If I ever see you give my mouth--my man a hard time, it's gonna be me and you," then threw him on the fence, and walked away.  I had never, ever seen such a bodacious display of bravado, and then the guy just strode off--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) There was no argument.
Speaker 2: --in a leather jacket, his gangster brim.  It was astounding.
Story_ID: 421421
Speaker 1: And all the guys stood around and watched this little dude named Little, Little Black Oscar [ph.] from 9th [Street] and Diamond [Street].  It was unreal, couldn't believe it.  I went back the next day and I tell my classmates, "Man, I saw Jimmy Waynes [ph.], man, get jacked up."  'Cause he was a big bully; he was a heavyweight in the junior high school [General Louis Wagner Junior High School; General Louis Wagner Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And the dude tells me, "Man, you need to shut up, man; don't need to say that; that's not cool," right.  And once I put the story out, I had marked myself.  Troubles [Jimmy Waynes (ph.)] catches me in the junior high school and makes me box a dude, who then jumped me in the boys room, trying to drown me in a boys room toilet.  And, and subsequently he's given me an ultimatum: I either join the gang [Summersville gang (ph.)] or just get beat.  I subsequently joined the gang because I was given an offer I could not refuse.  And that was my baptism by fire.  It was an amazing, absolutely amazing experience, absolutely amazing.
Story_ID: 421422
Speaker 1: I vaguely remember an initiation you were talking about, the--some sort of initiation where they wanted you to do something that you had to try to convince them that you would do it or--
Speaker 2: Oh, there was, there was an experience where we have to go out, and we were going out to fight.  And one of the members of the gang is Buddy Brown [ph.].  And it's a, it's a warm, balmy evening in late September, it feels like, or October.  It's after eight, getting dark.  And Buddy Brown's got a .38 revolver wrapped in a rag.  And we go out on a mission, and the point of the mission is to go shoot someone.
Speaker 1: Any particular one, or--
Speaker 2: No, just shoot somebody.  And Buddy Brown gives me the gun, and I remember he tells me to shoot a guy named Chucky Davis [ph.], who was walking up the street with his sister.  And I had gone to church with them.  They attended the same church I did.  And I remember getting into a fight with Buddy Brown about not shoot the kid.  It was amazing.  And there were about maybe ten of us, and we were cruising like a, a marauding pack of hyenas.  And Chucky ran 'cause they were gonna shoot him, just to make a statement.  And I remember getting into a fight with Buddy because I wouldn't shoot to kill, Chucky, Chucky Thomas [ph.], right, Chucky Thomas, that's right, and Inez Thomas [ph.].  Oh, I remember it vividly.  It was an amazing, amazing experience.  And it, it was--so my personality was being reshaped, and I learned the rules of engagement.  I remember one other instance of a sexual nature.  I'm with the brothers from the Ville [Summersville gang (ph.)], and they are pulling a sexual train on a girl.  And we couldn't have been any more than thirteen or fourteen.  I remember getting into a fight--I might have been fifteen--with them because I didn't want to pull the train, and they were all having sex with her.  And it was amazing because I, I just found it repugnant.  And I ended up in not quite a fight with dudes, because the joke was, Rivers [HistoryMaker Reverend Eugene Rivers] didn't get the pussy because he's cock strong, because I was boxing and doing gymnastics.  So I'm probably one of the most physically fit of everybody, and that was, that was a big deal; that was a big deal.  It was amazing.  An these--so, during this entire period, you know, I'm undergoing this transformation simply as a function of a, the need to adapt for survival.  And it's a complicated reality in life.
Story_ID: 421423
Speaker 1: How were you doing in school, I mean, you know, with all this going on?
Speaker 2: Passing, passing.  I was optionally intelligent, but I'm simply passing, 'cause I'm negotiating two worlds.  And, and, and that's a sense, in some sense, doing better than the rest of my classmates.  It was fascinating.
Speaker 1: Now did, did your activities cause your mother [Mildred Bell Rivers] any trepidation, I mean, at--I know there's a certain age where, where males get where their mothers can't really--you know, they don't have as much influence.  They really can't monitor them.  They don't know what they're doing, and they, they have fears about what they're doing.
Speaker 2: Right.  My mother was concerned, but she was working to put food on the table.  She, she was doing the best a single mom could do who was raising three children and taking care of her mother [Bertha Bell], so she was doing the best she could.  It was an unbelievable period, 'cause she's trying to negotiate that.  And my personality is changing, and I'm maturing and developing more self-confidence, as a function of my artistic ability and my athletic ability with the gymnastics and the boxing.  Made a world of difference.
Story_ID: 421424
Speaker 1: Now did you have any favorite coursework in school or a favorite teacher (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The art.
Speaker 1: --or anything?
Speaker 2: The art.
Speaker 1: Art? Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I, I was admitted to what we call an exam school.  I went to the Murrell Dobbins Vocational High School [Murrell Dobbins Career and Technical Education High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which had a commercial art curriculum.  And so I went to Dobbins to major in commercial art, and I loved it because I could spend time drawing, and developing a craft and becoming a serious artist, and very early on thinking about myself professionally.  So my self-definition as early as eighth grade, ninth grade was as, was as a professional.
Speaker 1: And you, were you aware of your father's [Eugene Rivers, Jr.] ability to--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --to earn money as an artist?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, I knew.  I knew that I came from a family where there was an artist in the family, and he was very good.  And he mailed us Muhammad Speaks [Muslim Journal], so I was--saw the artwork, oh yeah, yeah, very interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Dobbins High School, that was out of the neighborhood I suppose, I suppose, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, in fact, it was in a very tough part of town, and so I would drive almost halfway across the city--no, I would ride almost halfway across the city to get to school every day.  Get up early; had to be out of the house at seven to be to school at eight o'clock.  And yeah, it was, it was intellectually and artistically a great experience because it wasn't your typical neighborhood high school.  It wasn't your best exam school, but it was, it creamed off the top the guys who were really very good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 421425
Speaker 1: Did you have any, any mentors in any--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, eventually (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) area?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a mentor in my junior high school [General Louis Wagner Junior High School; General Louis Wagner Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], a guy named Lefty Johnson, John Johnson, John "Lefty" Johnson [ph.].
Speaker 1: And he was--
Speaker 2: He was our shop teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A very sharp guy, and we had enormous respect for him.  He intellectually was a mentor, Lefty Johnson.  And then there was an--one of his friends was a guy named Reginald Bryant, a, an art teacher, a graduate of Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], very sharp, a real intellectual, real nationalist intellectual.  And so they were real mentors as black men.  The, the, the, the, the dominant figure, however, in my life is a pastor, a working class black pastor by the name of Benjamin Smith [Benjamin Smith, Sr.].  And he pulled me off the street and got me into the church, the black church.  And that was, that was a very transformative, in fact, the most transformative experience of my life, because that pulled me gravitationally into another world.
Speaker 1: Now how old were you then?
Speaker 2: Sixteen.
Speaker 1: Sixteen, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what was the name of this church?
Speaker 2: The, the Deliverance Evangelistic Church [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Deliverance Evangelistic Church?
Speaker 1: Was this a large church?
Speaker 2: It was a thousand-member church by the time, and this is 1966.
Speaker 1: That's a pretty big church for those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right: that was a big church, thousand-member church, 1966; grew to about a ten thousand-member church--very good; he was a very solid individual, remarkably serious, and he provided additional structure and discipline.
Story_ID: 421426
Speaker 1: Now how did he [Benjamin Smith, Sr.]--was it hard for him to, I mean how did you encounter him?  Was it hard for him to pull you into the church?
Speaker 2: Well, what's interesting is that he was a working class black Pentecostal preacher, very patriarchal, and spent his time evangelizing young black men.  In fact, he was more successful with lots--he was more successful than the Muslims in evangelizing black men in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's something, that's--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now a part of that was that in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] the Nation of Islam was organized crime.  In fact, the most corrupt mosque in the U.S. was Number 12 [Muhammad's Mosque No. 12, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], under the leadership of a career criminal, Jeremiah Shabazz, absolutely amazing figure.
Speaker 1: Now what did they do?  What, what did they do?
Speaker 2: Drugs; extortion; they controlled the heroin traffic in Philadelphia, and is one of the most notoriously corrupt chapters in black political history.  There's a book that's just been written called, 'Black Brothers, Inc.' ['Black Brothers, Inc.: The Violent Rise and Fall of Philadelphia's Black Mafia'] by Sean Griffin [Sean Patrick Griffin].  And it's a history of the Nation of Islam's organized crime in Philadelphia.  And it is one of the most unbelievable stories, one of the almost unbelievable stories in black nationalist politics in four--in the last forty years.
Speaker 1: Is it, is it any way related to the Hanafi (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) These are the guys who did it.  These are the guys who did it.  And see, part of my transformation, Hana- what's my man's name?  [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti wrote about me in one of his books because living in Philadelphia I cut my organ- my chief organizing against the Muslims who control the heroin traffic.  And all of this come to a head when they commit the Hanafi massacre in January of 1973.
Story_ID: 420927
Speaker 1: So, we were talking about the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, Philadelphia (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Nation of Islam.
Speaker 2: --had a different kind of sensibility.  There is a uniform gang culture.  There is a, a stylistic and aesthetic sensibility.  There is a hoodlum, gangster, tough guy persona.  And the, the black church, in this case, helped pull me out of that reality.  It was amazing.  It was absolutely amazing.  And so--
Speaker 1: Well, had you been used to attending church in, in Chicago [Illinois] before you moved to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.  No, no, my folk were church-attending people.  My, my mother [Mildred Bell Rivers] was a Christian, and my father [Eugene Rivers, Jr.] messing up made her more of a Christian.  And my aunt and my mother were good church people, so I understood that reality.  And I understood negotiating the reality of the street, because as the oldest brother with two younger sisters, I was morally obligated to protect my two younger sisters.  So you were gonna step up and step out, and that reality shaped my understanding.  And when Benjamin Smith [Benjamin Smith, Sr.] pulled me off the street, that made the world of difference.
Speaker 1: How did that happen?  How did you encounter him?
Speaker 2: Well, I visited the church [Deliverance Evangelistic Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and what was significant, unlike the previous church I'd attended, is that it was a working class black church.  And you go into one of these Pentecostal churches and there are hundreds of young people and lots of young men, all of whom look like regular brothers, but they were Christians.  That made a world of difference because it gave me a, a sense of fraternity and a fraternity, because their value system was one that I could identify with.  And that made all the difference in the world.  That was very important, you see.  And this is a reality that was very significant but was beneath the radar skean- screens of the intelligentsia.  In other words, these black churches were functionally black nationalist institutions.  They were run by black people.  They were supported by black people.  They were owned by black people, and they were for black people.
Story_ID: 420928
Speaker 1: Now you know what the critique is of those black churches.
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: They say when you go into one--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You have a white Jesus on the wall.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you don't really, you know.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  That was--fifty years ago you go in the black church and see a white Jesus, not a problem.
Speaker 1: And the discussions about where your soul is gonna go, rather than what to do with--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, all of, all of the afterlife versus this life, white Jesus versus the truth, see, that's a argument that was more likely to be had in a city like Chicago [Illinois] where the bulk of the black church community were rural, southern people with no college education.  If you go to the East Coast, you've got an Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York] with a black middle class that's been educated for generations for sensibility, because this is the same city that gives you Marcus Garvey.  So you've got a pro-black ideology which has a certain level of refinement because Harlem [New York, New York] is the center of the black world.  So Chicago, with your rural, up south, Ma- Mahalia Jackson, Church of God in Christ, -ississippi, C.L. Franklin, Aretha Franklin kind of orientation was different than a East Coast, mid-Atlantic, Garvey-ish sensibility.  And so for me, I was always related to institutions controlled by black people, where black money financed what needed to get done.
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned Garvey [Marcus Garvey] a couple of times in relationship to this Mid-Atlanic region.  I know in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] there were still remnants of UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association] when you were coming up.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Did you encounter any of them?  I know Mr. Harvey I think was--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --a leader in Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: Well, see, you picked up--
Speaker 1: Thomas Hartigan [sic. Thomas W. Harvey].
Speaker 2: Right.  You picked up the sensibility among your working class black intellectuals, where the presumption of the self-sufficiency of black people was a foregone conclusion, right.  You just understood that that's how things are supposed to go.  And that was--so you see the Garvey.  You see it in the intellectual life and the cultural life of the community.  And, and then it's operationalized, so it's taken for granted.  We will control our institutions.  We always have.  And so there was that understanding that we control this.  This is ours.
Story_ID: 420929
Speaker 1: What difference did this church involvement make in, in school?  Did it, did it--
Speaker 2: The difference it made is that it accentuated the importance of literacy because this was a very Bible-centered church [Deliverance Evangelistic Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  So that meant that I'm supposed to read all sixty-six books, beginning with Genesis and ending with Revelations.  So it was a literacy-enhancing reality.  See, most folk have not sociologically understood the functional features of the organized life of the black church, for promoting literacy, instilling discipline, gratification deferral, thrift, savings, investing.  All of those are parts of the black church experience.
Speaker 1: Collective activity and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Collective activity is a kujichagulia.  Cooperative economics, is that the one?
Speaker 1: Oh, that's uji- ujima, yeah.  Cooperative--
Speaker 2: Ujima, ujima, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: So we were doing ujima before my man [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga].  You know, we're doing the, we're, we're doing imani; we're doing ujima.  What was nia?
Speaker 1: Purpose.
Speaker 2: The purpose, right.  We got, we got nia.  We got all of that.  In fact, we didn't have to make up the new stuff 'cause we had these, every one of them.  Now, there was never a proper nationalist understanding of the functional realities of the black church as an institution, but it was a black nationalist institution.  Now I needed to get some things cleared up, but it was clearly: it's a slave institution, and, and as such is a nationalist institution.  No black preacher ever wanted to integrate the black church, didn't need to, and never sought to.  All it would do is diminish the quality of the music, oh yeah. So, those are ideas that were percolating and all part of the understanding.
Story_ID: 420930
Speaker 1: When you were a senior in high school, say now what, what were your aspirations, and was it, were, were you, did you aspire to become an artist and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I initially wanted to be a commercial artist in some sense like my father [Eugene Rivers, Jr.].  And then I went to the museum--the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and then sought to be a painter.
Speaker 1: Now this is while you're in high school or afterwards, at while--
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because my senior--the Dobbins Technical High School [Murrell Dobbins Career and Technical Education High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], was an excellent high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so, so you were going to the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts while in high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of the Fine Arts, yeah.
Speaker 1: --studying painting?
Speaker 2: Yeah, after I graduated from high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, that's after--
Speaker 2: And working two--
Speaker 1: --okay.
Speaker 2: --part-time jobs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is after graduation you say?
Speaker 2: It's after graduation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my senior year, see, Dobbins prepared me and introduced me to a whole other artistic world, because I've run with the gangs; I've been in that.  I'm in the black church, and I'm also going to galleries, and museums, and openings, and meeting artists, whole, other kind of world intellectually.
Speaker 1: Now you, you graduated in '68 [1968], right?
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 420931
Speaker 1: Did you know John Biggers [John T. Biggers]?  Was, was he part, part of that art scene in, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Biggers might have been in Boston [Massachusetts] by then.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: It was Clifford Eubanks, Barkley Hendricks [Barkley L. Hendricks], James Branton [sic. James Brantley], Clayton--was it Clayton Walker [sic. Cranston Oliver Walker]?  Clayton Walker, I think, Ralph Downs [ph.], Pedro Hines [ph.], yeah.  These were, these were the, these were the important people.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there, there like a market in those days for black art--I mean black fine art?
Speaker 2: Well, what you had was just an enormously talented collection of young black artists.
Speaker 1: I know in '68 [1968], what they call was, I guess, the beginning of the Black Arts Movement or the, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a real flowering.  It was a real flowering of the Black Arts Movement.  I mean you--'cause you, you know, in the visual arts you've got Baraka [Amiri Baraka].  You know, he's doing stuff in Newark [New Jersey].  So there's a, there's lot of, there's enormous creativity.  And Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], with its music, its jazz, rhythm and blues, Philadelphia was just a--with the, well, you know, with the Philly sound versus the Motown thing, right, the McFadden and Whitehead [Gene McFadden and John Whitehead], and Gamble and Huff [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble and HistoryMaker Leon Huff], whole another kind of sensibility.  So, intellectually, artistically, politically, different kind of ball game.
Speaker 1: Even comedically Bill Cosby had emerged--
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: --had just begun to emergence of major star--
Speaker 2: In fact, Bill Cosby, Bill Cosby was from my neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm from Bill Cosby's neighborhood, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, Philadelphia that also I think in his--he produced a piece called 'Black History: Lost, Stolen or Strayed' that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --featured John Churchville's school [Freedom Library Day School] here in Philadelphia (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: That's right; that's right.  No, so it was
Speaker 1: --the black awareness of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, there was, there was an interesting discussion.  And there, there was all kinds of artistic, intellectual, musical, I mean all kinds of just incredibly creative stuff going on.  It was just remarkable, all kinds of--I mean it was, you know it was, it was, it was, I won't say a renaissance.  It was a, it was a flowering, you know, message music; Dean and--Jean and Doug Carn--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --right, one of the--I think they're out of Philly; Coltrane [John Coltrane], Dean [sic.] and--Jean [HistoryMaker Jean Carne] and Doug Carne, all of that from--
Speaker 1: I think Sun Ra was in Philadelphia then (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's right.  Ra--
Speaker 1: And then they moved to Philadelphia in '66 [1966], I think it was.
Speaker 2: That's right; that's right.  So no, you've got a whole another aesthetic sensibility.
Story_ID: 420932
Speaker 1: Well, how did you do at the Philadelphia--did you finish the course at the Philadelphia academy [Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I went and then got in- involved in doing activist organizing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was at the academy, had my own studio, and was trying to figure out what my, what my politics would be, what would my, what would my black church politics be, trying to figure that out.  That was a big deal, trying to sort that out, 'cause that was very important.
Speaker 1: I mean were, were people talking about what the, the, the, what--how the black church needed to change or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --adapt to--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh yeah, oh yeah, there was enormous conversation.  That was the question.  You see, now, part of the diff- this is very interesting.  Part of the difficulty is that the black nationalists had been so disconnected from the black church, they didn't understand what the theological debates were that were going on among the intelligentsia within the black church, because they had been influenced for better or for worse by the Nation's [Nation of Islam] rap on the black church.  Now part of what complicated that reality is that the black church to say, "Wait a minute.  These Muslims are all hoodlums.  They ain't gonna tell us nothing."  I said in a worst case scenario the black preacher is gonna chase a woman and steal a little bit of money.  He's not killing people.  We're just that, we don't get down like that.  We don't kill people, right.  We don't commit murder.  We don't engage in organized crime as a rule.  So, all things being equal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That, that, that is an important distinction.
Speaker 2: Right.  No, so, so, so the nationalists got bamboozled by their own rhetoric and got disconnected, which is why they got destroyed.  You see, and see, part of the difficulty--and Harold Cruse goes at this another way, 'cause he says the same thing.  Harold Cruse says the black nationalist community, the younger generation, are too ahistorical.  They don't understand what they're doing because they don't know that all of the new language that they're talking about Garvey [Marcus Garvey] did it.  They have been all kinds of iterations of this: the buy black; the black god, I mean all of that.  We've done it before.  We, it, the black community just wasn't as noisy as this younger generation.  That goes to another level when the Panthers [Black Panther Party] take on the cops.
Story_ID: 420933
Speaker 1: Now when you mention, when you call, when you say black nationalists, like who--are there specific groups you're talking about or, or individuals in--
Speaker 2: Well, the bulk (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Well, Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Chicago [Illinois], IPE [Institute of Positive Education, Chicago, Illinois], Haki [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti], The Black Scholar crowd, the Black World, Negro Digest crowd--
Speaker 1: Now, now Black World and probably Black Books Bulletin were probably nationalists--you know, would be considered.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Black Scholar, you got some of that, and you got some socialist rhetoric in there too and stuff (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right, right, right--
Speaker 1: You got--
Speaker 2: --right, right, right.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: But, I (unclear)--
Speaker 1: --I don't know.
Speaker 2: --I, I call it generally the black left--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Nathan Hare, Robert Allen [Robert L. Allen], Robert Chrisman, right, who are all now elderly men, right.  Then you had Haki, Black Books Bulletin, Black World, and then those little smaller operations, all of which were very interesting, but they didn't have an institutional base.
Speaker 1: Well, schools in those days.  A lot of them schools.  And--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in those days schools, right.
Speaker 1: --at one time they were, there were forty of these.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And they're still maybe twenty-five--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --independent black schools (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.  But they never had the power of a black church, which is wealthier now--
Speaker 1: This is true.
Speaker 2: --right, just politically.  And they never began the conversation with the black church, you see, intellectual and politically.  How do we engage?  All right, how do we engage?  We're not gonna come in talking stuff when we ain't got no money; we ain't got no numbers.  So we're not gonna be lecturing anybody, right.  How do we engage the most powerful institution in the black community in moving in a more nationalist direction?  And so that was, that was the question.  There's now a thing called the Pan-African Children's Fund that is working in at least twenty countries on the continent, right, Pan-African Children's Fund.  That would have been inconceivable thirty years ago, to have a black church talking that, and then raising money.  Denzel [Denzel Washington] gave them a million dollars, right.  So, yeah, I know it's, it's, it's an interesting reality--
Story_ID: 420934
Speaker 1: How did you get involved in organizing, activist organizing, through what vehicle (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it initially starts in the black church, because in the black they're evangelistic, and evangelizing is organizing, right, getting people to come to church (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Evangelists would get out in the street?
Speaker 2: Oh, do, boom.  I was doing that from the week I walked in the church [Deliverance Evangelistic Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  So you're evangelizing; you're doing outreach; your--oh, absolutely, and it makes a world of difference.  And so I got engaged in doing anti-violence, gang organizing out of the black church in 1970.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was, was there, what was the organizing traditions of that effort?  I mean, around the country today, a lot of people are organizing.  And there's a lot of people who are Alinsky, Saul Alinsky, actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right, I, I got you.
Speaker 1: --have the--they're, and then they're the grandchildren of Saul Alinsky and you know, on, on down.  But there is a--I know I used to argue with the trainer in Alinsky-style, that there was a black tradition in organizing that preceded--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, even Alinsky--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --though it's not codified and not taught like that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wait, well, well, see, see, there's, there's a black organizing tradition that has existed that didn't need Alinsky to lecture black people about organizing themselves since they have, in this country, they have sixty-five thousand black churches that say black people don't need other people to lecture them about organizing, or raising money, or building institutions, or organizing when they want to organize.  Now the, the timing has to be right.  The conditions, the leader, the issue, the time, the opportunity, all those things had to be in play.  And there were black church organizers that were northern versions of what was happening in the South, 'cause it was organizing going all over the country.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, just, just listening to you here.  And I'm probably talking too much about myself after this.
Speaker 2: No, take your time.
Speaker 1: But Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] is the home of black church organizing with, you know, with Mother Bethel [Mother Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], the--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --the home, the, the home of the black church (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: And then Mother Bethel, the first act was to organize a Negro convention--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --well, the first act (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that was a nationalist convention.
Speaker 1: --act, act of Richard Allen.  That's what it, that's what it was.
Speaker 2: Right, it's a nationalist convention.  So you get the National Negro Convention, so, so we don't need other people to lecture us on the business is my point. Don't need the lectures.
Story_ID: 420935
Speaker 1: What tradition did that first effort that you--what, what do they claim?  Did they--
Speaker 2: Well, there was a thing founded by a brother named Muhammad Kenyatta called the Black Economic Development Conference, BEDC.  And he began to organize around the issue of organized crime in the Nation of Islam in 1970, Muhammad Kenyatta.
Speaker 1: Now what was his background?  He had a Muslim first name, and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Kenyatta seems obviously an attempt to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was originally Donald Jackson [Donald Brooks Jackson] and going to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], left Tuskegee, became an ordained Baptist minister--and I think it might have been at Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi]--began to organize.  COINTELPRO [Counterintelligence Program] came after him.  He left school, was born in Chester, Pennsylvania, and began organizing in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And I met him in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Had he been a part of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] or anything like that--
Speaker 2: Oh, he'd been involved in all of it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --SNCC, Panther [Black Panther Party]; he'd been in all of that.
Speaker 1: And I, I guess somebody could argue that the most intense organizing going on in the U.S. was what SNCC was doing in I guess '64 [1964] in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And that's where all the national attention was, and that's where bodies were dropping.  And they were shrewd enough to draw national attention to the issue by bringing white kids down.  And tactically, that forced the issue and got Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] and Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965].
Speaker 1: Okay, so this effort, the eff- the effort of Muhammad Kenyatta was to do ant--the Black Economic Development--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Confer- was, was Conf--
Speaker 2: It was called Black Economic Development Conference.
Speaker 1: Okay, conference.
Speaker 2: Conference, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, and he was organizing--
Speaker 2: Around issues of economic development (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --within the black community and then took on this initiative around the gang stuff and the violence.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he, he organized out of the church that you were attending at the time, or--
Speaker 2: Well, no, he had set up his own shop in West Philly [West Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and began to focus on that stuff.
Story_ID: 420936
Speaker 1: So how did you get involved with, with him [Muhammad Kenyatta]?
Speaker 2: I met him in the process of doing outreach and organizing.  And I related to the issue of the organized crime and the corruption stuff, and that was important.  And he was a serious activist, and so I related to that.  And so he got me, he introduced me to a whole broader organizing world, Lucius Walker, who had been working with [HistoryMaker] James Forman on the, the whole initiative around reparations from the white churches, you know, in '68 [1968] and '67 [1967] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, yeah, that's an important movement.  I know it's, that is--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --right.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, then there was the Committee of Negro Churchmen [National Committee of Negro Churchmen], and that became the Council of Black Churchmen [sic. National Conference of Black Churchmen].
Speaker 1: Now that, that's the group that actually would go into these white churches and demand--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --reparations (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Reparations, right, yep.  And so there was all of that activity, and I got exposed to all of that.  There was a, there was a project called the Black Theology Project that was founded by Muhammad [Muhammad Kenyatta].  And they were doing very progressive stuff, the Black Theology Project.
Speaker 1: Now what was the goal of the Black Theology Project?
Speaker 2: To figure out a way to develop a theology of liberation that would focus on how to more effectively organize the black community.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so this is a local effort in that regard in, in, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Black Theology Project was a national initiative.
Speaker 1: National, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, so it--would [HistoryMaker] Vincent Harding might be a part of this and--
Speaker 2: Well, Vincent was part of it.  During its heyday Vincent was part of it, James Cone [HistoryMaker James H. Cone], and most of those guys.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were all part of it.
Speaker 1: When we say most of those guys, but people watching this later on won't know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --who these guys are.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, no.
Speaker 1: That's why I--
Speaker 2: Right, right. No, I got you, no--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Vincent Harding, James Cone, Lucius Walker, Cain Felder [Cain Hope Felder], then Albert Cleage [Albert B. Cleage, Jr.].  The folk that might revolve around the Shrine of a Black Madonna [Shrine of the Black Madonna].  You know, Cleage was then talking about black Christian nationalism.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Say would Bishop Ford [Louis Henry Ford] in Chicago [Illinois] be a part of something like that, or would he be--
Speaker 2: Bishop Ford.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He, probably not--Church of God in Christ, the presiding bishop of the church.  He would have been sympathetic to it, but that wouldn't have been his style because that was more intellectual and political.  And it would take a generation or two before you got black folk really doing that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: That's my sense of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, see, his rep. was being really black-minded but--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --not necessarily intellectual.  I mean not, not--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He was black.  He was old school black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's just pro-black, didn't like white people kind of black, but never intellectual, political, or philosophic.  So that was a different kind of game, different kind of game.  And so, you know, these were some of the ingredients and influences that shaped my thinking around the issue of public safety and crime.
Story_ID: 420937
Speaker 1: We're continuing an interview that we started last night.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But we were talking about the Black Economic Development Conference and the importance of Muhammad Kenyatta.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I think we were, got to the point where we were talking about Lucius Walker and [HistoryMaker] James Forman's reparations movement.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And it was a National Congress of Black Churchmen [sic. National Committee of Negro Churchmen; National Conference of Black Churchmen], which spawned the Black Theology Project.  And these initiatives were essentially an attempt by the academic division of the black church, the seminarians, and certainly activist black clergy, to catch up with the Black Power movement, variations of the Black Power movement.  There wasn't necessarily a theoretically, or for that matter really, theologically rigorous orientation.  They were trying to keep up with a black movement, which was now spiraling out on the force of its own axis as developments unfolded from 1965, with the death of Malcolm [Malcolm X], to the rebellions in the cities, which actually began in '64 [1964] and '65 [1965], but then begin to crescendo.  And so, there wasn't an intellectual structure to speak of, because people were being overtaken by political developments and events as the war in Southeast Asia escalated and the cities exploded.  And so when Harold Cruse writes 'The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual' and 'Rebellion or Revolution?' in '68 [1968], there were a whole series of developments which all of the activists that I can think of in retrospect really didn't have a big picture view of.  People were living in the moment, overwhelmed by events.  The rhetoric was of revolution, and no one understood what would be required, why that would necessarily even be a good thing, what the real policy and political benefits would be, and how the United States really would respond.
Story_ID: 420938
Speaker 1: What were you thinking at that time?  I know you're reflecting on it now.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But what were you thinking then?  What was your, your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, some of my thoughts were the following: number one, the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] were picking a fight with people that were gonna kill them, and that my, you know, grits, and cheese eggs, and sausage, Negro consciousness from South Carolina based in the black church said these dudes are selling some pretty tough wolf tickets, and I'm not really sure these cats are really equipped.  And the thing that occurred to me then, these dude aren't, these dudes are Vietnamese.  The Vietnamese had been fighting for one thousand years.  They know how to fight.  They will sustain casualties.  They're willing to lose a thousand people and keep it moving.  And we're dealing with young black people who don't have any historical understanding.  They don't know the last fifty years, really.  They just thought black is new or didn't have any sense of Garvey [Marcus Garvey]; didn't have any sense of Hen--Henry Turner [Henry McNeal Turner], or Daniel Payne, or--what were some of the other guys--William, or Henry Highland Garnet.  They had no sense of the history.
Speaker 1: Martin Delany.  I just had to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Delany, yeah, right, right, right, yeah.  So, so it was--so there were a bunch of young people.  Then I remember when Fred Hampton and Mark Clark were murdered in December of '69 [1969], and I remember how devastating that was to me.  But it only reinforced that my sense that there was a generation of young black people who really did not know what they were dealing with, they really, really didn't.  And so, while I was sympathetic to the broad outlines and the objectives, it was my view then that there was an intellectual crisis.  Cruse [Harold Cruse] had it right.  These folk really hadn't thought this thing through, primarily because they were all kids.  These were all kids.  They didn't know what they were doing.  There weren't seasoned intellectuals with a detailed command of the history of the United States, the history of cities, the, the balance of forces between the national security state, COINTELPRO [Counterintelligence Program], the militarization of the police, law enforcement.  There, there was no understanding of that.
Speaker 1: The, you just put that in perspective, I guess the oldest in this group was in their late twenties, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, no, so--
Speaker 1: And the, and Fred Hampton himself, when he was killed, was twenty-one I think--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, you know--
Speaker 1: --twenty or twenty-one.
Speaker 2: --you know what, I, I, I, I think it was--actually, I'll tell you what's amazing, I think: I think Hampton was nineteen [sic. twenty-one], and Mark Clark was twenty-two; I think it was something like that.  I could be wrong.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But they were between nineteen and twenty-two.  And he was a kid, and he didn't know what he was dealing with.  They were courageous, sincere in many cases, and naive.  They, they didn't know they didn't know.  In some sense, these black activists engaged in this war the way Emmett Till whistled at that white girl.  As the old white guy said many years later, "That boy didn't know where he was," and he had no clue how much danger he was in when he whistled at that white girl in that candy store; he had no clue.  So, for me, my determination to focus on the intellectual, the philosophic and the political was grounded in my observations of the disintegration of the movement.  I watched an entire movement disintegrate before my very eyes.
Story_ID: 420939
Speaker 1: In Marin County [California], when Jonathan Jackson goes into the courtroom with this--in this hopeless and tragic attempt to kidnap those folk in exchange for the freedom of his brother at Soledad prison [Soledad State Prison; Correctional Training Facility, Soledad, California], George Jackson, and the--just, just how deep it was and how reality-reinforcing it was when they killed everybody.
Speaker 2: I just--let me interject.  I was at the movie that they made, 'Brothers' [sic. 'Black August']--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --sitting in an audience in Chicago [Illinois], all black audience.  When that scene came on the scream, two brothers around me said, "Oh, that's so phony.  They wouldn't kill all them people."  I said, I tapped the guy, I said, "They did it.  They did it.  Look it up.  They did it."  It's, it's stunningly cold.  They (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean, but see--
Speaker 2: --they shot the judge [Harold Haley] and everybody in the van.
Speaker 1: The judge, the jury, everybody.
Speaker 2: And this is the--as the, as Jonathan Jackson is moving away in a van--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --the guard--the, whoever the officers were on the scene, they should, the riddled the van with holes, though (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They, they, they--
Speaker 2: --though they knew the judge was--
Speaker 1: --they killed ev--
Speaker 2: --in there and the jury.
Speaker 1: No, no, they killed everybody--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --everybody.  Now, the thing that was striking to me at that time, as I looked at the political activism of my generation, is that they didn't know they didn't know; they didn't know they didn't know.  So as one was watching these events, the, the futility of the ostensibly heroic gesture was (pause) shaping my consciousness as I looked at the, the, the reality and the rhetoric of the movement, that tragedy, that seventeen year-old kid, all right, who viewed himself as a, as a revolutionary coming out of a certain kind of Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] crazy politics, the crazy Bay Area politics of the white left and the, and the, the White Panther Party, and the white radicals out of Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] and their involvement in the, the suicidal attempt to free George Jackson from Soledad prison.  And it got crazier and crazier.  So for me, at 19, 20, 21, you know, I'm reading Ramparts magazine; I'm reading Black World [Negro Digest; Black World]; I'm reading Black Scholar [The Black Scholar], all of the black-- Presence Africaine, the English edition; I'm reading the work of James Spady [James G. Spady], who was the big Diopian scholar.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Spady, he's another Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Spady's another brother from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Another genius of sorts.
Speaker 1: Right.  And it was astounding.  It was absolutely astounding.  And this shaped my thinking.
Story_ID: 420940
Speaker 1: I heard you say at one point--correct, correct, correct, correct me if I'm wrong.  I'm trying to get my memories straight on this.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But I think you, didn't you attend college at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] at some point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went on the lamb.  After my head banging with the Nation of Islam and Jeremiah [Jeremiah Shabazz], Number 12 [Muhammad's Mosque No. 12, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: So what happened?  What was this about?  What happened?  Tell us what happened.
Speaker 2: Well, a friend of mine, Lou Charles Harris [ph.], had gone to Saint Joseph's College [Rensselaer, Indiana].  He had been accepted to Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut], and he went to Yale Law School in the autumn of 1973.  He said you should come up to New Haven [Connecticut] and visit and check Yale out, and I did.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what's this head banging though with the Nation of Islam?  What's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: --what, what is this?
Speaker 2: --we began to do the political organizing with Muhammad Kenyatta and the Black Economic Development Conference and Randolph Jones [ph.], who was a pastor of what would be termed abased Christian community, practicing liberation theology as a Pentecostal.  And he had really inspired me.  In nine--January of 1973, the Muslims from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] went and murdered a house full of women and infants, and it was one of the most violent crimes of that period.
Speaker 1: Now these were ex-members of the Nation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Former members of the Nation of Islam.
Speaker 1: I think the, the brother was director of security for the Nation at one time, and one, some city, either--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Philadelphia or--
Speaker 2: And at that point I said there's not a lot that can be done in Philadelphia, because the level of the political corruption was so pervasive.  And trying to organize was--because the org- the Muslims controlled the city.  And if you were doing political organizing on the streets and trying to engage on the streets, you were running into the corruption of the Nation.  It was just unbelievable.
Speaker 1: So that's why you decided to go on to Yale (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 420941
Speaker 1: And I went to New Haven [Connecticut].  I had come to the conclusion that the black nationalist organizing was impoverished because there really wasn't any overarching comprehensive social theory.  We were reading Dr. Ben [HistoryMaker Yosef ben-Jochannan]; we were reading Haki [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti]; we were reading Diop [Cheikh Anta Diop]; we were reading Chancellor Williams; we were reading John Henrik Clarke.  I mean you could just list them, you know, all of the major figures that revolved around the, the, the Black World [Negro Digest; Black World] to The Black Scholar.  We were reading Walter Rodney.  If you were really deep, you were reading Samir Amin. That most cats didn't really know about, right.  He was a, he was an Egyptian Marxist economist, and so there was that literature.  And I said I'm going to work on the, the political project of developing a more philosophically coherent theory and theology of politics, and that's what I went to New Haven to do, to study philosophy.  I was interested in epistemology and political theory.  And I was committed to that because no one else was doing it.  In fact, in 1971 I met Cornel West.  He was then a sophomore at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And we debated and argued and only agreed on, on this much: that there was not a sufficiently coherent intellectual or framework, conceptual framework, to address the structure of post-civil rights race relations in the United States.  And so that was a major part of my life.
Speaker 2: Now you were attending classes at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: And you were--I think from what I think you said is kind of, it's a--I, I think how you told this people--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and it's kind of a, has a punch line to it.  You were elected to an office-you said, you were, you were like head of the black student organization.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was actually--yeah, they--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Ironically, yeah, no, I--
Speaker 2: You were doing all kinds of stuff until they--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and then one day they discovered that--
Speaker 1: That I wasn't a student.  I wasn't enrolled in Yale.  And I was working with the Yale black student association [Black Student Alliance at Yale].  I was, oh, no, I was, I was doing that.  I was auditing courses in political philosophy with Kenneth Mills, who was a very brilliant Marxist, who had been educated at Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England], Oxford-trained Marxist philosopher named Kenneth Mills, who studied under A.J. Ayer at Oxford.  And then I, you know, took courses from Louis Dupre, the very sophisticated Catholic philosopher and scholar of Hegel [Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel] and Marx [Karl Marx].  Oh yeah, no, it was--
Speaker 2: So you, your--what were you thinking?  This is your--your objective was to learn, I suppose, because you weren't--
Speaker 1: Well, well, it, yeah, it, it, well, it was actually, it was that but more.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My objectives were political.
Story_ID: 420942
Speaker 1: There was a complete political and theoretical crisis within the context of the nationalist intelligentsia.  Cruse [Harold Cruse] was right: there was a crisis.  There was not an adequate political theory.  There was not a theory of municipal governance.  There was not a nationalist theory of taxation.  There was not a nationalist economic development policy for how we should view the gold standard.  There was not a real nationalist foreign policy.  You, you remember the debates about whether in Angola we supported UNITA [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --right, or the MPLA [People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola].
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: A lot of people supported Savimbi [Jonas Savimbi] based on--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --things they--it was this movie ['Savimbi's 1977 Campaign against the Cubans and MPLA: Observed for 7 1/2 Months, and Covering 2,100 Miles Inside Angola'] with Leon Dash [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash] running around with Savimbi and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, I know, I know; oh, I know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you had Dash; you had Savimbi, and they were sort of backed by the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency].  Then you had the, the MPLA being backed by the KGB.  And you know, and, and, and, and the, and the black community was split.  You know, you had one wing with Savimbi and UNITA, and they would surface in the Black World [Negro Digest; Black World], and then there were the people that were supporting--was Ra- was it Roberto Holden?  Was that him?  Was it Roberto Holden [sic. Holden Roberto]--
Speaker 2: I can't remember.
Speaker 1: --from the MPLA [sic. National Liberation Front of Angola]?
Speaker 2: I can't remember--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --no, I can't.
Speaker 1: Did it go into Northwestern [ph.], and got a Ph.D.  So I mean there was, there was all of that politics, you know.  Then there was Owusu Sadaukai [Howard Fuller].
Speaker 2: Yeah, Sadaukai, yeah, that's--
Speaker 1: Sadaukai.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Owusu Sadaukai.
Speaker 2: Howard Fuller.
Speaker 1: Howard Fuller, who is now Howard Fuller--
Speaker 2: Again.
Speaker 1: --by working in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], big educator, right.  Then he had the Malcolm X Liberation College I guess in South Carolina [sic. Malcolm X Liberation University, Greensboro, North Carolina].  So there was all of that.  And so it was more, for, for me, it had much more to do than learning, 'cause I could have just stayed in the library and done that.  It was: what does it mean?  What's the framework?  What's the conceptual framework for black politics domestically and internationally?
Story_ID: 420943
Speaker 1: I spent time with the Congress of Afrikan People and Baraka [Amiri Baraka] in Newark [New Jersey], trying to make sense of his, his politics.  And--
Speaker 2: What was your opinion of Congress of Afrikan People in those days?
Speaker 1: I was sympathetic.  I had little use for the mumbo jumbo.  I had little use for Karenga [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga].
Speaker 2: Now he was in prison I think at that point, or was he?
Speaker 1: What's that?
Speaker 2: He was in prison at that point I believe, or was he?
Speaker 1: He might have been in prison.
Speaker 2: When Baraka was in charge of--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --Congress of--
Speaker 1: So I, I, I didn't have a lot of use for a lot of that.
Speaker 2: Now you mean mumbo jumbo, what part are you talking about?
Speaker 1: Well, I mean, here again, there was a lot of symbolism; there was a lot of Egyptology; there was a lot of Kemetic, you know--
Speaker 2: Not in, not, not in Congress of Afrikan People (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, no, no, no.  Well then that was Kareng- well, that's--Karenga goes off later, I guess, and gets into that.
Speaker 2: He gets in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was, I was--
Speaker 2: --much later (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Now, I'll tell you, I was, I was impressed with the emphasis on the primacy of culture, right, the new art stuff in Newark with Baraka.  And so, I, I wasn't sure where it went.  And this is the other thing I knew: I knew enough about the Ellington [Duke Ellington] and Ellisonian [Ralph Ellison] black reality to know that if you weren't going to deal with the institutions of rank and file black people, you weren't getting anywhere.  You could talk all the rhetoric you wanted.  You were a handful of dudes wearing your Julius Nyerere jackets, right, having your black power conferences, and only a handful of y'all showed up.  And the bulk of the folk who followed you were students who would retire from that stuff once they got out of college and had to get a real job, you know.  And so, here again, it was the politics of the moment.  It was theater.  It was, you know, you got Baraka; you've got the Spirit House, but it wasn't rooted in the black America that, you know, the overwhelming majority of black people will hook into, the Masonic orders, the Baptist churches, the, the, The Links [The Links, Incorporated], all the bourgeois stuff that rank and file, middle class black people do, all right.  And you know, just--so, so intellectually it was--see, there was an impulse, there was--black people are sympathetic.  Black people really are, although they don't ideologically articulate nationalists, you know.  You've got an integrationist wing, right, but the vast majority of black people have nationalistic impulses.  They want to talk about the black community.  They want to do for themselves.  They don't want to--they want their own barbershops, their own churches, their own neighborhoods, their own institutions, their own food, their own leaders, right.  So even though, you know, they don't ideologically articulate anything fancy, at the end of the day they want their own stuff.  And you can, one can learn that going into any black barbershop anywhere on a Saturday afternoon, right.  And so, you know, philosophy, political theory, epistemology, the sociology of knowledge, and, and here for me, they were for political purposes.  You know, you know, getting an education, learning, you know, I had intellectual cultural capital in my household.
Story_ID: 420944
Speaker 1: What did the black community do?  And, and, and, and what reinforced this for me was sort of embodied in the symbolism of the Attica massacre, because for me that was the last gasp of sort of the black left.
Speaker 2: Explain.  I mean, I know what happened, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.  In other words--
Speaker 2: The prisoners took--tried to--
Speaker 1: --you know, the, the brothers take over the prison [Attica Correctional Facility, Attica, New York].  You know, it's an act of rebellion.  There's a certain political dimension to it.  A lot of these men had been influenced by Soledad brother and 'Blood in My Eye' [George L. Jackson].  George Jackson had quite a following in the prisons.  And those brothers took over their prison [Soledad State Prison; Correctional Training Facility, Soledad, California] and were massacred.  And when Big Black [Frank Smith] is interviewed, one of the organizers, I remember in the 'Eyes on the Prize' series he begins to cry because he says, "I didn't know they were gonna come at us like that.  I knew they would take the prison, but I didn't know they would come at us like that."  And for me, there was something very powerful about what, in retrospect, struck me as the naivete of it all.  You didn't think those white boys were gonna come in there and murder all of y'all?  What were you thinking?  It's like the Fred Hampton and Mark Clark.  I remember saying to myself at the time: what were we thinking?  We asked the man for war, and he gave us a taste (pause).  And then we're shocked when he gives us a taste of war.  It wasn't B-52 bombers going over the South Side of Chicago [Illinois].  Now that's real war, right.  I mean we, we just got a couple of cops with some shotguns and you know, a little dirty pool.  We didn't have napalm; we didn't have B-52 bombers, you know, and the, you know, and, and bombing missions with, you know, you know, two-ton bombs.  That's--so, I--it was an interesting period for me because somehow there was something remarkably unrealistic about the venture.  There was something profoundly immature intellectually.  A bunch--you know, in some cases, some young brothers got themselves killed unnecessarily.
Story_ID: 420945
Speaker 1: So you're at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].  You're, you're auditing courses; you're engaging (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --people in conversation--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) dialogue about this--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and, and, and--
Speaker 1: And that's the way--you, you said at one point, you said, "I could just go to the library read books and learn."  But this, isn't this like learning on a bigger scale.  You gotta engage people in discussion.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You've gotta listen to stuff.  You've gotta (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I was, I was, I was pursing an intellectual culture.  I wanted a more rigorous and higher intellectual culture.  I needed that.  I had exhausted all of the kind of auti- autodidactic, round-the-way, you know, intellectual life, you know, of the activists who read Robert Allen [Robert L. Allen] and you know, all the stuff that people read at the time.
Speaker 1: But you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's all the period literature.
Speaker 1: But, but did you--I don't know.  Did you consider yourself at the time like someone who, who was following maybe in the footsteps there with John Henrik Clarke or Harold Cruse that never really went to college?  You know, I mean that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no, no.
Speaker 1: --just kind of tangentially went?
Speaker 2: Well, see--
Speaker 1: Or somebody like--or, or were you seeing yourself as somebody, I can't afford to pay this tuition, so I'm just gonna go to the classes?  Or what--
Speaker 2: Well, no, no, it was none of that.  I mean--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I was, in, in both cases, my grandparents had gone to college, so I come from a college-educated middle class, right.  So it's not the Cruse story.  Cruse is coming out of Virginia.  He's a poor black dude, comes out of a working-class background, and did some college, went somewhere.
Speaker 1: John Henrik Clarke has a similar story (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, so--
Speaker 1: --Ala- Alabama.  He--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--
Speaker 1: --joined the art history club.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so my, my, my, my class history was different.  My class history was different.  My intellectual culture was different.  My father [Eugene Rivers, Jr.] was an artist, all right, so that's different just in terms of social class.  So Cruse was not really a prototype because there was an higher level of theoretical culture that needed to be developed, which I sought to pursue.  That was different, right.  There was no political theory, right.  The academic intellectual--the, the, the black nationalist left community was not a terribly sophisticated community, right--
Speaker 1: So you, just for clarification, you're putting two groups, the black nationalists--are you talking about the black nationalists and the black left (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And left, and the black left.
Speaker 1: And the black left, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you know, and, and, and for that reason.  There really was no strategy or tactics.  You have the, you have the, the Gary, Indiana, Black Political Convention [National Black Political Convention], right, and with the black elected officials and the black activists, you know, Ben Chavis [HistoryMaker Benjamin F. Chavis, Jr.] and--
Speaker 1: Did you--
Speaker 2: --Baraka [Amiri Baraka].
Speaker 1: --did you go to that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I thought about going--
Story_ID: 420946
Speaker 1: But my issues were, there isn't a deep enough understanding of the United States.  We really haven't known who we were dealing with.  I, I mean we could talk bad at them, but there was no real, you know, because had we a deeper understanding, someone could have told Hampton [Fred Hampton] and Clark [Mark Clark], "They're coming to see you, and they're coming to kill you for real."  We didn't have a better grasp of COINTELPRO [Counterintelligence Program].  And COINTELPRO was only now history for us.  No one had a bead on this thing, all right.  Another way to go at this is that I often thought then--I was twenty--where will we be twenty years from now, and who are the people that are going to be looking down the line twenty years from now to see how this thing plays out?  Where are thinkers that are really saying okay, "In 1990 we will be here," you know, in 1970, or in 2000?  I go back and I read all of that literature, all the various literatures of the period.  Everybody was caught up in the moment.  There's nobody that I can sort of pull a volume at and look at and say, "He saw what was coming."  What's going on in the black community with the disintegration of our youth, who would have imagined that?  And see, the complexity of it is amazing because you have these extraordinary, in some sense, dialectical opposites.  On the one hand, who would have imagined a black woman secretary of state, from Birmingham, Alabama.  You couldn't have said, told black folk that in 1970; they'll be a black secretary of state, you know--stop lying, right.  Or, or, you know, or Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] is, you know, Joint Chiefs of Staff.  And, and here again, I'm not into the, the hype of it all.  Just as a political fact of life, there was not understanding.  And so on both ends, we, we did not anticipate, I think, the black underclass.  Now I'll tell you who did get it in a deep way artistically, in a complicated way, The Last Poets, "Automatic, automatic push-button, remote control" (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) "Synthetic genetics"--
Speaker 1: --"genetics"--
Speaker 2: --"command"--
Speaker 1: --"command your soul; driving me nuts blue-driving"--
Speaker 2: "Bolt"--
Speaker 1: --"me nuts."
Speaker 2: "Bolts, screws, I got the blues ['Mean Machine,' The Last Poets].
Speaker 1: "Bolt, blues."  That's right, "From program news," right; you know, "Sun so up down on the corner, up town, I hit the sound, talking about who gone die next, 'cause the white man's got a god complex. Oh, dog," that stuff's prophetic.  Now that was prophetic; that was prophetic, right, 'cause the white man's got a god complex, spelled backwards is dog.  Now that was deep; that was deep.  They saw into the future.  And it was a religiously grounded, a theolog- actually it's a theolog- not Christian, oh, but almost Old Testament theologically grounded, understanding, oh, yeah, deep, very deep.  So outside of those folks--so, on the one hand you got the black underclass; on the other hand you've got Condoleezza Rice and Colin Powell.  And you've got a, a, a multipolar world where there are no good guys--the corruption of African governments, the disintegration of the Soviet Union, the, the ascension of Al-Qaeda, amazing period, amazing period.  And so, my projects, you know, I had an education.  I was a very educated person.  That wasn't the reason to go to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].  There was no philosophic, political leadership in the black community.  Yeah, I mean there was a nationalist community that was fairly insular.
Story_ID: 420947
Speaker 1: How did you sustain yourself at, at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]?  Now did you work--
Speaker 2: I was hustling welfare checks in three states.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: Writing papers for people for money, writing papers for people and hustling welfare checks and selling reefer.  Oh, I had a bunch of little hustles.  I would sell nickel bags for thirty-five dollars, make up stupid names, hustle welfare checks, and run back and forth between Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and New York [New York] and New Haven [Connecticut] and collect checks; you know, street hustler.
Speaker 1: So how long were you able to, to sustain this--
Speaker 2: For about three years.  I was in New Haven from '73 [1973] to '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: So what, what happened?  I don't want to jump too far ahead, but, but what, what finally happened that--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: 'Cause they thought, the administration thought you were--I mean, well, somebody thought you--the people you interacted with thought you were a student, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, they, they figured it out.  Soon enough they figured out I wasn't a student, but then I just developed relationships and hung around campus.
Speaker 1: Was that fairly easy to do?  I mean I--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean I looked the part; I looked the part.
Speaker 1: I can just imagine that.  You know, people would probably, if they got, if they engaged you in conversation and--
Speaker 2: Well, they, they thought I was a grad student.
Speaker 1: They--yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the majority of people thought I was a grad student majoring philosophy.
Speaker 1: They said who else could you be, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: If you (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  I mean who, who else is walking around with Martin Jay's 'Dialectical Imagination' ['The Dialectical Imagination: A History of the Frankfurt School and the Institute of Social Research, 1923-1950' Martin Jay] and the 'Dialectic of Enlightenment' ['Dialectic of Enlightenment: Philosophical Fragments'] by Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno, come on, right, you know, or E.P. Thompson's 'The Making of the English Working Class,' right?  Or, Michael Klare's a 'War Without End,' ['War Without End: American Planning for the Next Vietnams,' Michael T. Klare] a, a study of U.S. military and foreign policy planning?  It was published in '72 [1972], best book done in the period, brilliant study, which introduced me to all of the anti-imperialists and revisionists historiography of the Cold War, which is a whole other discipline in terms of radical scholarship.  And so the, the more accurate way to frame what I was pursuing was a philosophic and scholarly project.  There was all of the revisionist historiography of the Cold War, which was a literature that the black nationalists, neither the black nationalists or the left studied, you know, Gabriel Coco, historian Gabriel Kolko, William Appleman Williams, Barton Bernstein, Walter LaFeber, this whole group of neo-Marxist historians that were tearing Uncle Sam up, you see, and developing this revisionist, diplomatic historiography.  So my, my, my, my concerns were scholarly.
Story_ID: 420948
Speaker 1: The leading intellectual influence on me for the big picture was Noam Chomsky.  Black nationalists weren't reading Noam Chomsky.
Speaker 2: Haki [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti], probably, they would know.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah, they--
Speaker 2: There are probably some, some others.  I mean I, I really think there probably were some others.
Speaker 1: In 1970, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: I know Haki was, and there was, there were a few others.
Speaker 1: Right, well, so that's--during the heyday the nationalist phase, 'American Power and the New Mandarin,' ['American Power and the New Mandarins' Noam Chomsky] 'For Reasons of State' [Noam Chomsky], 'Peace in the Middle East' ['Peace in the Middle East?: Reflections on Justice and Nationhood,' Noam Chomsky], 'Towards the New Cold War' [sic. 'Towards a New Cold War: Essays on the Current Crisis and How We Got There,' Noam Chomsky], whole another intellectual traject- trajectory, in terms of scholarship and politics and direction.  So you're looking for a macro framework for looking at global politics and situating in comparative macro terms the black experience in the United States, you know (unclear) sort of George Padmore  and Walter Rodney, you know, or the Ben [HistoryMaker Yosef ben-Joachannan] or the Diopian historiography.  So it was another kind of project, man.  I mean, there were fairly clearly defined political and philosophical objectives and scholarly objectives.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but what drove you I guess in terms of--or how did you--a lot of people with the same amount of talent, the same kind of--there are a lot of real bright black people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, I know.
Speaker 2: --in the country that, you know, were probably at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], actually enrolled in class--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were students.
Speaker 2: --and with a dream of being Condoleezza Rice or somebody like that in the future and, and all of that sort of thing.  But you were driven not to be that--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --and not to be a part of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 420949
Speaker 1: Yet you were, you were learned at everything.
Speaker 2: In fact, in, in fact, was more intellectually engaged and intense than the overwhelming majority of them.  You know, I was coming off the street giving Cornel [Cornel West] a run for the money as a kid.  And my faith motivated me.  I was philosophically a Christian Pan-Africanist.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is this a self-defined--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm was gonna say there's no--
Speaker 2: --black people--
Speaker 1: --there were no Christian philosophical--what did you say just now?
Speaker 2: Pan-Africanist.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't think there were any really out here.
Speaker 2: No, but see--
Speaker 1: Reverend Cleage [Albert B. Cleage, Jr.] would come close--
Speaker 2: What yeah, but, but he was doing--
Speaker 1: --perhaps--
Speaker 2: --a certain brand of fairly ham-handed black nationalist stuff.  He was a--see, look, my class position gave me an entirely different perspective.
Speaker 1: You're right, right.
Speaker 2: I'm thinking global.  I'm thinking big picture.  I'm, I'm not the average--I wasn't the brother that comes up from under, reads 'The Autobiography of Malcolm' ['The Autobiography of Malcolm X,' Malcolm X and Alex Haley], and then goes to Fanon [Frantz Fanon], who says, "Arrr!" Right.  No, it, it was Fanon; it was Aime Cesaire; it's Senghor [Leopold Senghor]; it's Francophone versus Anglophone versus Lusophone, right; it's Cabral [Amilcar Cabral], Fanon, Rodney [Walter Rodney], right.  And then there's another lell- another level.  There's the UNESCO [United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization] scholars with the history of Africa, right, Obinga [sic. Raila Odinga], right, all of that, but, but in a much more cosmopolitan comparative, interdisciplinary way, another kind of ball game, another kind of ball game.
Speaker 1: Now who, just thinking, like, who, who would, who did you and--you say you engaged Cornel West in discussion.  You knew James Spady [James G. Spady], you said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Spady was my mentor--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Reginald Bryant, Spady.  Fader in--Spady introduced me to Diop [Cheikh Anta Diop] in an essay that he wrote I think in the Negro Digest [Black World]--
Speaker 1: I think that same--
Speaker 2: In 19--
Speaker 1: --essay was used for the introduction to the Third World Press [Chicago, Illinois] edition to 'Cultural Unity of Black Africa' ['The Cultural Unity of Black Africa: The Domains of Matriarchy and of Patriarchy in Classical Antiquity,' Cheikh Anta Diop]--
Speaker 2: That's right; that's right
Speaker 1: --of which he's railed about not receiving his royalties and stuff.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, that's right.  It was something, Negritude, Pan-Negritude and something, something ['Negritude, Pan-Banegritude and the Diopian Philosophy of African History,' James G. Spady]; that's right, that's right.  And so, so my intellectual influences were cosmopolitan, right.  And my class background had just--I'm, you know, when I, when I think about art, I'm thinking about a Roscoe [sic. Mark Rothko], and Ben Shahn, and Jack Levine, and, and Jacob Lawrence, and Bearden [Romare Bearden], but you know, bigger canvas, bigger intellectual canvas, okay, another kind of ball game.
Story_ID: 420950
Speaker 1: At that stage, what did you--could you see yourself organizing a movement around a--once you got yourself, you, you were able to sort all this out and to, to put, put together some coherent ideology or something?  Did you, you see yourself organizing around it?  Is that what you, you saw yourself doing?
Speaker 2: Laying the--when, when I tell you philosophically I was a Christian Pan-Africanist, right, this goes back thirty-seven years.  See, I knew where Pentecostalism was going to go, that there was a whole black church movement that none of the nationalists, none of the black left understood or even saw coming.
Speaker 1: Well, some, some may have seen some of it, but they didn't like it.  Now you might have to, might have to give them that.
Speaker 2: Well, well, no, they didn't understand it.  And as an intellectual, it wasn't your job to like it or dislike.  The job was to understand it, to analyze it.  See, I knew where this stuff was going.  And you know, I--well, you know, listen, you know, your New York [New York] counterparts, the East, all right, with--
Speaker 1: Jitu Weusi.
Speaker 2: Jitu and Adeyemi [Adeyemi Bandele], right, and that crowd, right.  So you got Jitu, Adeyemi, or Charles Barron, Leonard Jeffries, the whole Brooklyn [New York] armory, you know, Brooklyn nationalist community.  What's the boy, Lumumba--what's his name?
Speaker 1: Chokwe Lumumba?
Speaker 2: Chokwe Lumumba, I mean the whole thing right.  And I said you guys aren't gonna go anyway 'cause you don't have a base, all right.  I've got, I've got 10, 15 million black people that go to these churches.  Now it's gonna take time to build a new ideological sensibility and consensus.  But I understand that these things take years, so I'm not, I'm not looking for black revolution 'cause that's now how it happens.  And all you guys are gonna do is get shot up or burned out.
Speaker 1: Is that, was that the rhetoric of the East in those days, that there's gonna be revolution and stuff around the bend, or?
Speaker 2: Well, they were--well, you know, the East guys are running around with lots of girlfriends and multiple wives and you know, having debates over polygamy.  And I said okay, you know, all right, and you know, I'm good--you know, the fancy clothes, the, the whole thing, right.  I come in.  I see their stuff.  They're reading Carlos Moore, on Cuba and race ['Castro, the Blacks, and Africa,' Carlos Moore].  I mean you know all the stuff, right.  I said this is not terribly smart.  Now, now I'm committed to these people.  I understand them, right.  I'm a product of this, but this is not the game.  This is not going to go anywhere.  This will be a group of a handful of people sitting by themselves having Kwanzaa celebrations, pouring the libations and lighting the candles.
Speaker 1: And now?
Speaker 2: And that's what it is.
Speaker 1: Well, there's five thousand people come out for Kwanzaa in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: But, but that's, but it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There's, there, I mean (unclear)--
Speaker 2: But no, no, but see--
Speaker 1: In the East they fill an armory too--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no--
Speaker 1: --with, with people.
Speaker 2: --but it's politically meaningless.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's different thing to say.  Now that, that's--
Speaker 2: Okay, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's different.
Speaker 2: Anheuser Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies]--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --liquor peddlers underwrite Kwanzaa celebrations.
Speaker 1: Some places, not everywhere.
Speaker 2: Well, it doesn't make a difference.  My, my, my point is that--
Speaker 1: Not in Chicago and not in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but no, but see, but it never got translated into thing--any political power.
Speaker 1: Some--
Speaker 2: Where?  I'm open.  I mean I've been watching these guys for thirty-seven years.  What?
Speaker 1: Well, there have been, there have been elected officials that come out of this.
Speaker 2: You know what--
Speaker 1: And, and it's not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you gotta have three things.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I'm mean, I'm just saying.  I'm not claiming a, a--
Speaker 2: Okay, but see, but three things you gotta have in reality.
Speaker 1: --a, a, a political revolution (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You gotta have numbers.  If you don't vote, numbers as in votes, right, you've gotta have money, right.  You've got to have numbers, money, or elite influence.  Those are the three things you gotta have to have power in this country. Money, numbers, or elite influence, right.  You ain't got those three, dot.  You know, you're well, well-intentioned; you're good people; you're on the side of the angels, right.
Story_ID: 420951
Speaker 1: And here again, my point goes back to Cruse [Harold Cruse] and the other intellectuals that were--I mean Cruse in some sense was saying the same thing that [HistoryMaker] Martin Kilson was saying, but from a nationalist perspective.  You've got to have a political strategy.  There's got to be a long-term view, a macro view, a comparative view, if you're gonna play on the global stage, if you're going to be someone who gets it.  I mean you can be some hopelessly utopian loser, who at the end of the day, right, was a very sincere person, waiting for the revolution.  It's the embarrassing, almost tragic figure who's wearing the corduroy short--corduroy shirt, the, the, the, the dungarees, and the work boots selling the Spartacus Youth League paper, waiting for a revolution.  Now that's, that's sad.  I mean it is--and it's interesting for me because I run into Conrad Worrill [HistoryMaker Conrad Walter Worrill] in an airport, right, head of the Black United Front [National Black United Front].  And he knows who I am 'cause he's seen me during the Bush days [President George Walker Bush], right, all over the media.  And I said listen, man, I started out with Buff [ph.], when it was Herbert Daughtry [HistoryMaker Reverend Herbert D. Daughtry] in Brooklyn, New York, in 1979, and Jitu [Jitu Weusi], and Adeyemi [Adeyemi Bandele], and Michael Amon-Ra, right, and all these guys, and it was Conrad Worrill, right, then it was the Black Political Independent Party [National Black Independent Political Party] with, with the boy named, you know, [HistoryMaker] Manning Marable and that crowd and Ben Chavis [HistoryMaker Benjamin F. Chavis, Jr.].  Where is the program?  Where is this theory?  Where is the politics?  They petered out.  And here again, my point is simply that they weren't thinking in real hardball political terms.  They were thinking in ideological terms, and they confused ideology with politics.  If politics is the art of the possible, right, and, and, and, and money is as Tip O'Neill said, "The mother's milk of politics," so that you have the power to make things happen.  That's what it was about.  You know, and, and so that was the thinking.  These were all the questions that were germinating in my mind when I'm in New Haven [Connecticut] and when I leave and I come to Boston [Massachusetts] in '76 [1976] and eventually enroll at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and become a registered Harvard student.
Story_ID: 420952
Speaker 1: How did you make that transition from sort of a, like an underground student at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], sort of, in a way, though you were over ground, I'm sure, in terms of visibility--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to, you know--what happened to you?  Now I, I think I heard you tell the story once about, that Yale actually said, "Look, we can't have you doing this anymore"--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and, and--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) they extended an invitation to me to apply, and I said no, and I went to New Haven [Connecticut]--I mean went to Cambridge [Massachusetts], Boston [Massachusetts], and met Professor Martin Kilson [HistoryMaker Martin Kilson].  And he was my mentor and my advocate and broker, to whom I am eternally grateful to this day.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is in '76 [1976]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm admitted to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as an undergraduate in 1979.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're admitted by Dr. Martin Kilson.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was my--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --he was my broker.  He was my advocate.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you started taking courses in--I mean, as (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I was an undergraduate--
Speaker 1: --as a student.
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm doing--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Philosophy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: As a philosophy major?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --philosophy with some interest in history of science, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was it different, I mean the whole--how was it different for you actually being a student and--
Speaker 2: Well, well, when I got here, what was interesting to me was how unconnected the black students were, because none of the moral and intellectual aspirations that I had did they have.  That was not, was not interesting to them.  And that was pretty amazing.
Speaker 1: Now by this time, most of the undergraduate students were maybe just out of high--you know, they're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they were ten years younger than me.
Speaker 1: They're about--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were ten years younger than me.  I come in when I'm twenty-nine.  These kids are coming in at seventeen and eighteen, so I'm ten years older than them.  And, and, and it's ten years later in terms of history, so they have no coordinates for anything.  You know, all they've got is some embarrassingly stupid rhetoric that they don't understand because Malcolm [Malcolm X] really doesn't--in fact, my first political gesture was protesting a cabaret that the black students held with liquor to commemorate Malcolm X.
