Story_ID: 424036
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, my name is Kenneth D. as in David, Rodgers, K-E-N-N-E-T-H, D. as in David, Rodgers, R-O-D-G-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is--do I really gotta give that?  Okay, date of birth is 9/20 [September 20]--not the year--and my place of birth is Lansing, Michigan.
Speaker 1: You don't wanna give us the year?
Speaker 2: No, I don't give out years.
Speaker 1: Well this is a historical interview; it's for oral history (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, 1951.
Speaker 1: All right, that's not so bad.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and in Lansing?
Speaker 2: Lansing, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.   And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a mechanical engineer for Greeley, G-R-E-E-L-E-Y, dash Hansen, H-A-N-S-E-N [Greeley-Hansen, sic. Greeley and Hansen, Chicago, Illinois], a mechanical engineer, and I also am the executive director of a youth program called Youth Action Ministry, YAM is the nickname, out of Evanston, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March the 9th.
Speaker 1: It's actually December (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) December, sorry, December the 9th [December 9, 2004].
Speaker 1: Okay.  December the 9th--
Speaker 2: Two oh four [2004].
Speaker 1: All right.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at 1900 South Michigan Avenue in Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 424037
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is tacos.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is red.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year.
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is fall.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I like going to New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not really; no, not really.
Story_ID: 424038
Speaker 1: Okay.  I would like to ask you about your family history--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side and your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her name was Irene Shipp, and it's S-H-I-P-P, and my father's name was Joe--is Joe Oliver Rodgers, R-O-D-G-E-R-S, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now on your mother's side of the family--well, your mother's date of birth and place of birth first of all.
Speaker 2: Well, she was born in St. Louis, Missouri, she was--ooh--her birthday was June the 26th--ooh, the year I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do you think--what would you think?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: In the 1920s, or--
Speaker 2: Probably 1920s, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How, how far back can you trace 'em?
Speaker 2: Well, we've never actually done our complete tracin' of our family before.  They were--my mother and father both were from St. Louis, Missouri; I think my mom was born on the Eastside, my father was born on the Eastside; they went to high school and everything like that.  I think our family originated from Mississippi; the Rodgers family originated from Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Did--do you have--did you have any grandparents from Mississippi?
Speaker 2: I had an uncle from Mississippi and I had--both--most of my grandparents lived--the whole family lived like in St. Louis, Missouri, so when we were growin' up, we used to just go to St. Louis; we went to Mississippi just to visit, occasionally.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, now what do you know about--what do they--what did the family--are there any family stories about, about your ancestors in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Not, not really; we were kinda like a low-profile kinda like family.  They were farmers, as far as I know, and I mean that's basically about it; they were like servers, worked in the kitchens and things like that, so--
Speaker 1: There any stories about slavery or Reconstruction or any of that?
Speaker 2: No, no; not, not as far as I know.  I know on my father's side, my father's father worked for the trains--train company; he, one time, this, and I don't know if this is true or not, he was workin' as a cook or somethin' like that and some white man pointed his finger at his face and my grandfather bit the finger off and they arrested him.
Story_ID: 424039
Speaker 1: My father [Joe Rodgers] in Lansing [Michigan] started a program called the Urbandale [Lansing, Michigan], which was the poor side of Lansing, Michigan was dirt streets, outside bathrooms and things like that.  And it was very--it was during the early--late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s] where he did a lot to help African Americans go to school, he did a lot as for parent PTA [Parent Teacher Association] things, he met with the governor on a, on a regular basis to get paved streets, to get clean water and things like that, before the highway took over and bought a lotta the property and things like that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you're saying in the early days in Lansing, Michigan--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The black comm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My, my mother [Irene Shipp Rodgers] and father was very, very active in helping African Americans to become more responsible, become better citizens, to, to take--to have more value in the community, and things like that, as for taking responsibility.  My mother and father even, during the summer, would actually hold summer school for kids when they get outta school 'stead of them just playin' in the dirt and things like that, and we would--they would teach us reading, math and things like that, so--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 1: They both went to the same high school.  My father was in a band, he used to have his own little jazz band in St. Louis, Missouri.  My mom used to sing in a--behind Mahalia Jackson; she was one of her back singers--backup singers, and they met in church.
Speaker 2: What was the name of the church?
Speaker 1: They just met in church.
Speaker 2: Oh, they met in church.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they met in church and, you know, it was like--'bout like that, I guess.
Speaker 2: Do you know the name of the church?
Speaker 1: No, don't remember the name of the church.
Speaker 2: It might be important with all this connection with Mahalia Jackson and the--well, what was--so, so Mahalia Jackson was from St. Louis, right?
Speaker 1: Well, she used to sing in St. Louis, yeah.  So--
Speaker 2: All right, okay.  So, how long did your parents stay in St. Louis before they moved to Lansing?
Speaker 1: Well, they--originally they was in St. Louis--'cause I have nine brothers and one sister; there's eight--there's, there's eight boys and one girl.  My oldest brother was born and my oldest brother and the second one and the third one was born in St. Louis; the next one was born in Kansas City, Missouri, and then they moved to Lansing, Michigan.  So they, they moved around; my father was lookin' for work.
Story_ID: 424040
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, let me go back to your [paternal] grandfather a minute and this finger-biting thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did he ever tell that story himself, or--
Speaker 2: My father [Joe Rodgers] told us that story--yeah; my father told us that story.  My grandfather was a very strict, quiet man, so--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he worked for the railroad out of St. Louis [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay--and dining cars?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did, did he talk about the Pullman porters union [Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters], or anything (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Well, well, he talked about, he talked about that--about the problems that they were having, but I mean at that time I was just so young.  The most--I think the only time we really ran into racism itself, that I can remember, is like when we were in Lansing, Michigan 'cause I was born in Lansing, Michigan so when--before that, it was like--they would tell us stories about when they were growin' up--my mother [Irene Shipp Rodgers] and father--about how they fell in love and would catch the train and all this other stuff, but they would, they would basically talk about African Americans havin' a hard time, and things like that, but that was just the was everybody was talkin' about it, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--now, did your parents have a chance to go to get any higher education?
Speaker 2: Well, they both went to high school.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: They both are graduates of high school, and my mom went to nursing school, and I think my father went to like one year of college and that's about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and what did your father do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father was a dye maker for General Motors [Company, Detroit, Michigan]--Oldsmobile.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he worked for Oldsmobile?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: A dye maker; that's pretty--that's a, that's a skilled job at Oldsmobile (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Well, he, he started off on the line, and then he went--you know, he took some classes and things like that, and end up bein' a dye maker, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and he stayed there until he had--he has glaucoma and his eyesight got to a point where he couldn't really see the dyes and things like that so they changed him to bein' a janitor, and then they--he just kinda like retired, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's pretty good job for Oldsmobile, for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean it's better than the regular factory line work.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean he was only a dye maker for like the last, probably like five or six years; the majority of the time he was on the line.  I mean the most of the time he was--most African Americans worked on the line.  I think dye makers were, were non-African American positions.
Story_ID: 424041
Speaker 1: And you said back in those days--you gave us a quick but a good description of a lot of towns and 'til not too recently, a lotta towns are still, and some are still that way, where the black side of town is not even paved.
Speaker 2: Well in Lansing [Michigan], to this day, there's some certain parts of--it's called the Urbandale--that is in Lansing that is over by Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan], and some of the streets are still not paved.  I know they have running water and bathrooms but they still have dirt streets and things like that.  I'm one of these persons--I'm a phonetic--I'm always trying to go back and remember my history and things like that, so I always go back and visit where I was born at and things like that when I go to Lansing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in--now when you grew up, now you had like--you've got like--there are nine of you in the household, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did any of your grandparents live with you?
Speaker 2: No, no.  To be very honest, we were very fortunate by the, by the grace of God.  I remember when we were growing up; at one time, we all lived in like a one-room, and we had like a, a little heater in the middle to keep warm; we slept on floors and things like that, my mom [Irene Shipp Rodgers] did all kindsa odd jobs and, and we would, you know, just work together.  We're a very close-knit family, yeah; so--but, you know, it was, it was, it was rough; it was rough growin' up.  I mean--to me I consider myself rich as a child; not because of the financial status, but because of the love and the size of the family.  My mom and dad [Joe Rodgers] taught us to, to do things together, to keep in contact with each other, to love and support each other.  One of the things my father, which was really funny, is that when we used to, to go to school, it was really important that we kinda like tutored each other.  The oldest one would take the responsibility of working with the younger ones, and even when we went to school, we would have to like meet on the corner and all of us would come home together, go to school together.  If one person did something wrong at school, we all stayed at that corner 'til everybody got, you know, came home and we walked from class together.  We used to, to--in the wintertime, my mother and father used to put Vaseline on our face to, to let the water beads bead off of us and put, you know, we had cardboard in our shoes, and things like this.  And I remember our church which was Paradise [Missionary] Baptist Church in Lansing, Michigan.  It was a really, really raggedy church but you had bees, and roaches and rats and everything like that flyin' around--
Story_ID: 424042
Speaker 1: I think that the one thing that my parents [Joe Rodgers and Irene Shipp Rodgers] gave us was love and how to--and how to give back, 'specially from my father's side; my father has been--he's been beat up by policemens because of his race when he was in Lansing [Michigan]; he got--he used to fight to go to court for black families to make sure their kids weren't taken, and things like that.  He used to--my father was the one who actually went to PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meetings and that, and that--and during that time, even though my mom did a lot, my father was a very strong person, making sure that we learned values and I think because the--of, of the way I am right now, I owe that--a lot to my father because I've learned to give back to the community, that it's so important that you, you learn to give back; I think my father got that from his grandfather because my grandfather--even though my grandmother and grandfather was very quiet they, they took care of the people in the community--the children, older people, and things like that.  So I think that's the, the keys behind the Rodgers key--that is that we have learned to love and support, and what was really interesting is like during the time--and you--you're thinkin' about the '60s [1960s] itself, all of us graduated from college I mean and then--
Speaker 2: All nine?
Speaker 1: All nine of us graduated from college, and you're lookin' at the fact that your--you're lookin' at the fact that my mother and father didn't go to school, they didn't have--we didn't have--all of us didn't have scholarships.  All of us went to college, none of us got put in jail, you know?  And the thing which was unbelievable, this is during [the] Vietnam [War] and everything like that, not one of us went to Vietnam, not one of us were--I mean--and none of us were sick or anything like that, which is by the grace of God that, that it happened, that my mother and father was very, very strong in religion, you know?  Very, very strong and, and teachin' us values about foundation of--spiritual foundations and things like that.
Speaker 2: Did your father know any of the relatives of Malcolm X, Malcolm Little (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  He probably did.  Like I said, when I--I didn't really, really--
Speaker 2: 'Cause he kinda was raised in Lansing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was raised in Lansing; so my father was involved in a--like I say, he was involved with the governor, the mayor.  He did, he did a lot; he went to a lotta different meetings and civil rights stuff, going to school meetings and getting things together, so I'm sure he did most likely.  We even had [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] speak at our church one time--Martin Luther King, Jr. speak at our church, and Martin Luther King, Sr., 'cause Martin Luther King, Sr. used to be the pastor of our church in Lansing for about one or two years, when I was younger.
Speaker 2: Really?  Was he?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean--Daddy King [Martin Luther King, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So Martin Luther King, Jr. came and spoke a couple of times.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: At Paradise [Missionary] Baptist [Church, Lansing, Michigan]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: In Lansing, okay, all right.
Speaker 1: So it was, it was nice.
Story_ID: 424043
Speaker 1: Okay, that's the home of Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Michigan State University, Oldsmobiles, it's Fisher Body [Plant, Lansing, Michigan]--things like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what--can you describe your neighborhood for us, and tell us like what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growin' up?
Speaker 2: Well, we lived in a very poor neighborhood, and I mean when you look at the fact that you're lookin' at dirt streets, you're lookin' at the fact that you had outdoor sewers and plumbing and things like that; you had people that would grow things like vegetables and things like that in the back.  My parents [Joe Rodgers and Irene Shipp Rodgers] even had a chicken.  I remember one time that they, 'cause we were so poor, that they raised--and we got so poor we had to kill it and none of us would be willin' to eat the chicken because it was like a pet.  It was a atmosphere that--and I--like I say, I'm a youth director right now and I work with kids all over.  One of the things I tell kids is that the thing that we learned in the '60s [1960s] is the value of family and loving and support each other, you know.  I think that the one thing that--even though it was poor and it was dirty and we had people, you know--homeless people I don't think really existed 'cause more or less people could--African Americans took care of themselves, you know; if somebody didn't have something, if somebody needed a meal or somebody needed a place, we did that.  My--I mean mother and father, even though they had eight kids, and there were times we lived in a one-bedroom place, they would take in other kids, you know, other kids in the community if they needed a place to live or somebody needed somethin'.  So it was, it was a rough area.
Story_ID: 424044
Speaker 1: Now, can you describe--now where do you fall in the, in the order of children (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  I'm the middle child; there are four above me and four below me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how would you describe yourself as a, as a little boy?
Speaker 2: I was bad; I was really, really bad.  My mother [Irene Shipp Rodgers] and father [Joe Rodgers] said of all the nine kids, I was the worst one.  They even at one time, they meant as a joke, my father took me--there used to be a, there's a place called Pattengill Junior High School [Lansing, Michigan], which is nice--it's next to Eastern High School [Lansing, Michigan], and my parents took me over to the, it was like an adoption place.  He said, "If you don't learn to get better, you're gonna end up livin', you know, we're gonna just give you away."  But I was a bad child; I was in--I was in fights, I--when I was in third grade, I got--I threw a rock at a teacher and busted her head wide open, when I was in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Why?  Do you know why?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I just--she threw a ball at me and said, "Here, catch."  And I didn't catch it and she laughed at me, so I picked up a big rock and threw it at her and said, "Here, catch this," and busted her head wide open and she end up in a hospital.  But there's a story behind this which was really interesting.  When I was in seventh grade--and a lotta this my parents didn't know.  I was sneaky; I was really, really sneaky.  When I was in, when I was in junior high school, you needed fifteen blue slips for three years--seventh, eighth, and ninth grade--to be kicked outta--to be suspended; I hope my, my father don't see this--to be suspended from school permanently, and for the first six weeks, I had thirteen blue slips in seventh grade--for fights.  I was so small; I wrestled, I had did Golden Gloves, I did pee wee boxing, as I said, and as a little child, I was really, really small; I weighed--I used to wrestle and I used to wrestle for eighty-five pounds and I weighed sixty-nine pounds in seventh grade; when I got to high school, I weighed like eighty pounds.  So I was very, very small, you know.  I didn't really start gaining weight 'til I start boxing Golden Gloves and got into college [University of Detroit; University of Detroit Mercy, Detroit, Michigan], but I was a bad child; I mean I was really, really bad.  Teachers didn't know what to do with me, you know.  But I don't know what turned me around; I--what happened was I met a white architect when I was in third grade, and this is a true story.  And I've always like floor plans; I mean I was, I was a man--I was fanatic about doing floor plans, and I used to do like people homes, like my friends' homes; I would like design the little doll houses and things like this and, and we would like build 'em out of sticks and popsicle sticks and rocks and things like this, like the floor plan, not the--after building the (unclear) just the floor plan as to how to go in, and so I have--I've always liked--enjoyed the architecture aspects.  And then when I got in seventh grade, we took--I took a test for the state, and I met a man named Art Jones who was the very first African American president for the National Society of Civil Engineers, and he said there was somethin' about me that he  just--he, he admired; he just, he just admired.  He would beat me, he kept me in line, and I consider myself a street child, I really do, because my mother and father really--even though I loved them and they did a good job, the community basically--the community older people kinda like raised me.  I was in boxing clubs because of, of my attitude about school, I was always in fights, so there was a man named Dick Letts [ph.], who was the boxing coach, who got me into boxin'; I joined the wrestling team because of other people--African Americans who I knew that was in wrestling--I got into that.  So I was, I was awful, I was awful; I didn't really get myself together until I got to high school [J.W. Sexton High School, Lansing, Michigan].
Story_ID: 424045
Speaker 1: What grade school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I used to go to West Junior High School [Lansing, Michigan].  Oh, I'm sorry, I attended Allen Street Elementary School [Lansing, Michigan], West Junior High School, and then [J.W.] Sexton High School [Lansing, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And West--what is the second one?
Speaker 2: West Junior.
Speaker 1: Oh, West Junior High School, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was the high school?
Speaker 2: Sexton.
Speaker 1: Sexton, okay.  That's interesting.  Okay.  So, well, are there any teachers that stand out in and of these--
Speaker 2: I had a teacher when I was in sixth grade name Miss Kennedy--Cannady [ph.], I'm sorry; not Kennedy, Cannady, who was kinda like my favorite teacher; she taught me how to read, how to write, how to get myself together; she was the very first African American teacher I've ever had.  Then I had another teacher name Miss Stroman [ph.] who was my math teacher; she was--for some reason or another, I was good at math.  I've always been like really, really good at math, and even though my attitude and personality was bad, they put me in advanced math and she worked my butt off; I mean I--even though I got a D in her class, I'd sit there and cried and said, "Thank you very much," because she was teaching kids high school and college math when I was in junior high school, so she was a dynamic young lady.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you, did you make good grades?
Speaker 2: My grades were good, my attitude was bad, you know.  My parents [Joe Rodgers and Irene Shipp Rodgers] said they had--they can't see how anybody can get--they used to have--they used to get two grades when you were in school; you get one for your grades, and you get one for your behavior.
Speaker 1: Conduct, right; that's right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  You know, the conduct.  And I would get a--like a A-5.  They say, "Well, wait a minute, how can you get a--be excellent in your grades and you flunkin' your, your conduct?"  And I say, "I don't know."  But I was always in fights, and I think I was in fights because I was always so small that I was like--peop--I would think people would be pickin' on me, so I would try to just get attention by causin' fights.
Story_ID: 424046
Speaker 1: Did you have any friends?
Speaker 2: Oh, I had a lotta friends--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I, I had all kinds of--I had a lotta friends; I just--I was just a bad child, and I was--I really was--I consider myself a really, really bad child; I really did, you know.  And people look at me and go like, "We don't believe that."  I mean I have kids now and they go like, "[HistoryMaker] Mr. [Kenneth D.] Rodgers, you cannot tell us you were that."  I say, "I was bad."  You know, I was like--I was--I was a monster, I really was.  I feel sorry for my parents [Joe Rodgers and Irene Shipp Rodgers].  My mother and father used to spank me on the average of two or three times a week; I mean I--if, if I didn't get a spankin' in a week, my father would say, "Are you sick this week or what's going on?"  'Cause I mean I was just--I was bad; I stole money, I broke into--and please, my dad, I'm, I'm sorry about this; when I was in seventh grade I broke into a laundry machine, when I was in fourth grade I stole donuts and sold 'em on the playground; I mean I did it all, I did it all.  I will admit I--and I think that it's very important as African Americans, that you tell kids that; the kids sometimes look at older adults and be like quote-unquote "perfect," like you know you didn't have a childhood, that you just were an adult all your life, and you gotta realize that, you know, everybody had a childhood, you know.  The key thing to this is that you just gotta be honest with kids to let 'em know that yeah, that stuff did happen, you know, you know, and we out--we outgrow it, you know.  There--somethin' happens that you sit down and say, "This is not the way of life."  When I was--when I graduated from [J.W. Sexton] High School [Lansing, Michigan]--and, and this is a true story--I had every intention of not even goin' to college; I had--I didn't wanna go to college, I wanted to go work in the factory.  And the only reason why I ended up goin' to college was that, even though I did wrestling and I did boxing, I could never pass the physical at the factory; never could pass the physical and couldn't figure out why, and so when my father finally talked to the, the head--like a physician that you had to, you know, get a physical with, he said, "You had a, a curved back."  And what happens is if--you can lift somethin' and, and be paralyzed permanently.  And so--I didn't even know that, I mean I boxed, wrestled, did all this body-building; never had a problem, but he said, "You got a curved back," you know.  And I--that kept me outta goin' to General Motors [Company, Detroit, Michigan], so I said, "Well, I guess I'll go to school then."
Story_ID: 424047
Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growin' up?
Speaker 2: Yes, church is--for African Americans, church is always a big part.  I mean we, we lived in the church; we went to church--Bible study, Sunday school; I was a Sunday school teacher, I was a--I've been a choir director, I mean we--church was a big part of our, of our, of our life.  I mean we used to walk to church in the winter, we used to walk to church in the summer, you know; we used to have family meals together on, on Sunday and then go back to church, so yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, now, when you were in high school [J.W. Sexton High School, Lansing, Michigan], did you--so you--did you wrestle in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you play any other sports or anything?
Speaker 2: I wrestled and I ran cross country.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did, did you run for class office or any of that kinda thing?
Speaker 2: I ran a couple of times, but I was so bad most people wouldn't even vote for me anyway; they, they thought I was the biggest joke in the school, so--
Speaker 1: So, so they still thought (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  And I--and to be very--and to be very honest, to be very honest, when I was in high school, when I got to tenth grade, I got to the point where I really wanted to do something with my life, so I concentrated more on the grades than I did on the behavior, so I was kinda like a nerd in high school, I really was; I didn't do a lot of other things--I mean I wrestled, I boxed, I did all that stuff, but behavior, I had myself together when I got to tenth grade.  But I was more of a good grade person in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, but is it--is there any point that you can identify where you turned around something, or what--or--
Speaker 2: I think I just got tired of my father [Joe Rodgers] beating me, I really did; I think the spankings got to a point where I just said, "I'm just getting too big to get this," and I, and I think that when I met Art Jones, I--and I was--like I said, after about when I was in ninth grade and I start doin' a lot of different things--when Art Jones asked for draftin', and lookin' at buildings and things like that, and he told me that, "You know, in order for you to, to become an architect"--and my goal was to go to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and become an architect, he said, "You're just gonna have to get yourself together--attitude, personality"--and they just worked with me; I mean not my mother [Irene Shipp Rodgers] and father.  I was sneaky; my mother and father didn't know half the things I did behind their backs.  I mean I had, you know, I had knives, razor blades, all this other stuff--parents didn't even realize it, parents didn't realize it at all.  But I met--I had an--I had the right African American--and, and the thing which was really unbelievable, I had the right African American males, and during that time, the thing which is like I said is hard to believe, is that usually you always hear the story about the females doin' things, but I had the African American males who really kinda like took me under their wings and said that, "You know, you're gonna make somethin' outta your life."  And when I got into high school, I had a, a young man name Bob Riddle who was over the Urban League in Lansing, Michigan, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: R-I-D-D-L-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he basically, he was with a program called Project LEAP, which he called it Labor Advancement Educational Program [sic. Labor Education Advancement Program]; it was a program that teach kids how to get into construction and things like that, and he kinda became my mentor--as for goin' to school, as for doing drafting, as for goin' to college and everything like that, so he was probably the person that turned my life around.
Story_ID: 436237
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]--this UCLA story; this is--
Speaker 2: Well, when I--when I was in high school [J.W. Sexton High School, Lansing, Michigan], I always wanted to go to a big college, and I saw a picture of a, of a campus called University of Los Angeles, California [sic.], and so I applied there, and my grades were good enough that I got accepted there, and this was in '69 [1969], '70 [1970], and I went down there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  UCL--yeah, that's in--
Speaker 2: I went down there and--the funny thing was I got accepted to start like in January, so I took--with the luck of my parents [Joe Rodgers and Irene Shipp Rodgers], I took the train--not the plane, I took the train; I didn't drive.  We took the train; it was like a three-day, two-night all-American train ride to UCLA.  I got down there and they had housing and everything ready; my parents paid for me to go there for one year, had every--I had saved my money, my father did all this other stuff.  I got down there, I got homesick and I--after one week I--and bein' from Lansing [Michigan], not being used to the prostitution, the shooting, and all this other stuff, I turned back around and came home after one week.
Speaker 1: Now you--all that was goin' on in Los Angeles [California] where you, where you were stayin'?
Speaker 2: Yep, yeah.  Well, I was--walked downtown; walked down the streets of downtown and you get hit on at night, you know, 'cause I didn't know anybody, so I would just go try to tour the city and I just--I got scared and I just said, "No, I don't like this," so--and I came back home.  My mother and father was really hurt and shocked, but--
Speaker 1: Well, those were the days when Lew Alcindor [Jr.], who became Kareem Abdul-Jabbar--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he's playin' for the basketball team--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to a Rose Bowl game and the whole bit, so it was, it was nice, but I just, I just got homesick, you know.  It was--I don't brag about it but it, it happened, so--
Speaker 1: Okay, so well your parents were upset when you came back, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, very upset.  But my father, because of the auto industry at the time, they were lookin' for African Americans to get into engineering.  I tested high, and like I said, I was always good at math and science and I got a job--not through General Motors [Company, Detroit, Michigan], I got a job with a company called Motorworld [ph.] as a drafting assistant because I took drafting in high school, so I would actually kinda like work with the engineers learning drafting further, and then they paid for me to go to University of Detroit [University of Detroit Mercy, Detroit, Michigan], so I graduated from University of Detroit with a degree in mechanical engineering.
Story_ID: 436238
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Well, is there any memories of the University of Detroit [University of Detroit Mercy, Detroit, Michigan]--
Speaker 1: Oh, well, when I was in Detroit [Michigan], and like I said, it was good, it was good; we--I started a program called New Dawn, and the reason I started it was I--and it was in Lansing, Michigan; it was me and four of my best friends, and this is after I went--before I went to University of Detroit, I went to a program called Lansing Community Design Center [CDC], which was a school by an African American name Pat Smith; he started his own drafting school in Lansing to teach inner-city kids from Lansing English, math, and drafting, and the--we had a small group of kids--myself, Ben Williams [ph.], Kurt Branson [ph.], Gene Mitchner [ph.]; we started a program called New Dawn, and New Dawn was to help African American kids to get into architectural engineering when they go to college.  And we started on our own; we did tutoring, we did workshops and things like that, and it was a nice little program, so we--
Speaker 2: So it was started in Detroit or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  It was started in Lansing--
Speaker 2: In Lansing.
Speaker 1: It was started in Lansing, Michigan, but this was during the time I was goin' to college.  I also became president of a program--of a fraternity called Alpha Delta Chi [sic. Alpha Rho Chi Fraternity], which is a architectural fraternity out of Michigan; I don't know if it's still in existence; at the time, it was a small college fraternity and you had to have like a four point GPA to be a member, and I was the first and only African American member at the time of the program, so--and I became president (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  So you had a four point GPA.
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm, in college, yeah.
Speaker 2: So you were a good student.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, I've always had good grades, I just--the behavior was the problem, but once I got myself together, that, that corrected itself out.  And then I also, because of the fact that Bob Riddle, like I said, was my mentor, I also worked with, like I said, a program called Project LEAP, which is Labor Education Advancement Program, and that was in Detroit--in Lansing; he worked for the State of Michigan and I worked with him as a volunteer on the weekends doing math, tutoring and science and stuff like that, talkin' to high school kids about going into construction, and I did that as a volunteer.  And that's--he's the one who actually got me started doin' volunteer work in my life.
Speaker 2: He was Bob Riddle, right?
Speaker 1: Bob Riddle of the Urban League.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And you met him in Lansing, right? Yeah (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Lansing, Michigan, right.
Story_ID: 436239
Speaker 1: When you were at the University of Detroit [University of Detroit Mercy, Detroit, Michigan], were you commuting?
Speaker 2: I was commuting back and forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I notice you hadn't mentioned any Detroit [Michigan] activities (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah; I just went to school there because basically, the sch--Motorworld [ph.] was owned by Goodyear [Tire and Rubber Company, Akron, Ohio], and Goodyear gave us a scholarship and the scholarship was for a technical school, and University of Detroit was the one that they selected for me to go to, which I'm surprised I didn't go to Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan], but that's the one that they had, and because a lot of the factories were out of Detroit, so that's the one.  And it wasn't really a major problem; I mean I have relatives in Detroit, so when I had to, I would stay with them.  I worked with Motorworld part-time, I worked with Motorworld part-time; I even went to school part-time, that's why it's so--
Speaker 1: Okay; that's, that's a--quite a hike to make every day, though.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so I would do it like maybe like Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and then Thursday, Friday come home and stuff like that, and go to work two days.  I--you could only work between fifteen and twenty hours part-time, and that's what I was workin' at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there, are there any teachers at the University of Detroit that stand out (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Well, I had a--I had a, a professor name Dr. Cox who was the head of the architectural department, and he was the--one of the only African American teachers at their--it's C-O-X--and he was kinda like my college mentor; he kept me involved, he was the one who got me into Alpha Delta Chi [sic. Alpha Rho Chi Fraternity], he was the one who kept me doing different things.  He was the one who actually--'cause I had every intention of bein' an architect like I said, I really didn't like the engineering, and he's the one who persuade me that there was more of an avenue for black engineers than it was for black architects, so--and he said that you can get into NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] , he--there was more--other things--opportunities and at that time, black engineers were very, very rare--very, very rare, you know.  He would say it like, "You know, most architects--not unless you work for a big, big company or something like that, you know, as an African American you, you have a hard time," he said--but the--at that time, it was durin' the early '70s [1970s] that they were lookin' for African Americans to actually be, you know, quote-unquote their quota number, and so if you had a decent grade and if you did pretty good in college--I had, I had a--quite a few offers, so--but I signed a--the one thing is that with Goodyear you had to sign a five-year contract that once you get outta school that you have to work for them and pay them back for them paying you to go to school, so--
Speaker 1: Hmm.  So who did you work for?
Speaker 2: I worked for Goodyear.
Speaker 1: For Goodyear, okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  I mean it was--it's Motorworld.  Motorworld, who's owned by Goodyear.
Story_ID: 436240
Speaker 1: You stayed involved in civic activities, I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Oh, yeah, yeah; even when I was in--like I said, I started off with that in Lansing, Michigan when I graduated from college [University of Detroit; University of Detroit Mercy, Detroit, Michigan].  I met my wife [Toni Rodgers] in college at the time, and she was from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and I ran into a company who basically interviewed me at that time.  The nuclear power industry was pickin' up, and they interviewed me; they were lookin' for an African American who could do both engineering and architecture, and there was a company called Gilbert/Commonwealth [Inc., Commonwealth Associates, Inc.] in Reading, Pennsylvania who basically hired me, so they moved my wife and I to Reading, Pennsylvania.  And then I became president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I got on the board of directors of the Police Athletic League, I was the wrestling coach there, I was in charge of their educational program, I set up the only college chapter at the time was called Kutztown University [Kutztown, Pennsylvania], K-R-U-T-Z [sic.] Town University; it was right outside of Reading, Pennsylvania, and I set up a junior NAACP college chapter there with all white kids, which was really impressive at the time because of the fact that we got them motivated enough that they wanted to--and they actually came and did like tutoring and sponsoring like that, for African American kids to go to college, and that's how we started that up.  So I got--after Lansing [Michigan] I got, like I said, president NAACP, I got involved with Big Brothers Big Sisters in Reading, Pennsylvania, I was on the board of directors for them, president NAACP, I got involved with Police Athletic League as a wrestling coach, educational director--so I did a lot of, a lot of the--and plus I did things for my church, workin' with kids as well.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  You stay pretty busy.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  At that time, my wife and I didn't have any children, so we just kinda like--was very community-minded.  My wife was on United Way [Worldwide], and she did some different things as well.
Story_ID: 436241
Speaker 1: Okay, so how long were you in Reading [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: We were in Reading for about five years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that brings us to around 1980 or so?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then--well, no, 'cause we were there--I think like--it was like the middle of '80 [1980] or somethin' like that 'cause we moved to Chicago [Illinois].  My wife [Toni Rodgers] got a position--a promotion from CNA in Reading, Pennsylvania to a CNA here in Chicago [Illinois], and at that time, they helped me get a job with a company called A.M. Kinney [Inc., Cincinnati, Ohio], which was a architectural engineering company, and we moved back to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we've been in Chicago ever since then.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you still--I guess you continued your civic involvement here, right?
Speaker 2: Since I've been here, I've done, believe it or not, I've been with the, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Evanston, Illinois, I'm on the board of Coalition For Improved Education [In] South Shore [CIESS] in Chicago right now--
Speaker 1: Right, that's a far hike from Evanston, too; that's a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Yeah.  I'm also a commissioner, a zoning commissioner for the City of Evanston, I have my own program which I started; it's called the Youth Action Ministry, YAM, which I started back when I joined, under Dr. Hycel B. Taylor, Second Baptist Church [Evanston, Illinois], and he was the president of Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition], so he got me because of my motivation and actually, at the time when I first came to Reading, they got me to run for like--for school board, and I was a human relation commissioner, and some other things as well.  And so ever since then I have--I'm a person that believe in giving back, so I've always been involved in the community.
Story_ID: 436242
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us about YAM [Youth Action Ministry, Evanston, Illinois]; that seems like a major act--volunteer activity (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Well, Youth Action Ministry, like I said, when I got involved with it at the time, there was like--it was started at Second Baptist Church [Evanston, Illinois]; there was like five students in it.  Dr. [Hycel B.] Taylor, one Sunday, announced that he was lookin' for somebody to take over his youth program.  My wife [Toni Rodgers] and I--we came and we met with him and we told him that our goal was to make the youth program not a sec--not a church program, but make it community-based program, and he asked what did we mean by that, we said that we think that it's very important that we open up our doors not only to kids of the church, but kids--not only of Evanston [Illinois], but kids of the community.  So we came up with this crazy idea; we said, "Why don't we do college trips during the summer?"  And he goes, "Well, there's not that many people doing college trips; college trips are"--Dr. Taylor was sayin' at the time, were like really, really expensive.  And we said, "Well, how about we have our kids raise money?  Now, we'll show the kids how to do like car washes, we'll show 'em how to sell t-shirts, how to sell barbeque--things that we learned in Detroit [Michigan] in Lansing [Michigan]."  And we took the kids to Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan] the very first year that we started the Youth Action Ministry.  When we got back from there, we decided that what we wanted to do was--because of--my wife is a former educator and bein' one of the financial aid officers and directors at Michigan State University, we wanted to have the kids fill out a application, so we started tutoring kids, we started doing mentoring and things like that, and from there we decided that we wanted to focus--because we were dealin' with African American kids, we wanted to focus on, on African American colleges.  So we took the kids--the next time we took the kids, we took the kids to Nashville, Tennessee.  We took 'em to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], we took 'em to Meharry Medical School [sic. Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], we took 'em to the colleges in the Tennessee area, the black colleges, and that's basically how YAM got started.  And since then, we have had, I would say anywhere from three to four thousand kids have actually gone through my program.  Ninety-five percent of the kids that go through my program actually graduate from college, and we do--and the program is basically--there's no money that exchange--all the adults who are in the program basically volunteer their services.  The kids run the program; they are the ones who make the decisions about what they wanna do, how they wanna do it; we teach the kids everything from junior toast master, public speaking, to investments, to--they even do things with senior citizens as for doin' grocery shoppin' for 'em and things like that, but our main goal is gettin' kids off the street and givin' 'em some basis for education--for them to improve themselves.  We have been in Essence magazine, we have recognized--recognized [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor, [HistoryMaker] Senator Carol Moseley Braun has recognized us, we've been recognized by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], we've been recognized by [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson, [HistoryMaker] Jesse Jackson, Jr., we've been recognized by several different people.  I mean we've been--every year we're getting different awards.  We just got--we were just in Washington, D.C. just recently where we went to Jesse Jackson, Jr.'s office.  The kids got a chance to go to the White House [Washington, D.C.], so we take--I mean this year we're takin' the kids--this spring we're takin' the kids to visit black colleges in Atlanta [Georgia]; in the summer we're takin' the kids to visit colleges in Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana.  So, and like I said, we've been doin' this for about twenty-five years in this dynamic.  It's dynamic; the kids love it.
Speaker 1: Now, you keep a full-time job; you're not--you don't do this for a living; this is volunteer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  No, this is volunteer; this is, this is volunteer.  I'm an engineer full-time; I'm a full-time engineer.
Speaker 1: All right, so do you have to write all the proposals for this organization, or--
Speaker 2: Actually, we have a board of directors that--actually we have a, a young lady name Jan Roy [ph.], who write proposals like for the school district; she's on the board of directors so she help us write grant proposals and things like that.  My wife and I do a lotta the writing, a lotta the counseling, but we have a, a very dynamic board, and we try to select board members.  Vickie Pasley, who's a well-known attorney here in Chicago [Illinois], she's our legal advisor; Bill Jackson [ph.] who's also the church's attorney, is also our legal advisor.  Dr. Sandra Shelton who's a professor of accounting at DePaul University [Chicago, Illinois] is our financial advisor, so we have people--and all these people volunteer their services; everybody volunteer their services just--Judge Mary Maxwell Thomas is on our board of directors.  She's been our counselor and do things for us, so we have different people, and the thing what makes it is that it's just constantly growing, it's constantly growing.
Story_ID: 436243
Speaker 1: Do you have a certain philosophy of how you think youth ought to be dealt with in a, in a program like this [Youth Action Ministry (YAM), Evanston, Illinois]?  I mean how do you, how do you really do something like this (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Well, I can't--my biggest--I think the problem is that, with kids, is that kids feel like sometimes parents or adults are, are sort of dictating to them, you know.  My thing is you have to make a kid feel comfortable that they have some voice, some input into their life.  A lotta times, we as adults forget about the part that kids have a mind of their own, you know, and the same thing that we did when we were younger--I mean there's a lot more peer pressure right now dealin' with kids; there is an awful lot more of problem with kids dealin' with drugs and sex, and all this other stuff, but the thing is most kids just want somebody that they can talk to; that they can feel comfortable, and once you get a student to trust you and feel comfortable--you gotta be honest with students; I mean I think that sometimes we--and that's what I was tellin' you, we put these artificial fronts on ourselves that we were born perfect as adults and we weren't, you know.  Kids like to identify that, yeah, you grew up, you know, and that you had some issues in life as well.  And I think that the kids realize with, with me--I have this story and I'm--hopefully I won't mention the girl's name.  We took--on our second trip in--that we took, we had this young girl from Evanston [Township] High School [Evanston, Illinois] who, who went on the trip, and her mom forced her to go, and I was there and we had over a hundred kids on this trip, and this young lady who was one of my advisors, name Miss Myra Miles [ph.], come to me and said, "[HistoryMaker] Kenneth [D. Rodgers], we got a problem."  And this little girl who was no taller--she was like really small, said, "I hate it!"  She said, "I hate the trip--I hate everybody.  I mean I don't like anybody on this trip."  She goes, "I wanna go home; I wanna go home now."  So I told her, I said--tell you what, I said, "Spend one day on the trip; just one day on the trip," I said.  "If you, tomorrow morning, cannot find one person out of a hundred-somethin' people on this trip that you like, that you can identify with, I will personally out of my pocket, fly you back to Evanston, Illinois."  So, by the--by--I don't know if it was by luck or by the grace of God; I'm one of these person--I get excited, and when we do these trips, we always get like motivational speakers to come in to speak to the kids, and unfortunately, somethin' happened where the motivational speaker could not make it the night that we had to do it, so I had to speak, and I was talkin' to the kids about self-pride, about ownership in one's self, about taking responsibility for one's self, about looking out for one's self, about you owe yourself, you should love yourself, you should hug yourself in the morning.  So, the next morning I'm sittin' at the--I go around talkin' to all the kids, I was sayin', "Hi, hi, hi, hi, how're you doing?"  You know, "How's everybody doing?"  And this little girl come up to me and go, "Well, Mr. Rodgers, I got some good news and I got some bad news."  And I said, "What's the--what's the good news?"  She goes, "Well, out of a hundred and so-many people, I've only found one person that I really, really like on this trip."  And I said, "Okay, okay, okay, we can handle this; that's a start." I said, "So, what's the bad news?"  She goes, "Well, the bad news is the person I like is really you."  And I said, "That's amazing."  This girl has basically, I've been her mentor ever since.  When she got married, I gave her away at her wedding, she--her and her husband, who is an attorney, they live in Los Angeles, California.  I guess you probably know who it is now.  I'm the godfather of the children, I mean I--she, she writes to me on a regular basis.  Before she was moving to Los Angeles, she was kinda like my assistant director of the educational program, so--and I think that's what it is; kids have to be able to identify with you as an adult.  And the thing that I try to tell kids is that it's nothing wrong--it's nothing wrong with making mistakes, you know; everybody makes mistakes.  The thing is that you gotta be responsible; you gotta, you gotta be wanting--willing to be better than what you are, you know, and I, and I think that's what you--what it is, and as you just gotta be honest, you gotta be really, really honest with kids.  I don't think it's some magic potion, I don't think it's some magic thing that makes kids more, you know--cling to anybody.  I think kids--everybody wants to be loved, but I think with kids, they especially want somebody that they can talk to, you know; they have, they have a lotta pressure on them, and kids want somebody that they can just sit down and say, "Listen, I got some problems, I just need to talk to somebody," you know, and I think that's what a--that's the secret behind kids.  You know, we have a, a model with YAM that says, "Bringing out the best in the best to deliver their best," and we tell our kids, "You are the best," you know.  No matter what position you are in your life, no matter how old you are, how young you are, you are the best; you can become anything you want to be in life.  Don't ever let anybody, black, white or whatever, tell you you can't achieve somethin' in life, you know.  You deserve the best, so why not get the best?  And I--that's what I tell kids.
Story_ID: 436244
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a particular motivational philosophy or a style that--I mean 'cause there're a lotta dif--today--this is the age of motivational speakers, it seems, and a lotta people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Yeah, yeah, but my thing is I tell students that--you gotta be careful with motivational speakers, you know.  I do a lotta speakin' around the country, motivational speaking, and I tell the kids that basically, you need to do--evaluate with your motivational speakers.  When you have somebody speakin' in front of you, and if they have to read everything they're sayin' from a piece of paper, if they can't talk about their own life experience, you need to be very careful of that individual, you really, really do.  I think with motivational speakers, the key is you have to, you have to face up; you have to be willing to identify and talk from your heart and talk about your own personal experience about dealin' with kids more-so than anything else, and I think can buy into that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you gave some statistics, but what's your--what statistics really tell the story of what you're doin' the best--
Speaker 2: Well, I think that statistics tells you that the program [Youth Action Ministry (YAM), Evanston, Illinois] is successful, that it doesn't take--I think there were--we have--and I'm not being critical of the program; I think that for African Americans I've learned from my ancestors, which is the most important part, is that they used to pray and believe for their children, and they gave out of their hearts.  They didn't, they didn't--the rewards was not necessarily money, it was the idea of seeing their children to advance, and I'm the same way; I tell people on my board and things like that, our goal is to help kids out; it's not--our goal is not to make money off of this, our goal is not to have kids to pay a lotta money.  Our goal is to help any child out there in the community.  If a child needs something, and if they cannot financially afford it, then we should figure out a way to help a child out, to get what they need to get, you know, and I, and I, and I really believe that.  I think that we have a tendency of lookin' for programs where you're paying the administrator, you're payin' for the building, you payin'--and we don't do that, you know.  Every penny we get, every penny goes 100 percent to the kids, and we even, as adults, pay money out of our pockets to help kids out, so--
Speaker 1: That is different, it's unusual.
Speaker 2: And I, and I was tellin' you before, the thing that makes our program successful and, and it's the only one like it, is the kids run it 100 percent.  The kids are the boss--they are the directors.  I am--even though I am the executive director, I'm the executive director behind the scenes because the kids tell me what they will and will not do.  We're planning a trip to Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana; the kids picked the colleges, the kids pick when we're gonna go, the kids are the ones who figure out how we're gonna pick the rooms, the kids sit up the rules and regulations, the kids are in the financial ads for the buses and things like that.  So kids do everything, you know; my job is just to make sure that it's done so that we don't have any problems, and that's the problem--that's the thing with all the different adults working with us.  When we do self-esteem workshops, we actually ask the kids, "What is it that you want us to talk about?  Who do you want us to bring in here?"  When we take kids, when we do college trips, one of the things which is unbelievable is that we actually interview chaperones; I mean the kids actually interview the chaperones.  We do a fingerprint background check more so on adults than we do on the kids, you know, and if the kids don't feel comfortable with a chaperone, they don't go.  We don't let parents go on the trip 'cause it's a children's program, and the kids sometimes can't be themselves if their parents are there, so we don't let parents go on the trip; kids go on their own, you know, and the kids love it, the kids love it.
Story_ID: 436245
Speaker 1: What's the success rate in terms of sending the kids on the college tour?  Do they mostly all go to school, or?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say probably--unfortunately, I would say probably 75 percent of the kids, and I'm sayin' unfortunately; 75 percent of the kids that go on the tours go to college; unfortunately the percentage of kids that go to [historically] black colleges [and universities, HBCUs] is not as high as we'd like for them to be.  Our goal is to get the--motivate the kids to go to college because of the fact that a lotta the kids are out of state, kids that will visit like Tennessee or Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  The cost of goin' to a black college sometimes is a little bit higher, you know, and if you go to an interstate college, it's a lot cheaper.  And so our rates for getting--our rates for getting kids into college is good; I mean that--statistics wise we are, we're good at that.  Our goal is to get--because we were close to it through United Negro College Fund [UNCF], our goal is to get more kids into black colleges, and we're still workin' on that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, I know what it was; I was gonna ask before is like, well what is--what kind of a decision-making process do you use for so many--how many youth typically make a decision, and what, what's the process you use to--
Speaker 2: Well, we have, we have a very unique board; it was something that the kids set up.  To be an officer of YAM [Youth Action Ministry, Evanston, Illinois], you need to have at least a 3.5 [GPA] in high school, you gotta be involved in the community, you know--not only in church, but in the community; you have to be a role model.  The kids have to write--basically, the officers are--we have like one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight--probably 'bout nine different kids are officers.  We have a president, two vice president, a sergeant of arms, a secretary, a youth coordinator, a youth representative from different churches or different schools and things like that, and they are the board of directors, and it's anywhere from nine to twelve kids that run it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  And they don't have to be, even though our program is, one of the things, even though our program is founded in the church [Second Baptist Church, Evanston, Illinois] and it's in Evanston [Illinois], you do not have to be a member of second--of our church, and you don't have to be a, a resident of Evanston to be on the board of directors; anybody can be, if they fit the qualifications that the kids set up.
Story_ID: 436246
Speaker 1: We were talkin' off-camera about some of the kinda workshops you do, and some of the special challenges that youth have today.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Like I said, one of the things that we do is we do self-esteem workshops with students, which is something that we try to do every three months; we're setting up one right now for January 29th, 2004 and we're working with Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois], we're working with other churches out of Evanston [Illinois], and we're working with other organizations out of Chicago [Illinois].  The way that we set this up, and like I said, our student runs YAM [Youth Action Ministry, Evanston, Illinois], is that, right now there's a questionnaire goin' out in the community as for the different subjects kids would like to have on those self-esteem workshop--be taught.  The kids would gather that information, and then we will combine that and compile it as to the top subjects that the kids wanna hear; then, what we do is we give them a list of different individuals that we think would be ideal for the workshop.  We have Carl Hampton, who's out of The Family Institute out of Northwestern University who's a licensed social worker; we have another young lady name Keisha Birch [ph.], who's a--she's a child psychiatrist on our board of directors as well.  We have another young lady who's director of District 65 Family Center [Evanston, Illinois] which caters to low-income kids and things like that, who's on our board; we have a young lady name Melda Potts, who used to be over African American recruitment at Northwestern University; she's gonna facilitate the program; she's on our board of directors and she also has her own program called College Outreach, and the two of us basically have always worked together as for helping kids get into college.  Because our church [Second Baptist Church, Evanston, Illinois] is right next door to Northwestern University, we do a lotta different things with their black faculty, staff, and students at Northwestern, so she's been very, very active.  Then what we'll do is we'll--what we're plannin' to do is we're plannin' to do a workshop, and it's an all-day workshop where the kids will come and they will go to the different classes and we will have different subjects--anything--like from sex, drugs, rap, child abuse, education--whatever, and we'll have different adults, that the kids feel comfortable with, talk to 'em about these different subjects, and then at the end, we will have Dr. Potts to facilitate it as for bringing everything together.
Story_ID: 436247
Speaker 1: I've worked for the last, and like I said, I do a lotta community service stuff, for the last three years, I've been doing, facilitating things for [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley for the Youth Leadership [sic. Youth to Leaders, Tavis Smiley Foundation] out of Chicago [Illinois], and so I've done one on family love, I've worked on one on self-esteem (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Now, now what are these?  What exactly are you talking about--Tavis Smiley--
Speaker 1: Well, Tavis Smiley, Tavis Smiley has a program, calls it Youth Leadership, and he has a show on like a--he does it like in Chicago, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], New York [New York], and what he does is he brings in experts in that city to talk to kids, to motivate them about how to be successful in life--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --everything from financing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  This isn't on television, or anything like that--
Speaker 1: No, it's not on television.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No, it's not on television.  But the last one, the main one, 'cause what he does, he does it around the country, then he has like one main one; last year, he had it like in Washington, D.C., and then he had the different top kids from those different workshops to go to Washington, D.C. or to San Francisco [California], or New York, or whatever, and they talk for a weekend about what they learned at these different workshops, so--but I've, I--and I've worked with the Urban League as doing self-esteem workshops for single black fathers, I've done--I was on the board of Chicago Adoption Center [sic.] and I've done a couple of workshops for them, for adoptive parents.  I've been on the board of DCFS [Illinois Department of Children and Family Services], so I've, I've done a lotta different things workin' with kids, and I try to keep them motivated.  But getting back to this workshop, one of the things I've learned is that you have to have the kids' input because if the kids don't feel like they're gonna get somethin' from it, they won't come, you know, so what we try to do is we try to make it so that we get the kids' input as from learning, or what subjects they want to get from it, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  So you conduct a survey?
Speaker 1: So we conduct a survey, throughout the city, you know, different churches, at the high school, or whatever, and let the kids just--and they don't have to put their names on it; they just give it to like one of our officers, drop it in a box at our church, or whatever, and then we just collect it, and then the kids--the officers of YAM [Youth Action Ministry, Evanston, Illinois], which is anywhere from, like I said, nine to twelve kids sit down, combine it together, and then we--that's how we start it off. And we do this like every three or four months.
Story_ID: 436248
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in terms of the specific self-esteem issues that--I mean this is 2004.  Do African American kids have different self-esteem issues than other kids in the city, you think?
Speaker 2: I think that--racism is, to me, is always a big thing that you gotta deal with, you know.  You have to, you have to tell kids that you gonna be black all your life; no matter what you say, no matter what you do, you're gonna have to get around that.  I think one of the things that--I have an adopted daughter that we adopted when she was very, very young, and she was a child who had some physical problems, medical problems.  It's a thing that we--that you gotta teach kids is that you have to love yourself, pride--take some pride in yourself so--and I think African American kids sometimes feel as though that the system is always gonna be against them, so I think that yes, there are some issues that black kids deal with that other kids do not have to deal with, and I think that racism is something that, even though people keep sayin' that it doesn't exist, I--to me, I think it does exist, and I think a lotta the problems that black kids face is because of the racism in America.
Story_ID: 436249
Speaker 1: Now Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] is one of the, among other things, Northwestern's one of the best universities in the United States.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is; it's a tremendous--it's a beautiful, beautiful program and like I said, we have a lot of officers and members.  Dr. Ava [Thompson] Greenwell, who teaches journalism there, is on our [Youth Action Ministry (YAM), Evanston, Illinois] board of directors, so we have a lotta key people from Northwestern who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  You got the Medill School of Journalism [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], one of the best in the country right there--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, so we have a lotta different people from Northwestern who works close with us.  And like I said, we've been doin' this for quite some time, so--
Speaker 1: Now I notice that you have like in the logo, I mean the, the name, Youth Action is--what's the last part--Movement, or?
Speaker 2: Ministry.
Speaker 1: Ministry, Ministry--makes YAM, you know, which is a--the, the crop for Ghana and a lotta West African countries; it's the crop--yams, or the real, the real yams, you know.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, and I think yams stand for strength; I mean to me, really, I really have--I've been lookin', and I don't know if anybody out there can help me with this, I've been lookin' for like a plastic yam symbol that we can get.  I wanted to like--to somehow get a yam that you can somehow get like really, really hard that you can just use as a sample, but we have never been able to find like a really, really big yam that we can--a plastic one or somethin' like that.  We've been to vegetable stores and discount stores and all that out there, but I think--to me, yam stands for strength, you know, for ancestors.  We have done everything with yams; black people have done--you know; you name it, you can do with a yam, and so--to me, I think the, the--even though yam was there under Dr. Hycel B. Taylor--he created the, the Youth Action Ministry--to me, since I've been the executive director for twenty-seven years, is that yam represents a strength in one's self, so--
Speaker 1: You know, I know that you have adinkra symbols from Ghana--actually from Ghana.  Actually--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --this is, this is--did this occur consciously or unconsciously (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  No, well, Dr. Taylor created the whole thing.  I mean his daughter--one of the things we wanted is that when I got into YAM, I wanted to have a symbol; I wanted us to have like a logo that we could use, and so his daughter, who basically was on our board, came up with this whole logo, so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but it's really deeper than--I don't know if most people who would just see it would know the connection between the yam and the country of Ghana, and also bein'--that also bein' the origin of those symbols to bein' a country of Ghana--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the Akan people use the adinkra symbols in their, in their clothing, and in carvings, in artwork; then you've got the, the biggest festival in that part of the world, is a Yam Festival--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --a harvest festival for yams.  I mean the--a lot of dancers are--have to do with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Right.  Well, I think that what, what you gotta look at is that under Dr. Taylor leadership, and I think that, for those people who don't know Dr. Taylor, Dr. Taylor is a dynamic--I mean he was a president of Operation PUSH [Rainbow Push Coalition], he's got books out, he is like my spiritual--not only my spiritual, he's probably like one of my best friends.  He has made it so that YAM itself does represent everything that you just talkin' about and that his thing was to always make sure that kids know where you came from, you know; get that, get that foundation--what, what it's all about--
Story_ID: 436250
Speaker 1: And, you know, Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] is--I make this connection, too--Northwestern is one of the premier seats for African studies in the United States.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And it doesn't--which has in the past, actually precluded--kinda excluded black people, I mean black Americans--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) usually don't participate in African studies on these campuses--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --but Northwestern, Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], University of Wisconsin[-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]--these are the seats for African studies in the United States; that's where they--they are the full departments with chairmen and collections--
Speaker 2: I think Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan] has one, too, if I'm not mistaken (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Yeah, yeah, probably, probably.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, 'cause I know that Michigan State has a dynamic African American study program in their campus, as well.
Speaker 1: I'm talkin' about African studies--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, specific--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know; that are--the ones that we usually are not in.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But that's--it's interesting.  Do you ever use their resources over at Northwestern?
Speaker 2: Not for that.  I mean we use 'em for--we use 'em more-or-less for like the mentoring, the tutoring, the--getting kids motivated and so we're in the process of--right now, our goal is--not this year, but next year, take five kids to Ghana; that's, that's our goal, you know.  And like I said, our--because of the fact that we work with different things and we get corporate sponsors, we get money from the government and things like that, we know that to take a child over to, to Ghana is gonna be about five thousand dollars per person, so right now--we were plannin' to do it this year, but because of the fact that we have to plan--the kids plan stuff like two to three years ahead, that we decided that--the students decided that what we're gonna do is do it next year, so probably the--our five officers will probably end up goin' to Ghana, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just thought I'd mention it 'cause they--you might be able to get some resources outta that department there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: They have this--they have what they call the Melville [J.] Herskovits Library [of African Studies, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --up there, with nothing but--it's a library totally devoted to African studies.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's one of the best in the country.  So--yeah.
Speaker 2: This year, what we're going to do is we're trying to culturally--not the African American as much as the slavery, we're trying to teach the kids about Africa itself, so we're--like every month, we're gonna do somethin' to talk about Africa in our program, so that is something that we're workin' on right now.
Story_ID: 436251
Speaker 1: Then the church [Second Baptist Church, Evanston, Illinois], from what you were describing--now, does the church have a history of--it's the oldest black church in Evanston [Illinois], you said (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Well, it's--Second Baptist originated out of First Baptist Church [Lake Street Church, Evanston, Illinois] in Evanston, which is, or was--is one of the oldest white churches in Evanston.  A bunch of African American slaves didn't think they were bein' treated fairly religiously-wise, and so they got together and decided to build their own church and they called it Second Baptist, and that's how Second Baptist was--and it is the oldest black church, and come to think of it, the majority of African American churches in Evanston is off of Second Baptist, and members who left Second Baptist are just--are tiding to Second Baptist.
Speaker 1: Is it--did it play a role during the Underground Railroad days?
Speaker 2: That I don't know, that I don't know.
Speaker 1: All right, 'cause I live--the same--the exact same history is the history of Second Baptist [Church of Detroit] in Detroit [Michigan], which has (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is it really?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: They started at First Baptist [Church of Detroit, Detroit, Michigan] with the white congregation and split--and formed Second Baptist, which is the oldest black church in Detroit--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and that was the Underground Railroad church, and that sorta thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well Second Baptist, like I said is--and, and it actually, it's a landmark church right now in Evanston, so the original church basically is--the shell is still there but the inside they have done some like little changes to keep it up, but--yeah.
Story_ID: 436252
Speaker 1: Do you have any, well, particular stories that, that really--about your work with YAM [Youth Action Ministry, Evanston, Illinois] that come to mind that you could share with us?
Speaker 2: Well--and I don't, I don't have the right year, but I do know it was in the '90s [1990s].  We were on our fourth or fifth trip and we were heading toward Texas, and one of the things that, and we never even thought about it before, was--we stopped in Louisiana and we stopped and we had two busloads of kids, and the bus driver--and the gas station would not let the kids get off the bus, go the bathroom, or anything; it was really, really surprising.  But that's nothing, that's nothing.  We went to a place called Vidor, Texas, and this is when YAM made national news, and we stopped--it was like eight or nine o'clock, and we were on our way to, I think, to Houston, Texas or to Dallas, Texas or something like this, and we stopped and we had two busload of kids and we went and--what we normally do is we stop where there's like a McDonald's, Burger King; different places where kids can like spread out, get something to eat, and get back on the bus, and we didn't know it was the home of the KKK [Ku Klux Klan], and people start shootin' at the kids; I mean people actually start sh--and we had--it's known--it's in a magazine and everything.  They actually--this was in the '90s [1990s]; they start shooting at the kids--the KKK, and we actually had to have state policemens come in and get the kids back to the hotel.
Speaker 1: This is in the '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: This was in the '90s [1990s], yeah, and I mean we were on national television and everything from this, and it was remarkable.  And, and after that, we went to Washington, D.C. and we were stayin' right outside of Richmond, Virginia and every year after that, we taught--we teach the kids about racism when we goin' to these colleges 'cause we never know what we're gonna run into.  We had one trip where we stayed in Washington, D.C., and this was a really, really nice hotel, and apparently they didn't realize we were a African American group, and we got there and we reserved the swimmin' pool, and one of our kids--we had, we had like seventy-five African American kids there, and one of the kids said, "[HistoryMaker] Mr. [Kenneth D.] Rodgers, there's a dead body floating on the bottom of the pool."  And they had a white lifeguard, and we told him, and the lifeguard said, "These are black kids, they're lyin'; they don't know what they're talkin' about."  And apparently, somehow or another, this body was floating or just drifting in the bottom, and it entangled one of our kids, and it pulled the, the body--the, the weight of the body pulled the girl down, and we had a Chicago [Illinois] policeman who was with us, and Judge Mary Maxwell Thomas was with us, and we pulled the, the girl out the body, and apparently, this boy had a--and it was a white kid had an attack before we got in the pool, and the lifeguard never did believe us and they said that if the lifeguard would have believed us before this, the girl--the kid coulda lived.  So the white parents sued the hotel and used us as witnesses because their kid died because of the fact they didn't believe the black kids.  We went to another place in Richmond, Virginia where me and Carl Davis [ph.] and his wife Yvonne Davis [ph.]--the hotel didn't realize we were black kids and had the state policemen standin' outside all night to watch us, watch us, just make sure that we don't do anything wrong.  Yeah, we went to another place in Nashville, Tennessee when we first went, and the head of the black student government said that, "Now look, let me tell you somethin', after a certain time, you can't walk down certain parts of Nashville, Tennessee because of the fact that it's racism."  Every time we do these trips, one of the things that we do is we take the kids on civil rights museums or civil rights tours and things like that.  So, when we do these trips, it's kinda like a cultural experience.  We took the kids to New York City [New York, New York], and one of the things I'll never forget was that--this was the time that they discovered the, the slaves in New York that was built that would--the underground (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  The, yeah, the slave burial ground, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we didn't know about that, yeah.
Speaker 1: The African Burial Ground, around Wall Street [New York, New York], right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and a lotta those were kids that were killed as slaves, and we didn't know that, you know.  So, yeah, yeah, we have had a lotta racism--a lot, a, a lot, a lotta, lotta racism that we had to deal with.  But you deal with it.  I mean--and that's why I say I think racism is very, very--a big thing in America, and we have to teach kids you know, you have to deal with it.  That's something that--when we do our workshops, Yvonne Davis is one of the oldest YAM members up to me; she started YAM with my wife [Toni Rodgers] and myself.  She come in and talk to the kids about, "You know, you never know what you're going to expect; you never know what you're gonna expect on these trips."  You know, I mean you thinkin' about the '90s [1990s] and runnin' having the KKK shooting at you, having bodies, you know, swimmin' on the bottom of a pool and things like this, and all this stuff is documented, so yeah.
Story_ID: 436253
Speaker 1: What is your opinion of the value today--there's a lotta discussion about [historically] black colleges [and universities, HBCUs] and that they may be--I--we had a--I interviewed [HistoryMaker] Derrick [A.] Bell [Jr.] about a month ago, and he was sayin' that he thought that a lotta black colleges would not exist in five years.
Speaker 2: I agree, I agree, and I think it's unfortunate, it's a shame, but I think it's, it's more of a--it's a financial reason because we do not support them, we have a tendency of--and I did not go to a black college, like I said I went to the University of Detroit [University of Detroit Mercy, Detroit, Michigan]; my wife [Toni Rodgers] is a graduate of Wilberforce University [Wilberforce, Ohio] and then a graduate of Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan], but I think that for some reason or another, we do not support our own colleges.  And even though black colleges are--to me, it's very, very important, and one thing that--if I had to do it all over again, and I tell kids this--when I did--I remember my very first black college tour, and I'll be very honest with you, and the kids might not even know this--I never visit a black college until I went to--I started doin' black college tours for Second Baptist Church [Evanston, Illinois]; I mean I've always done workshops like--as, as an engineer--[The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] when I was in Detroit [Michigan], Michigan State, University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], but I--we went to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] and I fell in love with it.  And I think what it is, it's a, it's a family; it's that family connection that you don't get at a white college.  I--you just don't get it, and I think that it's the family that--and for black people, family is so important; it really, really is.  That is really what makes it so successful.  It is not necessarily your blood family as much as it is that family connection.  I had this thing about--what really, really bothers me is African Americans attackin' African Americans, you know.  Not everybody agrees with each other, but because of all the problems that we have to deal with as African Americans, it's so important that we support each other, you know, even if we don't do it--behind closed doors, we can say what we want to each other, but publicly and openly, I think it's very important that we, we kinda like support each other and show each other that we are a strong body because of the fact that--I know that racism is such an ugly thing; it's a, it's a very hard thing to deal with, but you never know--you never know when you're gonna have to run into it, and it's very, very important that you have that connection.  And for black kids in college, black kids who are tryin' to find a college--the one thing I try to tell them about when you go to black college, is that you get the family values.  You get col--I think you get--the thing is that the black colleges they take a personal investment in their own more so than--and I'm not, I'm not downgrading white colleges, but I think it--it's the fact that that's part of them--they see walkin' on that campus; that's--you know what I mean, that's part of them and they see them walkin' across the auditorium gettin' their degrees; I think it's, it's--they take a, a certain pride in that that, "Yeah, we help you to make somethin' of yourself."  And I think it's very important; I think it is extremely important that we as African Americans realize that we have to be willin' to give somethin' back.  It's not always the dollar that is the important thing; it's that we gotta realize that our ancestors basically died, not for themselves, but for their children, and for their children's children--that basically, that--just a vision that they're gonna make sure their kids don't have to be lynched.  You know, I--and I get very emotional.  I spoke on the last trip and I--and we was at--in front of Abraham Lincoln's memorial and I was tellin' the kids, I said, "You know, you gotta realize somebody died for you to just have these simple rights, you know.  Somebody basically died for just a vision of you just to be able to breathe, to have a job, to go to school, to be able to have clothes on your back," and I think that we have a tendency of takin' these things for granted.  We put so much value on the fact that we live in good homes and that we have the comfortable cars, and that we make the dollars, but we forget about who did it, you know.  We didn't do this on our own; we, we did not, we did not make this on our own back, you know?  Some little kid was, was lynched, was sold, was beat, was--some woman was raped by some white man out there in order for you to be successful, you know, and you need to be willing to give that back, you know.  If you--if somebody is willing to die for you, what are you willing to give back to them?  And I, and I'm, I'm a fanatic about that.  Maybe that might be the reason why I do a lotta things from my, my heart; I don't look for the money.  I'm willin' to say like, you know, I know my mother [Irene Shipp Rodgers] and father [Joe Rodgers] basically--they suffered, you know, they suffered as all--as all African American people have suffered in this country in one way or the other.  But the question is, they did it outta their hearts; they gave everything they could to help not only their children, but other children in the community, to give back.  So it's our responsibility to make sure that we give it back as well.
Story_ID: 436254
Speaker 1: Now this is more of a technical question here, and I have a teenage daughter and other people who will watch this tape later on may be interested in this question, but what is the path to--I mean there, there--you know, you said kids have choices, that can go to a state university, which is probably the cheapest way to go to school--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --a junior college first--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a state university; if they have good grades in high school or are going to a good high school, chances are they can qualify for any school, but there are--you know, for most of them, a state university, if they're college bound, is gonna be the cheapest way to go, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is.
Speaker 1: But if you, if you're talkin' about the [historically] black colleges [and universities, HBCUs], are there--is there a--what mechanism or what path is in place for black kids that are not like, you know, sharecroppers' kids or something, to get into a black school if they're not--if they--if their parents don't have a whole lotta money?
Speaker 2: I think--and this is my own opinion--I think if the--what you gotta look into is the scholarships and different things that are out there for black--there are a lotta money out there for African American kids that has never, ever been utilized; I really do believe that.  I think that if you decide you wanna go to a out-of-state college and if you decide to go to a black college, contact that college; contact somebody who goes, who basically know somethin' about that college, look into the--go on the website; I mean when we were growin' up--you and I were growin' up, computers was not a thing.  Now, you can basically bring up everything on the website.  You make up a list of, of African American scholarships, you be surprised how much the--I remember when I was growing up and I graduated from [J.W.] Sexton High School [Lansing, Michigan], we had some girl--it was a black girl who got a, a scholarship to go to, to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] for just using Colgate--for brushing her teeth.  There was a, there was a, a national--was a scholarship set up for you to brush--for this, and you can go to any college you wanted to go to. So there are a lotta--and I'm not only sayin' black scholarships, but look on the basis of what scholarship--what monies are out there.  College is expensive; it is, and it's gonna get more and more expensive and, and unfortunately, the competition for black kids to go to black colleges and black colleges competing with other black colleges just to stay afloat, is gonna be really unbelievable in the next few years.  I think that a lotta black colleges may not be in existence because of their numbers, you know.  I don't think it's really the quality of the education, I think it's more-or-less financially you don't have the money there to stay afloat--
Story_ID: 436255
Speaker 1: So I think that it's very, very important that you, that you look at trying to--one of the things which is really, really important and which is really, really surprising--we went to Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland]; this was really, really sometime back, and we had this, this older black lady from the admission office talk to us and she says that it's very, very, very, very important that we as African American start preparin' our kids for college in elementary school.  It's not that you're gonna become a doctor, a lawyer, a architect, a dentist, or anything like that, its object is that you will go to college, you know.  You may not go to a black college, but you will be goin' to a college.  We wait until you get into middle school and sometimes into high school, and basically it's wrong.  Non-African Americans basically--they teach their kids, something that we need to learn, is that education is so important, you know; it is very, very important that we teach 'em that, to teach 'em that at a very young age, you know.  I have a grandson whose six years old, and he was goin' to a school in Evanston [Illinois], and they had this award program, and it was, it was--and they had all these different kids gettin' awards.  He asked himself, wait a minute; how come there's no black kids getting awards?  And he was six years old.  And the teachers wrote him up--saying, "Your kid's a racist."  And he wasn't a racist, he was just, just askin' a very simple question--"How come no black kids are getting awards?"  We need to teach our kids there's some value--there's some value in yourself; that you got--you know.  And where--and we always go behind closed doors like, "Aww," you know, "you can't come out and say things like that because it's racism."  And it's not racism.  And I can't remember the guy's name; he's on the tip of my tongue.  The man who wrote 'The Conspiracy to Destroy the Black Child' [sic. 'Countering the Conspiracy to Destroy Black Boys,' Jawanza Kunjufu] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Oh, Jawanza Kunjufu.
Speaker 1: Kunjufu--and he made a very good point, that most black kids are very aggressive, you know; they are very aggressive and they want to learn and they want--and they have that, and when we get the kids into the school system--the school system is set up to make black kids fail; they--it really--it really, really has.  And no matter what people say, that's, that's the way the system is.  Black kids who are aggressive are basically put in special ed [special education].  This is--that's not the way your kids are supposed to act or behave.  So I think that the thing you gotta look at, first of all, is that you gotta teach kids at a early age that college is important--extremely important; that it's not a matter of you goin' to a black or white college, it's a matter of that you got to do better than just high school, and we gotta teach kids that right--as soon as they start readin' A, B, C.  Take 'em--I mean we do one thing in Second Baptist [Church, Evanston, Illinois] that we do--we were tiding with the high school [Evanston Township High School, Evanston, Illinois]--it's called job shadowing, where we have African American professionals and non-professionals take kids from all over to spend a day on their job, to show them what a person who's on a factory line does, and what a secretary does, what a engineer does, and what a doctor does, you know.  We, we had all that different thing, and I think it's very, very important that we show kids that.
Story_ID: 424067
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I think the--my number one concern is for us to love each other--to have more love and have more respect for each other, to have more, more pride in our heritage.  I think that we take--like I said, I have not--I'm not the best person when it comes to African American history, but I think that we take what our ancestors did for granted, you know; I really do.  I think that we owe them a lot more than what we, we give them credit for and I, and I think that we as a race need to learn to, to share, to give back, to love, to have more respect for each other, to have more patience for each other, to support each other, you know, to--I think black-on-black crime is, is such a, such a tragedy to me.  I think that we do more damage to ourself than anybody else by the things we have learned.  When we were growin' up, a lotta the things, the crimes and things that happen, African Americans would never be even--thought about doing stuff like this and now it's nothing new, you know.  And I think that one of the things that we need to learn is to have more love; have more understanding, to support each other and to, and to put more back into our youth.  I mean I think that we should never give up on our young people; they are our future, they are our life; we need to give everything we can to help them to learn, to--and, and I think it's like a cycle; you recycle, you know.  You gotta constantly give it, and give it, and give it, and you can never get tired.  You know, I, I--people always say--because you know, "[HistoryMaker] Mr. [Kenneth D.] Rodgers, you're getting older; when you gonna give it up?"  And I said that, "I'll give it up when God says it's time, you know; he will be the one who's gonna make a--you know, health-wise or death, or whatever."  To me, I'll give it until, 'til the very end because of the fact that so many other people gave it for me, you know.  I used to have--and, and I'm a radical, for those people who don't know--for this tape; I really consider myself a radical.  I used to have a picture in my office, and it says, "You can kill the man but you can't kill his dreams."  And I used to--it was a picture of the people bein' lynched down south, and the bodies bein' burn and, and they're pointin' up to 'em and smilin', and I said--and that's very--that's very, very important, you know.  This is your body, but you're dream and your belief is somethin' that lives on forever, you know.  When you die, the people gonna remember you for what you gave to, to society, you know.  Yeah, you may have been rich, you may have the luxury homes, but people remember you as to--I don't want somebody to sit down and say, "Ken Rodgers was a, a--was a dynamic engineer; Ken Rodgers was a--rich"--I want some young kid to come up to me and say, "I remember Mr. Rodgers getting--giving all he could to help me get to where I am," and I--and to me, that's, that's my reward; that's my prize in life, it is when I have kids come back and just say, "Thank you, Mr. Rodgers, for helpin' me out, helpin' me to be somethin' more than what I thought I could ever be."  And I think that's important.
Story_ID: 424068
Speaker 1: Tell me, if you--when you look back on the things you've done, and you're still relatively young, despite being born in 1951 (laughter).
Speaker 2: Shh, quiet (unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I think--everything that I've done--well, no, no; let me, let me change that; I think everything I've done has made Ken [HistoryMaker Kenneth D.] Rodgers to be what he, what he, what he has become in life and that is, to me, a success.  And I mean I don't quote-unquote call myself a success because of my degrees; I call myself a success because of the fact that I'm, I'm an African American man who takes some pride in my life, who has, who has a beautiful wife [Toni Rodgers] who takes pride in me, we have children that takes pride in me, and I think that success is when other people look at you as bein' something of a person of character, and I think success is character; that's what life is all about--it's, it's buildin' character.  I would probably have changed some of the things I've done when I was younger, you know.  I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  And that brings us to the rock throwing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, there's a story associated with that, but we didn't finish.  What was the end of that story?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I was sad.  Unfortunately, when I was goin' to college [University of Detroit; University of Detroit Mercy, Detroit, Michigan] and--let's repeat this story again.  When I was in third grade, unfortunately, I had this teacher that threw a little soft--threw a softball; I won't say little softball, but threw a softball at my head, or at me, and said, "Here, catch this."  And I missed it, and I thought the kids were laughin' at me so I picked up this great big rock off the playground and threw it at her and said, "Here, catch this."  And it hit her right in the head, right above her eye, and it cut her--I mean really bad, and she was bleeding, I mean she had to go to hospital; she was in the hospital and my mother [Irene Shipp Rodgers] and father [Joe Rodgers] were scared that the, you know, school was gonna sue, and all this other stuff, but it didn't happen, but when I was a student--when I was in college, one of the requirements was that you had to actually do student teaching, and unbelievable or not, I actually ended up bein' her student teacher, and she--they did this portfolio of me like, "Here's this Ken Rodgers, Project LEAP [Labor Education Achievement Program] director, working with the Urban League, doing things in the community, doing--studying architecture," and she was just so excited.  Here's a African American black man--'cause in Lansing, Michigan the school was teaching in was a black school, and she said that I can have this guy come, and I was the only black male at that time studying engineering, so she wanted me to come, and I walked in the classroom and she realized I was the same one who threw the rock at her head.  And so she almost passed out, like, "No, you can't be that same person."  And the kids didn't even realize it and so she told the kids the whole story.  "He put me in the hospital and tried to kill me," you know, and the kids were all crackin' up like, "Wow, Mr. Rodgers, you really did this?"  And I was so embarrassed and I was--I--it--and, and I didn't tell you the whole story.  Every day, for six weeks, I brought her flowers--every day for six weeks, I--just to say, "I'm sorry, I really am sorry; I didn't really mean it."  And it wasn't like expensive flowers, just--and I don't know if she really forgave me or not; she kept saying, "Well, you were a little kid, you didn't know any better."  I kept sayin', "But I was so embarrassed; that was the most embarrassing thing I've ever done."  So, yeah, I, I--that, that, that did happen but--her name was Miss Maryella [ph.], and it was the Allen Street [Elementary] School in Lansing, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Well, how, how do you spell her last name?
Speaker 2: M-A-R-Y-E-L-L-E, something like that--Mary Ella, Ella, somethin' like that.
Speaker 1: The whole last name is Maryella.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah; that's her last name.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 424069
Speaker 1: Tell us, likewise, when you look back at everything you've done to this point and which is--and you still got a lot to do, what would you consider, at this point, to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think YAM [Youth Action Ministry, Evanston, Illinois] is, I really do.  I think the fact that I have, I have had--have had so many kids go through my program, have been successful to a point where they have actually learned to give back.  The majority of my kids, now--like I say--'cause the kids don't have to pay any money and there's nothin' like that, but the kids--I teach kids is that when you graduate from college, just do the same thing--give back.  And the majority of the kids that have actually come through my program, they come back and actually work with my program; they work with other high school kids, elementary school kids, or even if they live in--I have a young lady, a girl name Jennifer Barton [ph.], who's a graduate of Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and we just went to Washington, D.C. and she started her own YAM in Washington, D.C. at her church, so I mean it's nice to see these kids realizing that what I taught them about values and giving back is so important that they're doin' the same thing.
Story_ID: 424070
Speaker 1: Now, did your parents [Joe Rodgers and Irene Shipp Rodgers] get a chance to see you become successful?
Speaker 2: Like I said, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Well, your father's still alive, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father's still alive; my mom passed away about, about three years ago.  I don't know what you call success, you know; my, my parents--because of the fact that I was really like a street child, they never could under--comprehend what a engineer was, you know.  They would brag about all their other kids but they never could understand what a engineer was all about.  I think my, my father was more content with the fact that I was spiritually involved with the church 'cause I was--I'm a deacon at my church [Second Baptist Church, Evanston, Illinois]; he was very happy with the fact that I was a good husband, and he was very happy with the fact that I wasn't in jail.  I think my mom and dad love all nine of their children, so successful--I think they're, they're just happy about all their kids bein' successful and the fact that none of them ended up in prison; all of 'em went to college, all of 'em--all of us, all eight of us, somehow or another have somehow or another given back workin' with kids in the community.  I have a sister who's in Richmond, Virginia and she's over a community college over there doin' the same thing; I have another broth--I have a brother in Detroit [Michigan] who work with inner-city kids, helpin' kids to become better; I have another brother in South Bend, Indiana doin' the same thing, so I have, I have brothers and sisters who just have done the same thing my mother and father have taught us to do, so I think success in my family is that yeah, you didn't go to prison, you went to college, and that you go to church.  So, yeah, I think they did consider me a success.
Story_ID: 424071
Speaker 1: Is there anything else about yourself that you need to tell us before we--'cause we're almost at the end.  I have one more question, but--
Speaker 2: I thank the opportunity of being part of this [The] HistoryMakers program; I'm really, really shocked that I was bein' considered.  Bein' a young person, I always thought that, that bein' a history maker, you had to be an older person.  The one thing that I would like to tell people is that I don't want you to use me necessarily as a role model, but use my actions and my deeds as role models as for giving back and learning to respect our race as a, as a family--to love and support each other.
Speaker 1: And this is the last question we ask, and it's similar to legacy, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a person who just gave the best he could to as many as he could.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you very much, sir.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 424072
Speaker 1: I think the picture you're lookin' at right there is two young ladies.  I had the unique opportunity to be selected as a Man of the Year by the Chessman Association [Chessmen Club of the North Shore] out of Chicago [Illinois].  This is taken at their program and this was in the year 2002, if I'm not mistaken.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This young lady is a part of Chicago Public School[s, CPS]; her name is Latashia Grant [ph.]; she was our very first president out of the Rogers Park [Chicago, Illinois] area, and this is at her high school graduation where I was the keynote speaker at her high school graduation.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: This was just this August.  We went--we had the unique opportunity to take a, a busload of kids--the kids were from Chicago, Springfield, Illinois, Ohio, Detroit [Michigan], to a--to visit [historically] black colleges [and universities, HBCUs] in the Washington, D.C. area.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: For the last three years, I had the unique opportunity to be invited by [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley, personally, to be part of his youth leadership conference [Youth to Leaders Leadership Institute] that's held in Chicago.  This is a, a picture of me with Tavis Smiley in the year 2002, here in Chicago, at DePaul University [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Keep goin'.
Speaker 2: Every January, we have a city-wide youth recognition award dinner that we conduct at Second Baptist Church [Evanston, Illinois], and the kids select some outstanding person that they consider a role model that they would like to be like, and this is from the year 2004, and that's myself and Fox News reporter, Tamron Hall.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This was--oh, this was about twenty-five years ago and they had a surprise recognition dinner at Second Baptist Church for my wife and my, myself.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: This picture here is a picture that is actually thirty years old; this is our--actually the founding team with myself, that found the Youth Action Ministry [YAM, Evanston, Illinois], and this picture consist--myself on the left, Dorothy Barton [ph.], my wife Toni Rodgers, Miss Mya Miles [ph.], Ken Ramsey [ph.], Cindy Reid [ph.], Susan Roddy [ph.] and Rita Jasper [ph.].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Every year, for the last five years, the Youth Action Ministry for community service, they play a black Santa, where we actually dress up as a black Santa Claus with black elves, where if a church is lookin' for a black Santa or a school, or a banquet, we will donate our services for free.  This was taken about five years ago.
Speaker 2: This is a picture that was about three years ago, the year 2001.  This is my wife and I, our twenty-fifth wedding anniversary; we renewed our vows.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on, please.  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my, my friend and my mentor, who helped me to start YAM.  This is a picture of Dr. Hycel B. Taylor, and this is a picture of one of our annual youth award program in January.  This probably is a picture about ten years old.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: I had the unique opportunity--the young lady I was talkin' about who's--I'm a mentor for, she had--she got married about a couple years back, and this is at her wedding reception.  This is a picture of my wife and myself.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a picture of our just recent trip again.  In this picture is myself, Dr. Cynthia Chambley [ph.], who's the director of the YAM in Springfield, Illinois, and this is the nurse from the trip; her name is Melissa Rogers [ph.] from Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture from the year 2001; this was taken at Central State University campus in Wilberforce, Ohio.  This is a picture of Anita Bodie [ph.], myself, and Trina Watley [ph.].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture--we had the unique opportunity--usually, every year, the Second Baptist Church does a black college tour.  About eight years ago, we decided to do a cultural experience, we called it, and this is a picture of, of me on the bus goin' to Harlem, New York [New York].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: In my, in my younger days, since I was born in the '50s [1950s], or whatever, this is a picture of me running in the main course, and this was in the year 2001 in Downtown Chicago.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: We had the unique opportunity to have a young lady, who was president of YAM, name Tamika Jackson [ph.] who lived in Chicago, Illinois, and she was selected as Miss Mahogany, and I think that's year 2002, and this is me presenting her with her award.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: This is a young lady name Stephanie Crompton [ph.], who is one of our former vice president, who's one of the top models, and she lives in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Did she become Miss Something-or-Other?
Speaker 1: She was Miss--some college she went to.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is another picture of our trip to Harlem, New York--the bus of kids inside.  That's me back in the back, way back in the back.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: About two years ago, year 2002, we had the unique opportunity to take the kids to Atlanta, Georgia.  We had--we were at a all-night eating place and a man walked in who had on just a t-shirt and blue jeans, and this is Mr. Lou [HistoryMaker Lewis] Myers, who's the actor from 'It's a Different World' [sic. 'A Different World'] and these are the students and myself, and this was taken in like two years ago, and it was like at one or two o'clock in the morning.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next; it's twenty.
Speaker 1: Every year the, the Chicago Urban League has a youth recognition program for outstanding youth leaders; this was taken with one, two, three, four, five--five of my kids bein' recognized for their outstanding achievement, and the picture is--ooh, I don't have my glasses on--Bianca Reid [ph.], Myra Miles [ph.], Sandra Shelton, Jamie Arsenol [ph.], and Bradley Dominique [ph.], and this was taken at--ooh--in Chicago, at the Urban League award program.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: This was taking--again, this year we went to the Washington, D.C. trip; this is Dr. Williams [ph.], who's the president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Washington, D.C.; he was our special host for our program.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: We had--like I said, we have programs constantly where the kids recognize outstanding people in the community.  This young lady name is Diane Curry [ph.], who was recognized at our African American summer award banquet, and this was in the year 2001.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: This is a family portrait of my wife, myself, and our adopted daughter, Danielle Rogers [ph.], and this picture is at least fifteen years old.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of--I was selected again as Chessman of the Year, Man of the Year for the Chessmen Club, and this was taken at the banquet with the different officers and their wives.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This was taken at Bowie State University's campus [Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland] this year [2004]--me and my youth group.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: I had the unique honor to be selected as a Mr. Black Glow [ph.], which is a black cologne through Ashley Lawrence Fragrances, and this is a picture of a, of--they used for the model.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of us at Florida A&M [University; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] campus, and this was taken in the year 2001.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's it.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Do me a favor.  I'm done with that one; put up the photo of his parents and him at the airport one more time.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, just give us a description one more time on this one while I'm doing (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Like I said, this is-- you want the other picture behind it?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I'm finding that out, so just go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Okay.  This is a picture of, of my foundation and my bringing up--this is my mother, my father, and myself at the Lansing Capital [City] Airport [Capital Region International Airport, Lansing, Michigan].  This is about, about seven or eight years ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And even though you mentioned it in the interview, give us their names.
Speaker 1: On the left-hand side is Joe Oliver Rodgers, that's myself, [HistoryMaker] Kenneth [D.] Rodgers, and that's Miss Irene Rodgers.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Very good; thanks.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead, please.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a picture of, of myself, Kenneth D. Rodgers at J.W. Sexton High School [Lansing, Michigan]; this is my junior year when I was a paper boy carrier for the [Lansing] State Journal, and I was selected for my grades and my--being honored--doing stuff in the community.
Speaker 2: Didn't you deliver more papers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  I delivered more papers than anybody else--
