Story_ID: 506010
Speaker 1: --With Dr. Elizabeth Rawlins [HistoryMaker Elizabeth B. Rawlins] at her home at 101 Dukes County Avenue, Oak Bluffs on the island of Martha's Vineyard in Massachusetts.  The date is June 22nd of 2005.  The interviewer is [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden, and the videographer is Neculai Burghelea.  Madam HistoryMaker, would you give me your full name, including your middle name and would you spell your name for me?
Speaker 2: All right, my full name is Elizabeth B. as in Belle with an E at the end of it, Rawlins.  Did you ask me other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Spell it, just spell it.
Speaker 2: R-A-W-L-I-N-S as well, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, capital B-E-L-L-E.  My maiden name was Miller, so Miller Rawlins, R-A-W-L-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: Dr. Rawlins, what year were you born and where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Cambridge, Massachusetts.  November 25th, 1927.
Speaker 1: I know that you are retired, but how would you describe your profession, your occupation during your long-time career, how would you label yourself, what were you?
Speaker 2: Well technically I'm retired.  I--I would say that I'm a--an retired educator who has taught all the grades from kindergarten through graduate school.  And also spent eleven years as a dean, associate dean of the college at Simmons College [Boston, Massachusetts].  So I've rather covered the waterfront in education.
Story_ID: 506011
Speaker 1: Before we come back to your career and your early education, we have a few warm-up questions--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that we use, People magazine type questions to give the people who will look at your--your story, your life story some dimension of your personality.  And let me ask you, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Ice cream (laughter).
Speaker 1: Ice cream, okay.  Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I would say the fall, yeah.
Speaker 1: Any particular reason?
Speaker 2: Yes, because, because of the beauty of the fall, because of the leaves and the trees, and because of the weather.  It's more temperate.  And now that I'm retired here for about the last thirteen, fourteen years, because it's less busy here in the fall.  So I'd say the fall is.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: It's yellow.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I'm in my fav--favorite (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: I would say the Vineyard's [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] my favorite destination, which I occupy most of the year now anyway.
Speaker 1: You say most of the year and?
Speaker 2: Well in the fall--I mean in the winter, either two or three months, my husband and I are in Sarasota, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay, his name?
Speaker 2: Keith, Keith W. Rawlins [Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite phrase or favorite kind of philosophical saying that you use from time to time?
Speaker 2: Oh wow, probably so many that I can't think of one favorite one, but in fact I'm blocking on it.
Speaker 1: We can come back to it.
Speaker 2: We can come back to it.
Speaker 1: Yeah and maybe you can slip it in at some other point along the way as we, as we talk.
Story_ID: 506012
Speaker 1: We like to start by looking at your family history, parents, grandparents, great-grandparents in order to have a background and a context in which to view your growing up years and your young adult life and, and your career and the things that influenced you early, early on.  And I wanna start with your mother.  What was your mother's name, where was she born and when was she born?
Speaker 2: Well my mother's name was Nellie Mae Williams Miller.  And she was born in Albany, New York in 1894.
Speaker 1: And where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: She grew up really in Cambridge, Massachusetts.  Because in doing my family history, I discovered that my grandmother, her mother, came east from Albany, Troy [New York], Williamstown [Massachusetts] area in the late 1890s.  They were in the 1900 census as being in Boston [Massachusetts] on Franklin Street for some reason.  But they soon moved to Cambridge.
Speaker 1: Do you know why they came from New York, Albany area to?
Speaker 2: I have no idea why they would leave such a beautiful area.  Cambridge is beautiful, too, but I don't know my grandmother really didn't talk much about it.  But they did come from that area and settled here, she and her sister-in-law.
Speaker 1: What stories and tales did your mother share with you about her growing up years briefly in Boston and then Cambridge?
Speaker 2: She didn't really share any of them.  My mother died when I was young, very young actually.  I was nine.  And prior to that, she had been very ill and hospitalized at least since I was about five.  I remember very few times when she was at home for any length of time.  My grandmother, her mother, was the dominant in my life.
Speaker 1: And what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Grace Williams.  Grace Hawkins Williams.  So that when my mother died, I had a brother [Ernest Miller] a year younger than me and the two of us lived with this grandmother.  And so it's her family, part of it, not really lots of it, but part of it about which she talked.
Story_ID: 506013
Speaker 1: Well tell me about your [maternal] grandmother, Grace Williams [Grace Hawkins Williams].  Where was she born and when?
Speaker 2: Well--excuse me--she was born in Albany [New York], but at a young age I think they moved to Troy, New York 'cause it appears from the history that her mother and father and her siblings lived in Troy and they traveled back and forth from Troy to Williamstown [New York] where their grandmother and aunts lived in William--several of them had grown up.  So my grandmother had two sisters that I remember.  She had five it seems from records, but I knew two of them.  One of them for whom I'm named, my middle name is Belle [Hawkins], which is after one of her sisters.  And another--another one, one of whom was very ill and in the hospital here [Oak Bluffs, Massachusetts].  But this--this sister for whom I'm named was ten years younger than my grandmother, lived in Troy, was an organist and used to come and visit every once in a while and sort of disrupt things (laughter) in the family in this sort of quiet way.  They were both musical, the both played piano and this aunt played the organ.  This aunt always li--also liked the movies and so she took my brother [Ernest Miller] and me to movies.  My grandmother didn't really approve.  So she--it seems she must probably had stayed at least a week or two, and we had lots of fun when she came.  And she dis--disappeared when we'd see her, you know, afterwards.  But I didn't know any of the rest of her family.  The records show that they had probably died by then.  I've--I'm not completed the history, but I'm working on it, so.
Story_ID: 506014
Speaker 1: Tell me about your growing up years in Cambridge [Massachusetts] then with your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, I grew up in Cambridge.
Speaker 1: --with your [maternal] grandmother [Grace Hawkins Williams], what was that like your growing up years with her?
Speaker 2: Well the things, thing that I remember is I went to the school that's now called the Martin Luther King School [Houghton School; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And that we--our lives revolved around school and church.  We--my grandmother went to the--to Union Baptist Church [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and she used to tell me about that and its history and the clergy who were there.  We had small neighborhoods where people knew each other and my--I had three older siblings, nine, thirteen and fifteen years older than me.  So they were adults.  In fact, my oldest brother was already married and had children by the time my mother [Nellie Williams Miller] died.  So, I grew up with this grandmother who was already seventy-eight (laughter) when this happened, but was a very active woman, was a secretary for a black insurance company at that age and, you know, just was really very active, lived to the fullest, had a strong sense of self.  And I think I, in later years, I realized I modeled some things after her that you don't think about when you're, you know, when you're young.
Story_ID: 506015
Speaker 1: What did she tell you about her [Rawlins' maternal grandmother, Grace Hawkins Williams] growing up years?  Did she share--
Speaker 2: She didn't really talk about it, she acted it.  You know, I mean I knew because of the way she behaved that her growing up, I've learned since that her father [Peter Hawkins (ph.)] who was in a colored regiment from Troy [New York] in the Civil War, was also a minister.  And I would have guessed that because she was quite religious and she was, she believed that--that people should treat each other as they wanted to be treated.  She believed in good manners and all those good things that, that made you a comfortable person with whom to interact, you know.  So, it--it turned out that she and I lived together.  My younger brother [Ernest Miller (ph.)] was a bit much for her handle, so turned out to be the two of us.  And I remember that as a quiet experience, not--it wasn't lots of playing of games, it was nothing like with my grandchildren.  You know, we--I could not say I wanted for anything that I needed.  She was proud of my work.  She didn't always congratulate you, but you knew that she was glad if you did well in, you know, in school and all of that sort of thing.  So, I had a--I don't quite know how to describe, what word describes my growing up.  It was secure, it wasn't fun, but it was secure.  And--and it gave me a sense of what were the right things to do.  She was delighted I wanted to teach because she had had two aunts who were teachers.  And she didn't talk about it, she simply showed me an article from a newspaper and I found that article in Williamstown [New York] later.  The exact same article about these two aunts who taught in the colored school in New York and then who went to Liberia to teach.  And so it took me back all those years of being maybe thirteen or fourteen when she just showed it to me.
Speaker 1: You mentioned that she had worked for an insurance company--
Speaker 2: Yes she did.
Speaker 1: --where and when?
Speaker 2: It was on Hancock Street in Cambridge [Massachusetts].  And it was up the little hill there between Green Street and Mass Ave [Massachusetts Avenue].  And I can remember to this day where it is and--and a--
Speaker 1: What did she do there?
Speaker 2: She was a secretary for them.  She just, I guess, kept records.  And many years later, the woman who followed her in that job gave that job to me when I was at Salem State [Salem Teachers College; Salem State University, Salem, Massachusetts] and needed to work, you know, for my education.  And I worked in the same little insurance company.  Now I don't remember the name of it, but it was--it was a black insurance company.  I could go into records and find the name (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's interesting.
Speaker 2: But yeah, right in Cambridge.
Speaker 1: Wow, black insurance company?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 506016
Speaker 1: Could you, before we talk about your father [Archibald Miller] in the same way, would you say a little bit about describing the neighborhood in which you grew up with your [maternal] grandmother [Grace Hawkins Williams].  What was the neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a very mixed neighborhood.  There are--Cambridge [Massachusetts] was like that.  I don't know but what it might still be that way, there're probably five different cities in Cambridge.  And the one in which we lived, in Cambridge if you're black you talk about having grown up on The Coast or in The Port or in North Cambridge, you know.  And so it was the Central Square area of Cambridge towards Magazine Beach [Magazine Beach Park, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: I know the area.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And we lived on Franklin Street, which was closer to Putnam Avenue.  So you were in the--the neighborhood, but on the fringe of the neighborhood.  Most of us went to the Houghton School, which became the King's School [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in elementary.  People knew each other, looked out for each other.  You know, you had lots of mothers who checked on what--what you were doing.  People went to one of--I think there were four black churches in Cambridge when I was growing up.  And three Baptist churches, which--two of which had split from Union Baptist [Union Baptist Church, Cambridge, Massachusetts], which was the first one.  And then there was an Episcopal church, so St. Bartholomew's [St. Bartholomew's Church, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and St. Paul A.M.E. Church [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Rush A.M.E. Zion Church [Rush Memorial A.M.E. Zion Church, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And in those days, a lot of your social activity was connected to your church.  I mean that's how you got to go out on a school night.  Otherwise, (laughter) you did not go out.  You know, you went to--and you did different things at different churches, and St. Bartholomew was the Episcopal church was where you could dance, 'cause the Baptist and the Methodist you did not dance at their functions.  You played games or did various other things, but.  So there was a lot of sort of intermixing across church--churches and people knew and respected and married into each of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well did you and your grandmother and siblings have one particular church or did you kind of move around?
Speaker 2: We went to her church, which was the Baptist church and until we were teenagers, and as teenagers, you know, you sort of look around and see what you think of various others.  We wer--we weren't Catholic so we're not restricted in the sense that Catholic kids were restricted when I was growing up.  And I had an aunt who was the organist at St. Bartholomew's before and who died when I was very little.  But I knew that history and so sometimes I would go there.  But our lives--our lives revolved really around church.  The people who were in church were the ones thinking about how to bring us all up safely and--and with a good sense of ourselves and so forth, so.  It's what life was like, you know.
Story_ID: 506017
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father.  Would you give me your father's name and tell me when he was born and where he was born?
Speaker 2: Okay.  His name was Archibald FitzAlan Miller.  And he was born in 1892 I think it--it was in Barbados, West Indies.  And he came here from Barbados at about nineteen I gather.  Excuse me, he and my mother [Nellie Williams Miller] were separated and from--
Speaker 1: He came where--from where?
Speaker 2: --he came here, I mean he came to Cambridge [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay to Cambridge, all right.
Speaker 2: And a very interesting thing that I discovered when I was getting ready to be married is that he came and stayed with my husband's [Keith W. Rawlins, Jr.] family when he first came, but I never knew that.  I never knew that.  He, too, died when I was a teenager.  But--and my parents were separated so I did not have lots of interaction with him.  And I learned a lot about his family from Keith's family.  Keith's parents who knew his parents, knew that has mother and his sister were teachers in--
Speaker 1: In Barbados (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in Barbados, yeah.  They were from--he was from someplace called Top Rock in Barbados.  And he was a painter.  He used to paint houses inside and I re--one pleasant thing I remember is seeing him paint in a person's house on Magee Street [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and he was putting designs into the ceiling that just really struck me.  I couldn't have been more than seven or eight when I saw that, and it really stuck with me.  And when my daughter [Pattie Rawlins] was painting her ceilings not long ago, she was doing that and it took me back.  But she never knew him of course because he died so long ago.  But, so I don't really have a lot of--
Speaker 1: Did he share any stories with you about his early years in Barbados?
Speaker 2: He really didn't and I don't know his family.  We didn't know his--I know that he had one uncle who lived in Cambridge.  But it was--I was very little and I simply remember the name and that his name was Fred Prescott [ph.], but I don't remember him.  And because--it was one of those peculiar situations with--where my mother was in college and my [maternal] grandmother [Grace Hawkins Williams] was not happy that she was dating and interested in being married.  And that meant there was no meeting of the minds with the two, with my grandmother and father.  And these days, actually my daughter, the social worker, would probably have done something about that for us.  But--
Speaker 1: I notice that you indicated that his mother's name was Codel [ph.]? Is that--
Speaker 2: Yes, but I don't know her--her fir--last name.  Couldn't find it in the records anyway.
Speaker 1: She was the teacher in Barbados is that what you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and her daughter Ruth [ph.].  His--he had a sister named Ruth who taught in Barbados.
Story_ID: 506018
Speaker 1: We've gone back to grandparents, but I know that you've done some further back work--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --on your ancestry, would you want to share that with us briefly (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure I did.  I was in Williamstown [Massachusetts] just doing a little family history and I went to the family history center.  I knew that their name was Duncett, which could've been D-U-N-S-C-E-T-T, C-E-T, whatever.  And so I went into their family history center and the woman in charge said well we don't have a lot of material, but the students at Williams College [Williamstown, Massachusetts], black students at Williams College had asked her, just recently, to--to put together some of the history of blacks.  Didn't black people live in the area, and there were plenty of blacks who lived in that area.  And she said, "So I did do that and if you wanna look at this folder."  And so I took the folder and in the folder I found the article my [maternal] grandmother [Grace Hawkins Williams] had shown me when I was about thirteen of her--it was her grandmother who had died and another article about her mother who had died.  So that then sent me to look at the Duncett, because I was then reassured that Duncett was indeed the name, and--
Speaker 1: Would you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: Yep, it's D-U-N-C-E-T-T.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: And so when I looked up Duncett in the Williamstown records, I found the births of the children of Cato [ph.] and Zubia [ph.] who soon became Duncett, at least Cato, the father, is listed as Cato Duncett.  And it's--goes back to 1790 in Stamford, Connecticut.  And then this tells me that Cato and Zubia had Anson [ph.], who is my forbearer and they had a Cato, Jr.  They had Achsah, A-C-H-S-A-H, turns out who was a woman.  I thought--I thought it was a man, but it turns out it's a woman.  And they had an Alfred [ph.].  So they had Achsah and Alfred and Charles [ph.], Anson, I think Roxanna [ph.].  And they were the first of that line.  I don't find any record of Cato's parents or Zubia's parents.  So I suspect that when I continue I'll probably be looking at ship, slave ship records to go back any--any further.  Anson, it seems, is the only one who had children.  That's our line.  All the others appear not to have had--not to have married nor have had children.  And so I found their death records and their birth records and that they all grew up in Williamstown, which is how they got there, I guess.
Speaker 1: You're very fortunate to be able to go back that far, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, to have that, right.
Story_ID: 506019
Speaker 1: Tell me about your siblings, you had two brothers, a sister and then a brother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Tell us their names and when they were born and what they did?
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.  Well I had--my oldest brother was Aubrey, Aubrey Hawkins Miller and Hawkins is my [maternal] grandmother's [Grace Hawkins Williams] maiden name.  Her father was Peter Hawkins [ph.] and he's the Civil War participant.  And he came from Richmond, Virginia, married Henrietta [ph.], child of Anson [Duncett (ph.)].  So Aubrey was named after the Hawkins, and he is the oldest brother who had five children, two girls and three boys.  And actually had a daughter when I was five years--was born when I was five years old.  So she and I are pretty close.  He had a couple of bo--more--he had one other girl and then three boys.  And he was a tailor, I mean he worked in a tailor--in a tailor's which would now be called cleaning establishment and he worked in New York in restaurants.  And then I had a second brother named Alan [ph.], well he's Archibald, Jr. [Archibald Miller, Jr.], but we called him Alan and he was in the Merchant Marines [U.S. Merchant Marine Academy].  And when he left Merchant Marines he drove a truck long distance.  I remember getting a ride on the running board of that.  And then I have a sister--each of the boys has died.  I have a sister who just turned eighty-six and that's Starz [Doris Miller] who lives in Medford [Massachusetts] who has several, who had four children, three girls and a boy and each of them has many children.  So that where I have lots of nieces and nephews from there.  And she once--her husband was in the [U.S. military] service and so she was at home, and as the children got older then she worked for Sears and Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.].  And at the moment, she is in a nursing home really in--but doing better than she was.
Story_ID: 506020
Speaker 1: And after Doris [Doris Miller]?
Speaker 2: And after Doris, nine years later came I.  I always thought this was an afterthought, and my brother Ernest [Ernest Miller], who was a year and a month younger.  And so the two of us, as you can guess, were a lot closer, at least for me.  He and I were really close.  We did not do the same things.  Ernest went into the [U.S. military] service and when he left the service, he married and he was a long-distance trucker.  He just loved it, the bigger the truck, the better for him.  So in personality and interest, we were not the same, but we had a real kinship and we grew up--we--and we actually we have the same family.  Each of us has a girl and a boy, and the boy is older and the girls (laughter) is younger.  It--it's incredible and I--we just lost him two years ago in March.  So--so the--the growing up, the family growing up memories that I have that are--especially that are fun are with Ernest who--and the two of us lived together with my [maternal] grandmother [Grace Hawkins Williams] for maybe three or four years.  But he was really too much for her to handle.  Not bad, just active and she was by then eighty.  And so he was in a foster setting.  And he used to talk with me about it and say, I wonder what took her so long (laughter).  It's what he didn't do--what he didn't think of couldn't be thought of to do.  And she was really distressed that she couldn't handle him.  But he used to come all the time.  He lived with a family in Medford [Massachusetts], and he used to come back and forth to visit.  And she adored him, but eighty was a bit much to deal with an overactive, young boy.  So there're really sort of great memories of the fun things that we did together, the picnics and the sharing of chores around the house where he tried to get out of as much as he could.  You know (laughter), that kind of thing, so.
Story_ID: 506021
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up in Cambridge [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Well the Charles River reminds me of growing up because of Magazine Beach [Magazine Beach Park, Cambridge, Massachusetts], which was a beach then.  And was--really was a dangerous beach.  It's where I got my fear of the water, being tossed in.  But it was also just up the block and down the street from me, within five minutes of our house.  And lots of people went there.  So we had picnics and that kind of thing at Magazine Beach and so Charles River always reminds (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So the water must've come much further up then it is right now then?
Speaker 2: So the water goes up to Dedham [Massachusetts], the Charles River goes--
Speaker 1: No but I mean for it to be a beach.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, it did.  It came right--
Speaker 1: To have any depth--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it--and there was a platform out, you know, people used to swim out to and all of that.
Speaker 1: Well that's where the drive is now and the houses and the school and all that, is that right?
Speaker 2: Exactly. Near the school, exactly.  The Morse School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And a girl upstairs drowned there.  You're always hearing about somebody drowning there.  So that site I think of all the time.  And as for smell, rolls baking (laughter) is a smell that I remember because there was a woman in the neighborhood named Mrs. Johnson [ph.] who made yeast rolls, Parker House rolls, every Saturday and people would send their kids to go and buy them from Mrs. Johnson on Saturday.  And I make rolls now.  So the smell always makes me think of that.  And I've forgotten what the other one was you asked me, the sight, the sound--
Speaker 1: Sound, sounds.
Speaker 2: Oh the sounds.  What sounds?  I--I would say the sound that would make me think if I were to see kids out playing kick the can (unclear), you know, that game in the street with a--a can that you kick.
Speaker 1: Clunk, clunk, clunk.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: Kind of a tinny clunk.
Speaker 2: Right (laughter), yeah, yeah that's sort of--brings back happy memories.
Story_ID: 506022
Speaker 1: What is your earliest, farthest back memory as a child growing up, how far back, what incidents do you recall (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I was three--
Speaker 1: Tell me.
Speaker 2: On Magee Street in Cambridge [Massachusetts] there used to be a man.  Instead of having Morgan Memorial [Morgan Memorial Goodwill Industries, Boston, Massachusetts] and places where you take clothes that you no longer want or something or where you could get rid of them.  People seemed to me just got rid of things then and they had this rag guy who came around (laughter).
Speaker 1: I remember them.
Speaker 2: Right.  And I can--I remember this man.  I was three, I had to be three because of where it was.  And I had come down the stairs and was at the curb there and I don't know what my father [Archibald Miller] was doing in the situation, but I remember him and the rag man and myself right there on the--and I had to be three, three or something.
Speaker 1: Speaking of sound, one of the sounds I remember is the rag man coming up my street.
Speaker 2: Oh calling out.
Speaker 1: Calling, "Rags, rags."
Speaker 2: Maybe that's what it was, too, yeah.
Speaker 1: He was horse drawn.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: A little wagon.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I remember that and going to nursery school.
Story_ID: 506023
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you now about the beginning of your, quote, formal schooling.  Where did you first go to school?
Speaker 2: Well because my mother [Nellie Williams Miller] was so ill, I was in nursery school at two and a half.  My birthday is November 25th, so it's late.  And I was always young and big.  But because I was big I looked like I was probably three or so, and I was able to go to nursery school at two and to kindergarten at four.
Speaker 1: They didn't look at your birth certificate?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know whether they did or not.  But I was in school at four and a half in kindergarten.  And so I began there.  And then--then I went to the Houghton School [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] for kindergarten at four and a half.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: So you were in kindergarten--
Speaker 1: Right, so I--I went to kindergarten at four and a half at the Houghton School, which meant that I was going to high school, you know, at thirteen instead of fourteen.  And--but by the time I was in the second grade I knew I wanted to be a teacher.
Speaker 2: You did?
Speaker 1: I did.  I never wavered.  I had a wonderful, wonderful (laughter) second grade teacher named Miss Gorman [ph.].  I'll never forget her.  And I taught second grade, too, by the way for a while.  But--
Speaker 2: What was it about Mrs. Gorman that--that made you decided you wanted to do what she was doing?
Speaker 1: Well, as I look back on it, it--it probably had more to do--I--I loved school, even as a preschooler.  I mean I liked to write.  I was an early reader, you know, all those things that would suggest that you were going to be in education.  And, excuse me, but Miss--but I was a little kid with a family in distress with my mother ill, with this separation, you know, with my [maternal] grandmother [Grace Hawkins Williams] in and out and all of that.  And I think in retrospect that Miss Gorman must have either known or suspected, and she was just a warm person.  You know, I was also very shy as a little girl.  And I remember feeling so comfortable and you know, capable in her class, and hating to leave her, hating to leave her so much so that I remember the next woman was Miss Burns [ph.] (laughter) and she didn't fair too well with me.  But I did well, you know.  You know, I just loved school.  It was something secure about that.  So I graduated from Houghton School, and I had a very successful experience there.  I remember being number five in my class tied with another black kid who was a friend around the corner because that school really focused on preparing you for high school.  I'll never forget we listened to that all the time what you had to do and how you had to do it to be prepared for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So Houghton went through grade eight?
Speaker 1: Houghton went through grade eight.  Cambridge [Cambridge Public Schools] was an 8-4 system [8-4-4 education system].
Story_ID: 506024
Speaker 1: When I got ready to go to high school [Cambridge High and Latin School; Cambridge Rindge and Latin School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and choose my program, I chose college because I knew I wanted to be a teacher.  I--I didn't think about what it cost or how I was gonna pay for it.  I didn't think about that, I just knew that's what I wanted to do.  My [maternal] grandmother [Grace Hawkins Williams], by this time, was about eighty-two or three years old, you know.  And she'd had a couple of heart attacks, but she was really a very strong woman.  She didn't pay a lot of attention to what the doctor said, so she was up on her feet sooner than she should have been.  And so when I got ready to go, the eighth grade teacher [at Houghton School; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] I had, who was also the principal's assistant, looked at what I'd chosen and told me that I really needed to choose another course because they were not really hiring black teachers, she said colored teachers then and I would want to get a job.  I will never ever forget it.  And when I talked with my grandmother about it, she said you know, "I just can't fight, I can't go up tho- I can't climb those stairs.  Maybe if you take," what did she tell me, "take something with typing," this is the secretary, "so you'll be able to get this job if you're not able to teach."  And I was distressed, but I did it.  That's the way kids did then, you know.  My minister who had heard me talk about wanting to teach since I've been that high during the first term said to me, "How you doing," you know, and that sort of thing.  And I said, "Well, I'm not in the program I want," and told him the story.  And he wrote a letter to the dean of--of students and the next day I was in what they called the normal course because this--we were on the fringes then in the '40s [1940s] of normal school and college.  So that the on--thing that I missed taking was Latin.  Everything else was like a college course.  And that was my first racial experience.  The first time I ran into somebody saying I couldn't do something on the basis of race that I recognized anyway.  It turned out okay because I did it.
Story_ID: 506025
Speaker 1: What was the racial, ethnic composition of the Houghton School [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: It was probably, I want to say it might have been half and half.  Cambridge [Massachusetts] was--there were quite a few black people who lived in Cambridge, but we lived in The Port and The Coast and North Cambridge, and there was nobody that I knew of in East Cambridge.  It was very much like Boston [Massachusetts] in a sense with enclaves of people from--who are Irish or Italian or whatever.  And my brothers said that they used--the boys used to fight each other, you know, call each other the Cherry Street gang and that kind of thing.  But I don't remember any of that with girls.  So anyway, I went to Cambridge High and Latin [Cambridge High and Latin School; Cambridge Rindge and Latin School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and--
Speaker 1: Before you left eight grade--seventh and eighth grade, in addition to liking school, what other kind of interests and activities did you have for yourself, summer, after school, what'd like to do beyond the academic, had you--
Speaker 2: Well, I--I was pretty athletic.  I roller skated, I ice skated, you know, I played softball.  I played football until I was playing in the street with the boys and I slit my skirt and she said that's enough of that (laughter).  But--and I went to the Cambridge Community Center [Cambridge, Massachusetts] where I participated in, you know, classes that they had and drama, and cooking and various things that you would do at a community center.  That's--I mean our lives were neighborhood contained.  And I also corrected papers for Suzanne Green, Suzanne Revaleon she was then, who was the fourth grade teacher, a black woman who knew my family.  But I had looked up to her because it was a black teacher in my school.
Speaker 1: She's still living isn't she?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: I know her.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: I saw her three months ago.
Speaker 2: Right.  And she went to Salem State [Salem Teachers College; Salem State University, Salem, Massachusetts].  So, so when I left--when I got ready to decide about college I chose Salem State purely because the black teachers I admired had gone to Salem State.  I applied nowhere else.  You couldn't tell me to apply (laughter) any place else.  You couldn't tell me that I might not get into, and I did get into Salem State.  And--and then the fun began (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's--let me--let's stay in high school for a bit and then we'll go to college.  You went to Cambridge, it was Rindge and Latin High at that time.
Speaker 2: No it was not.  It was Cambridge High and Latin--
Speaker 1: Cambridge High and Latin.
Speaker 2: --and Latin School.  Yes, it was the Latin school.  Right.
Speaker 1: So you were in--
Speaker 2: And the Rindge was the Rindge Technical School [Cambridge Rindge and Latin School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and it was all boys.  And Cambridge High and Latin was coed.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And the boy boys went to Rindge.
Story_ID: 506026
Speaker 1: So you went to there as a freshman in what year, it must've been about fifteen?
Speaker 2: Forty [1940]--let's see when Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt], '41 [1941].
Speaker 1: Forty-one [1941]?
Speaker 2: It must've been '41 [1941].
Speaker 1: Yeah right, that's about--
Speaker 2: Two, two--three, three--four--four--five yeah, '41 [1941].  Fall of '41 [1941].
Speaker 1: Were you aware as a thirteen, fourteen year older of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, the president.  Did you pay much attention to his presence, because he was a very significant president at that time?
Speaker 2: I was aware of him--but I was aware of him because my [maternal] grandmother [Grace Hawkins Williams] was a Republican.  And she voted for--not Dewey [Thomas Dewey], what was the man--now it's gone out of my head.  I can see it.
Speaker 1: I can't help--I can't help you right now either, I should know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's gone from me, but it was the other--she did not vote for Roosevelt.  And the interesting thing is she died just before--just after he was elected for his third term from the same thing.  She had cerebral hemorrhage and stroke, and so did he not long after.  But yes indeed I was aw--I think that I was--she must've talked about it a lot because I was aware of this difference between Republican and Democrat then.  And it was, you know, she--her thinking was the party of Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln].  I know that it was.  She read the Chronicle [Cambridge Chronicle], not the Guardian [Boston Guardian].  And yeah, I was.
Speaker 1: So you went to the Cambridge High and Latin [Cambridge High and Latin School; Cambridge Rindge and Latin School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Tell me about those four years, what were they like for you in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, they were--they were interesting.  If I had not liked school so much, like the work of school so much, I would probably look back and say, well you know, I didn't have much interaction with anybody.  But that wasn't important to me.  The things I remember are knitting for the Red Cross [American Red Cross] for the guys in the war [World War II, WWII] and the people, the peasant women, these sweaters that were so huge, you know, that you never got through.  I remember that--that I wanted to work after school and that my grandmother was anti that because she felt that people took advantage of kids when they were (laughter) working.  And she didn't want anybody to think that she wasn't gonna really take care of me.  And so I had to fight to get a job babysitting.  But I don't remember participating.  I did not go to a prom.  I didn't--I mean my granddaughter's ten and she's doing all sorts of things.  I don't remember doing--participating in anything much at the high school.  I know they had things, but I don't remember participating much in them.
Speaker 1: And you still were aiming to be a teacher at that point?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Oh yeah, yeah.  They had to assure me that the course--the program I was in would get me in and it did.  I didn't have to take an exam to get in, just Salem [Salem Teachers College; Salem State University, Salem, Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 506027
Speaker 1: Were there any particular students, classmates or teachers that were especially meaningful to you during high school [Cambridge High and Latin School; Cambridge Rindge and Latin School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that influenced you in some way?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't know if you know the Owens Family, the--the mover [Henry F. Owens, Inc.; Owens Movers].
Speaker 1: Yeah, very well.
Speaker 2: Okay, well Marilyn [ph.] that--you know that's Henry Owens family, well Henry Owens, Sr. [sic. Henry F. Owens, Jr.] had a brother named Robert [Robert Owens] and his daughter Marilyn.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'd didn't--I know Henry Owens.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have his picture somewhere in here.  We were very good friends because our grandmothers were friends.  And Marilyn was in my class.  She was very, very bright, went to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], she's a nurse.  And Ruth Marshall who was the librarian over at Boston Public Library [Central Library, Boston, Massachusetts].  It was--it was Marshall, Miller and Owens, and we sat (laughter) together all through in our homerooms.  So they were--they not only--not only was meaningful then, but are--we are godparents to--we are godparents to her daughter and she to our son [Paul Rawlins].  Her husband died not long ago and he was in our wedding and Keith [Keith W. Rawlins, Jr.] was in theirs.  So, you know, we had--we had that kind of relationship.  I had a teacher that I remember there at the high school, really was a woman named McGurr [ph.], an English teacher, the only--the first person who said to me--who gave me a grade low--that I knew was lower than my combined score.  And when I went and spoke to her about it, she said, "I know and I gave it to you because I think you can do better."  And it had never occurred to me somebody would do something like that before.  But I admired her for it, because indeed I hadn't, I don't know what was going on, but I hadn't put in the time and she knew it, and that's how she got my attention.  But, the high school was--was not where I participated in a lot of things.  My life was just--I mean my [maternal] grandmother [Grace Hawkins Williams] is getting older and older, indeed she died Easter, Maundy Thursday Thursday and I was graduating in June.  And so it was very traumatic, yeah.
Story_ID: 506028
Speaker 1: What did you do that summer after you graduated from high school [Cambridge High and Latin School; Cambridge Rindge and Latin School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After I graduated? I worked.
Speaker 1: Did you work that summer?  What did you do?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked at Raytheon [Raytheon Company] in Watertown [Massachusetts], that's where it was.  Because I needed to work for--you know, it came to me you really, nobody's giving it to you.  My parents [Nellie Williams Miller and Archibald Miller] were dead, my [maternal] grandmother [Grace Hawkins Williams] had just died.  My older siblings, it was not their interest.  Although my oldest sibling, Aubrey [Aubrey Miller] gave me a couple of bonds, you know, the--the post office--
Speaker 1: Savings bonds.
Speaker 2: Savings bonds, and of course Salem State [Salem Teachers College; Salem State University, Salem, Massachusetts], the state colleges then were seventy-five dollars for the year.  You needed another twenty-five [dollars] for books and stuff.  But that was like seventy--seventy-five thousand [dollars], you know.  And so I worked.  I lived with a friend of my grandmother's.
Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you what--where you lived at.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I lived with a friend of my grandmother's because my sister [Doris Miller] had two children then and--and we were not on the same wavelength.  This wasn't her interest, is the most charitable way I guess to put it.  And so I just--I was seventeen and too young to be--legally to be out there, but I was out there since I wasn't quote misbehaving, it wasn't a problem.
Speaker 1: What did you do at Raytheon that summer?
Speaker 2: I was working with some kind of little equipment.  I don't even remember it, but I know that--that--that's where I worked that summer.  And got--was accepted to Salem and I was gonna be there (laughter).
Story_ID: 506029
Speaker 1: So how'd you feel when you arrived at Salem State [Salem Teachers College; Salem State University, Salem, Massachusetts] in September?
Speaker 2: I was so excited.  It was--when I look back on it, it's--it's just incredible.  It's probably why I enjoy being a dean so much, is that these young women reminded me of myself when they would come in with this incredible optimism and they hadn't done the work and not academic work, but work thinking about, planning your life there.  I--I was just living from job to job, and as long as I could pay my bills and stuff I was okay.  So but I was really extremely happy to be there.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the academics and what you studied, and what was the instruction like?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to be an elementary school teacher.  I never wavered from that.  I wanted to teach second grade or fourth grade.  I wanted to teach fourth grade.  I had my teacher placements in both second and four.  I did really very, very well in it.  I had a rough first year and this was another thing that helped my deaning.  Because the first year, now remember my [maternal] grandmother [Grace Hawkins Williams] has just died and so I'm essentially out there trying to figure out life and I'm also going to school.  And I had bronchitis as a teenager.  So I have very weak lungs and whenever stress got to me, it took its form in either pneumonia or bronchitis or something.  So I missed a good part of the first year.  I passed everything, except biology I think it was.  And at the state colleges then, you had to have a 70--a 7.0 in order to pass, not a 65 or a 60, but a 7.0.  I had a 6.9999.  And I had to make the decision of whether I would go back and start again, or change to another school, or quit.  Well I wasn't--going to quit.  I thought about changing, but then I said no that's just your pride.  If you had really been able to be there all the time you wouldn't have had that problem, so--and Salem is where you wanna be.  So I went back and I started again.
Story_ID: 506030
Speaker 1: So you were saying that you had an experience at Salem State [Salem Teachers College; Salem State University, Salem, Massachusetts] that was very instructional for you and meaningful in terms of your later becoming a dean at Simmons [Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts].  But tell me--continue with that story?
Speaker 2: Well the thing is that I have, as I say, I had the choice about what I would do, and I chose to go back even though I knew it meant I would start again and take courses in which I had gotten A's and Bs, as well as to get this biology thing, and indeed increase my grade point average.  And so I did do that.  The president [Edward A. Sullivan] was a wonderful man, a hands-on president and he knew about my struggle.  And so he was--I not only had the illness struggle, but I had a money struggle because I really had no money coming in except what I worked for.  And that meant I had to find a job, as well as do the work.  So the instruction that that gave me when I later was a dean and dealing with students going through the same thing was that I could say to them, "Look, it can be done, I did it."  And--and not be just, you know, patting them on--on the back.  I think each of the four years I was at Salem I--I lived a different place, you know, I--based mostly on the job that I had.  I--I lived in Salem [Massachusetts] one time with a family and baby sat, the mother's helper and was paid--I got my board and room that way.  And was paid a little something, and I mean a little something.  And then one year I was doing that secretarial work and tried staying with my sister [Doris Miller] and her children, and that didn't work out because it was just too stressful.  Another year I lived in Marblehead [Massachusetts] with a family, which worked out very, very well.  And they could not believe that I didn't have an income from somewhere.  It just--in fact they were--the woman in this couple was a Goodyear of the Goodyear Tire [The Goodyear Tire & Rubber Company].  And she said, "You mean to tell me there is--you have no inco- no income," I said, "No.  I--only income I have is what I'm able to earn," and so she then increased what they were paying me a couple of dollars.  So, and she said, "And if--if you need something for"--I was graduating that year, "you could use my credit card," (laughter).  I said, "No, I don't need to use your credit card."  But it was a struggle, but I still believe that it was--it was not beyond me.
Story_ID: 506031
Speaker 1: You know, I mean because my full day, every day was where I wanted to be and I just had to figure out a safe, and--.  I stayed with a friend one year who--who, too, couldn't believe I didn't have.  I prob--I was homeless, really I guess.  I never thought of it that way, but I--but I guess I was.  And so her mother felt that that was something that they could do, so.  And she wouldn't accept--had a job in Filene's Basement, a stock girl and she wouldn't take any of my money.  So, so anyway I got through and was hired for Springfield, Mass [Springfield, Massachusetts] for my first job.  And I stayed there a couple of years, but I wanted to work on a master's [degree] at Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts], and I began a program in counseling for high school.  And so I needed to be back in Cambridge [Massachusetts] or in this area, and Cambridge was putting me off and putting me off (laughter).  And decided that they wanted to see me teach in June when it's impossible for a teacher to leave her class, you know.  And at a conference, the principal or the headmistress of the Buckingham School [Buckingham Browne & Nichols School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was in the audience.  The leader of the conference was the city manager, but he'd been my math teacher in the eighth grade [at Houghton School; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] where I had done exceedingly well.  And I raised my hand and he acknowledged it and he said she can say whatever she likes, she hasn't told anybody that I was her teacher when she was way back in the eighth grade.  And I spoke about this Cambridge experience--that my hometown had put me off, and I had a very successful college [Salem Teachers College; Salem State University, Salem, Massachusetts] experience and teaching experience.  Springfield was a little angry that I was leaving after two years.  And Nancy [B.] Morse, the princi- the headmistress, spoke to me afterwards and asked if I'd ever thought of private school.  And at twenty-three, you know, I said no, never, because I believe in public (laughter) education (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Schools.  They paid a lot more, too.
Speaker 1: Oh, I--well I didn't even think of that at the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I'm sure they paid more.
Speaker 1: And I said--and she wondered if I knew about the school and I said, no and I'm from Cambridge.  I've never heard of Buckingham School (laughter).  I laugh when I think of it.  And she kept after me and asked if I'd come and just visit them and take a look.  And so I did.
Story_ID: 506032
Speaker 1: I went to their [Buckingham School; Buckingham Browne & Nichols School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] assembly and I met the headmistress of the entire school, Marian [W.] Vaillant.  There was an upper school and, you know, and a lower school.  And they were, at that point, receiving applications from black parents to have their children come to the school and they'd never had a black child.  And they wanted to do the right thing.
Speaker 2: This was early '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 1: This was in the '50s [1950s]--
Speaker 2: Early '50s [1950s], yeah.
Speaker 1: This was '52 [1952]. And so Miss Vaillant said, "Miss Miller [HistoryMaker Elizabeth B. Rawlins], I will come right out and tell you that we are really are interested in doing it right."  And she said, "Do you think we should have a black child first or a teacher?"  And I remember it like yesterday, I said, "Look, teachers over twenty-one ought to be able to handle whatever comes her way.  A child need protection."  And I walked right into the trap, you know, she said, "Well would you consider being," and I thought about it and thought that the difference in my pay would be negligible if I were back here near where I wanted to go to school.  You know, I was already in the Tuffs [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] program, I was part way through.  I'd have to think of somewhere else.  So in my mind I thought I have nobody to take care of but myself, I can--I can do this and I accepted, and I was there for eight years.
Speaker 2: Were you perhaps the first African American teacher of color in a private school in the greater Boston [Massachusetts] area?
Speaker 1: Well I was the first one at Buckingham.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what about--
Speaker 1: I didn't know of anybody anywhere else.
Speaker 2: You very well could've been the first.
Speaker 1: Could've been.  They--it was a wonderful experience for me.  My son, Paul [Paul Rawlins], went to transition, you know, they have a transition class in kindergarten there, and then we were in Lexington [Massachusetts], so he went to school out there.  We built a bond.  They were open to my ideas and we had one disagreement about the way I should handle a situation with a child, and I said to Nancy [Nancy B. Morse], "Look you're my boss, if you say I have to do it this way I will do it, but it won't be because I think it's right."  Ten minutes later, to her credit, she came up and said (laughter), "I'm embarrassed."  They wanted to for--it was a child who was ill, and they wanted me to go and do school work with him.  I said, "But he's sick, I'll go and see him, but not do that."  And--and I was right and they admitted it.
Story_ID: 506033
Speaker 1: I went off to Japan to teach the next year, and Miss Vaillant [Marian W. Vaillant] sent me a telegram, "We do"--and I was getting married--
Speaker 2: Well I was so excited about, I guess anticipating to hear about--hear about you going to Tokyo [Japan]--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --how did that happen?
Speaker 1: It happened because one of my friends with whom I taught in Springfield [Massachusetts], black woman, said to me, how about going to Africa--Ethiopia, and we--that was the year before and we applied and we were accepted but for the next year to teach in the teacher training.  And then she had the bug, so she said well their interviewing for overseas, dependents of the [U.S.] Army.  So we went to BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] together and we interviewed.  We wanted to go to France, they had no place in France, but they had Japan.  And Mae [ph.] said, Mae was a little older than I was, and she said, "Hey, would you spend your own money and take that trip? Let's do it." So we both applied, we both were accepted.  I was sent to Tokyo and she was sent to Hakata [Hakata-ku, Fukuoka, Japan], south.  And I also at the same time had said yes to Keith.  So I was gonna be married when I came back.  So I spent a year there teaching dependents--the children of dependents.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 506034
Speaker 1: Quote who was Keith [Keith W. Rawlins, Jr.], and what was he doing during this time that you had just started your teaching career, when did you meet him and where?
Speaker 2: Well I met him when I was probably eight years old.  He says it was eight.  I don't really remember him well in my life until I was maybe a teenager, thirteen, or fourteen.  We--our grandmothers were pillars in the same church [Union Baptist Church, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and knew each other, were friendly.  And he and I both sang in the church choir, belonged to the youth group and we did all the same things.  And so you could say we've known each other all of our lives, just about.  Went to those shows at the RKO Keith Memorial [RKO Keith Memorial Theatre; Boston Opera House, Boston, Massachusetts] and that sort of thing.  And he was--he had been in the [U.S. military] service so he was behind me a year and he was at Central State, Wilberforce [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 1: So he was out there while you were starting your career?
Speaker 2: Oh I was in Japan--no while I was teaching in Springfield [Massachusetts] '50 [1950], '51 [1951], he--he graduated in '51 [1951], I in '50 [1950], and he--when he graduated had the job as director of the community center in Medford [Massachusetts].  And so he was working there one--the year that I went off to Japan.  And we married when I came back.
Speaker 1: That was 1954?
Speaker 2: Fifty-four [1954], um-hm.
Speaker 1: When you got married? Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 506035
Speaker 1: Tell me about Tokyo, Japan now, just before your marriage [to Keith W. Rawlins, Jr.], tell me about teaching there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was--yeah, that was really--that was really nice.  They--
Speaker 1: You were in an American school then, you were teaching in an Amer--
Speaker 2: We were--we were in the, yes, we were on an [U.S.] Army base, Narimasu [Narimasu Airfield; Grant Heights].
Speaker 1: Could you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: N-A-R-A-M-A-T-I-S-U [sic.].  I think it's--I think it's in my--
Speaker 1: I have it here.
Speaker 2: Right.  And the elementary school there had about 1400 children, it went through the sixth grade, I think it was the sixth grade.  They--I taught first grade.  They--I again was a statistic.  But there was a woman there, white woman, who had gone to Cambridge High [Cambridge High and Latin School; Cambridge Rindge and Latin School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], my high school, lived on Trowbridge Street [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and we became, you know, good friends.  My friend [Mae (ph.)] was south in Hakata [Hakata-ku, Fukuoka, Japan], and so we agreed that I go to Thanksgiving and she came up to Tokyo [Japan] for Christmas, and then we did a three-island trip for Easter, you know, during the spring vacation.  We had a marvelous principal from California which of course was in the lead then, who saw to it that every weekend we went off somewhere so we were all over that country.  And the people were friendly, they were curious.  It's not that they didn't notice we didn't look like them, but it was a curiosity.  And or pleasant kind of curiosity.  We had a couple of Japanese artists who taught at the school and was a very, very full year.  So much so that Marian [W.] Vaillant was afraid I was going to stay, and she telegraphed hoping that I was coming back.  So I learned to speak a little Japanese.  And when I returned we had a little boy named Yoshi Yamaki [ph.] come to Buckingham School [Buckingham Browne & Nichols School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] whose dad was a botanist, I think it was, and he was at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And Yoshi came to second grade speaking Japanese, of course, and French, very fluently and very little English, but the right words, please, thank you, you know, that sort of thing.  The other second grade teacher and I had both taken French in high school and college, and so with our combined French we could communicate with Yoshi, who by--by October was up on the stairway and said, "Mrs. Rawlins [HistoryMaker Elizabeth B. Rawlins], please do not speak French to me, I speak English," (laughter) and he did.  He outstripped everybody.  And his parents kept in touch with me for years afterwards.  I believe they must've died because they were--the mother especially would write, send me pictures.  I have a picture of Yoshi when he got married, and he was only seven when I first met him.  So it was a wonderful experience.
Story_ID: 506036
Speaker 1: It's my historical knowledge, and yours, too, that African Americans who finish teacher prep programs and normal school in the '20s [1920s], '30s [1930s], '40s [1940s], even '50s [1950s] went south to teach.  Even in the middle of the 20th century before gaining a position, let's say in a northern public school.  So here you are in 1950 going to Springfield [Massachusetts] and then to a private school [Buckingham School; Buckingham Browne & Nichols School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Right. I never thought of that, I was accepted--
Speaker 1: --where--
Speaker 2: -- at Long Beach, too.
Speaker 1: Long Beach?
Speaker 2: California.
Speaker 1: California.  But other teachers of color at Salem [Salem Teachers College; Salem State University, Salem, Massachusetts], or certainly people that you knew in teaching who were people of color, were they beginning to be hired by the northern schools?  Because, you know, Boston [Massachusetts] didn't have any black teachers in the City of Boston really until 1955, '56 [1956].  You know, John [D.] O'Bryant, Jean McGuire and maybe some--
Speaker 2: But it had--
Speaker 1: --but were you an exception or was--what's happened, were things changing then?
Speaker 2: Well, I only know this because--because I knew black teachers--
Speaker 1: You did.
Speaker 2: I mean there was Mrs. Stead [ph.] in Cambridge [Massachusetts], there was Suzanne Revaleon [Suzanee Revaleon Green], there was Helen Danz [ph.] in Cambridge.  There was a Perry, Miss Perry [ph.] and another woman, King--Keys [ph.] was her name, there were five--and th--six because there was another woman whose name I can't call right now.  But there was six black teachers at Cambridge.  And then there was several in Boston, but they were like twenty-five years older, twenty, twenty-five years older.  So there must've been a time, and they were Boston State [State Teachers College at Boston, Boston, Massachusetts], many of them.  But many of them were Salem State because when Salem State put on a minstrel show, the sophomore class, four of those tea--women wrote that college because--because we were connected to them.  I--I was a little sister with Aristo Club.  And you know, the Aristo Club was women teachers and business women.  And that's how they mentored us.  They were available and I remember Jackie [ph.]--there were four black students in my class, I was one of the four.  And each of them taught, one from Everett [Massachusetts], one from Boston, two of us from Cambridge.  So--
Speaker 1: Well maybe that presence had already started then.  I--I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it had started--
Speaker 1: --it's probably much earlier than 20th century.  I guess I'm thinking of when they went south--
Speaker 2: And then (unclear) taught in Sal--no she went to Salem State, yeah.  Salem Teachers College and--and Charlotte Hawkins Brown is a graduate of--
Speaker 1: Salem.
Speaker 2: --Salem, but she went south, yeah.  So I don't know.  Each of us was able to get a job--
Speaker 1: Well maybe I'm thinking of some of the African American female teachers who went to teach for and with Charlotte Hawkins Brown.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah and maybe that--
Speaker 2: And (unclear) was one.
Speaker 1: And Will--maybe that's what I'm thinking.
Speaker 2: And she would have been able to encourage people to come because she was such a stalwart in Boston, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I know that my great aunt was the second black teacher in New Bedford [Massachusetts] and finished the normal school in New Bedford, it was a two-year program.  And she first taught in North Carolina A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] coming out of New Bedford with a two-year normal degree.  So I guess I'm--I'm a little bit ahead, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were married (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But there hadn't been anybody to precede me, I think, at the--in the private schools.  I don't know of anyone.  There're some since then.
Story_ID: 506037
Speaker 1: Well 1954 you were back at Buckingham, Browne and Nichols [Buckingham School; Buckingham Browne & Nichols School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  You married Keith [Keith W. Rawlins, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: Not Browne and Nichols, just Buckingham.
Speaker 1: Buckingham, I'm sorry.  And you married Keith Rawlins--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and you started your family I guess soon after (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your children?
Speaker 2: We had--we have our son, who is adopted, and this is another way my brother [Ernest Miller] and I were--nobody ever even thinks it, everybody swears Paul [Paul Rawlins] looks just like me.  But Keith is a social worker and was--there was a--an agency where the director knew him well, of course, as a social worker and new me because of some work I was doing with the  camping association.  And he said we have this adorable little boy who's available and all of that, and--and neither of us had been thinking about it.  We'd only been married three years, you know, but we talked about it.  And then--she interviewed each of us.  You know, like you would do normally.  And then we met Paul and it was like (laughter), he'd just been waiting out there someplace.  So he sort of sat on my lap and looked at me and played with the pendant.  He was just never upset, never anxious or anything, and so one Friday I said to the children in my class at Buckingham, "Monday when I come back I'll be a mommy."  And they said, "Really?"  You know, how is that gonna happen, so.  And so we've always taught our kids about the different ways you can be a parent.  And I came back and I introduced Paul to them and they had brought in little gifts and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: How old was he?
Speaker 2: He was only fifteen months, not quite fifteen months.  So he was really just a little over a year.  And then he, about let's see he was six, and he said I need a sister.  And that fall I was pregnant.  So (laughter), you know, but that often happens with adoption.
Speaker 1: And your daughter's name?
Speaker 2: Pattie [Pattie Rawlins], yeah.
Speaker 1: So Paul's sister was born when?
Speaker 2: She was born July 3rd, 1962.
Speaker 1: And her name?
Speaker 2: And her name is Pattie Elizabeth [ph.], and he is Paul Henry.  Right.  He's named for Keith's grandfather and she has the Elizabeth from me and for Keith's paternal grandmother.
Story_ID: 506038
Speaker 1: --Tell me where Pattie [Pattie Rawlins] is today and what is she doing career-wise?
Speaker 2: She--well she works for the department of social service as an investigator and has been now for nineteen years this past May.  She really would like to move into schools.  She's been talking about the work that she does with families and how she sees a necessity for social workers to be in elementary schools and so she has been trying to pursue that.  But she loves, you know, she really likes--she feels rewarded by her work.  But it is very draining.  It's really very draining.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And Paul [Paul Rawlins] is presently doing what?
Speaker 2: Paul is a musician.  And he also, I say it in that way, because his love is the music, he's a drummer and has been since he was about fourteen with big bands and has toured and all of that.  But he's also a computer whiz.  And so he works for a division of Hewlett-Packard [Company] that closed its office and then opened again.  Actually I think he troubleshoots.  Whatever is wrong with your computer you can tell him on the phone and he can tell you how to fix it.
Speaker 1: Is that right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So he's one of those persons you call at midnight or three o'clock in the morning.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Exactly or any time.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your grandchildren?
Speaker 2: Well my grandchild--we have a granddaughter [Sharisse Scott-Rawlins], it's my daughter's daughter who is eleven.  And who is in the fifth grade going to sixth grade in Brockton [Massachusetts].  Who was student of the month and she does very, very well.  She's very serious, almost a perfectionist and pretty artistic.  And her brother [Keith Scott-Rawlins] is four years old right now, is it three o'clock yet, that's when he was born.
Speaker 1: It's twenty after four.
Speaker 2: Right, well he's three years old--four years old now, today.  And he is in a preschool and speaks Spanish because his caretaker is Spanish speaking.  And he's very proud of himself.
Story_ID: 506039
Speaker 1: Well you marched right along in elementary education back to Buckingham School [Buckingham Browne & Nichols School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], but then of course you moved on to different school districts.  Tell us about your career path after Buckingham, where did you go next (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. After that? Well after Pattie [Pattie Rawlins] was born, Keith [Keith W. Rawlins, Jr.] changed his job.  He was working in Quincy, Mass [Quincy, Massachusetts] on the south shore and we were living in Lexington [Massachusetts].  And it was too much of a travel and he was courted to be the director of the Protestant Social Service Bureau [Interfaith Social Services], which is a child placing agency on the South Shore that services Milton [Massachusetts] through Scituate [Massachusetts].  So we looked for a town within those dimensions and came up with Hingham [Massachusetts].  And we moved to Hingham when Pattie was a week less than a year old, Paul [Paul Rawlins] was seven and in the second grade.  And there we stayed until each of them finished high school, Paul--until Paul married [Kit Rawlins (ph.)] and Pattie was just beginning college.  So you might say that they were really brought up in Hingham, Mass.  And while there, I was asked by the superintendent, who was a neighbor, if I would be interested in completing a year for a teacher who had had to leave--went to Newton [Massachusetts].  And so I did.  Pattie was a year and a half and we got a sitter and I finished the year.  And then, the next year they got Title I money and wanted me to head their Title I program.  And because I could manage my own time with it I did that.  And then I saw the article in the paper about the Simmons [Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts] master's [degree] program in urban teacher preparation.  Now I had not in all the years prior to that in Springfield [Massachusetts], at Buckingham, in Tokyo [Japan] and even in Hingham, I had never had more than two black children in my class.  Two children of any color other than white.  And I was--thought to myself well that should be an interesting program giving another perspective as a teacher, you know, clearly I have it as a parent.  And so I applied and was accepted to the program.  And when I completed it, I was asked if I would teach the course in, let's see, classroom teaching, the nature of classroom teaching.  And then if I would supervise the student teachers and the rest is history (laughter), you know.
Speaker 1: So that's when you became a lecturer and then an instructor?
Speaker 2: That's when I became a lecturer, instructor and--and I loved it because it meant I could hop in after Pattie was in school, she was fi- five then and in kindergarten for half the day.  And I could run into Simmons and teach my class and get home before she got home.  So it was perfect and I did that for two or three years.  And of course she kept progressing, getting older and Paul was then in junior high.  So when black students began to come to Simmons in large numbers as undergraduates, they--they approached me about a course that would focus on, you know, have its focus as black.
Story_ID: 506040
Speaker 1: How was that transition for you leaving the teaching in elementary school and becoming a instructor--teacher at a place like Simmons College [Boston, Massachusetts]?  How was that--how did that transition feel?
Speaker 2: It was scary, really.  I remember it as--Erma Brooks asked me, you know, she--she said what we're asking here is what you've been doing for, at that point, thirteen or fourteen years.  I had taught several of the grades.  I had run some workshops.  I, you know, I had done like with Circle Associates [Circle Inc., Boston, Massachusetts] and all of that.  Said that's what we need, that's what the students are asking for that kind of experience.  So, you know, te--teach the course in Nature of Classroom Teaching.  And frankly I thought well it would be convenient because of my daughter [Pattie Rawlins] and her age and so forth.  So I approached one of the faculty in the ed [education] department and said to her, "Lydia [ph.], I don't see anywhere that teachers, professors have been taught to teach and so how about some hints for me."  She said, "You're right, we haven't been taught to teach, but--so you have all the skills and knowledge and pedagogy and so forth, and we just have the information and we should make a good team."  So I taught thinking the way I did teaching elementary and junior high kids, that you gotta have a plan.  You have to know what you're gonna teach.  You gotta do something to engage them.  And that was always the way.  And--and that you have to think about the whole person.  So I approached it in that way.  And as long as I was doing the urban teacher prep program, I was really fine.  But then, when these black students who began to come and saw that they were not in the material anywhere, wanted somebody to teach thinking about that and approached me.  (Laughter) I thought I was--might be getting a little above my head, but what I did was to ask them to help me plan what it was they were talking about.  I said because that's not been my experience.  What you wa- I know what it is you want, but it hasn't been my experience so I need you to be engaged in this, and they were, they were wonderful.
Story_ID: 506041
Speaker 1: And so we wrote a course called the Teaching of Afro-American and Other Minorities.  And the other minorities was so that other students who were not African American would feel as though they could also gain from this, and maybe have a release from seeing Dick and Jane all the time and their family as the model for what--what they did.  So that's how I began.  And then, of course, the program [human service program] had not only the Nature of Classroom Teaching, but it had student teaching and it had, there was another course there that used my background in--no that was a human service thing.  Well whatever it was, it'll probably come back to me.  But the way in which I built that program was to think about what's been missing and add that to the material that anybody would use for it and it was successful, so much so that I had huge classes all the time and still have a lot of connection with lots of them.  And I think you asked me, when did all this happen--did black students begin to come in such numbers.  And I would say, at Simmons [Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts] anyway and I believe that that's indicative of the rest of the country, it followed the King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination.  And it was the university's response, just like the corporate world responded by bringing in, and so there was the Black Student Organization began to agitate for and the assassination had happened and the college began to recruit.  And by 1970, there were--they went from having two or three in a class to at least 10 or 12, and then 20 and 30 and 50 black students in an entering class.  So you were assured of a good size class and participation, and the course was not always just black students, but they were in the majority.  And--and it was good for them and it was good for the white students who were in the minority then because the lesson was as clear as looking at who they were.  So and that increase continued until about '79 [1979] and then began to--it was like a bell curve.
Story_ID: 506042
Speaker 1: Did you ever imagine when you were in the elementary school level and even as an instructor and lecturer at Simmons [Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts] that you would be moving into higher administrative positions?
Speaker 2: No, no, I tried not to.  It was really funny because Dottie Denniston [Dorothy H. Denniston] was the associate dean of the college.  And she was working on her doctorate at Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], and she needed a year or two.  And she and Charlotte Morocco, the dean, got together to think about who could replace her for the year.  And then they talked to the president and the three or four of them got together and decided that I should be the person they--who would be the acting associate dean.  Well when I went into the president's office to talk about it I said, "Bill [William J. Holmes, Jr.], by now you know Keith [Keith W. Rawlins, Jr.], he's a--you're looking for a social worker, I am not a soc," (laughter) "social worker."  And I can see me now sitting there trying to talk them into hiring Keith, who by the way knew nothing about it.  And they said, "We love him dearly and we know he's a wonderful social worker with a great reputation, but we want you to do this job."  And so I said, "Well I'll do it, but I'm not giving up the coordination of the human service program nor the course--one of the courses that I teach because no one else is prepared to do that, and I'm coming back to it so I don't want it messed up."  They said, "Sure," why wouldn't they say sure.  Dottie stayed away for three years.  So first time around I was associate dean and coordinator and the human service program for three years.  And then I went back to my department and that was in 1980, yeah 1980, or '79 [1979], '80 [1980].  And then for--they had--they had another dean and it didn't work out for some personality or whatever, and it didn't work out.  And so Charlotte came back after me and said, "Aren't you ready," (laughter) "to sort of leave that and come permanently."  And in '84 [1984] I did.  I still would guest lecture in human service.
Story_ID: 506043
Speaker 1: Now what were your responsibilities at this point now as--as associate dean [at Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts], not acting associate, but what were your responsibilities?
Speaker 2: Well, the way we--the way the department office was structured was that there was a dean and her two associates.  That's the other way she got me back.  She said, "I'm gonna get Carol [ph.] to come, too.  And so each of you will be able to focus on what you think is very meaningful, a meaningful need, and I will take my lead as the theme from the two of you from these departments."  And so I had the responsibility for what we did with foreign students, black students, Hispanic, you know, Asian and so forth students.  In addition to which I--we saw students as they needed to see the dean and as the dean was available.  I was the dean responsible for the honor board, responsible for the commuter student advisors.  I was the dean for the counseling center.  We had nine offices who reported to us including residents, and you know, financial aid and just all--it was a full-time administrative slash you know what job.  And the thing about it that I enjoyed was that the three of us, that first time when the first three of us, we just were so amenable and we were so different.  So everybody was covered because one of us had a personality or a focus.  And Charlotte [Charlotte Morocco] used to say to me, "It's apparent we need you."  You know, 'cause neither she nor Carol, the other Carol were parents.  So it was great, I really enjoyed it.  But I would never have thought--I would--I would never have applied.  Actually I have never applied for a job, except the first one anyway.
Story_ID: 506044
Speaker 1: You resumed your education, higher education--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: You received a Ph.D. I believe in--
Speaker 2: Ed.D. [from University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts], yeah, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ed.D., I'm sorry.  Tell me about your graduate studies.
Speaker 2: Well, that, too, was not something I--I started out to do.  I was on the Board of Regents [Massachusetts Board of Regents of Higher Education], and so I had connections with and interactions with faculty and administrators of all the state and public institutions.
Speaker 1: You're on the Board of Regents of what?
Speaker 2: Public higher education for Massachusetts, which--
Speaker 1: Okay, and when did you get that appointment?
Speaker 2: In 1980.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you were doing that and moving up in Simmons [Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts], too, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was my volunteer work.  My life has always been tripartite.  My family, my paying job and--
Speaker 1: And your volun--
Speaker 2: --my volunteer work.  And so for eleven years I did the regent work.  And one of the--the vice president at Salem State [Salem State College; Salem State University, Salem, Massachusetts] whom I got to know well, it was a black woman and I got to know her well.  My daughter [Pattie Rawlins] was there.  And I was also chairing the committee for faculty and student affairs.  And faculty affairs dealt with curriculum issues, and Salem State wanted a graduate program in social work, a public institution to have one, only the privates have them.  And I was chairing and I--and Nancy [D.] Harrington talked with me about what was their idea.  You know, that--that all these public like DSS and DMH and all of those, those folks working there who wanted higher ed degrees wanted degrees that I would say were more practical than philosophical ones that Simmons had or that BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] had and so forth.  And so they wanted to build a program.  And the private schools, except for Simmons, were ha--giving them a hard time.  Bill Holmes [William J. Holmes, Jr.] was making sure I knew he was not with (unclear) and the person at Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts] objecting.  Because he saw it, too, that the publics could well do this.  And so, you know, I found myself interacting with a broader spectrum of people in the public than I would ever, ever have expected, you know, to--to be with.  And I would think that, by the way that program very, very successful, very successful, gotten awards and so if you wanted a master's in social work that--the kind that you would do in the public sector, Salem is the place to go.  It costs you a great deal less, and is supported--
Story_ID: 506045
Speaker 1: I think I was trying to find out more about your Board of Regents [Massachusetts Board of Regents of Higher Education] experience.  And that was a volunteer and public high--yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh right.  Right.  Well it's, yeah, it's--I mean it's the kind--it was volunteer and it was every month and it was a good bit of time.  And I worried about taking it because I was working for Simmons [Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts] and that meant that I was having to leave the college on a regular basis to do this.  And I chaired a couple of committees, so it wasn't a name only thing.  But in fact my president [William J. Holmes, Jr.] at the time made me understand that it was good for the college that one of its professors, or its dean, I was a dean then, should be a member of the Board of Regents.  Not something that they would get out of it that was tangible, but the whole idea that of the two women who are on the board, one of them was from Simmons.  So they gave me no hassle at all about it.  We just wrote in my schedule that I was gone for that.  It was helpful because I--especially since I was connected to the ed [education] department because I could get firsthand what the thinking is behind some of the orders issued by people at the Board of Regents, now the Board of Education of Higher Ed.  But it was very interesting.
Speaker 1: And you served for ten years on it?
Speaker 2: I served eleven.
Speaker 1: Eleven years, uh-huh (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because I served that extra year.
Speaker 1: But even though it was volunteer, you had to be appointed?
Speaker 2: You had to be appointed by the governor, right.  And then of course you get these telephone calls in your office, the governor would like to--and our office had this--I was home here one day and Charlotte [Charlotte Morocco] called me and said, "I got a call for you from Governor Dukakis [Governor Michael Dukakis] who wanted your number.  I didn't give him," (laughter) "your number without your permission."  And of course I took lots of ribbing from Dukakis about that.  Because I told her it's okay to give him my number and--and he called.  It was--I liked it because it kept a separation.  You know, there's a way people use politics that I think is not really healthy.  And there's a healthy way to use it.  So, yeah I was pretty busy.
Story_ID: 506046
Speaker 1: As a regent [on the Massachusetts Board of Regents of Higher Education], what kind of decisions did you have to make, what kind of--did you have any special responsibilities as a regent or did you all have the same responsibility, what kind of decisions were acting upon as a regent?
Speaker 2: Well one that would interest you is if you will remember that Roxbury Community College [(RCC), Roxbury Crossing, Massachusetts] was always in the air in the beginning about what they were gonna do about Roxbury Community College.  And when we first began in the '80s [1980s] there was a move to combine Roxbury Community College with Bunker Hill Community College [Boston, Massachusetts].  I was brand new to this political arena.  And I was bound and determined that I wasn't going to say no you can't just because it's Roxbury, that I was gonna try to look at it as an educator, that's who I am, and--and--and through the eyes of the state so that I understood what was up with them.  And then make my decision.  Well (laughter) they voted, they had one vote one day to combine it with Bunker Hill where there was a fine president, who was doing a really good job and who seemed, to me anyway, not to be hostile to us you see.  So the vote came around to me and I was the last one and it would've broken the tie.  And so I said, "Well I'm going to vote with a reservation," (laughter) (unclear).  I said, "On the surface it looks good to me, so I will vote yes until we get the information," and I can't even now remember all the details, but I wanted a certain kind of information that told me whether they were really shafting RCC.  So that meant that they had to bring it back again.  When they brought it back, RCC was all around the place and everybody else was.  Remember the tall guy who was a dean, he's now in Connecticut.  But anyway, they were all there and Ken Haskins [Kenneth W. Haskins] was still the president and I had gotten the information I wanted and they were not--if they combined, it was gonna be Bunker Hill Community College who would be the dominant.  They had not figured out how to equalize it, and so I voted no.  And there were people on the board like Judge Fox [John Fox] and you know, all these big corporate guys who just see one way, but they couldn't, they could not get rid of RCC behind my vote anyway.  And so forever they've been feeling as those I (laughter) saved them.  But you--you had--you had some touchy things like that where the newspapers would call, wanna know how you gonna vote the next day.  Len Berm--not Bermhem [ph.], there's a--there's a newspaper reporter who called me in my office to wanna know how I was gonna vote.  I said, "How do I know, I haven't heard the material yet."  Oh but you must have some idea.  But that's not what you asked me, you asked me how am I gonna vote (laughter).  So you had to--we had to--had to deal with curricular issues, with new presidents and I always had to be on their case about the fact that there were no minority presidents at that point.  There were few women, there were no minorities.  There--there were issues of how the different institutions were supported.  There were issues of governance with the faculties, just everything.  It's a tough, tough job.
Story_ID: 506047
Speaker 1: For many years, too, you were volunteering back at your alma mater--
Speaker 2: At Salem State [Salem State College; Salem State University, Salem, Massachusetts] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at Salem State.  Tell me about you served in what capacity?
Speaker 2: Right.  Well I retired from Simmons [Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts] in '92 [1992] in June, and somehow Nancy [D.] Harrington, who's the president at Salem, got wind of the fact that I was retiring and called me up in July and asked if she could forward my name to Governor Cellucci [Governor Paul Cellucci] to be a trustee at Salem.  It's the only place I would have said yes, I was really, yeah I'd about had it.  And I said yes and they appointed me.  So I was on that board for ten years, for two terms, it's five-year terms and I was the chair three years.
Speaker 1: Chair of the trustees?
Speaker 2: Of the trustees, yeah for three years of that.  And that's as political as the regents [Massachusetts Board of Regents of Higher Education].  You know, because the governor appoints, so you know, you get if the governor is a Republican you get a preponderance of Republicans and vice versa.  Dependent upon the skill of the president really and some of that can be, you know, toned down.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have any telephone calls from Governor Cellucci or Governor Swift [Governor Jane Swift] to put pressure on you around some decisions, were there any controversial things in which they called you and--
Speaker 2: No they never did, but Dukakis [Governor Michael Dukakis] did and tried to tell me--say that it wasn't pressure, but do you remember the Jim Collins [James Collins] thing when they were looking for a chancellor for UMass Amherst [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: I don't believe so.
Speaker 2: I think it was the UMass Amherst, and they wanted Jim Collins.
Speaker 1: I don't think I remember that.
Speaker 2: In my office were Olver [John Olver], the senator [sic. U.S. congressman] calling up asking--I took such ribbing from my colleagues.  Olver was there, Judge Fox [John Fox] came into my office, Mahoney, Chick Mahoney [ph.], the (unclear) Mahoney, you know, all saying, "I'm not pressuring you, but I would just like to make sure that you understand," this, that or the other.  They knew better than--than to really pressure me in that negative way, they learned that in meetings that I spoke softly but I was not gonna put up with that.  They were just coming to inform me.  So yes, I've had pressure, but not Cellucci and not Jane Swift at Salem.  They--they don't pay as much attention to the colleges as they do to the university, they still don't.  You know, it's the chancellor who's there might do that, but they don't.
Story_ID: 506048
Speaker 1: Going back if we can to the mid-'60s [1960s] to mid-'70s [1970s], you were at Simmons College [Boston, Massachusetts] as an instructor--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and then assistant professor, and during those decade--or that decade '65 [1965] to '60 [1960]--'75 [1975] we had a federal court order in Boston [Massachusetts] to desegregate the Boston Public Schools [BPS].  And Simmons College and the other twenty-plus colleges were asked by Judge Garrity [Judge W. Arthur Garrity, Jr.] to be involved and engaged in helping with the school desegregation process, which was quite volatile and quite violent at times, and very controversial.  So as an instructor and person at Simmons, did you get involved or were you involved in the school desegregation issues and if so, how'd you get involved?
Speaker 2: Well we had Jamaica Plain High [Jamaica Plain High School, Jamaica Plain, Boston, Massachusetts], Simmons had Jamaica Plain High.  I was in the education department.
Speaker 1: Would you explain for those who are listening what does it mean when--when Simmons had Jamaica Plain High (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Jamaica Plain High School.  Well the judge looked at all the high schools in town and looked at the colleges, and had paired them up with some rhyme or reason, I think.  But--and I think in some cases it was clear.  Simmons was paired with Jamaica Plain High School because we had a large science--science program.  We had not only the hard ones, you know, like the physics and chemistry, and so we had nutrition, and we--the kinds of programs that were related that were science-related.  And--and so I think that's why he paired us in that--in that way.  We also had an education department and the issue about teaching and approach and so forth was clearly something we could be helpful with.  And so that's how I got into with Bart Hamlin and a few other faculty and I served on the Jamaica Plain-Simmons quote committee for years.  We had symposia, we had workshops.  I went out and worked with teachers around issues of approach and teaching, and discipline in a broad sense of the word, how--how really how to help kids discipline themselves and encourage them to do that.  So yeah we did, we--I did rather run some meetings.  I came across a workshop that Lydia Smith and I did, we had speakers come to the college.  You know, Simmons really did its part in--in that we had a great big forum upstairs around the whole issue of busing.  And President Holmes [William J. Holmes, Jr.], I guess because he'd been baptized (laughter) with all of the black students coming in was open to it.  So, so yeah we were, we really were very much involved.  Our students were in lots of the agencies in Boston just--and the new schools, you know, the Roxbury Community School [Boston, Massachusetts], the New School for Children [Boston, Massachusetts], the Montessori school, and there's another one I'm missing.  But that's what we were doing.
Story_ID: 506049
Speaker 1: Would you share with us some of the black students at Simmons [Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts] that you counseled and worked with, particularly (unclear), the Black Student Organization and other such activities, who are now Simmons graduates and are out in the world doing some very significant things and holding some very powerful positions.  Who are some of the people that--that you remember?
Speaker 2: Right.  Well I was lucky enough to be there at a time when they were first coming.  So I either taught them, or was their dean, or was their advisor or a combination thereof.  So I think about this--the late '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] there would be Paula Sneed [HistoryMaker Paula Ann Sneed] from Everett [Massachusetts], who's president of a division of Kraft Foods [Kraft Foods Group, Inc.].  And Ann [M.] Fudge, who is now with Young and Rubicam [Y&R], the first woman, I think, heading that.  And I would think of [HistoryMaker] Zita Cousens right down the street here with her wonderful gallery plus the work she does at Boston Latin [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts].  Rehema Ellis on NBC and [HistoryMaker] Gwen Ifill, who is on NBC as well.  And Lynne White, who is in New York on channel--on Fox, Fox News.  And then Jackie Glee [ph.] who has been--who worked with the--in forensics here in Massachusetts and then went off to New York to do that.  They are in education, they're in communications, there's some--there was something I think Gwen said at one of her meetings, it must've been something in the water because there are so many Simmons women, black Simmons women.  There are others as well, but we're focusing on--on black women who have just been outstanding.  There's Joanna Rory [ph.] at the (unclear) community health center.  There are admissions directors of (unclear).  Holford Bedford [ph.] who is now out in California running--private school as admission, not running it, but is admissions director.  If I had their names here I'd pop them all off, but there are quite a few of those women.  And it's--I mean it's the kind of reward educators get, it's not monetary, is--it's just sort of basking in the glow when I see the--the Essence Award gala [Essence Awards] and then I think about Karen Thomas who--whose idea it was working with Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] at Essence to mount that and to do it, and now she's opened her own school [Marion P. Thomas Charter School, Newark, New Jersey] in New Jersey.  People are Zardinese Scaklin [ph.], who's the principal.  There are several principals of schools.  So that all that work out in the field, you know, has really worked with them.
Speaker 1: Well certainly you've identified some potential HistoryMakers--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --and we'll be adding them to the list for providing an interview perhaps sometime in the future.
Speaker 2: You would have a wonderful time because they're in all sorts of fields, you know, finance and big companies, the little companies, just they've done very, very well.
Story_ID: 506050
Speaker 1: Well in retirement, if we can call it that, you have returned to Simmons [Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts] to mount a project and direct a project that is bringing a lot of these people back to Simmons.  Tell us about the major project that you've been involved in for the last two or three years, right from the beginning because I think it's a model and significant?
Speaker 2: Well, in 1989 I was concerned about the way in which black students at the college used the resources they had, especially me.  They were very solicitous of my time and of how busy I was and you know, all of that.  And I began an--and--and it showed itself because sometimes I've--professors would speak to me when the student had been in trouble for a while, you know, and if we'd talked earlier could have gotten out of it.  And so I began to think about the issue of entitlement, and whether or not these students had a particular lack of a sense of entitlement.  That is, if you buy something you are entitled then to everything and you don't have to do anything special, you already bought the ticket.  And so I--I began to talk to a few of the students about that and asked them what they thought.  And they said, "But Dean Rawlins [HistoryMaker Elizabeth B. Rawlins], you know, you're so busy, you have us over to your house, you do all these other things," and so I'd just figured I'd try to work it out my--myself.  And so then I thought--I talked with the president [William J. Holmes, Jr.] and said, you know, "They need to see what their sisters who've gone ahead of them have done.  There's so many wonderful a--alums.  And what'd you think about trying to get them to come back here," and he was very positive.  He said, "That would be fantastic, why don't you try it.  Spend--we'll pay for whatever it is you wanna do."  So in short, what I did was to invite about seventy alums, black alums from the Boston [Massachusetts] area just to try out the idea, which included Rehema by the way, Rehema Ellis.  And--and I asked them about it and how they had felt when they were--when they were there.  They had a group of us black alu--black administrators and faculty who were very supportive of them.  And so, you know, they could understand what I was talking about.  Well to make a long story less long, they agreed that it would be a good idea to have a symposium and the president said, "Do it."  So we did it and we got 168 black women back who'd never set foot in the place before, at least 165 of them had never come back before.  Harriet Elam [Harriet Elam-Thomas] had come on occasion, but most of them, and they were from the '70s [1970s] and the '60s [1960s], you know--I mean from the '70s [1970s] and before, the ones who had come back.
Story_ID: 506051
Speaker 1: So we had that wonderful symposium [at Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts], it really got a lot of press.  [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor came and we had great speakers and the--and the alums began to support the present students.
Speaker 2: When did this take place?
Speaker 1: This took back--place in '89 [1989], 1989.  This past year--not past year, at the turn of the century, Simmons became a hundred years old and it began in '99 [1999] to celebrate that.  There was very little of our presence in that celebration.  There was some, I'm not about to say there wasn't any, but there was very, very little, you know.  So, Reggie [ph.] and I have the same idea that maybe it's time, you know, for another one and the new president [Daniel S. Cheever, Jr.] agreed that, you know, maybe it's time.  But he--the new staff who are here were not there when we had the first one, so they had no idea what could happen and they worried.  They will tell you they worried about this thing and it got in the way.  But we persevered and we had over three hundred people come this time, the April 7, 8th and 9th, and this time there were--of course there were more women who'd achieved even more so it was so impressive, it just blew your mind.  And in addition to which, this time, unlike the first time--the first time around the women gave $7500 and they'd never given money before.  And the head of alumni affairs had told me that's why we don't have them as trustees and this sort of thing 'cause they don't--they won't give, and they don't answer.  I said well you--you need to find a way to do it and then they will.  So they started this fund back in '89 [1989] and they named the scholarship for me, it's the Elizabeth Rawlins Fund [Elizabeth B. Rawlins '67GS Scholarship Fund], and now there are two of them because I thought there should be a different kind, a borrowing one, as well as one that was an outright scholarship.  But this time around, they gave, what was it, 60,000 over $60,000 was raised through these women who came.  And the (laughter) college was blown, you know, not that in comparison with the millions that they get broadly, that's such a tremendous amount, but that's a lot of potential.  So the college was so impressed that it has said it will do it every three years because it now gets the message that we really are a resource, we really do support, we really do understand and we get it that our kids need to be supported while they're there and they need to be supported by--by us.  So I was really excited about that.  I had not planned to be working this hard as a retiree.  But I think we gave you one of the calendars which was a lot of tedious work to find--to--to show that during the time that the usual things you see in the newspaper were happening, these were the things that were happening and being done by black alumni of Simmons College.  And people are so impressed.  It's--it was a combined effort.  Several of our alumni--we did conference calls from as far away as California.  Once a month we were on a conference call of two hours and all of our corporate people were there using their corporate language to make sure things got done.  Barbara Edelin was hired to help with this.  It was--was wonderful.  It was really wonderful.  And that picture down there is the--a gift from the college to me.  You saw it probably in the calendar that shows, you know, sort of a cross section (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm gonna put that on the video later when we do the pictures.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, yeah, part of the cross section of Simmons' alums over the--over the years.  The--the people who are the most impressed were some women from 1945, 1940, someone was there from the '30s [1930s] and from the '50s [1950s], because there was nothing.  There was no recognition like that when they were there.  None.
Story_ID: 506052
Speaker 1: Dr. Rawlins [HistoryMaker Elizabeth B. Rawlins], is there anything else that you would like to add to this [The] HistoryMakers interview that you've granted that I've not asked you?
Speaker 2: Not--well yes and no.  You asked me way back was there something that I generally say or is there some comment (laughter).  And I've been thinking that I am noted for saying, this too will pass.  And I suppose it goes along with the--the kind of life story I've had.  That difficult things have passed.  They've, you know, they've looked like tremendous mountains and yet you find a way either around them or under them or through them or so.  So I would think that.  And I was thinking about the description of my [maternal] grandmother [Grace Hawkins Williams].  I used to say that she out-puritaned the Puritans.  And--and then I realized as I got older it's what kept me on the (laughter) straight and nar--narrow.  But, no it's been a full life.
Story_ID: 506053
Speaker 1: Why did you want to tell your story?  I mean, I know that you were invited to share your life with us, but why did you wanna tell it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, well I've come to appreciate that it's important, especially for black people in the United States to tell their stories.  I think it--I think our young people would have an easier time if they had some history.  If they understood.  I find myself with my granddaughter [Sharisse Scott-Rawlins], who's eleven going on forty, having conversations with her about what it used to be like and why certain things her mother [Pattie Rawlins] insists that she do and why some things are annoying and why you should put your effort here, how it will pay off.  And she's old for her age, so you know, you can almost hear her telling her little brother [Keith Scott-Rawlins] some of the same sort of things.  So I think it's important.  I wish our family were closer and had more reunions because there are lots of children.  There--I now have two nieces who are deans and their mother has--has called to tell me about it.  Not two nieces, a niece and a nephew.  They are the children--they are the grandchildren of my sister [Doris Miller].  One is a boy, I mean a male, and he is associate dean at a Christian academy, and the other is a girl and she's got her degree, her bachelor's, at Salem State [Salem State University, Salem, Massachusetts] and I presented it to her because I was a trustee at the--time.  I think I was chairing at the time.  And she's in a college in Maryland and her mother called me on the ceiling about these two who are deans.  And I got to say to them, I hope you remember that I told you that your family's connection to education goes back at least to the early '80s [1880s].  So you're doing what you're supposed to be--be doing.  So I--I think it's very, very important, very important.
Story_ID: 506054
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you have lived your life?
Speaker 2: Well, if--if I--it's hard for me to talk about that because I--as a New Englander, you know, you're not supposed to applaud yourself.  And yet there are times when I'm really am able to look at it sort of objectively and think about what my life was like as a child.  You know, where my parents [Nellie Williams Miller and Archibald Miller] left before I was independent that all sorts of things could've happened.  And so given all that, yeah I feel pretty good about it.  You know, I mean I feel as though I've learned important lessons and I've cared about people and moved in the direction my [maternal] grandmother [Grace Hawkins Williams] did that and she was the role model for me, so.
Speaker 1: What do you still wanna do that you have not yet done?
Speaker 2: I want to complete this family history.  I really am trying to get back to it.  Because now I understand better how to find material that's missing.  I understand how I can get the Barbados side now.  And--so that's really what I--I--I want to put some effort there.  I plan to put some effort there.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you have done already that you think you would've liked to have done differently?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  Well, I think I would've what--I would have been more comfortable about my own abilities and enjoyed it more if I'd been less of a New Englander when I was asked to be dean, and asked to be a regent [on the Massachusetts Board of Regents of Higher Education], and asked to do all these things.  My--my life is full of--except for my first job in Springfield [Massachusetts] where they came to the college and watched me teach and then offered me a job.  That's the closest I came to--that's the closest I've ever come to applying for a job.  I don't know how to apply for a job, out of practice.  So and I think when--I mean somebody has always asked me to--or seen in me something I haven't looked for or wasn't seeing.  So, you know, it's--it's not modesty, it's just that's the way it's always been.  And so I wish I'd known--wish I'd looked at me in a different way and I would have felt a lot more comfortable and maybe I'd been freed up to expand, you know, some.  But outside of that, I think I've tried to do (laughter) the best I could.
Story_ID: 506055
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and/or concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I'm really hoping th--I have a--a very specific hope about college professors, black college professors in predominantly white settings.  I'm kind of hoping that, but they'll find it possible to take some of that approach that black professors whose first went into predominantly white colleges had, which was more hands on with the students and not feel that it isn't their job.  I mean, there had--I think the present day black professors in these predominantly white schools are really in a bind because colleges I don't think appreciate the necessity for reaching out in this way.  And it's still very necessary.  During this project we got to talk with lots of students and they were not anti their black professors, but they didn't feel the--kind of connection.  They did with some specific people, but not in general.  And--and I don't think they're encouraged to--to make those connections.  We were encouraged because white people (laughter) didn't know what to do, you know, so they were glad we were there.
Speaker 1: Were there, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: So that's--that's a--that's a hope that I have.  And I kind of--you know--you asked me what I worry about, huh.  Now because I have two grandchildren I worry about what it's gonna be like for them.  You know, like when Sharisse [Sharisse Scott-Rawlins] gets ready and she's already saying she would like to go to Simmons [Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts] and that's because she's been to so many things there with me and she's been to Amherst [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts] to storytelling with me and var--various places.  And she says well I think--I think it's Simmons I wanna go.  I want Simmons to be a place that really appreciates her, 'cause she's very bright.
Story_ID: 506056
Speaker 1: We're coming down to perhaps the last question.  How do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I--I suppose I most wanted to be what I've been working on, trying to be a positive force in the lives of people, but mostly young people.  And I don't seem to be able to get away from it.  So I suppose that's what I think I should--should be a--the new students who didn't know me.  They weren't there when I was there, but they act like they know who Dean Rawlins [HistoryMaker Elizabeth B. Rawlins] is, you know, and--and they get comfortable right away which then allows me to be able to have some conversations with them about their schooling and their future that I hope will be meaningful.  So I guess I'd like to be remembered as somebody who not only cared but tried to be helpful, you know.
Story_ID: 506057
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you and your husband, Keith [Keith W. Rawlins, Jr.], are retired to the island of Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] in--what year was it again?
Speaker 1: Ninety-three [1993].
Speaker 2: Ninety-three [1993].  And in those--these ten-plus years, you've been doing things right here on Martha's Vineyard in retirement.  Tell us just briefly what you've been doing to continue the--the theme and the trend that you just shared with us?
Speaker 1: Well I'm on the school counsel at the high school as a representative from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], which really helps to provide a--a point of view and a perspective that they don't have because it is a pre--it is more than predominantly white, I think there're very, very few people of color there.  And I've been accepted well, you know, received well.  We both are very active Episcopalians, my husband even more than I 'cause he's a warden at the church where we are in the summer at Trinity [Trinity Episcopal Church, Oak Bluffs, Massachusetts] here.  I was on the board of Nathan Mayhew Seminar and I've given a couple (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What is the Nathan Mayhew Seminar, that's here on the island?
Speaker 1: Here on the island.
Speaker 2: What is that?
Speaker 1: It's a--it--it's a group, I think it was started by Mendenhall back--and Vera Shorter [HistoryMaker Vera Thelma Shorter] would be a good one to explain that.
Speaker 2: She's gonna be a HistoryMaker this coming Friday.
Speaker 1: Right.  Well her--one of the rooms--one of the buildings at Nathan Mayhew was named for Rufus [Rufus B. Shorter], her--her husband who died.  But one of--the reason I agreed to be on their board was because they wanted to have a connection with the public higher ed [education] with Cape Cod Community College [Barnstable, Massachusetts].  They offer courses here on the island for people that get credit, college credit because they are part of the college.  And so not only Cape Cod Community does, but some Salem State [Salem State University, Salem, Massachusetts] people do, Lesley University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] does, UMass Boston [University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, Massachusetts] has offered various co--so that the teachers can get their higher ed degrees.  So I've done--I've done that as well.  I have a book club which I belong to the in the summer and we read the works of black authors, discuss them and that's fun.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: And you're helping with the interest on the island in African American history, what--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right with ASALH [Association for the Study of African American Life and History].  I'm--I always--I, believe it or not, I always wanted to be a member of that but I really didn't have the time.
Speaker 2: What is the full name of the group?
Speaker 1: The Association for the Study of African American Life and History.  And there is now a chapter here, as you know.  We both are very active in that and I'm delighted to--to be a member of that because that connects with my family genealogical work.
Story_ID: 506058
Speaker 1: This is a formal portrait (laughter) of the younger Rawlins with Keith [Keith W. Rawlins, Jr.], Pattie [Pattie Rawlins], Paul [Paul Rawlins] and myself.  Pattie was five so that was back in 1967 and it's in our home in Hingham [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Now this is my granddaughter and grandson.  Granddaughter, Sharisse [Sharisse Scott-Rawlins] and her little brother, Keith [Keith Scott-Rawlins].  She has to be eight, I think eight years old in that picture and he's just under a year.
Speaker 1: And that is Sharisse Marie Elizabeth when she was eight years old.  It's a school picture, and my granddaughter.
Speaker 2: And that's our son Paul and our daughter-in-law Kit Rawlins [ph.] in their home in Cambridge [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: And this is a picture at my graduation for the doctorate at UMass Amherst [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts], 1991.
Speaker 2: And this is a family picture of when Pattie received her bachelor's degree at Salem State [Salem State College; Salem State University, Salem, Massachusetts] in 1986.  I was a member of the board of trustees there and got to present her degree.  So her father, Pattie and myself.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my husband and me on our fiftieth wedding anniversary last August the 27th. Nineteen fifty-four [1954] was our wedding.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Dr. Johnnetta [B.] Cole and me.  We were both at the annual meeting of the National Association of Women Deans and Counselors [National Association of Women Deans, Administrators, and Counselors], and she was the speaker.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my husband's grandparents on their fiftieth wedding anniversary.  The bridesmaids were living, but the ushers had died.  And so Keith's father and his brother Bill [ph.], and he served as ushers.  It was at St. Paul A.M.E. Church in Cambridge [Massachusetts].  They're Rawlins.
Speaker 2: This is another picture of our grandchildren.  Sharisse and Keith on Keith--I guess this was--in fact it was a Christmas picture when he was two.
Story_ID: 506059
Speaker 1: This is my husband Keith Rawlins [Keith W. Rawlins, Jr.].  We have a boat here on the island [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] that when the season is over, the boat takes people who are here on a little trip around the water and that's what we were doing that day.
Speaker 2: This is my son [Paul Rawlins] and daughter-in-law [Kit Rawlins (ph.)] and an extended-family sister on the occasion of our anniversary last year.
Speaker 1: This is the cover to the calendar we put together for a symposium held at Simmons [Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts], The Power of Our Presence: The Black Experience at Simmons College.  It took place in April of 2005, and brought back three hundred alums.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And this is a gift from the college to me of the members of the planning committee.  It's the cover to the brochure.  It went out about this black alumni symposium that happened in April.
