Story_ID: 187501
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: Gwendolyn, G-W-E-N-D-O-L-Y-N; D is my middle initial; Rogers, R-O-G-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: And the D stands for?
Speaker 2: DuBose.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my family name.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: All right.  And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: May 30th, 1931, in Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 1: Well, right now I'm retired.  However, I've had a number of occupations.  I was a school teacher, primary teacher; then early childhood teacher; and then an administrator with the Chicago Public Schools; teacher in Europe for a year with the American Dependents' Schools; and then after that, after about twenty-five years in the profession, I went to the Chicago Urban League, where I served as the director of education for twelve years; and following that I took a job at the Chicago Park District as the director of external affairs, which later became director of community relations.
Speaker 2: Okay
Speaker 1: And now I'm retired.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: For the past two years.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 1: Today is December 16, 2003.
Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: You're in my home at 4800 South Chicago Beach Drive [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Apartment 2201 North.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 187502
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions we always ask.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they just require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The first one is, ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Probably--lasagna comes to my mind or soup.  I love soups.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably beige.  Always the kind of muted colors and I wear a lot of beige and brown and black.  I'm not very much in the reds or the bright, bright colors.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring, fall and summer.  Anything but winter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Anywhere that I can travel on a ship.  Of course I like Puerto Vallarta [Mexico].  And I like San Diego [California].  I love Paris [France].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question is:  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: You know, I can't think of one particular phrase.  I really can't.  I probably use all kinds of phrases, but a particular one--
Speaker 1: Earlier you were quoting your mother [Lucy Pinkard], some of her phrases.
Speaker 2: Oh, my mother had so many phrases and sayings, as I said earlier, that were instructed.  And she was a very funny lady and very clever.  But I remember the things that she said, but they are not ones that I particularly use.  But they come back to me as being instructive.
Story_ID: 187503
Speaker 1: Now, I'd like to ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: And I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother was Lucy Alberta Grove DuBose Dickerson Pinkard.  My mother, A-L-B-E-R-T-A, Alberta--I'm sorry.  Lucy, L-U-C-Y and Alberta was the middle name and Grove was G-R-O-V-E.  She was married to my father, [Robert] DuBose, but unfortunately he died when I was eleven months old.  And she had three children; I have two brothers; Robert [DuBose, Jr.], who is an Episcopal priest my brother Grover [DuBose], who was a full colonel in the U.S. Army.  And I was the youngest.  We were all born in Birmingham [Alabama].  As a matter of fact, we were all born in the same house.  When my father and mother got married, he built a home for us there--right, a couple of blocks from Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama].  He had a notice that he wanted his children to grow up in a college town.
Speaker 1: Now, can you tell us how far can you trace your mother's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately not very far.  And I regret that, because my mother had a--she could talk about it, but she passed on before I realized how important it was to know more about it.  I know that my mother had two sisters and a brother.  And, of course, one sister died very early.  I think she was about seventeen or eighteen.  And one of the sisters was Farrah [ph.], who moved from West Virginia to live next door to us when I was growing up, which was very interesting.  And my uncle lived in Camden, New Jersey, and he was a dentist there.  My mother's mother's name was Lucy, also.  And my mother's father's name was William.  And they both died before I was born.  So I never got to know them at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they tell any stories about where the family started or was the family always from the Birmingham area or?
Speaker 2: No.  My mother was from Mobile [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my grandmother, my mother's mother, was from Mobile; a little town out called Pritchard, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Mmhm.
Speaker 2: And they lived there during my mother's childhood.  And when my grandmother died, my mother remained there.  And she taught at a little school there in Mobile, Alabama.  And she married in West Virginia where my aunt lived.
Story_ID: 187504
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was your mother's [Lucy Pinkard] birth date?
Speaker 2: My mother's birthday?
Speaker 1: Birth date.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: January the 28th.  However, you'd have to go back.  My mother's been dead for twenty-two years.  So--and she died when she was seventy-five.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She would have been ninety-seven years old now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And she would be--she would be ninety-seven.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So 19--what?  My math is (laugh)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So 97--'03 [1903] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  (Unclear)  (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's interesting.  I always remember the day and the day--the day and the month--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But not the year.
Speaker 2: --but I've never ever thought about what year it was that my mother was born.  But she lived until she was seventy-five.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very unfortunately.  She had really been very much interested in my going on to get a doctorate.  And I had just completed all of my work, had had my exams, and was just waiting for graduation in June, and she died in February of 1980.  And she did not get a chance to see me graduate.  That's one of the painful things in my life, because it really meant so much to her, and she was a very influential person in my life.
Speaker 1: She was born 1905, 1906, I guess.
Speaker 2: Something like that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Let's stop trying to compute it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So did they tell any stories about the nineteenth century or what they were doing during slavery or the Civil War or any of that kind of stuff?
Speaker 2: You know, I didn't know that much about my mother's parents and grandparents.  I know that my grandfather on my mother's side--my mother's father--worked on--as a steward on a board that went from Mobile [Alabama], I think, to New Orleans [Louisiana] and back.  And my mother told stories about that and what wonderful foods they ate as they were growing up, because he brought all these wonderful foods home from the ship because they didn't keep the food for the next voyage.  They had to get rid of the food, you know, before the next trip.  And I really don't know.  My grandfather was probably a child of a--there was miscegenation, because he was very, very, very fair skinned, and I suspect there was a slave master somewhere in the past.  I knew a little more about my mother's--sorry--my father's [Robert DuBose] family, because they were still alive--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, well--
Speaker 2: --until I was grown.
Story_ID: 187505
Speaker 1: Well, give us your father's full name and spell it for us, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My father's name was Robert Lee DuBose.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: R-O-B-E-R-T, L-E-E, D-U, capital B-O-S-E.
Speaker 1: And what was his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: You know, I really don't know.  I didn't know my father at all.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: I just know that he was born down in the area of Chapman, Alabama; somewhere between Chapman and Brewton [Alabama], because that's where my grandmother came from.  And my grandfather came from the same area.  But he was quite young when he died.  I would say probably no more than thirty years old.  He died of pneumonia.  He was a Pullman Porter, a very, very, industrious man who, at the time of his death, he had just really worked very hard at a home built, which we kept until about three years ago.  He had purchased property all around, and yet he had not had a long life to accumulate.  My mother [Lucy Pinkard] used to say all the time, "If your father had lived, we would have owned all of Vinesville [Birmingham, Alabama], because he was truly a go-getter, hard worker, and which pretty much led to his death, because he was really too sick to go to work but he went anyway.  And, of course, you can imagine what it's like running on the road when it's cold in the wintertime or--I guess it really wasn't wintertime, it was in the spring, late spring, because he died the first day of May.
Speaker 1: Right.  That's right.
Speaker 2: 1931.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did he have a chance to go to school at all?
Speaker 2: No.  He did not have any postsecondary education, only high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he was raised--was he raised near--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In Chapman, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Chapman.  Is that near Birmingham?
Speaker 2: No.  That's below Montgomery, Alabama.  It's closer to Mobile.  It's between Montgomery and Mobile.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: But it's rural.  Very rural area.  And my grandfather was a farmer.  They had a huge farm there in Chapman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, it's something--the name DuBose is from a French newspaper family, you--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.  This is all that I know, and I'm getting ready to get into genealogy (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm going to trace back and find out who--the one thing I remember my grandfather telling me is, that his father was a newspaper man in either Brewton or someplace around Chapman, from a newspaper family.  But I have discovered that I can use the census data and go back and find out more and I do plan to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandfather [Charlie DuBose], in addition to being a farmer where he raised corn and cotton, watermelon, had horses and cows and chickens and ducks and the whole bit, and also had tenant farmers; but he also worked as a Grand District Deputy for the Masons.  And he traveled all over Alabama setting up lodges and going to oversee the work of the lodges.  So he was away from home quite frequently.  My grandmother's mother was a slave, and my grandmother was, once again, the daughter of the slave owner.  Her name was Lillie.  Lillie Belle [DuBose].  But I never met her mother.  I never met my great-grandmother, but I did spend lots of time in the country with my grandparents; the happiest days of my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did they tell you any other family stories or anything?
Speaker 2: Only that my grandfather was an only child, and my grandmother was an only child.  So I had no great-aunts and uncles.  And my father was an only child.  So it was a very, very small family.  There are some cousins and all, but I don't know them.  I've never--I only met one young man who was--who called himself my grandfather's nephew.  But I never knew of any brothers or sisters that my grandfather had.  So you see, I've got a lot of work to do when I start with this genealogy project to find out about my history--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and my background.
Story_ID: 187506
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us about your mother's [Lucy Pinkard] personality.  What was your mother like and what did she do?
Speaker 2: Oh.  My mother was a no-nonsense woman.  She was left with three young children when my father [Robert DuBose] died.  She had gone to college at Alabama State [University, Montgomery, Alabama].  And, as I mentioned earlier, she had taught for a while in Mobile [Alabama] before she and my father married.  She was a woman who was always interested in all kinds of things.  She got a degree in beauty culture.  She got a degree, some kind of certificate for being an electrician.  She could do all the stuff around the house in terms of electrical outlets and--she ran a bakery at one time.  She ran a radio shop at another time.  She was an entrepreneur of the first order.  And she did beauty products that she manufactured on a very, very small basis.  But I keep thinking, in a different day in a different time and with a few more resources, she could have been a George Johnson or could have had a business like that, because she made some wonderful products.  Her last probably twenty years she spent as an office manager for an insurance company in Birmingham [Alabama].  As a matter of fact, the office she worked in was right across from the park where all of the bulldogs and the hoses were used during the Civil Rights era.  And that's the point at which she became ill.  She witnessed this every day, and she got terrible high blood pressure.  And it went on and on, but that affected her very, very deeply.  And, of course, at the same time, my brother [Robert DuBose, Jr.] was a minister down in Montgomery, Alabama, and he was a part of the Civil Rights Movement.  And their house was damaged, and he was threatened, and he went to jail and all of this; so all of these things really conjured up to create great anxiety in her.  But she was a woman who was fearless, you know.  She didn't belong to lots of social clubs.  She didn't believe in them.  But she belonged to groups that were advocacy groups.  She was around registering people to vote.  She spent a lot of time getting petitions to get our street paved, to get lights, and she was sort of a thorn (laughter), because, I mean, in the city administration's--she kept them bothered a little bit, because she was always saying, "We can do better.  We need better streets.  We need lights.  We need sidewalks.  We need more people voting.  And, as I said, she didn't spend time with social clubs and a lot of eating and partying.  But she was busy always with some kind of advocacy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She loved children.  She played the piano beautifully.  She sang beautifully.  She played for a church near us.  And she did a lot with our own church, which was an Episcopal church in Birmingham and played the organ there; started Sunday school for the little ones.  And I think the thing that I remember about my mother, and I started out saying she was no nonsense.  She was a strong woman who picked up the pieces after my father and just decided--fortunately we had a home he had built, and he had the foresight to have it insured so when he died we had a home.  And we had home all of our life, a lovely home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, your mother came to Birmingham to go to Alabama State?
Speaker 2: No.  Alabama State is in Montgomery.
Speaker 1: Montgomery.  Oh, that's right.
Speaker 2: She went to college at Alabama State.
Speaker 1: Well, how did she end up in Birmingham?  Is there a story about that?
Speaker 2: Because when she--she played the piano for concerts, the end of the year concerts up and down between Mobile and Montgomery.  And my father met her when she was there doing a concert; playing for the concert.  And when they started courting, and they got married, his run was from Birmingham to New York [New York], I guess it was, on the L&N Railroad [Louisville & Nashville Railroad].  And so they moved to Birmingham.  That's how she came after she married my father.
Story_ID: 187507
Speaker 1: Now, what was it like growing up?  Can you describe your house or what it looked like and the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It--interestingly enough, most of the people in this little community did own their own homes.  We were about three blocks from Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama].  And they were bungalows.  In our house we had three bedrooms, a living room, a dining room, and a kitchen, and only one bath.  Later on, you know, we added another bath.  But that was the basic home.  We heated by gas--by oil.  And when I was a little girl we had coal stoves.  And as I grew up, we went into electricity, electric.  But it was a very pleasant neighborhood, and we had a very close association with the college.  My brothers [Robert DuBose, Jr. and Grover DuBose] and I, we were always in the plays when they needed children in the Christmas plays, in the Easter plays.  And I had godmothers who were students there.  When I say godmothers, I guess you'd really call them big sisters.  They kinda adopted me.  And so I spent a lot of time on campus.  On Sunday afternoons, I'd go to visit some of the girls in the dormitory.  My mother [Lucy Pinkard] had one thing that she always preached to us, and that is, "You must have an education.  I don't want you to talk about what you're going to do after high school.  You can talk with me about what you're going to do after college, because you are going to college."  (Laughter)  That was non-negotiable.  And interestingly enough, even though my father [Robert DuBose] had built the home very close to the college, to Miles, none of us ended up going to Miles.  I went to Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama].
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: One brother went to St. Augustine [St. Augustine's University] in [Raleigh] North Carolina and one went to West Virginia State [College, later West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia].  So the college served a real purpose for us in grounding us, helping to focus us on education.  But we ended up not really doing what my father had in mind, and that was putting us close to a place where we could go to school.
Speaker 1: Now, you had, like, three stepfathers?
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: Two?
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.  Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: My mother married John W. Dickerson when I was about six years old.  That was about five years after my father died.   And he lived until I was a junior in college.  And then I left and came to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] to work--to get my master's degree, and it was during that time, maybe two years after my stepfather died, the one who was in the household for all of my childhood, to tell you the truth; then she married Erskine Pinkard, who was really a great guy, just a nice guy.  We called him Pops.  And they were very, very close, and she died in February of one year, and he died in January, the following January.  He absolutely could not make the adjustment to her death.  And she was very organized, very forceful, very take-charge kind of person.
Story_ID: 188208
Speaker 1: The sights and sounds (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And smells.
Speaker 1: And smells?
Speaker 2: You're right.
Speaker 1: The sights.  Well, I guess I think of the changing of the seasons as I trudged to school every morning, because I walked about a mile every day--maybe a mile and a half to get to my elementary school.
Speaker 2: Was that Fairfield?
Speaker 1: Fairfield.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Fairfield Elementary School.  Actually, I started out at St. Mark's Episcopal School [Birmingham, Alabama], and I was there until the second grade.  I guess I went kindergarten first and then second and--the school closed because (unclear) who ran the school, who was superintendent, he died.  And the Episcopal Church did not send a replacement.  So then I went to Fairfield.  And I walked to school with my brothers.  And going through the college campus, and I can remember a little creek that ran through there, but it was--there were lots of trees; and then remembering up the hill and around several blocks to get to the elementary school.  It was quite a trek.  But it was great in the spring.  In the winter, it was hard; it was harsh, because even though people think that Birmingham is south and it doesn't get cold, it does get cold.  And when you're walking a mile, and while I was bundled up, it was still very uncomfortable.  But I loved the fall and I love the spring.  And, of course, we were out of school in the summer.  And in the summer, I was often in the country with my grandparents [Lillie DuBose and Charlie DuBose], because the one thing that my mother [Lucy Pinkard] did was to ensure that we kept a close relationship with my father's [Robert DuBose] parents.  And so we spent summers down with them, which was great.  So the sights would be of a green--lots of greenery and the sounds of the street on the railroad tracks--on the streetcar line tracks.  I remember the old streetcars and the clangy sounds that they made.  Smells?  We had lots of flowers.  My mother had a wonderful garden in the backyard with roses growing; and, always fresh flowers in the spring and the summer.  And I remember the smells of the food she cooked.  She was an excellent cook.  And when we came home from school everything was ready for dinner and was on the stove.  And she'd make bread puddings and banana puddings and things like that.  Things that kids love.  And those smells I can recreate them even now.
Story_ID: 188209
Speaker 1: Now, what was school like?  How did you like school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved school.  I loved school.  I had teachers that I remember now very vividly.  Even though I'm seventy-two years old, I can still remember teachers at my first school, at St. Mark's [Episcopal School, Birmingham, Alabama].  I used to be taken home for the weekends with some of my teachers.  And I was very talkative, and I did very well with my grades, but I often got a little comment about the fact that I talked a little bit much.  I was a great storyteller when I was a kid.  I used to create stories.  And when the teacher would go out of the room, she'd let me come up and tell stories to the rest of the kids.  And I'd make them up as I went along, and they would always say, "Let Gwen tell a story.  Let Gwen tell a story."  I don't know where I got these characters.  I remember one was a crippled crab and his crutch (laughter).  And I would make up different episodes about the crippled crab and his crutch and things he encountered.  And that was fun.  And I was in the choir, and I was in the dramatic club; drama group in high school; and I was in the acrobatic team.  So, it was just really a fun thing.  And I took home economics.  And the teachers who taught home economics, they just loved me and my friend.  And the unfortunate thing is they would often get us out of class, algebra class, to come in to bake cakes (laughter), especially if they were having guests there at the school.  So I missed a lot of my algebra in there, but I could really bake good cakes (laughter).  And I learned how to set the table in the appropriate way for formal settings, because that was all a part of the home economics experience.  Unfortunately when I went to college, I had a little bit of a rough time in the math part because I had missed so much of it doing these extraneous things.  And I guess maybe they thought that girls didn't need that much in terms of math.  My brothers [Robert DuBose and Grover DuBose] were great, and they got wonderful grades in math and algebra and geometry and the whole bit.  And I got great marks in home economics (laughter).
Story_ID: 188210
Speaker 1: Now, who were some of the teachers that you remember [at St. Mark's Episcopal School, Birmingham, Alabama]?  And this is an all-black school, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And segregation was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --going on in Birmingham [Alabama] in those days?
Speaker 2: St. Mark's was all black; Fairfield Elementary was all black, and Fairfield High.  E.J. Oliver was the principal.  He was very much a disciplinarian, and he ran a tight, tight ship.
Speaker 1: Now, he was the principal of all three?
Speaker 2: No.  He was the principal of the high school.
Speaker 1: Of the high school.
Speaker 2: Mrs. Robinson was the principal of the elementary school, and she was--she was also pretty a strict disciplinarian, but very fair.  I remember Mrs. Collier [ph.], who was such a great English teacher.  And she did more--she was one of the best teachers I think I've ever had barring none.  And it served me well, you know, when I went to college and had to do a lot of writing and all.  I remember Mrs. Orr, who was my--Miss Orr.  She was my teacher at St. Mark's.  This was the one who would take me home 'cause she had the nieces and nephews, and I would go and play with them, and she'd take us to the movies and all.  And it was fun.  There was also my social studies teacher, whose name I can't remember now, but she was absolutely fantastic.  And we went to the academic Olympics, and I was one of the winners.  And my brothers also won in that category, because she did such a great job of teaching us.  Those elementary, high school ones who stand out in my mind.  Of course college, that's a whole different ballgame.
Story_ID: 188211
Speaker 1: In high school, you went to Fairfield [Industrial] High School [Fairfield, Alabama]--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Fairfield.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about high school.  What was high school like?
Speaker 2: High school was very good.  I enjoyed it.  I had lots of friends.  And, you know, like all little girls, we would decide what we're going to wear to school the next day, and we'd walk to school along with my brothers [Robert DuBose, Jr. and Grover DuBose].  And we would join everything there was to join; and as I said, the choir and the drama group, and the athletics group.  I played basketball for a little bit until my mother [Lucy Pinkard] decided she just couldn't take me to every one of those games, and she was not about to let me go without her chaperoning.  So my basketball years were rather short lived.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, it sounds like you had a lot of activities in this school, you know.
Speaker 1: Oh, we did.  We did.
Speaker 2: Was this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: We lived in a separate world.  But it was our world that was really very exciting as a child.  I could hardly wait for school to start back in September after I had been away.  I loved being with my grandparents down in the country.  But I was always excited to be back.  And, of course, I was always trying to keep up with my brothers, because they were really the scholars.  And I wanted to be on the honor roll as many times as they were on the honor roll.  So I was just two years behind them.  They were both born a year and seventeen days apart, so they were both in the same class (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now how--
Speaker 1: --all the way.
Story_ID: 188212
Speaker 1: How were people in Birmingham [Alabama] deployed?  Were all the black people in one section of town or were they kind of scattered around?
Speaker 2: Oh, they were scattered.  There were people who lived in Vinesville [Birmingham, Alabama] out near Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama].  There were people who lived in Smithfield [Birmingham, Alabama].  That was over near where Parker High School [Birmingham, Alabama] was.  There were people who lived on--in Westfield [Birmingham, Alabama], people in Titusville [Birmingham, Alabama].  So there were different communities where blacks were--the population was mostly blacks.  And there were schools there.  So we didn't all go to the same school.  Birmingham was a fairly large place.  I don't--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So how many black high schools were there?
Speaker 2: --there was--and all of these might not have been in Birmingham proper, but we considered it, you know, all a part of the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: The metropolitan area?
Speaker 2: --Jefferson County School System.  There was Fairfield [Industrial High School, Fairfield, Alabama], Parker [High School, Birmingham, Alabama], Westfield [High School, Birmingham, Alabama], and a couple of other smaller ones; about five or six high schools during the time that I was coming up that were all black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 188213
Speaker 1: You were involved in a lot of activities and making good grades.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Well, who were some of your high school teachers--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Mrs. Collier [ph.], whom I mentioned.  Oh, there was a music teacher, and I don't know why her name escapes me, but I was in the choir with her.  Mrs. Pulliam [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Mrs. Pulliam.  And, Mrs. Cuyer and Miss Gray [ph.].  There were two sisters, very glamorous, young ladies, who were my homeroom teachers at one time.  But those are the ones that I most remember.  Mr. Leggett [ph.].  He didn't teach me, but I knew Mr. Leggett.  He taught shoe repairing and stuff like that.  We had cleaning and pressing.  Ours was like a vocational school.  Beauty--kids took beauty culture; cleaning and pressing; shoe repairing.  In addition to the academic subjects, they could also take these vocational classes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you run for class officer or anything like that?
Speaker 2: I was never the president.  I might have been a vice president or secretary or something of the sort.  But typically, it was the boys who got the presidency.  It was not so much the girls who ran for those offices.
Speaker 1: So they didn't really encourage the girls (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They didn't encourage them that much.  The leadership, who's primarily the boys, who got the presidency.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you go to the prom and all that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  Absolutely.  And, of course, my mother [Lucy Pinkard] always chaperoned the proms (laughter).  So I never got a chance to be free out there.  You know, she always volunteered to be chaperone to the prom.  And they would even pick us up and bring us home (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Very sheltered.
Speaker 1: And what about--now, when you were a senior, did you have an idea what you wanted to do vocationally?
Speaker 2: I had a lot of push--my mother thought that I would make a wonderful nurse, because she thought I was so nurturing.  And then I loved cooking.  And she thought I should to Tuskegee [Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama] maybe and become a home demonstration agent or something like that.  And I didn't want any of that.  I wanted to go to Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama] because my uncle had gone to Talladega, and my cousins next door had gone to Talladega, and, you know, they had just painted such a wonderful picture of Talladega and I wanted to go there.  And at first I thought about medicine, but I had been so crippled in terms of the math background that I quickly changed my mind about that.  And then I became interested in foreign languages.  And my mother kept saying, "What are you going to do with it?  Got to do something practical.  You got to be able to make a living.  You got to be able to support yourself.  You got to be independent."  That was what she always preached.  And so I met Lore Rasmussen and Don Rasmussen, who were two of my college professors.  And Lore was in charge of the elementary ed [education] piece.  At Talladega, we didn't choose a major until our junior year.  The first two years were what you call the comprehensive courses; communications, social studies, natural sciences and the humanities.  And everybody took the same thing, so you declared your major in your junior year.  And there was sort of a tug of war between my French teacher, who wanted me to major in French; and Lore Rasmussen, who wanted me to major in elementary ed.  And I went the elementary ed route.  And I thoroughly enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 188214
Speaker 1: Now, you started in 1948?
Speaker 2: I graduated [Fairfield Industrial] High School [Fairfield, Alabama] in 1948.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Finished Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama] in 1952.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: So, what was going on at Talladega in terms of--was there any political activity going on at Talladega when you were there?
Speaker 2: Oh, there was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Had they started--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --quite a bit going on.  But it was more--it was not so much national politics as it was internal politics.  We had--now, this was my first experience with non-African American instructors.  Lore Rasmussen and Don Rasmussen--Don was Scandinavian [sic, German], and Fritz Oppenheim was German, and so on.  And the president at the time, Dr. [Adam] Beittel, was a very, very fine man, I thought.  But there was a great deal of dissention between faculty and the president of the college, because they--many of the faculty members felt that he was too conservative.  And he was anti-Jewish, and anti--non-white Protestant Christian people.  So there was a political upheaval, and students--many of the students got involved.  I wasn't really deeply involved in that.  I--but they ended up, in a sense, kind of forcing Dr. Beittel out.  He was there through my four years.  And then he left.
Speaker 1: Is that the same Dr. Beittel that went to Tougaloo [College, Jackson, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: I don't know if he left and went to Tougaloo or not.  You know, I kind of lost track of what happened to Dr. Beittel.
Speaker 1: Was he from Ohio or from--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: --was he from Ohio, from Toledo or something like that?
Speaker 2: Could have been.  Yeah.  Yeah.  I thought he was a very charming, gracious man.  I didn't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I think it's the same one--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It might very well be the same one.
Speaker 1: --he--yeah.  I think he's the same one.  And he ended up--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --really supporting the Civil Rights Movement and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He did?
Speaker 1: (Unclear.)  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, see, the feeling was that at Talladega that he was not active enough in supporting the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 1: Maybe they changed (laughter)--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Maybe they changed him, but I had no personal kind of problem with him.  I thought he was a fine man.  But I also really loved Lore and Don Rasmussen.  As a matter of fact, the reason I'm in Chicago [Illinois] today is because of Don and Lore.  Don was a professor at the University of Illinois.  He got his Ph.D. from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  Lore was his student, and she was working on her Ph.D. there.  And Hilda Davis, who was a cousin of D.O. Davis [ph.], the military man, she was our dean of women, and she was getting her doctorate at U of C.  And they absolutely almost railroaded me into coming to the University of Chicago to get my master's degree.  They helped me get a scholarship, they helped me get housing.  They helped me get a job, you know, to supplement while I was there.  And it was a wonderful experience for me.
Story_ID: 188215
Speaker 1: But they [Lore Rasmussen and Donald Rasmussen] were insistent that I was not going to stop, that I was going to graduate school.  And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Did you want to stop?
Speaker 1: My mother [Lucy Pinkard] felt maybe I should get some experience working and earn my keep.  But they convinced me and my mother that my parents wouldn't have to put out a penny.  And they didn't.  Well, first of all, the State of Alabama paid my tuition, because they wouldn't allow me to go to the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama].  And I know you've heard this story before from other blacks from the South.  So I didn't have any tuition to pay.  Then they got--arranged for me to have a teaching assistantship at the Lab School at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  So I got paid for that.  And then Hilda Davis helped me to get the job in the [University of Chicago] Law School [Chicago, Illinois] as a checker in the dining room, so I got my meals there.  My tuition was paid.  And I made money, enough from teaching the teaching assistantship at the Lab School to pay my board, you know, my room.  So I did go through there and get my master's degree without any additional cost to my parents.  And I understood where my parents were coming from, because for six years they had people in college.  My two brothers [Robert DuBose, Jr. and Grover DuDose] were in college two years before I graduated.  Then two years, all three of us were in college.  And the last year, I was in college.  So my parents had been, you know, they had a true expenditure on their hands with three kids in college over a six-year period.  So my mother was kind of anxious for me to get out and get a job.  But once she found out that I could handle it financially, she was pleased that I did go on.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now what was your major at the University of Chicago?
Speaker 1: Educational psychology.
Speaker 2: And--well, who were some of the personalities that influenced you there that you ran into?
Speaker 1: The one, Alison Davis was the key person who influenced me there, who was my mentor, and he was my--he was the person who worked with me when I was preparing my master's thesis.  And I took several courses from him.  And he was just always someone I could talk to.  And Dr. Bruno Bettleheim influenced me, but not in a positive way.  We called him "Brutal Bruno." (laughter).  Because--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 1: B-E-T-T-L-E-H-E-I-M.  Bruno Bettleheim.  He ran the [Sonia Shankman] Orthogenic School [Chicago, Illinois] for years over here at the university.  But he was--he was a brilliant man, but he had no mercy on students at all.  And he would embarrass you if you didn't come up with the right answer; he would storm out of the room and leave you sitting there wondering, well, what's going on.  He was a very interesting man and--but a brilliant man.  And he wrote, you know, a number of books.  But he stands out in my memory because he was so different from Alison Davis; Alison Davis, who was kind and gentle man, very scholarly; but by the same token--and demanded a lot of you, but in a gentle kind of way.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So those are two people I very much remember.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now this is in the early '50s [1950s] in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Well, I got my master's degree in '53 [1953].  I completed it in the summer of '53 [1953].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I went directly from Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama] to U of C.
Story_ID: 188216
Speaker 1: Did you like Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  One of my best friends from Birmingham [Alabama], who had gone to Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama] with me, had come here too when she got married, and so I had a best friend here.  And at the university [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I met a lot of interesting people who are still my friends today.  And I had some relatives, kind of distant relatives, here.  And a number of people from Talladega were from Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So we had a really nice little social group operating.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  So you finished in 1953.  Right?  And--so what did you do after you graduated?
Speaker 2: Oh, I started working.  I taught in Chicago Heights [Illinois] for two years, and then I came to the city and taught out at Carver Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois].  And after Carver, I went to Doolittle [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] down at 35th and Rhodes.  And after Doolittle, I left the classroom and I went to Europe, and I worked with U.S. Dependents' Schools--the U.S. Dependents' Schools as a teacher there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Got a chance to travel all over Europe.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you're teaching in the military.
Speaker 2: Teaching children in the military.
Speaker 1: Children.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Came back, back to Doolittle and stayed there, and I became one of the first Head Start Teachers in the City of Chicago.  There were three of us.
Speaker 1: Now this is about 1969 now, I guess, or so --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That was now about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --or early '60s' [1960s]--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yeah.  Right.  Early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Mmhm.  Mmhm.
Speaker 1: There's nothing about Europe you want to tell us?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved it.  I loved it.  I didn't know how to drive when I went there, and I went to a French driving school.  I didn't speak French very well, but enough to get by.  Bought a brand-new car and drove all over Europe and--you know, with some of the other teachers who were there.  But it was a marvelous experience.  Absolutely marvelous.  And got to spend a lot of time in Paris and in London and Italy and Spain.  So it was just really seeing the world.  And I absolutely loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And I came back then, back to Doolittle, and then that's when I started working with the younger children in early childhood and Head Start.  And then after that, I became a supervisor of--what they call it--curriculum consultant for other Early Childhood Centers that were opening up.  And then from that, I was tapped to be the director of the Early Childhood Center at Walt Disney Magnet School [Chicago, Illinois].  It was the first full-fledged magnet school that was started.  And we were there in the pilot phase.  And I stayed there for eight years, and I think did a very good job in my role as a director.  Helped to hire staff.  Helped with the curriculum development there.  And got involved with some professors from Northwestern who were doing a special project a Disney, who encouraged me to come on and get a doctorate at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois].  And then, of course, I left Disney, and I spent three years at Northwestern.  And while I was at Northwestern, I was encouraged to accept a job as the director of the master of art's in teaching program, which I did, and went out and recruited students from all over, and then finished in 1980.  So I went there about '76 [1976].  Three years there.  And the fourth year, I ended up coming back to the system.
Story_ID: 188217
Speaker 1: Let's backtrack on some of these positions and--
Speaker 2: Head Start you were saying.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now, as a primary teacher, you know, I mean, there're a couple of articles we have here, you know, show you doing a lot of interactive things with children--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and what's your philosophy?  I mean, how were you taught to teach, and what is your personal philosophy of teaching small children?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, maybe at Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama] with Lore Rasmussen, whom I mentioned earlier, that she had a very, kind of progressive way of thinking about children and how they learn.  And that you needed to engage children in discovering, exploration and discovery.  And that you needed to be sure that you knew as much as you could about child growth and development; that that was really the key.  If you knew how children grew, and you knew how they developed, then what your role became is finding the appropriate kinds of activities to engage them in.  The whole matter of sitting still and with your hands clasped and not making a sound:  Never.  Out.  That's not children.  That's not how children grow.  That's not how they learn.  They need to be out there in the environment.  They need to discover for themselves.  They create their wh- their intellectual world by how they are allowed and encouraged to interact with it.  And that has always been my feeling from the time I started with Lore at Talladega, and as I tried--went into the classroom, I tried to always remember that and to learn as much as I could about what stage of development the children are.  And then making sure that they had plenty of time to, for large motor activities; making sure that, when you're teaching them to read, that they're reading something that's relevant, and they're writing about their own personal experiences, and that they learn better for things that have some kind of emotional impact on them.  And that's the way I tried to structure my classrooms.  And also to try to be very sensitive to children's own emotional life and what they were going through.  And being not just a teacher, but a friend and a mentor, and listening and working with parents, which I always thought was very, very important.  And I tried very hard to develop good relationships with my children's families so that I had a sense of what was going on, if there were traumas that were happening in their homes or things that were creating difficulties for them that I tried to know them individually, and to support them when things may not be going well somewhere else, you know, in their life.  And I tell you, one of the reasons I went back to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], went to Northwestern to work on my doctorate, was because the things that I was doing with kids seemed natural and right to me, but I wanted to be authentic.  I want to make sure that the literature supported the kinds of things that I was doing and--so that was one of the things that helped me make up my mind about going back to school.  And it was so interesting because so much of what I was doing kind of intuitively, turned out to be what the literature was telling me was appropriate.  And that was very satisfying to know that I hadn't been too far off.
Story_ID: 188218
Speaker 1: Now people today--well, and in the past--in schools in poor communities seem to be very concerned about discipline, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the big emphasis on discipline and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: There was a time, and maybe within your lifetime as a teacher, there was a lot of spanking and corporal punishment in classes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and so forth.
Speaker 2: That happened to me when I was in elementary school.  We would have to run around the room.  If we missed one spelling word, we'd get one; if you missed two, you'd have to run around twice and the teacher was there with the strap to hit you (laughter).  It was really pretty bizarre.
Speaker 1: Sounds draconian when you think of it.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  Draconian.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: But, no.  By the time I had my training in elementary education--as I said, Lore Rasmussen was such a rare person.  I just remember once she was saying, "We always worry about the victim.  If there's been a fight between, but you have to also concern yourself about the perpetrator, and to try to understand where that person is coming from and what's missing, and what needs to be made available to that person.  Yes, you worry about the victim who got beat up, but you also worry about the person who was doing the beating; the why.  And I think that got deeply implanted in my mind very early only on.  And I never lost that kind of feeling, not only for children, but in my relationship with staff that I have over--supervised, you know, through the years.  I always tried to remember that, and it worked very well for me.  What I feel very good about is that I hardly know of anyone that I supervised or who worked in my department I'm still not friends with. I never fired anybody.  If something wasn't working well, I tried to talk with the person, and then to say to them, "It's not working out, but I want to give you the opportunity to resign.  But I'm going to give you time, because I want you to look for another job, and then you have the freedom to tell anybody here why you're leaving.  And it's not going to be that I fired you.  It's going to be because you're going on for different opportunities."  And even people that I had to, in essence, get rid of I tried to remember that as a part of my relationship.  And even now, people that I taught with back--the girl right now who was my aide when I was at Head Start over at Doolittle [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], I encouraged her to go back to school.  She got her degree, 'cause she had not gone to college, and then I encouraged her to go on and get her master's, which she did because she was so bright and just felt like she was wasting her time just being an aide.  And then she became a teacher, and then she became an assistant principal, and she just retired a short while ago, and she's been over here in the past couple of weeks and she said, "I'm never gonna let you get away from me."  (Laughter)  So she's been over here helping me to set up files for my husband's [John Rogers, Sr.] den, office space.  But we've kept in touch, you know, through the years.  And she calls me--that I'm her mentor.  But it's some of this stuff that Lore taught me back years ago that I have never forgotten.  And I'm still in touch with Lore Rasmussen.  She must be about ninety now, and she lives in California.  But we email each other, back and forth, and every now and then we'll call and talk.  But that was my philosophy about teaching.  It's just not teaching subjects, but trying to teach a child based on what that child's growth pattern, his developmental level was, and what was appropriate in helping support the growth and development.
Story_ID: 188219
Speaker 1: Were you influenced by Montessori programs?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean, I know a bit about the Montessori Method, and I think there some parts of it that are really very, very good.  And they do a lot with the exploration and discovery kind of methodology, where children have materials that they can play with, that they learn a sense of orderliness and how to approach tasks, whether it's cleaning silver, they know that there's a place for things and how to put them back.  And I think that's a good kind of training.  I'm a little bit less--and I don't mean this as a pejorative kind of statement.  I'm a little less rigid in my approach with children.  I try to give them more opportunities to make choices, and certainly to stimulate their creativity, and to accept wrong answers that can be very much instructive as kind of walk through it and find out some alternatives for an answer, why if something else might be a better solution to a problem.  That's the way I have worked with children through the years; and certainly through my years at Disney [Magnet School, Chicago, Illinois].  I think we built a really fine team of early childhood people and encouraged them to go back and arrange workshops, and also that they could become better acquainted with children and the growth and development.  That's the point at which I approach teaching.
Story_ID: 188220
Speaker 1: Now, Head Start gets parents involved too, am I correct, at a young age?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Head Start has gone through many evolutions, I would say.  At the beginning, we were so fortunate to have a model that included health, there was a teacher-nurse, nutritionist, teacher, teacher aides, the adult-child ratio was very, very favorable; the kinds of materials that we had available to us.  I have not been with Head Start, you know, for years, now.  I kind of left education.  After I got my doctorate, I went to the Urban League to be director of the education there.  And I have not followed it; however, many of my friends stayed with it and they've said, "Well, Gwen, it's so different now than it was when it started.  You know, we don't have the teacher-nurse full-time, and the nutritionist, and the teacher-pupil ratio is not the same and all."  So we had a kind of ideal situation to start with.  And our parent development teacher--I think they still have parent development teachers, but that was certainly very, very important in helping parents to understand about appropriate ways of helping children grow and develop; alternatives to spanking and alternatives to screaming and yelling at kids when they're doing things wrong; but trying to help them to see alternatives ways.  And that's one of the things that I--the reason I have stuck with Family Focus [Chicago, Illinois].  I just finished my term as the chairman of the board of Family Focus--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's in Evanston [Illinois].  Right?  That's a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: There is a--we have several--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --we have one here.
Speaker 2: --we have about six--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --six sites.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One is in Lawndale [Chicago, Illinois]; one is out here on the South Side; one in Aurora [Illinois]; one in Evanston; one up further north, North Shore, recently joined us.  The thing that endeared me to Family Focus is our concentration on families and helping families to understand more about child growth and development.  And so there is a link between my years of teaching and the work that I do as a volunteer now in places like Family Focus and the Chicago Children's Museum [Chicago, Illinois], and certainly with Garfield Park Conservatory [Chicago, Illinois] and all, and what we have tried to do with children in all of those instances.
Story_ID: 188221
Speaker 1: I think I've forgotten what--the question you asked me.  I kinda got--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was asking you about Head Start--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --about Head Start.
Speaker 2: --and parents' involvement, you know.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Parents' involvement is very, very important.  I mean, children don't grow up in a vacuum, you know.  You can do whatever you have to do at school, but you want it to carry over in the home.  And you want parents to be supportive of what you're trying to do in the school.  And in turn, you want to be supportive of what the child is going through in the home.
Speaker 2: I guess a better question would have been, like, what were the initial aims of Head Start.  I think parental involvement--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and then getting their kids involved in the academic setting earlier--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Right.  And one of the things was, is the literature was telling us that you can't wait until a kid is six years old to start trying to help his intellectual development bloom.  You need to start much earlier.  Children start learning from the moment they are born.  And the parents have such an important part, whether it's breastfeeding; whether it's deciding when you feed or how much child has had.  The child has to direct some of this, but it can't all just be imposed upon him.  And those are some of the kinds of things that we tried to do with parents; to help them understand the kind of lifecycle in early childhood and how children are learning and developing, and what they can do to support that learning and development.  And also there's home ed [education] about socialization of children; how do you socialize children; how do you make them loving human beings and comfortable in their own skins and give them a sense of self-confidence.  Those are the kinds of things that parents play a very key role in helping children grow and develop; whole child, not just whether he can say the ABCs and count to ten.  You know, there's so much more.  But it's helping children learn how to learn and being supportive of it.
Story_ID: 188222
Speaker 1: Now, what did you do at [Chicago] Urban League [Chicago, Illinois] as educational director--or as director of education (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As the director of the education department?
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Our department provided both direct service but mostly advocacy.  We were advocating, and we have been through the years and still continue school fundings, school finance, school funding, school reform, those kinds of issues that many required legislative action.  In addition to--well, things like trying to get minorities into apprenticeship trade training programs.  We worked very hard on that.  As you recall, we had a--in the Chicago Public Schools over at Washburne, the Washburne Trade Center [Chicago, Illinois], we had programs where blacks, males and female, female whites, Hispanics, could not get into.  It was closed shop.  And yet the board of education was pouring big money into the programs.  And so we established a coalition called CFATT, Coalition for Fairness and Apprenticeship Trade Training.  And we worked for years on that, and finally some of the unions refused to let blacks and Hispanics and women in on a fair basis; many of them left.  They left.  The electricians left, the carpenters left, the plumbers left.  And what we had left was the culinary arts that was later taken over by City Colleges [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  But that was a fight that went on for years, trying to insist that there be fairness in selection and allowing blacks to get the training--I shouldn't just say blacks, I should say minorities--get training.  With school reform, we worked on issues primarily about funding.  Our whole issue was putting together with the research department--the research department and the education department worked very closely together.  The research department would come up with the facts and the figures and then make a recommendation as to what we ought to be asking the legislature for and also drafting legislation and finding somebody to sponsor it.  And then we would organize.  We would organize groups of people to go to Springfield [Illinois], letter writing campaign, rallies on the steps of the [Illinois State] Capitol [Springfield, Illinois], meeting with key legislators to get their support for the things that we were trying to get passed.  And that fight still goes on.  In the direct service line, we had scholarships and grants.  We had afterschool programs for children.  We started the first Math Counts program with CNA Insurance Company.  We started a scholarship program with Anheuser-Busch for young people who were trying to go to community colleges.  We--the school reform issue was probably the toughest and the longest, but we did get a lot of things passed and changed in the legislature.  The whole matter about the selection of school principals and the selection of teachers and how that would operate, we tried to change some of the things that happened.  Some things that changed have worked well, some have worked fairly well.  School, what do you--councils, Local School Councils, we worked on that kind of issue.  And one of the big issues that [HM] Senator Emil Jones really worked hard with us on was trying to get money for disadvantaged children in the schools where the disadvantaged children were, as opposed to putting it in a pot and spreading that money that came from Springfield throughout the system.  And we did finally achieve that.  So it's, it's some of those kinds of real tough issues that you don't get a success overnight, you work on for years to get system change.  And that's what we were devoted to there, trying to change things in the system, as well as giving some direct services to young people.
Story_ID: 188223
Speaker 1: The [Chicago] Park District.
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: You worked for the Park District--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: For eight years.
Speaker 1: --for eight years?
Speaker 2: For eight years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Twelve years at the [Chicago] Urban League [Chicago, Illinois] and then my last eight years were at the Park District.  And I went into the Park District at the time where [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.], my stepson; and Forrest Claypool came in.  And they were about making the Park District a more customer-focused kind of operation and by making the resources be used efficiently and effectively; not just having a lot of people on the payroll who weren't doing it; trying to make the environment not only cleaner but nicer; the grass cut appropriately; the place kept clean; and listening to community about things that they wanted.  That's what I spent a lot of my time doing, is going out and working with community groups; to hear them, to hear the things that they wanted and to try to work with them as partners in getting those things happening in their communities.  For instance, I don't know whether you know the garden up here, the Perennial Garden.  It's on Cornell [Avenue] and it's around 59th--between 58th and 59th.  For years, that garden just went down, down, down.  I mean, it was junky.  It was--the flowers weren't tended, the grass (unclear) wall was down; and the people kept coming from the community down to the board meetings saying that it was a shame that the Park District didn't do anything to upgrade that.  And so, finally, my task became to organize the community group; work with them and work with staff to say, "What do we want to see done here?  Let's put a timetable, let's see how much it's going to cost, how much can we afford."  It's an award-winning garden now.
Story_ID: 188224
Speaker 1: Working at Garfield Park Conservatory [Chicago, Illinois], the superintendent had asked me to go out and work with the community, because people were afraid that Garfield was gonna close down because it was in a minority community.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It had not been cared for in years.  And so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  West Garfield Park [Chicago, Illinois] was really--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --at one time it--I guess it still is--it can be a very dangerous neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But, you know, that really got overplayed, because actually the Conservatory is on 300 North Central Park; right at Lake Street, 300 North and about 30 something hundred west.  That beautiful Conservatory was there, and it was--stuff was leaking, the plants were half taken care of.  So I, along with several other advocacy groups, we started something--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Friends of the Park is it?
Speaker 1: --Friends of the Park.  Westside coalitions and all--we all came together, and we started something called the Garfield Park Conservatory Alliance: a public-private partnership.  And what we did was to say these are the things we want and let's sit down and see how we can do them; write proposals; get some funding; work with the [Chicago] Park District.  And now, it's a jewel of a place.  An absolute jewel.  Tomorrow--no, day after tomorrow, we having the grand opening of the new Palm House, where all that plastic that was up there on the top has been taken down and replaced with glass like it was originally.  We got an L stop there by working with CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] and [HM] Valerie Jarrett, Bill Kastrin [ph.], the people who followed her, and the Mayor to say, if we could just have transportation.  Because what we found was, that people didn't come because they didn't have safe transportation to get there.  They could get a cab over there, but they couldn't get a cab back, you see.  And we kept saying, "We need an L stop here.  We need an L stop here."  And we got an L stop and it's wonderful..  It's wonderful.  And our numbers have increased tremendously.  We started art programs out there.  People put art exhibits there.  We brought musicians in.  We had special events where we'd serve to the people.  We did a massive door-to-door campaign, trying to get the people in the community to come.  And it has been a success beyond our belief.
Speaker 2: I remember back in the early '90s [1990s] Friends of the Park sponsored bus tours for people involved in Chicago cultural activities--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --to explore the use of the parks on Saturday afternoons and, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --I remember the tours revealed caretakers of--I don't know what their titles would be, but the people supervising the parks--was it gangling (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --keys with the field house locked up.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: And these guys are walking inside afraid of the neighborhood and not letting the children come in, you know, to do anything.
Speaker 1: Oh, there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The South Chicago--you know, just a few, I think--(unclear) Park and the South Side was actually doing something--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --on that Saturday when that tour was taken, but it was really a (unclear) in the way things had been run, you know.
Speaker 1: There has been a fantastic change in the parks over the ten years.  We work closely with Friends of the Park, my department, External Affairs, which later became Community Relations.  And we started a volunteer program that came out of my department.  We had the Plant A Tree Program, where people could buy trees and have them planted in memory of someone or something.  I mentioned the volunteer program.  And then we were responsible for setting up local park councils, so that you had an avenue of people, community people, who were interested that we could talk with, work with, plan with.  And it really made a difference.
Speaker 2: Well, things have changed a lot of--I think--was it tough to change that, because--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Very tough.
Speaker 2: --it seemed as though these were entrenched political jobs--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: At very--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that were handed down to people --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Very tough.
Speaker 2: -- you know, food chain, who just--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know, would--they'd run a park basically as a plum; some kind of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --political plum.  They had no idea.
Speaker 1: And that changed dramatically.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 188225
Speaker 1: [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] and I would go out.  He would come by and pick me up and we would go out and visit parks to see how they were looking and talk to the people out there.  And some of the things that we discovered were really very upsetting.  The people, you know, sitting in--no kids there--feet propped up reading the papers, smoking a pipe, you know.  That kind of thing.  But where were the kids?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Where were the activities?
Speaker 2: And the doors are locked (laughs).
Speaker 1: And--yeah.  Knock on the door, "May I come in?"  But that got changed very, very dramatically.  And it was hard.  It was not an easy task at all.  Great resistance.  Great resistance to the new leadership.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it has made a dramatic improvement.
Story_ID: 188226
Speaker 1: Just tell us some of that on tape, some of the improvements in the [Chicago] Park District's activities and facilities.
Speaker 2: Well, actually, my department's role was to interact with community and try to listen to problems that the community people had about their parks, and to listen to them and to help them articulate what they would like to see as opposed to what was.  And then we would try to sit down with them and work out: what can we do now, let's put a timetable on this, if this is feasible, if this is feasible, and let's move on it  And then we would bring it back to the administration and try to work through, and then we would report back to the community as to what the plan was in trying to be responsive to what the community was asking; and the same thing, like, setting up the advisory councils so that we had a pipeline to the community.  The advisory council meetings, we would go to the meetings; we would listen to what they had to say, and we'd come back and discuss it with the administration and find out how much we could of the things that they were asking for, and get back to them.  And things, like, redoing Osaka Garden, the Perennial Garden, Garfield Park Conservatory; we've worked on this whole lakefront project.  We were still working on that when I left, and I don't think that's been solved yet as to whether we're going to use limestone or whether we're going to do the revetment the way it's been done around the [Shedd] Aquarium [Chicago, Illinois], [Adler] Planetarium [Chicago, Illinois], down there or not.  But some compromise will come.  But at least the community is having a voice in it.  And that's the way it should be.  You know, it's taxpayer money.  It's the community that uses these facilities, and they need to have a voice in how the money is being spent to improve their community.
Story_ID: 188227
Speaker 1: Ma'am, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: I would truly like to see our community become more politically active and to become more knowledgeable about the power that they have if they're willing to get involved; get involved voting for who your elected officials are going to be; holding the elected officials accountable for the kinds of things that happen.  I'd like to see our community utilize some of the facilities that are here now that are underutilized.  I mean, Chicago [Illinois] has so much to offer, and so many of our young people, as well as our older people, have never been to some of the wonderful places and participated in some of the wonderful activities that go on here.  I think of the [Garfield Park] Conservatory, a beautiful place of rest and relaxation, and beautiful plants and wonderful programming there, free.  Every now and then there's something that has a small charge associated with it, but for the most part, everything there is free.  Using--I think we do a pretty good job of using our parks and playgrounds.  But you've got to be there advocating if you want more things in your park, more programs.  You've got to get involved.  You can't sit back and simply say what we don't have.  We can get almost anything you want, if we join hands together with something that's reasonable and we let our voices be heard.  I think taking a passive road is truly not the answer.  We have to be involved.  We--when we talk about crime in our communities, we have to get involved to help.  It can't just be the police.  It has to be every citizen taking responsibility, getting involved in programs like CAPS [Chicago Alternative Policing Strategy], this community area patrolling--policing.  We have to join some of these advisory councils.  Don't cost any money.  They cost--take a little time.  But it's called let your voice be heard and be a part of the solution and not a part of the problem and sit back and complain about it, but get involved.  I think, truly, that's the key.  And we've got to take a more active role in keeping our kids in school.  Parents, community people have got to help in ensuring that our kids go to school, and that parents and community people are involved in seeing that the schools are offering what our kids need, and they're being relevant to what our kids' needs are.
Story_ID: 188228
Speaker 1: When you look back at what you've done so far, what would you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I would say my involvement with community and parents and children.  Right now, my husband [HM John Rogers, Sr.] and I have just started on a new thing.  We're starting scholarship funds.  We've just established a scholarship program at Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama] where will pay all tuition, four years, for a student.  And that will continue.  And my husband now is talking about other things that we ought to start to do.  It's involving ourselves in a way where we can actually make it possible for young people to do some things that otherwise they wouldn't be able to do.  And we just started the scholarship fund this year with Talladega.  And there're some other things that he already has in mind that he wants us to do with the [Chicago] Urban League [Chicago, Illinois] and some of the other things.  I have been on the board of Family Focus for almost twenty years.  And I, as I said, I've been chairman of the board for the past two years, and ended my tenure on Tuesday--last Tuesday, I think it was, was the last.  But I will still be with them, because I'm very much involved in families and giving family support for children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I will--I'm still serving as the secretary of the Garfield Park Conservatory Alliance, which I will continue with.  I'm working on the advisory committee with the Chicago Children's Museum [Chicago, Illinois], and I will continue with that.  I was on the board for eight years, and you have to give up--no, nine years.  And so after the ninth year, I became a member of the board of advisors.  I'm working on the leadership committee with the Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] to try to get minorities more involved in the life and the work of the Art Institute.  As a matter of fact, tonight they're doing a tribute to the Tuskegee Airmen, of which my husband is an original Tuskegee Airman.  And they're presenting a trophy to the DODO Chapter here [Chicago, Illinois].  But we've done a lot of things in the past.  What, five, six, seven years I've been on this committee in getting more minority people involved in the Art Institute.  And these are the things that I will continue to do; being involved myself, but doing it in a way to try to get other members of the community involved to appreciate and enjoy the beautiful city that we have.
Story_ID: 188229
Speaker 1: When you look back on your life, is there anything that you would do differently, anything?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know.  I have not thought about it.  It's that I have been so blessed to have enjoyed every job I've ever had.  I've never--I can't remember ever getting up in the morning not wanting to go to my job, because I've had exciting jobs.  I've had jobs where I've an opportunity to work with people.  And I guess that's my great joy in life, is working with groups to bring about change, and to do things to help other people have a better quality of life.  I wish I had more energy and I had more time.  There are some things I would love to do that I just don't have enough time to do them; groups I'd like to work with.  I had started a group--a network, three of us; three women started a network for black educators, female.  And it's gone on for about twenty years.  And, unfortunately, I'm no longer working where I have the chance to get--to do the kind of work that I was doing with this group.  It lasted for twenty years, and we haven't met for a year.  And I was just saying to my husband [HM John Rogers, Sr.], "Got to get the group back together," 'cause it's a group that has really done a lot of good in supporting each other, especially newcomers who come here for academic purposes, teachers, students; that this black women's education network has helped a lot of people get acclimatized, let's say, to the Chicago [Illinois] community; help put them in touch with people who can help them achieve their goals.  So that's one thing that's on my agenda to revitalize that group.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any other future goals?
Speaker 2: To work on this scholarship program that my husband and I are devoting our thought and resources to.
Story_ID: 188230
Speaker 1: Is there anything you want to tell us that we haven't asked you?  We didn't know to ask?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure, as soon--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --as you walk out of the door, I'll think of, why didn't I tell him about this?  Right at the moment, I can't except to say that I've been tremendously blessed to have a good family with values that have stuck with me through the years.  And I appreciate my mother [Lucy Pinkard] more and more every day as I think of things that she taught me, and her whole commitment to helping other people is something that is very much a part of me.  My mother, my grandmother, I think really wonderful people.
Story_ID: 188231
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Just as a fair and decent, honest person who truly had a commitment to children, to families, to community.
Story_ID: 188232
Speaker 1: Well, this picture is of me when I was about six years old.  And that would have been taken around 1937.  It was made a Brown's Studio in Birmingham, Alabama.  And I don't remember exactly what the occasion was except that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  That's fine.  We can move on to--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Does that have a date on it?
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Is that the League of Women Voters?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  (Unclear)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of--made at one of the annual meetings of the League of Women Voters, where I received the civic award for that year.  Edna Pardo (ph) was, I believe, the president of the League of Women Voters at that time, and she's the one who's presenting the plaque to me.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: It was a plaque awarded because of the advocacy that I'd done in the School Reform Movement.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  And the year was what year?
Speaker 1: 1993.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Oh, this is a picture of my mother [Lucy Pinkard] when she graduated, I believe it was from junior college.  And, my gosh, she was probably about 18 or 19 years old then.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  That's fine.  Next.
Speaker 1: Is this in Mobile?
Speaker 2: Lucy Grove was her name at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next photo.
Speaker 1: This is the picture of my dear brother Robert, the Rev. Robert DuBose, who was the rector of St. Thomas--oh, historic St. Thomas Church, Episcopal Church in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: Is that okay with the light--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  It's fine.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is my office, the last office that I had before I retired from the Chicago Park District right here in Chicago [Illinois].  My retirement was in 2001.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This picture was taken without my knowledge at one of the events that my department, the Department of External Affairs, had organized at the Garfield Park Conservatory [Chicago, Illinois].  It was one of those events where we were attempting to get more people from the community, both the immediate community and the larger community, to come back to Garfield Park and experience the beauty of the plants as well as some cultural programming.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  What year?
Speaker 1: This would have been about six years ago--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay
Speaker 1: --which would be about 1997.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my dear mother.  I believe she was about forty-five years old when that picture was taken.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Next.  All right.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my husband [HM the Honorable John Rogers, Sr.] on the occasion of one of his birthdays that was held here in Chicago, Illinois.  My stepson [HM John Rogers, Jr.] and I had arranged for this party at the Fairmont Hotel [Chicago, Illinois].  It was a wonderful affair.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next.  All right.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: I believe this was a picture of my husband and me celebrating our second anniversary; our second wedding anniversary.  And that would have been in 2002.
