Story_ID: 55625
Speaker 1: I'm Julie.  I'm Julieanna Richardson, I'm the Interviewer, my God, and Scott Stearns is the videographer and I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us and putting your middle name.
Speaker 2: Sure, my name is Joe Rogers.  That's J-O-E, R-O-G-E-R-S.  My middle name, you said?  Joseph is actually my formal legal name--is Joseph Bernard Rogers.  B-E-R-N-A-R-D.  I'm Lieutenant Governor of Colorado.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Born on July 8th, 1964.
Speaker 1: And the loc--the location where we are now?
Speaker 2: We are located here at the State Capitol.  The Colorado State Capitol.  Located at 130 State Capitol, Denver, Colorado  80203, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July 17th, June, I'm sorry, today's date is June 17th, 2002.
Speaker 1: And your profession?
Speaker 2: I am Lieutenant Governor for Colorado.
Speaker 1: Would you say that's your profession?  Would you say that's your position right now?
Speaker 2: I'd say it's my position.  I'm an attorney by background.
Speaker 1: Attorney slash politician?
Speaker 2: Oh, Lord.  Politician is a bad label.  Why don't we just call me a--no, I'm just teasing.  I'm just teasing.  Actually, either one of them--actually we can joke these days whether you're an attorney or a politician.  Yeah, absolutely, I'd guess I'd say both titles.
Speaker 1: Okay, great.  That--just say attorney and politician so that's not--okay.
Speaker 2: I am an attorney and politician.
Speaker 1: Okay, great.
Story_ID: 55626
Speaker 1: I ask five questions of every one and they are little "People Magazine-ish", so just short answers.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, my favorite food, it depends on the day, but I'm crazy about a good steak.  I don't mind a good steak and a good piece of corn and baked potato, I guess that's sort of Western by nature but that's probably the favorite for me.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall, I'm a fan of Fall.  It's cool and the leaves begin to fall and it's a special time of year.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color, probably blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Oh, goodness.  I haven't had a vacation in a while but I'd say favorite vacation, oh, goodness, I had a great time in the Caribbean.  Really enjoyed the Caribbean for a while.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: There's a scripture in the Bible that says, Proverbs Chapter Three verses five and six, "Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding but to in all of thy ways acknowledge him, for he will direct thy paths."  "Be not wise in thine own eyes but fear the Lord, and depart from evil."
Story_ID: 55627
Speaker 1: Okay, I want you to talk--give your mother's name and I'd like you to talk about her and what you know about her background.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, my mother's name was Lola Marie Streeter.  That was her maiden name.  Her present name is Lola Marie Terry and, Lord, my mother's background come from a long line of pastors, in terms of my family.  My grandfather, my mother's side, was a pastor.  His name was Reverend Emmett Theodore Streeter.  A good man who worked so hard throughout his life and did a series of remarkable things, both in the Civil Rights Movement and certainly in the context of--of seeking to bring people together.  He did a remarkable job of doing that.  My mother was the product of that family with Reverend Streeter and Mrs. Streeter, my grandmother, who was Gladys Streeter.  Boy, what can I tell you about my mother's background.  She was the youngest child in the family.  She was the baby girl of the family.  She was the one child that they were looking forward to in terms of the family being able to afford to pay to go to college and do everything else in between.  And then my brother came along, the final year of my mother's year in high school.  And back in 1963, or 1962, that was a bit different time in America.  And being the daughter of Reverend Streeter, there was no doubt there was a great deal of pressure on mom at the time and via my grandmother, in particular.  It turns out that the young man who was responsible was my father, Joe Rogers, who lived right next door to my mother over in Omaha, Nebraska and they ended up getting married very quickly.  As you all know, they used to be those shot gun weddings when you had to get married real quick and they did that in terms of our family.  And my mother and father got married.  My brother came into the world back in 1963, in June of 1963.  And that started the beginning of, no doubt, remarkable life, I think, with all of us in many respects.
Story_ID: 55628
Speaker 1: Did she talk at all about her growing up--in the growing up in, you know, the son of Reverend Streeter--did she talk about that at all?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, she did.  She talked about what life was like for them growing up.  There's no doubt my grandfather, in the ministry, traveled quite a bit all throughout the country, to some extent.  He worked with Dr. [Martin Luther] King, the Civil Rights Movement and--and our family was very much active in terms of church business and relationships and my grandfather was the--was the minister in the United Methodist Church and so he was responsible to travel quite a bit.  He also spoke fluent Yiddish and spoke Spanish.  Obtained a Doctorate at a relatively young age.  Had a difficult time in terms of the country's history and he learned how to speak Yiddish growing up in a Jewish bakery in Springfield, Illinois.  And it was, as a result of his background, his experience, and his education, that that led to some remarkable relationships that he was able to develop over the years.  And he took the family along the road and my mother, being the youngest child, was a part of that family as they--as they made their way trying to find a way to do good things for people.
Story_ID: 55629
Speaker 1: Absolutely, my grandfather is--you said describe him a bit more?  Grandfather, pastor in the United Methodist Church, as I mentioned.  It was kind of interesting when you talked to my grandmother and grandfather because my grandmother always said the last thing in the world she ever wanted to do was to marry a minister.  She'd rather--said, she'd rather dance than eat and the last thing she wanted to do was to be married to a minister 'cause she didn't think she could do those things.  My grandmother, it turns out, was a basketball player.  She was crazy about playing basketball in the earlier part of the last century.  And just a remarkable life with the two of them.  It was kind of interesting to hear about the way that they asked each other to get together and, frankly, the way they ended up getting married.  They dated for a little while and my grandfather asked my grandmother.  He said, "What do you say, you and I get together and have something running around the house besides a white picket fence?"  And it was interesting because I was so fascinated by, frankly, their lives and the fact that they were able to stay together for some fifty years in terms of marriage.  And, frankly, to do so many good things for people that I asked my wife for her hand in marriage the exact same way.  What do you say you and I get together and have some running around the house besides a white picket fence?  My grandfather had a remarkable impact, I think, in terms of my life and so many others' lives.  Again, he was educated relatively young.  He had a gentle but kind spirit. a forceful personality.  He had a booming voice that resonated with a sense of eloquence that was quite profound, actually, as I listened to some of the tapes of him having spoken and some of the sermons that he had delivered.  A remarkably gifted man in many respects.  And there's no doubt that those gifts, in many respects, were expended, extended to our family and extended to my mother and so many people throughout our family.
Speaker 2: Did--did he tell you the story of him running for, you know, for the school board?
Speaker 1: He did.  He told me about his experiences in terms of making that decision to run and what life was like for him then.  Literally, the life for my grandfather was interesting, as you know, the country was in a whole different mode.  It was--segregation was alive and well.  Hatred was alive and well in terms of America.  And his experiences growing up and the compassion that he had as a minister of the gospel, though, were also alive and well.  It was interesting to hear my grandfather talk because he believed very much in faith and prayer and finding a way to do the right thing for people in communities.  At the same time, my grandfather kept a shotgun in the house because he believed that you had to pray as if everything depended upon God and, frankly, work as if everything depended upon you, and that included protecting your family.  And his experiences having grown up in the South and in the Midwest, were just hardening experiences in many respects.  But leading up to him running for office, he believed he had to find a way to make a difference.  And he knew that his having served as a minister of the gospel meant that there were opportunities to express, not only the ministry, the gospel of Jesus Christ, but also the opportunity to, to talk and to speak about and to be forceful on the issues which were passionate in the day, especially at Civil Rights.  That's why, of all things, he launched his campaign for the school board.  Back in 1960, the sum total of African American elected officials in the entire United States was about 250 people, literally.  From any capacity in the country, whether you were the local township chair or a city council person or if you were a local mayor or sheriff or in any capacity being elected, only 250 people in the entire nation.  At that time, he ran, he ran for the school board.  That was a significant position.  And I keep, of all things, his card with me which was his campaign card that he used at the time.  [Holding up card.]  Literally says, "Vote for Emmett Streeter, Board of Education, democracy needs everyone."  It's interesting that he uses that phrasing.  "Democracy needs everyone" because in many respects that's what the movement was in far greater than the idea of even him even serving on the Board of Education.  It was this whole idea of just trying to find a way to open up doors of opportunity for people and that's what his life was about, clearly.  And I gained a great deal as a result of listening to him and talking to him and being encouraged, frankly, by the relationships that he had with others.  My grandfather was the kind of man, I remember, I'll never forget this.  When I went to the funeral service when he died, I was seventeen years old, I was in high school and when we read the accounts of all of the folks that had things to say about my grandfather, he clearly was a man that had an absolute and dramatic impact in terms of people's lives.  And if there was anything I gained as a result of my experience with him, it was that determination to try to do the same over the course of my lifetime.
Story_ID: 55630
Speaker 1: Now, did you know your father, Joe--did you--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Absolutely--
Speaker 1: Did you try--okay, okay, good.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Oh, because your parents divorced--you were--they divorced in '66 [1966], it says.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That's what I read, okay.
Speaker 2: That's right.  They divorced back in '66 [1966].  I've got a picture of my dad over here.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about him and what type of person he was?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, my father worked hard.  Again, having grown up next to my mother, of all things, as kids.  My father was not raised by his mother.  He was raised by his father, who was Guy Rogers.  Was raised out in Arkansas, and in Camden, Arkansas.  The South, again, with all of its problems related to hatred.  Its problems related to strife.  At the time he grew up in the midst of all of that, the world for my father was a world in which you didn't look a white person in the eye when you were walking down the street.  The world was a world in which there were clear rules or else you paid a price for having broken those rules.  My father was named Joe Lewis Rogers and Joe Lewis, as you know, was a great fighter, legendary fighter here in the United States and for our people.  And I went back to my dad's class reunion, of all things, his forty year class reunion and, or his thirty year class reunion, and had a chance to spend some time talking with some of the people that knew him back then.  And he lived up a bit to his name, Joe Lewis.  My dad was a fighter.  He didn't take much from anybody in terms of scrapping at school every once in a while but he always had a forceful and a determined personality.  And that served him well in Vietnam.  My father was one of the early people to go to Vietnam at the time when they were still called advisors.  And he fought well on behalf of the country.  He was drafted into the war.  And there's no doubt that I think that the war, to some extent, hardened him as a person and as a man, like it did a lot of young people at the time.  The average age in the war in Vietnam was nineteen years old.  And--they--my father was there when he was twenty and so it was a hardening experience to some extent.  After the war, my parents split up and my mother came here to Colorado and--and--but was the fortunate thing about our family is that we went back home every year.  Every year my--my dad sent us--sent for us and we went back to Omaha and spent summers or we spent the Christmas break at least once a year, once a year for most of my years growing up.  And my dad never forgot his kids and even though my parents weren't together, they found a way to have an impact, frankly, in terms of staying together for purposes of our lives in terms of at least helping to raise the kids.
Speaker 1: Now, how old were you when your parents divorced?
Speaker 2: I think I was two or three years old.
Speaker 1: So you have really no memory of that?
Speaker 2: Don't have much memory of the divorce, no.
Story_ID: 55631
Speaker 1: Now, what is your earliest memory about Joe?
Speaker 2: Of my dad?
Speaker 1: Period?
Speaker 2: I can remember times at my grandmother's house over in Omaha because that's where the family really was rooted, in Omaha, Nebraska, and I remember goin' back to Omaha and spending time over at my grandfather.  We used to go to this place called "Kings Restaurant".  It used to be called Kings and I remember being probably four years old or so and saying, "Grandpa, can we get some cheeseburgers and get some onion rings, a chocolate shake over at the Kings Restaurant."  And my grandfather would pull off the side of the road.  Those are the best tasting onion rings in the world.  I can recall that as clearly now.  I think those are vivid moments for me, especially when I was young and there's no doubt that there had been a series of moments throughout these years, I mean, moments of watching our family struggle, to some extent.  My mother came here to Colorado, again, after my parents split up.  It was back in 1966 or early '67 [1967].  Again, the country was a different country.  Her coming here with three hardheaded boys in tow and trying to make a living and trying to make a difference in terms of her own family.  Times were not always easy for my mother.  She did not want to let my grandfather know about how difficult things were because the reality was my grandfather would have had her come back to Omaha [Nebraska] and--and--and given her a sense of security.  But she was determined to try to find a way to make it on her own.  And so in, in our family, that meant that she struggled a bit in terms of jobs and we ended up being on that system we call, welfare, for about eight years, in terms of our family.  But she was determined to keep us together and I was fortunate to have a great father and a great mother and at the same time a great stepfather who came into our lives, John Terry, who treated us as boys as if we were his own.  And encouraged us in school and encouraged our own success and to try to do everything we could to achieve something in life.
Story_ID: 55632
Speaker 1: Now did you--describe family life 'cause by the time that you're conscious you're living in the projects, right?
Speaker 2: I think so, sure, sure.
Speaker 1: So, can you just describe what life--and you're the--you have siblings, so you're the second oldest.  Can you give your siblings' name first?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, my oldest brother is Chris and myself is, they used to call me Bernie, Joseph Bernard.  Everybody called me Bernie when we were growing up.  So it was Chris and Bernie, kind of like salt and pepper, my mother used to say.  And then Tracy was right after me and then Jamie was the youngest and, yeah, the life for us in terms of our family, you know, I can still remember my mother and how I used to love macaroni and cheese and spaghetti and everything else in between.  And cut up hotdogs and pork 'n beans and Kool-Aid and potato chips and the whole nine yards.  I think those were all my favorite dishes when I was a kid.  I used to love a trip to McDonald's every once in a while.  But in terms of our family, I also remember just some difficulty for mama.  You know, the reality for us is that sometimes things just didn't work out.  You weren't able to meet the bills or--I remember one very vivid occasion when we just couldn't take care of the rent and--and came home and all of our stuff was on the outside of the apartment and--and I remember that look of hurt on my mother's eyes and a determination on my part that--that she wouldn't have to experience that.  So for me as a kid, at a relatively young age, being five and six years old, I would--I was one of those kids that would knock on your door and I'd say, "Ma'am, would you mind if I shoveled your snow or raked your leaves or is there anything I can do for you around the house."  I used to knock on doors and be amazed I made pretty good money doing that and I've money to come home and sometimes take care of a meal for our family or have a little extra money for my mother when, when things ran short and we didn't know where we were gonna make ends meet.  I had a raw determination very young that I didn't want to see my mother suffer, ever.
Speaker 1: And so you were sort of keenly aware that things were, you know, tight for the family?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, there's the clear reality for us is that it just, you know, and it's not unlike a lot of families but at the same time when you're going through it, you almost think it's just you.  And there's no doubt I think in many respects as a child I was probably angry to some extent.  I was angry at the fact that things were difficult for my mother because I knew what a good person she was and I knew how she wanted to make a difference but it just didn't seem like she could get ahead.  You know you couldn't get the job at the time.  How do you take care of your kids?  You've got three boys.  How do you take care of them?  And then four boys, with Jamie coming along, and--and I just remember always wanting to find a way to change that.
Story_ID: 55633
Speaker 1: If you take yourself back to those early years that you were growing up and if you sort of close your eyes, what sights and smells, or sounds, would remind you of your childhood and growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother would tell you, to some extent, my ingenuity.  We couldn't afford a bike.  Couldn't afford to go buy a bicycle but I was always the kind of kid in the neighborhood who could find a way to put together virtually anything.  And one of the things that I found a way to put together was a bike.  I would pick up various parts that were laying in the alleyway or laying anywhere in terms of the community, various parts at any point in time.  My mother used to complain because I used to have nothing but bike parts all in my room, at the house, in my little corner of the room.  Well, eventually I ended up putting together that bike and it was a bike that I put together, it was incredible.  I loved that little Schwinn bicycle I had at the time.  My mother, I remember, looking at me in somewhat amazement saying, "I can't believe you finally put that thing together."  I wanted a bike.  We didn't have any money to get a bike so I made a bike and I think--that is as vivid a memory for me as anything from my childhood and I think, again, it reflects for me, just as sort of determination that, okay, we are saying we can't do it, there has to be a way.  And that's as vivid for me as can be.  Another vivid, from memory for me was the experience that we had when we went--we were crazy about Bruce Lee movies.  Everybody likes Jackie Chan, these days, but we were crazy about Bruce Lee.  And down at the Paramount Theatre in Denver [Colorado], having fixed up my bicycle, I used to ride with some guys in the neighborhood, other kids and never forget we decided we'd go on down, we had just enough money to go down and watch a dollar movie at the Paramount Theatre with Bruce Lee.  And I'll never forget, we rode downtown, it seemed like it just took forever.  It was only a few blocks but it took forever to get downtown.  We're there, we're watching this movie on Bruce Lee.  We leave the movie theatre and I walk outside.  I'm probably eight years old or so at the time, nine years old maybe, and I came outside and I remember how vivid it was.  I saw these men walking down the street in these nice suits.  They had these suits and ties on and they were walking with briefcases and I remember literally sitting there on the corner, on my bike, one hand down, you know with my arms sort of lurched over the handle bars, and standing there and looking at these men and to some extent at being absolute amazement.  And I remember coming home and I said, "Mama, I went downtown" and I said, "I saw all these men with these nice suits and ties on, they were carrying briefcases."  I said, "Mama, when I grow up, I wanna do that.  I wanna have a briefcase and wear a tie."  And my mother said, "Baby, don't worry about it.  You will.  Just keep working hard, stay in school and do everything you're supposed to do and pray the good Lord, things'll work out."  I remember her optimism and the optimism of my stepfather also.
Speaker 1: Now when did your mother get married again?
Speaker 2: My mother got married again when I was in--well, when did Terry and mom get married?  Had to be when I was in fifth or sixth grade.  I'm not sure exactly when they got married.  I know they got together when I was in the fifth grade, or the sixth grade.  And I think they got married and then when I was in the sixth grade, or early seventh grade, and then we all moved over to Commerce City, which is some projects over in Commerce City here in Colorado.  And I remember Terry quite vividly, frankly, because he used to come over and whenever Terry would come over when he and my mother was dating, we'd have hotdogs and popcorn.  And we'd sit down on Friday evenings and watch "Creature Features," something like that.  There used to be a movie called "Creature Feature."  It used to be on television.  Scary movies on Friday nights and we'd be sitting there.  Absolutely, I remember those moments.
Story_ID: 55634
Speaker 1: Now, give me your elementary schools you went to--you went to?
Speaker 2: We went to quite a few because we ended up shifting around because we moved so often.  Before, in particular, my mother met Terry, we moved almost every year.  I went to Hamilton Elementary School.  I went to Wyatt Elementary School.  I went to Central Elementary School over in Commerce City and I'm sure there are a couple of other schools.  I don't quite remember.  We did not live consistently in the same apartment, as I recall, for any stretch beyond a couple of years.  Harrington Elementary School is a vivid memory for me that that was the first school that I went to from kindergarten.  Harrington over in northeast Denver [Colorado] and we lived off of Josephine Street then in a small apartment and lived there for two or three years.
Story_ID: 55635
Speaker 1: Now, as a child, would you say you were more similar to your mother or as a person, I shouldn't say as a child?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: What attributes do you have of both?
Speaker 2: I'd say I'm probably a blended child.  I'm--I'm sure like most children I've got some attributes of both my mother and my father.  Again, my father has a dogged sense of determination.  So does my mother.  My mother's got a measure of compassion for people that is very alive and real.  My mother's a very articulate woman.  Even though, of all things, she--she, as I had mentioned earlier, had my brother early in the last year of high school, my mother did very well in high school.  She was the child again everybody was hoping was gonna go on to college and everything else.  Then my brother came along but my mother read with a real consistency, always, when we were children growing up and everything else in between.  So I'd say I'm sort of a blended kid.  I picked up a little bit of everything.
Story_ID: 55636
Speaker 1: Reverend Streeter, I know he had a great deal of influence on you.  I wanna ask you, was there any one in school that was also have a--I mean, you know, any teacher or anything or anyone else that was influencing you?
Speaker 2: Oh, clearly, there were a number of teachers that as I think about the impact when I was very young, in particular, over at, sixth grade, at Central Elementary School, there was a teacher named, Mr. Owens, who was a math teacher there.  And I'll never forget that, for me, in particular, because, you know, I don't know that I thought I was the best student one way or another but Mr. Owens was--gave me a math test to try to figure out my math skills and abilities.  And I remember for getting--bumped me up in the math class and raised me up to another level.  He said you know, "Kid, you got some real abilities and skills and--and we need to be utilizing those skills and let me help you do everything I can to help you.  And then I never forget when he headed on to Mr. Rarick [ph.] who helped me learn to play an instrument, of all things, in Kearney Middle School.  And started out with a baritone and then I ended up playing trumpet.  And the reason that was significant for me is that I ended up going on to high school and Mr. Keyland [ph.] who was our math director there, not math director, he was the--Mr. Keyland was the music director over at Adams City High School.  And he worked with me wonderfully in school.  Encouraged me to play and was key in helpful in me getting a scholarship, of all things, to college on music.  I didn't end up utilizing that scholarship but just the fact that he cared enough and encouraged and Mr. Cleary [ph.], who was my math teacher at--at Adams City High School, who was also my tennis coach.  Also cared a great deal and helped to sponsor me with a scholarship that they gave me to school, personally.  A few hundred dollars a month that he ended up giving to help me to get through college and had a great impact in terms of me and my life.  And so I've been honored to have had good teachers and people that cared and recognized some talent, perhaps in me and the potential within me at a relatively young age.
Story_ID: 55637
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna just go back and have you describe--what--I know the schools.  I'm back--I'm back in elementary school, a little bit.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Commerce City [Colorado].  What was Commerce City like?
Speaker 2: Commerce City [Colorado] for me was essentially sixth grade on.  Everything up to sixth grade was in Denver [Colorado] but from sixth grade on, life in Commerce City was over the project.  It was the Holly Park Apartments there which are still there now.  They've been upgraded quite a bit since we were living over there in apartment number 356.  I think life for me was there like lots of other kids.  I mean it was fun.  It was playful to some extent.  There were other kids in the neighborhood that we got to know and friends that I'd develop as a result of being over there.  J.J. Humphreys [ph.] and John Flores, Bakos [ph.], Galloway, Arlando Galloway, but we called him Bakos when we were growing up.  You know we all developed interesting friendships and good friendships throughout the years.  In many respects we still maintain contact with each other even dating back from the time we were in sixth grade with each other.
Story_ID: 55638
Speaker 1: And what was the young Joe Rogers--what was he like?  What did you dream of being?  What were your thoughts?  I mean, were you outgoing or--
Speaker 2: Yeah--you know what's interesting.  If you talk to people who know me now, who knew me back when I was a child, when I was a kid, they aren't surprised at all about what I'm doing.  They're not even remotely surprised.  They're sort of saying, "Well, Joe, we knew you'd end up doing something."  And I think it was for me.  I was always a kid who had a pretty clear sense about what I thought was right and wrong.  I was the kid that would take on the bullies in the school.  I was the guy that would want to go fight the bullies.  Never forget an experience that we had, in particular, when I was over at Kearney Middle School.  It was the first year over at Kearney.  I walk into the school building.  As I walk into the school building, in the hallway, I notice that a bunch of kids were gathered together by the trophy case in the school.  The trophy case is where, obviously, we had a number of our awards in sports and academics and everything else.  It was over in Commerce City [Colorado].  And as I walk closer to the trophy case, I notice all the kids were getting louder and they were all pointing at the trophy case and everybody was sort of laughing.  As I looked at what they were laughing about, it turns out that they had put inside of the trophy case a kid named Bobby Locke [ph.].  Bobby Locke was a kid who was slow.  You might have said he was slightly mentally retarded.  He was the kid who nobody paid any attention to.  And, frankly, who everybody occasionally made fun of.  And I'll never forget as I walked up and saw Bobby inside of the trophy case, it was a huge glass trophy case, I saw him on the inside.  He was obviously not laughing at all.  Bobby, as a matter of fact, was sitting in the corner of the case with his head inside of his knees and his arm wrapped around his knees and he was, obviously, shaking and, and he was crying.  And I remember walking up in between all of the students.  I walked up to the case and I slid the case back.  All the kids were then making fun of me, look at what Joe's doing.  Well, Joe, what are you doing?  What are you trying to do, blah, blah, blah.  And I slid the case back and I reached inside to try to grab Bobby's hand but as I grabbed his hand he flinched all of a sudden.  He flinched back.  He thought I was going to try to hurt him.  I said, "Bobby, why don't you get down."  As Bobby proceeded to get down, all of a sudden all of the students got quiet.  Everybody got real quiet all of a sudden.  And as Bobby got down, I started to walk back with him.  It turns out that he and I were in the first class together.  And as he and I started walking back, I'll never forget this because it was kind of an unusual situation, all the students who all got silent and they all sort of began to part the way, to open up a door, or a path, for Bobby and I to walk.  And they were all dead silent.  As Bobby and I were walking, Bobby said, "Joe, I don't have any friends and nobody likes me here in the school."  And I said, "Bobby, that's not true.  I'll be your friend and I like you."  I went into the classroom and I asked the teacher, I said, "Would you mind if I shifted my seat, so I want to sit next to Bobby?"  She said sure.  And over in the lunchroom, at our school, Bobby was the kind of kid who would always sit by himself.  Nobody in the world wanted to sit next to Bobby.  And so I decided at the lunch period I would sit with Bobby.  Well, it was a strange phenomenon.  At the end of the school year, do you know who the most popular kid in the school was?  It was Bobby.  Bobby all of a sudden ended up becoming the kid who everybody wanted to hang around.  He wasn't so bad.  He was kind of quirky and kind of slow and all of those kinds of things, but actually people found that there were some interesting qualities about Bobby.  I'll never forget that in particular because I saw the transformation take place.  A kid who everybody was making fun of who was sitting in the corner crying in a trophy case.  Who at the end of the school year everybody liked to be around.  And I think for me if you think--if I think vividly about moments that had an impact for me in my own life, it goes back to that situation with Bobby.  I haven't seen Bobby since.  Don't know what happened to Bobby the next year.  I don't know what happened to him, you know, the next grade or what ended up happening or where he went to.  I don't know.  I just know that for that moment in time, me as a kid felt like I had some impact and I think that's been a continuing thing for me throughout all of these years.
Story_ID: 55639
Speaker 1: As a kid I was active in heading up student organizations.  I headed up the Black Student Union.  When I was in high school, I was the--the Drum Major for the band, the marching band.  I was the lead trumpet.  I was the, you know, co-captain of our track team and of our--of our tennis team on the school.  I got actively involved in debate.  Challenged the status quo.  I led a student revolt, to some extent, against the administration in high school when they were downsizing the school and they were, frankly, firing some of the teachers that were some of the best teachers in the school.  And I protested that before the school board.  I said I thought that was wrong.  That we oughta have the best quality teachers here.  And led a student movement there.  You know, I was just one of those kids who was sort of, a little bit different, I guess.  I was the kinda kid that could get along, I think with everybody.  I could get along with the kids we called the "Stoners" and at the same time get along with the kids who were the sort of brains of the school and everything else.  And I ended up being our graduation speaker at Adams City High School coming out of school, but--
Speaker 2: Now how did you get chosen to be on the graduation speakers?
Speaker 1: I was making trouble, as usual, to be frank with you.  It turns out that I was the head of the tennis team and I--I quit football in order to play tennis.  So everybody in the world called me every name in the book.  All the guys said, "Ah, what are you doing?  You're a sissy now.  What's up with you playing--playing tennis?"  Well, frankly, I liked the idea of playing tennis.  I liked the idea of succeeding in a sport on my own merit and getting out there and learning.  I was crazy about Arthur Ashe and Jimmy Connors and Bjorn Borg and these great players.  And I wanted to sort of be like them.  Achieve the merit on my own.  And I was real disappointed that nobody was supporting the tennis team in the school.  We'd come out to matches and we wouldn't have any fans that would show up and none of the other students would show up to watch us play tennis but yet everybody in the world would show up to a football game or a basketball game.  But we used to have these big sports assemblies in high school.  You know, where you'd gather all the kids together and you'd go rah, rah about all the individual sports.  And usually as the team captain you got a chance to get up and give a little speech about the football team or the wrestling team or the soccer or baseball or whatever team you were on.  Well, my turn came up as co-captain of the tennis team, to get up and to share some thoughts with the school.  And I decided that I would get up and not just give a rah, rah speech but to give a speech to the school letting its students know about how disappointed I was that they were not supporting the tennis team and how I thought we were of equal merit and that we were talented and that we deserved as much support and respect as every other athlete in the school.  And all I can tell you is that I got up there with the intention of, well, sort of giving people a piece of my mind.  And then to my absolute amazement, there was sheer silence among all the students in the school.  When I gave these remarks, there was absolute sheer silence.  I must have spoken for a--must have been only about three or four minutes, maybe five minutes or so.  At the conclusion of my remarks, the students stood up, gave me a rousing standing ovation and I went and sat down.  I was then approached by the Language Arts teacher to say, "Joe, had you ever considered speaking?"  I said, "No, not really."  "Well, this is your final year in school and we're having tryouts for the graduation speaker and several people have suggested that you might want to consider it."  And lo and behold, from the kid who was determined to sort of give everybody a piece of my mind, I ended up being selected as the graduation speaker for our class.  And spoke to students what I thought about our futures and about what we oughta be doing.
Speaker 2: That must have been a high point for you?
Speaker 1: I'd say, yeah, in a way.
Speaker 2: What about your mother?  Was she in the audience?
Speaker 1: Yes, my mother was there.  My stepfather was there.  My father came down.  Everybody came.  The family all came together.  My grandmother was there.  That was a special time clearly.  The idea of us having graduated from school that that really did mean something.  You know, to graduate from high school and there was no doubt in my--my mother and my grandmother and my father, stepfather everybody was proud that I was the speaker for the graduating class and I remember being as nervous as can be about giving that speech but, you know, standing up and sharing my thoughts and, again, a wonderful rousing standing ovation from our class after the speech we gave and, I knew, to be very frank with you, that there were something we had, wasn't quite sure what it was, but perhaps some ability to move people in some way.  And I was determined to, you know, to follow through on that to some extent.
Story_ID: 55640
Speaker 1: It's time now for you to go off to school now and I'm wondering was that a problem--was it assumed that you were gonna go off to school?
Speaker 2: No, not assumed because we didn't know how we'd pay for college.  We knew I was involved in the Upward Bound Program in high school, which was the remarkably, wonderful program and it really was the key in terms of me making a decision to go onto college and, frankly, to understand some abilities that we had.  Upward Bound, which is one of the key TRIO programs in the United States, takes kids from quote disadvantaged backgrounds and gives them an opportunity to spend some time on a college campus over the summer and during the course of the school year to have some additional academic assistance.  I loved Upward Bound and I originally thought it was going to be a fun program where you could just go up and hang up in the mountains and hang out in the mountains, that kind of thing.  But there some great people involved in that program.  Janelle Padian [ph.], Paul Thayer, who were critical adults in my life who really said, "Joe, you can be and do anything."  And Dawn Person who was the Director of Black Student Services up at Colorado State University.  It was my experience in Upward Bound that ultimately led to this vision of being able to go to college because, frankly, growing up in the projects, even though you might say you wanna go to college, how you gonna pay for it?  Frankly, when college costs more than the total income of my family in one year, I think the most my dad had ever made, my stepfather had ever made, was about $12,000 a year, maybe 13,000 a year and the tuition and fees and everything else for CSU [Colorado State University] was, I think, fast approaching, living expenses about 10,000 a year.  We didn't know how we were going to pay for it.  But, as a result of participating in Upward Bound and getting my act together academically, I got some scholarships and got some good financial aid packages, student loans, Pell Grants, plus I worked through college--delivered cheese steaks and pizzas and dug ditches and did everything else I could to get through school.  We were able to do it.
Speaker 1: Now how did you--did you feel a tremendous sense of obligation when you went to school--to college?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, I sent money home from college which I was proud to do.  Again, the struggles for my mother and father and family just didn't end all of a sudden.  I mean--I mean, the road has just not been easy and it wasn't easy.  But I remember earning a few dollars every now and then or having a little money left over from--from, you know, whatever we had in the bank account.  I would send some money home periodically.  You know those are things that my mother appreciated.  I don't know that she'd be all that proud of me mentioning that necessarily because, you know, even though we were poor, we were not poor in spirit and my mother didn't--you know her way of--of life, was not a way of wanting you to feel sorry or anything else in between for her.  It was not our way in our family.  But there was a sense of obligation that we had.  The obligation was I was the first to go to college.  My brother, Chris, did not go immediately to college.  He ended up subsequently going.  Three of the four of us graduated from Colorado State University and I was proud to be the first to go.  And, but there was clearly a sense of obligation.  I had to find a way to make it.  That was important.
Story_ID: 55641
Speaker 1: So how did you find Colorado State [University]?
Speaker 2: Through the Upward Bound Program.
Speaker 1: No, but, I mean, how--how was the experience for you?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed being at CSU [Colorado State University] for the most part.  It was where I met my wife.  I met her the first day on campus, of all things.  Me, as being a silly acted kid and I was a freshman and the big deal on campus, you know, Julieanna, heck, you got girls on campus.  I mean, you're a--you know you're in high school, you're about to go to college and I'm about to be a college man.  Never forget this.  I had a 10 speed, a Schwinn ten speed.  I had it all decked out.  I found out you don't deck 'em out as a way that we had 'em in the projects.  You don't quite deck them out that way in the college.  I had my streamers and everything else on the side coming out and my reflectors on and everything else.  In any event, I had my ten speed up on campus so I'll never forget it.  It's a first day at school.  I'm so excited.  I just checked in and got my financial aids squared around.  I got my classes all picked out and I'm riding down by Corbett Hall, which is one of the major dorms at CSU [Colorado State University].  I see this young girl and decided I wanted to get her attention and I had drived by her and fell off my bike in front of her.  That was a big deal 'cause I was proud of my bike, first of all, but--first of all that sounds silly but let me give you the context.  I guess I was the kind of boy growing up--there are some boys that are real smooth, real suave, real debonair and they've always been that way.  And then there are other guys.  I was in the other guy category.  If I liked you I sort of hit you in the usually--playfully.  And well, lo and behold, I fell off my bike, I get up and I said, "Hello."  She then proceeded to immediately ignore me.  She kept walking.  She was a sophomore, I was a freshman.  It was obviously that I was a freshman.  She completely ignored me.  But ten years later she married me.  So, maybe there's a testament to--to persisting.
Speaker 1: So you went in also as a business major, right?
Speaker 2: Not directly.  I didn't know what I was gonna major in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I thought it might be music. The thought might be political science.  I thought it might be a number of things.  As a result of my involvement in the Upward Bound Program, I was selected to attend the Presidential Classroom for Young Americans.  They gave me an exposure to Washington, D.C. my last semester of school.  It was in February of 1982.  Had a chance to go meet members of the House and the Senate.  Met our congressperson, Pat Schroeder, at the time.  Met our senators.  Had a chance to see the President and I thought I might major in Political Science.  I knew I was interested in terms of public policy and I was quoted in our student newspaper.  When I came back as saying that the, "Adam City Eagle Eye", which is our student newspaper, I was quoted as saying that I wanted to be involved in politics.  That I thought I might be a politician one day.  But I couldn't figure it out necessarily in my first couple years of school.  So I was in a general studies program and then I declared my major in my junior year, which was Business with a minor in Political Science.
Speaker 1: Now, you--I wanna go back 'cause you said you had gotten actually a scholarship to--is this--can I say CSU?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, you had gotten a scholarship there--a musical scholarship, right?  Wasn't that--
Speaker 2: I had gotten a scholarship, it was to another college for music.  And for CSU I received a scholarship, it was called the, "First Generation Award" and the "Sachs Foundation" which gave me a scholarship to go to school.
Speaker 1: And you--you played the trumpet--was the trombone?  No--
Speaker 2: Trumpet.
Speaker 1: Trumpet.  Trumpet.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Do you still play the trumpet?
Speaker 2: I do not.  We quickly found out that although I played the trumpet, I was not gifted at playing the trumpet.  And there are people that are gifted in music and I wasn't one of them, ultimately.  So, we stopped playing after my first year in school.
Story_ID: 55642
Speaker 1: Now, Joe--when you--was there--let me ask also about CSU [Colorado State University].  Were there other--anything else that was sort of important during that period of time?  'Cause, you know, going to college is, I believe, an acculturation process.  You even said that.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: You know--
Speaker 2: There are a number of things that were critically important at the time.  While we were in school, I headed up student organizations.  We--I was selected in my sophomore year of school as--as homecoming king for the university.  That was significant because it was based upon academic achievement and school involvement.  And there I was a sophomore in school competing against juniors and seniors in the school and I was selected as the homecoming king for the university.  And that was a big deal at the time.  I remember there was a great sense of honor I had as a result.  I had never been any of that in high school.  I wasn't class president.  I wasn't class anything.  I think it was class musician, as a matter of fact, coming out of high school.  But I was not anything else at all.  And certainly had never been recognized academically and hadn't been recognized in other capacities and--but I came to college and immediately had a three point five grade point average and was successful academically and got involved in a number of different student groups early on, in terms of my school.  My freshman year I ended up becoming vice president of the dorm at Edwards Hall.  Immediately  wanted to enact changes for the students on campus.  Created a number of other initiatives on campus.  Led a student protest movement against South Africa.  Called for divestiture of student funds against South Africa.  Got involved.  Was the president of the Congress of Afro-American Students up at CSU [Colorado State University].  We ended up putting together the largest fundraising event in the school's history.  When we brought to give--brought Jesse Jackson to campus back in 1985 after he had run for president in '84 [1984].  Brought Jesse Jackson and a fella named Carl Stokes who was a former mayor of Cleveland and we ended up packing out Moby Gym, the arena with 8,000 or so people.  Had a very successful event at the time.  I led student movements on campus for more funding for education and I was looked to run for the president of the student body and decided I would not do that.  It was important that I go to law school and I wanted to get out of college in four years.  I was determined to be done in four years and we were able to do it.  So there were lots of significant moments.  I was selected as a--one of the top 200 student business leaders in the United States by "Business Today Magazine" when I was in college and was honored to receive, again, a number of other scholarships based upon my academic performance in school.  Clearly got involved, again, in terms of student movements and issues of concern.  It was the years--those years for me were years of activism as a kid.
Speaker 1: And that wasn't a very activist type--time period nationally though.  I mean in terms--
Speaker 2: It was, except for the issue of South Africa which was still alive and well.  Keep in mind this was 1982 through 1986.  Mandela had yet to come to be freed until 1993, as you know, and so at that time that there was no doubt there was--those were the issues of concern.
Story_ID: 55643
Speaker 1: Now when--when you decided to go to law school, what is--what is your motivating?  What motivates you to do that?
Speaker 2: I'd never known a lawyer in my lifetime.  The only lawyer I'd known was Perry Mason in watching "Perry Mason" on TV.  But I think there was this determination that I still had to be involved in public policy and we thought that me majoring in Business would be key as a part of a background that I will always have something to fall back on.  But I knew I wanted to go to law school.  That I wanted to somehow be an advocate for people.  And, frankly, that in terms of my being involved in politics we thought that my going to law school might be a good thing to do.  And there had never been a lawyer in our family.  And I'd been successful in terms of my undergraduate education and successful in college, so far, and I thought, frankly, I didn't want to grow up too fast either.  I wanted to keep going to school and I thought the idea of going to law school would afford us some new opportunities.  I had no idea what you could make as a lawyer and knew we didn't have any money growing up but I knew I wanted to find a way to be in a profession that would give me some security in terms of income and that would allow me to succeed based upon my merits.  And I thought that law would be a key means of doing that.
Speaker 1: And, so, how did you find the law school experience?
Speaker 2: I loved law school for the most part.  Law school is three things:  The first year they scare you to death.  The second year they work you to death and the fourth--third year they bore you to death.  I guess that's what we always--those were the three phrases we used to come up with.  But I loved my law school experience.  I went to Arizona State University [Law School].  It was the last school I picked, believe it or not, to go to.  But I didn't have any money coming out of college.  Didn't have any money still.  So even though I finished up with college, I didn't know how it is that I was going to pay for law school.  So I applied to about ten schools--or twelve schools throughout the United States.  Got into five schools and Arizona State offered me a scholarship and nearly a full ride.  And I went to Arizona State [University].  My first year I ended up heading up the Black Law Students Association.  I won a statewide competition in the moot court competition for the school, the Jencks Cup Closing Argument Competition and my second year in school, we won the school's first ever national championship when I won the American Bar Association Negotiation Competition.  And I could not have been more pleased to do that.  First of all, it was a national title.  I had never done anything like that before.  And, frankly, to be recognized as the best in the country at something, was a remarkable thing.  And--and a great source of pride for my family and a confirmation of us having worked to develop some skills and maybe a recognition that things were on the right path.
Story_ID: 55644
Speaker 1: So when you finished law school, is that when you worked as a--account--worked for U.S. Senator Hank Brown?  Was that it or was that before?
Speaker 2: I finished up law school.  Got a great offer.  I couldn't believe it and I'd only mention this because it was so significant for our family.  I had never worked in a law firm.  I had no idea what lawyers made and I got an offer after my first year in college to work over the summer with a great firm called Snell and Wilmer and based in Phoenix, Arizona.  And I'll never forget they told me that I was going to make $3,500 a month over the summer.  Well, that was more than triple the amount that my family had made in any given month and I couldn't believe it.  I thought that I'd gone to heaven, working in a big gun law firm with these top lawyers and everything else in between.  And after my second year, I clerked again at Snell and Wilmer and then ended up working at Davis, Graham and Stubbs here in Denver [Colorado], which is one of the oldest to largest firms in the state.  I was real proud about those opportunities.  These were top gun law firms.  And, again, for me to have the opportunities--this kid who grew up here in Denver to come back and be with the top law firms in two states, was a heck of an honor.  After having practiced, I decided to come here to Colorado because my grandmother was sick and we knew that my grandmother might eventually not be with us and I wanted to be with her.  And I didn't mention to you my grandmother.  I should have mentioned a great deal about my grandmother more 'cause she was such a remarkable woman.  But I wanted to come here to be with my grandmother, be with our family.  So I accepted the offer at Davis, Graham and Stubbs and I came back to Denver.  And I practiced at Davis, Graham and Stubbs for about four years in practice and then I received a golden phone call that came from our U.S. Senator from Colorado's office, Hank Brown.  They were looking for a person to serve as counsel to the senator and previous partner who had worked at Davis, Graham and Stubbs was leaving that position to come back to Denver and my name came up as somebody they might want to have on board.  And I spent some time visiting with Hank and made the decision that I would join him and his staff and went to Washington [D.C].
Speaker 1: And how long were you on his staff?
Speaker 2: A little over two years with Hank.
Speaker 1: Did you enjoy that?
Speaker 2: I really did.  Hank Brown was a great man to work for.  I joined him when I was a Democrat, of all things.  I said, "Hank, you sure you wanna have a Democrat working for you in terms of your office?"  And he said, "I'm absolutely certain."  He said, "I understand you're talented and you have some abilities to help me in terms of doing my job better for the people of our state.  And I said I'd love to help you.  And so I went to Washington [D.C], frankly.  After my experience of being with Hank for about, oh, four or five months in Washington, it's when I made the commitment that I would get involved in politics directly.  And also made the decision in terms of my party--to change parties, politically.  It was only after that experience of having been in Washington and, frankly, having to confront directly the issues of our day--issues of key public policy, that I understood exactly where I stood in terms of the orientation of public policy.
Story_ID: 55645
Speaker 1: And at the end of the day I knew that I was a Republican.  People had always said when I was growing up, even all the way through college and, frankly, even throughout my high school years, they said, "Joe, you're just a closet Republican."  And--and they used to tease me about that.  So anybody who even knows me now says Joe you haven't changed.  You're exactly the same guy.  And I think for me it's true because, in terms of parties, I made the decision when I--you make all kinds of promises to the good Lord if he just lets you pass the Bar exam.  Every person in the world who has ever taken the Bar exam makes promises.  But one of the promises I made is that I'd always be true.  And I'd find a way to always be me.  And--and I've been proud of about that decision.  Trying to create new--new trails.
Speaker 2: Now, what--what motivated you though?  Did you believe that this was something with the Republican Party that--against what you already knew or did you get dissatisfied with the Democratic Party?
Speaker 1: There were two things, I think.  First of all, I knew I was not liberal.  I knew I didn't support the idea of two men being married together and that that was a philosophy being articulated by the Democratic Party.  I didn't embrace that.  I knew that in terms of the social issues of our time, on welfare, having grown up on welfare for eight years, I didn't want a system that preserved--paid people in poverty.  I wanted a system that somehow elevated people out of it.  And I agreed with Republican philosophy that articulated a vision that said, "We oughta measure our success and welfare not by how many people are on the system, but by how few people are in the system."  And I agreed in terms of basic economic reforms that the future in terms of our communities, especially in terms of the African American community, that for us as a people having grown up there my whole life, I knew that the key things that we lacked were jobs.  And I knew the key things we lacked were businesses.  I knew that we didn't have good places to eat and we didn't have shops and we didn't have factories and all those kinds of things in our communities that provided a basis for economic growth.  I knew we didn't have home ownership as a reality for people's lives.  And so when I looked at the base philosophies of the parties, I knew clearly where I stood.  It was consistent with my business background at Burns and Boozer.  It was consistent with the way we grew up in my family.  It was consistent of the pride of my grandfather, my grandmother.  And I knew I just had a different orientation in a spectrum of thought being liberal versus conservative.  Liberal meaning more open and thought about sort of, you know, you sort of let things go the way you want them to go and being more traditional in terms of my faith and my family.  I knew where I was politically.  And the key was to find a home because I wasn't crazy about the Republican Party necessarily either.  The Republican Party didn't have me in existence.  I didn't exist in the Republican Party.  Essentially, the party structure in the United States is it essentially came down to this.  Black folks uniformly said, "Okay, we'll be Democrats only because essentially we perceived that white folks who were Democrats somehow love us more than white people who are Republicans."  And essentially that's, philosophical orientation was-- was to divide the black folks as being Republicans and Democrats for years.  The same thing was true in the context of black people being Republicans.  As you know throughout the United States history, every black person in America, from 1965, 1865, all the way up to the early 1940s, was a Republican.  Indeed Roosevelt, Frank, FDR, Franklin Delano Roosevelt--really the key president in the Democratic Party in the modern era, the sum total of votes that he obtained from African Americans when he was first elected to office, was about twenty-three percent of the vote.  Seventy-seven percent of blacks voted for the Republican candidate.  But there was a shift that had occurred and the shift occurred throughout the United States.  As Democrats clearly began to articulate a vision that talked about having us at the table and that found a way to articulate civil rights policy in a way that said we've got to open up doors of opportunity.  That was the right thing to do and the Republican Party should have jumped on that banner.  After all, this was the party that opened up those doors.  This was the party that ended slavery.  This was the party that fought in the Civil War.  This was the party that fought against anti-lynching legis--fought for anti-lynching legislation.  It was the party that stood up at the time but somehow lost its way.  And I think for me I have been, and remain determined, to find a way to change that.  This needs to be a party that represents all of America but I was determined, and I knew that I couldn't do it, frankly, from the outside--that I had to do it not only as a Republican but as an elected leader.
Story_ID: 55646
Speaker 1: I want to talk about your involvement in education reform 'cause it's been a big hallmark of yours.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And that preceded actually your run for Lieutenant Governor, right?  I mean you actually--did it--did it occur--it also occurred after you had--you know, I'd like to talk about how you first came to run.
Speaker 2: Sure--
Speaker 1: For the Congress--is it--
Speaker 2: Running for Congress back in '96 [1996].
Speaker 1: Yeah, for Pat Schroeder's old position.  So if you would just talk about that.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  After having spent time with Hank Brown in the senate, some two years with him in the United States Senate, I made the decision to come home to run for Congress myself.  It was after a conversation that I had with a dissident from China.  His name was Lien Chow Han.  You remember the movement that took place at Tiananmen Square where there was an uprising of students in China to try to bring about democracy?  And Lien Chow Han was one of the leaders of the student movement.  He had escaped out of China and he made his way to the United States.  Ended up getting his law degree from Harvard [Law School] and ended up working for Hank Brown in the Senate and we worked together in the same office.  We were sitting down in the basement of the Hart Senate Office Building and Lien Chow and I were having a cheeseburger and some french fries and I'll never forget, in the middle of us eating this food, he stared at me, put his cheeseburger down and he said, "Why are you wasting your time?"  He said you need to be here serving.  It's obvious that you got a passion about America and you got an understanding about how this works.  Why aren't you serving?  Something about the way he said that at that moment and, frankly, from it coming--coming from the substance of a man who had fought Communism and fought all of its evil that it stood for, who made his way and escaped out of the country, it was a deep measure of substance in that moment.  And I made the commitment that I'd come home and run for office as a result of that conversation.  Having those cheeseburgers down in the basement of the Hart Senate Office Building.  So I got up.  I talked to Hank Brown about it.  I said, "Hank, I wanna run and I want to challenge Pat [Patricia] Schroeder for the seat in Denver.  Pat Schroeder had held the seat in Congress for some twenty-four years and I was convinced it was time for a new generation of leadership.  That some people said Joe you're crazy.  How in the world are you going to possibly win?  You're taking on a long-term incumbent, twenty-three years, twenty-four years in office.  Joe, don't you know you're the youngest person to ever run for Congress in Colorado?  Don't you know you'd be the first African American to ever even run for Congress in the history of the state of Colorado?  I said, "Yes, I know those things but I'm gonna run."  So we came home and built one of the largest campaign teams in the district's history.  We raised more resources than any other candidate in the district's history and I ran.  We challenged Pat for the seat.  She ended up dropping out of the race.  She decided she would retire from Congress.  I faced a series of Democratic opponents.  Ended up in the final days of the campaign obtaining the endorsements of both of Colorado's newspapers, "The Denver Post" and the "Rocky Mountain News."  Became the first Republican to be endorsed for Congress in Denver's congressional seat in some fifty years of Denver's history.  Denver is two to one Democrat versus Republican but I was convinced that I could appeal across the board and the Democrats and independents would vote for me.  At the end of the day I lost the election. I lost that election but I ended up carrying the largest number of votes ever cast for a Republican in Denver's history.  And in a remarkable way I carried nearly 50 percent of the black vote.  It was the highest margin in the United States for an African American who was a Republican.  And for us to be able to carry those margins, in particular, was of some shock to political pundits around the country but in essence laid the foundation for my being present even here today as Lieutenant Governor.  There were Democrats across the board who crossed the line to support me and to vote for me in that election.  And that was despite having been beat up by everybody.  The Democratic Party brought in everybody in that race.  They brought in Jesse Jackson, who was a friend.  Jesse Jackson, Jr.  Martin Luther King's son.  Coretta Scott King.  They brought in Kweisi Mfume  Charlie Rangel from New York.  Maxine Waters from California.  Congressman named Cleo Fields out of Louisiana and a number of other folks who they brought into that race.  It was a remarkable time.  A remarkably spirited fight but I lost that election at the end of the day.  But we had to get up from that defeat and we were able to get up from the defeat and subsequently run for Lieutenant Governor.
Story_ID: 55647
Speaker 1: But in between was when I watched in effort for families and this education movement throughout Colorado.  We filed a class action lawsuit on behalf of 4,000 parents in Denver to challenge the education system in our state.
Speaker 2: And what was your theory?
Speaker 1: The theory is essentially that you have a basic denial of educational opportunities to families and to kids, in particular, in the inner city communities of Denver.  It was a challenge sued on behalf of parents, in particular, on behalf of minority parents and all parents in Denver given the quality of our school system.  Denver had a forty percent, forty-three percent dropout rate for black children, in excess of a fifty percent dropout rate for Hispanic children.  The average test scores for black children, Hispanic children, were less than half the average scores for white children in the district.  And if you looked at essentially across the board in the terms of the quality of education the kids were receiving, I was determined that we oughta find a way to change it.  So we got together parents, some 4,000 plus parents, who asked to be a part of that class action suit, and we challenged the school system.
Story_ID: 55648
Speaker 1: Now, you--were you--like when you made the showing for--for the congressional seat, how long did it take you to--to-get geared up to run for Lieutenant Governor?
Speaker 2: Literally, we lost that congressional seat in November and I will never forget I got a phone call from Hank Brown who was, again, the senator I worked for.  Hank called me up the day after the election and he said, "Okay, you gave it everything you could, you fought hard.  What's next?"  And it was at that moment that we began to think about, okay, I can't sulk at having lost this election.  What can we do that would still move forward in terms of serving people and doing right by our community?  And that's why I made the commitment, after some two months, that we would run for Lieutenant Governor of our state.  And when I made that decision, then people said he's really out of his mind.  Joe, don't you realize that if you're elected as Lieutenant Governor of Colorado, you would be the youngest Lieutenant Governor in terms of the country?  I was thirty-three years old.  Joe, don't you know that if your odds as Lieutenant Governor of Colorado, you would be the first African American ever elected as a Governor, Lieutenant Governor in the United States who happens to be a Republican?  And don't you know that you would be of one of only four African Americans ever even elected as a Governor or Lieutenant Governor in the entire history of the United States of America?  Well, if I were to listen to all the pundits at the time, there's no way I'd be sitting here because they were right about those statistics.  They're right about the facts.  At the same time I was determined to find a way to succeed and to win and so we got up out of that race, having lost the race for Congress, and we're committed to run for Lieutenant Governor.  You look so sleepy.
Speaker 1: No, sorry.  I had, I had--sorry about that.  Could I--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --I want to ask you about--I really wanna go--'cause we're--we--we have a time constraint here, but I want to really ask you about what you're proud of as--that you've done as Lieutenant Governor but also because--I wanna get into subjects of being a black Republican.
Speaker 2: Sure, I'm happy to do that.  Let me share with you some thoughts first of all about how we were able to succeed in the race for Lieutenant Governor.  First of all, my pundits were right in the first phase.  I lost the race for Lieutenant Governor at the State Convention.  At the State Convention, there were four candidates who went into the State Convention.  I was running against two sitting state senators, a state representative and an activist out of Boulder [Colorado].  And we all went into the inner party of the inner sanctum of the Republican Party, which is the Republican Convention and I asked for the delegates to vote for me and support me.  Well, it turns out I was rejected.  Nearly seventy percent of the delegates voted against my candidacy for Lieutenant Governor at the State Assembly.  I walked out of the State Assembly with just thirty-three percent of the vote.  And I was convinced at that time I just lost an election again.  Wait a minute, I failed in the run for Congress, now I failed with respect to this run for Lieutenant Governor.  But on the way home, we stopped off at a Denny's Restaurant, of all things, here in Colorado and some folks were kind enough to come over and say how did the Convention go.  And I said, well it didn't go the way we anticipated.  They said, well, don't worry about it.  We think you're gonna succeed anyway.  Well, lo and behold, they were right and when we--I received just enough votes by getting at least 30 percent of the votes.  You qualify for what's called the primary ballot and there were two of us that ended up qualifying for the primary ballot.  I ended up winning the race for Lieutenant Governor, winning the Republican primary election, carrying 92 percent of the counties in the state by a nearly 60 percent margin.  It was the largest margin of victory in the state's history.  And all I can say is that the good Lord smiled on me.  The key in our state is Colorado's black population is about five percent of the state's overall population.  So you would have told me there's no way you can succeed.  You can't possibly win.  Well, we were able to do that.  And as a result of winning the primary election, then we teamed up as the race for Governor and Lieutenant Governor of our state and we were able, ultimately, to win victory in that Fall, in the November general election which led to my presence here today.
Speaker 1: Who is that person who came up to--who were the people who came up to you at Denny's, who said, you know--
Speaker 2: They were everyday people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't even know who.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wish I could recall the name but they were some everyday folks who sort of said, aren't you the guy that's running for Lieutenant Governor.  I said, "Yes, I sure am."  They asked me how the results had gone and that's when they mentioned they thought we'd be all right.
Story_ID: 55649
Speaker 1: And did you--but--what--the other question I have just in reading material--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: The Governor--you teamed up with Governor Owens?
Speaker 2: That's right, Bill Owens and I ended up teaming--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --teaming up.
Speaker 1: And one of the things--did he have a more limited vision of the role--the position here than you did?
Speaker 2: It was different.  Actually he ended up having a more limited vision but in the beginning we talked about a more expanded role for me to serve as the Lieutenant Governor.  I made it very clear when I visited with all of the gubernatorial candidates that I intended that the office of Lieutenant Governor had to be expanded, that we had to expand our responsibilities and functions and duties and all of those kinds of things.  And we were in agreement that that's exactly what would happen.  But I'd say over the course of years, absolutely, there was a change in that perception or thought.  And he wanted to limit the role much more.
Speaker 1: And why do you think that occurred?
Speaker 2: I'm not exactly sure what to tell you on that.  I was disappointed in the fact that there was a change in thought.  The reality of our state is that we were both separately elected in the primary election and then essentially we joined together to form the ticket and we were so effective in terms of serving as a ticket.  Colorado had not elected a Republican as Governor or Lieutenant Governor of our state in 28 years.  The last time a Republican was ever elected as a Governor or Lieutenant Governor in Colorado was the year 1970, with the election of John Love that year.  And so, the thought very clearly, and I campaigned on this basis, I said, "I believe I add votes to the ticket, and I bring an ability to help us win."  And that was my determination and that was what I essentially brought to the ticket.  And I'm proud that I think we did bring votes to the ticket.  We ended up winning that election by the closest margin in the history of Colorado, dating back since 1918.  We won that election by just about 8,000 votes and I'm proud that I think we played a key role in helping that--that victory happen.
Speaker 1: Did there--did you see any shift in things when you were at the convention at all with the Governor or did the shift happen later?
Speaker 2: I think it happened somewhere between that period from the convention on forward through the primary election.  And, again, I was disappointed about that.  It was clear that that we had talked about an expanded role and an expanded vision for the office of Lieutenant Governor but one of the things that became very apparent to me is that very little thought was given by the Governor about exactly how to do that.
Story_ID: 55650
Speaker 1: And were there parts of the black community that said, no way, we're not going to support a black Republican?
Speaker 2: No, actually, it was the exact opposite.  It was kind of interesting because if you look at the dynamics, it's kind of interesting the way we phrase things.  Black Democrat versus black Republican and I kind of find the phrasing to be interesting.  For me, in our state, given the fact that I had run for Congress, and again I had been very successful in that run for Congress. Against all odds, I carried the largest number of votes ever cast by African Americans for a black person who's a Republican.  You know, as well as I do, that generally in our community, me being a Republican, means we ain't votin' for you.  At the same time, we were able to do something different.  I talked about the issues that people cared about.  I talked with a sense of passion and understanding about where it is that our community must go and needs to go.  And, frankly, that message resonated with our people here.  And in the--the reason it was so critical for us is, again, we won an election by just 8,000 votes which means if 4,000 plus one go the other direction, you lose the election.  And if you look at our margins that we carried in the black community, in the race for Governor and Lieutenant Governor, black folks who had voted less than three percent of the vote--three percent of the black vote had gone to the Republican candidate for Governor just four years earlier.  In this election, we carried in excess of twenty percent of the black vote in the race which was a ticketed race with me and a white candidate for Governor.  Clearly, that was significant and that was substantive and the impact that the black community ultimately had in terms of us winning the election was critical.
Story_ID: 55651
Speaker 1: Now, back to the subject though of--though you say the--the terminology is interesting but, you know, you are a black Republican and the fact of the matter is is that there were black people who wore that title very proudly--
Speaker 2: True--
Speaker 1: --you know, previously.
Speaker 2: But it can also be used as a negative term.  You don't--you don't take, particularly, characterize black people who were Democrats as black Democrats.  You don't walk around saying, "Oh, that's a black Democrat."  But if you see a person, a black person, who is a Republican, you say, "Oh, you are a black Republican," kind of as if that's some oddity or rarity in life and it may well in fact be rare but I'm not quite sure I'd walk around with a label that says, "black Republican."
Speaker 1: Well what--when people--the fact is is that you've chosen a Republican Party as your party.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --party of choice.  And so maybe you should talk about it in terms of that.  But there is a body of people who call themselves black Republicans.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Just like my friends in the Democratic Party call themselves, "black Democrats" occasionally.  Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Am I wearing you out, Julieanna?
Speaker 1: No, what does that title mean to you, though?  What does it mean philosophically?
Speaker 2: I think at the end of the day you have black folks in our country.  There are an excess of thirty-eight million African Americans in the United States of America.  We are nearly thirteen percent of the U.S. population and as a people, I fundamentally believe that there ought to be no sector of American life in which we do not have a presence.  There ought to be no table in which African Americans cannot have a presence or ever see that.  No door in which we cannot open or cross a street in which we cannot walk down.  And so in the context of the Civil Rights Movement in the United States, clearly we ought to never have a world in which every black person in the world is either a Republican or a Democrat.  Our people are too broad for that.  Our people are too diverse and, frankly, we're too talented.  And, frankly, we have a broad spectrum of thought as any good people or any group of people has and I know that clearly in our community.  I have never met two black folks who think alike, ever, and I know in the context of our political orientation and thought, we ought to have people in every single party in our country.  It just makes sense to do it.  Just as you have white folks in every party in America.  And, frankly, we ought to never close the civil rights door. It's simply the Democratic Party door's footsteps.  Why in the world, I mean, doorsteps.  Why would we close it there?  Why would we in that great culture in which we sought to break down doors of opportunity so that you would have the opportunity as you have in the job you have right now to do what you're doing.  Why in the world would we open up doors of opportunity to live wherever--where we want--wherever we want to live.  To go to colleges. To wherever we wanted to go to school.  To work wherever we wanted to work but yet we wouldn't open up doors of opportunity in the other great political party in the United States.  There are two great parties in this country ever since our founding.  The Republican Party and the Democratic Party.  Why wouldn't we open up doors in both of those parties?
Speaker 1: But, okay, I agree with that but the thing is--let me--let me--but that door has always been open though.
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: In the Republican--
Speaker 2: No, because keep in mind with the reality of the Democratic Party was.  In the Democratic Party you had two great chairmen.  Great is a bad word to use.  Two significant chairmen in the Democratic Party.  Orval Faubus was the--was the chairman of the Democratic Party in Arkansas.  You had George Wallace, who was the chairman of the Democratic Party in Alabama.  You had several, a series of Boston mayors who were, at various capacities, Democrats who led various conventions.  You had riots that took place at the Democratic Party in 1968 and 1972 in Chicago [Illinois] in which black people were saying let us in.  We're going to open up the doors of opportunity in this party and we need to have a voice at every table in this party.  The Democratic Party has not always been open in terms of our people.  It was as a result of us knocking on those doors and opening up those doors and saying, "Let us in."  And we're going to have a voice and a say at the table.  The change took place there.  Frankly, in many respects, the same thing needs to happen in the Republican Party.  Why isn't there a movement?  Keep in mind that Jesse Jackson spoke in 1976 at the Republican National Convention and he went there with a message that said, "We need to open up the doors of opportunity for our people in this party," and I believe you have to open them.  At the same time he made a decision, obviously, that he was going to be a Democrat and a strong Democrat.  So he couldn't have it both ways.  He couldn't be a strong Democrat and at the same time articulate a vision for being Republican.  At the same time it's my obligation and my generation to now do that.  We have to expand our base.
Story_ID: 55652
Speaker 1: You really think people were crazy about fightin'?  They aren't.  But look at our movement.  Look at the Civil Rights Movement.  Look at what Medgar Evers did.  Look at what a number of people did all throughout the South.  In many respects, they had to drag people to try to find them to make a difference in their lives because they were content.  Many people were not content but they didn't want to rock the boat.  Many of our folks didn't want to rock the boat.  That was just the reality of life.  Leadership agitates and encourages the change.
Speaker 2: Okay, so the conference you held.
Speaker 1: Yes, I--we were proud as can be.  Actually we held the conference about a year and a half ago.  A little over a year and a half ago we brought together the first of its kind summit.  It was the African American Republican Leadership Summit.  And I had the vision of somehow trying to find a way to bring together African Americans who were Republicans throughout the United States together for the purpose of bringing people together to talk about essentially what we cared about.  How is it that we expand our base and our presence in the context of this party?  How is it that you help elect more people to office in various capacities?  And how is it that we fight for the issues that we care about in terms of our communities and the context of the Republican Party?  And that summit was overwhelmingly successful.  I was very proud of that.  Having hosted that here in Colorado.  And my hope is that there will be continued to be good things that come about as a result of it.  There have been.  There are multiple, various, many summits that are taking place in various states throughout America, that have all taken place as a result.  There are new efforts that are being engaged by African Americans throughout the country.  Be asked to encourage people to join this party or to find ways to vote for candidates who they think are in their best interest.  So there's a measure of success that we're having but, in my opinion, the dialog is never enough.  There ought to be more.  I want to see continuous activity to again agitate and to find a way to say yes, that we're going to have a voice and you aggressively seek to have that voice.  But most importantly, to have people elected to various offices throughout the United States.  I think that's critical.  The political power for African Americans in the Democratic Party came as a result of us being elected in various capacities because that gave us a seat at the table and it put us within the room.  At the end of the day you want to be in the room.
Story_ID: 55653
Speaker 1: You know, I have--you say that your friend is J. C. Watts?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I was wondering why, you know--are your--is your friendship?  Are you guys on tandem?  'Cause I'm trying to get a--you know you said you had a summit and I'm wondering was there philosophy that emanated out of the summit?  I just wanna to--I--
Speaker 2: There was a summit.  There was a philosophy that emanated out of that summit.  The philosophy said there has to be more of our presence in this party.  The philosophy says we cannot be taken for granted as African Americans who were Republicans in the context of this party.  The philosophy said that we have to expand the more numbers of us to be elected in various capacities throughout the United States.  The philosophy said that we will no longer allow ourselves to go unchallenged in the context of our Democratic friends who are African American Democrats who will con--conjure up names like Uncle Tom and sell out and all that other kind of silliness and mess.  There are plenty of Uncle Toms in this world who were Democrats, as you well know.  And we ought to find a way to get beyond those terms and to focus, frankly, on doing good and right by our people.  The reality's that there's different approaches to doing that.  And as long as we agree on what the problem is, the solution is subject to debate but it, at least agrees to what the problem is.  We're well aware that problems related to race are alive and well in America.  How do we solve those problems?  How do we deal with the key problems in our communities, with urban blight, with the lack of home ownership?  How do we deal with our families which, as you know, in many respects are falling?  Seven out of every ten black children born in the United States of America this year will never know me.  They will not have a father at home.  As people are watching this tape years from now, I don't know what they're watching, maybe ten years from now or twenty years from now, what's the next statistic gonna be?  Eight out of ten, nine out of ten of our kids didn't have a daddy at home.  We've watched this dramatic transformation has taken place with respect to our communities and in many respects no different than a frog that if you put him in water and you turn up the heat, you can turn it up to a boil and he still won't jump out because he's gotten used to it over time.  In many respects, the same thing is happening right now with respect to our communities and in terms of our families.  We're watching as it's perfectly okay for women to grow up and not have a man involved in their lives in any significant capacity.  This whole notion of my baby's daddy or my momma's baby, my momma's daddy, whatever else, I mean, this whole notion of--of men not being responsible to raise children is at epidemic proportions in terms of our community.  So that's the debate that needs to be had.  Not a debate about whether you're a Republican or Democrat.  Later for that, and I'm tired of that, and I think most people are tired of that mess.  Why don't we get to substance?  Why don't we get to the substance of how we have endemic problems that led to a situation in which the most stable families in America were measured by studies in 1950 were African American families.  But just 50 years later, in the year 2000 and beyond, the most vulnerable families in America, African American families.  So we can talk all day long about being liberal, conservative or anything else in between.  Why don't we try to find a way to get to solutions to problems?  And right now we're dealing with epidemic problems with respect to our people and certainly in terms of our families.
Story_ID: 55654
Speaker 1: And you have been very outspoken on the issue of vouchers?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, so have black people.  And that's the one thing that we've been so right about.  And I'm honored.  I'm right about it because we're right.  The issue of vouchers comes down to issues of choice for families.  And, frankly, families having the best choice in education.  Of those 4,000 parents who joined that class action lawsuit here in Denver, the vast majority of them were African American and Hispanic families who were fed up with the poor quality of education our kids have been receiving from ordinary public schools.  So what they've said is this:  "Listen, we don't have one week, one month, one year, ten years to give you to fix our school systems.  Give us the dollars to follow our child to the school we find best because it just makes sense."  Nobody would put their child in the position of saying that it's okay for you to fix the system.  Meanwhile, my kids are suffering.  Nobody wants to be in that position.  That's why the number one supporters of vouchers throughout the United States, are African Americans.  The black families, in particular, in the inner cities and, frankly, it is African Americans who are Republicans who have articulated the philosophy that says we've got dib choice.  We can't have this anymore who do not want to simply preserve the status quo for the sake of preserving some job for somebody or some union job for somebody.  We're fed up with that.  People are fed up with lousy schools.  With lousy education being given to their kids.  We need better and we deserve better.  So, if school choice is part of the solution, fine.  If vouchers are part of the solution, heck, I just look at the numbers.  Look at what they did in Milwaukee [Wisconsin].  Look at the numbers of black families that are lined up in droves saying, please give us this choice.  Let us be able to send our kids to the school we find best.  Look at what's happening in Cleveland [Ohio].  As parents are dramatically saying it.  Look in Chicago [Illinois].  You're going back to Chicago.  Key city for African Americans.  Marva Collins and all of the great work she's done there.  I mean, our families want choices and, frankly, at the end of the day, again, we want solutions.  Later for this Republican Democrat stuff.  Why don't we get on to the focus--focus on what solves problems for everyday people.
Story_ID: 55655
Speaker 1: How do you weigh in, in on the issue of affirmative action?
Speaker 2: I support that affirmative action which means equality of access to opportunity.  I do not support quotas for one very simple reason.  I look at the NBA [National Basketball Association] and I look at hockey.  Two great sports.  The NBA, as it turns out, is about 93 percent black in terms of the players in the NBA.  But it's more popular now than ever before.  But the rules used to be that you couldn't allow black athletes to play in the NBA.  When we change the rules and we allow the best players to exist on the court, guess what?  The sport is overwhelmingly successful.  Now it just so happens that you and I don't exist in hockey.  We don't exist there except for a few players.  But guess what?  Hockey is overwhelmingly successful and you get the best players on the ice.  I don't want a world in which you limit me to having one out of the 10 positions or a world in which you say, okay, we can only have two black folks out of a hundred that are here because you're limiting me by some quota.  Whether that's viewed in the positive side as sort of a base number or in the negative side as sort of a minimum number.  I just don't believe in that world.  I wanna world in which opportunities are available for people across the board and affirmative action to me means aggressively providing opportunities for people to succeed.  Don't you tell me you can't find black folks to work at your firm.  Are you interviewing at the right places?  Are you providing opportunities for people who are attending black colleges or schools in the inner cities or community colleges or otherwise?  As long as you provide the opportunity, whether that person succeeds or fails, hey, that's on them.  But at least provide the opportunity for success.
Speaker 1: Reparations, where do you weigh in on them?
Speaker 2: I don't support because I think it's silly, to be frank with you, and I really believe that.  At the end of the day there are 38 million African Americans in the United States.  I know this debate is now a popular debate to engage in about dollars being paid for slavery.  Now, heck, I'd much rather have the idea of an apology for slavery in the context of sort of saying, it's wrong, we clearly know it's wrong.  Our country knows it's wrong.  That's why we passed the civil rights legislation.  It's why we passed the amendments.  It's why we fought, yes, wars and battles and everything else in between.  We know it's wrong.  I do not believe the idea of you and I getting some check from the federal government will somehow solve problems.  Is a check nice?  Sure.  Every one of us would like to have a check.  Period.  But that doesn't move us to a point of solving the issues of concern to our people.  We have got to stay focused on what matters.  What matters for our people, again, is not some nostalgic notion about what reparations will do.  I wanna talk about what we're doing with respect to our own families.  I wanna talk about how it is that we find a way to have black men and black women stay together to raise children.  What can we do to solve that problem?  You wanna bring something to me.  Bring that to me.  You bring that solution to me.  All of these great scholars and all these great folks that we've got in our community, articulating a vision about reparations.  You articulate a vision to me about how we keep our families together.  You wanna prove something to me?  Prove that to me 'cause right now we're in epidemic proportions and we've got problems.
Speaker 1: Well, you have to open up the prisons--bring the men in back home.
Speaker 2: Nah, if you actually look at the numbers, it's actually not true.
Speaker 1: Well there are--
Speaker 2: If I showed you the average number of black men in prison versus the average number of black men in society, you'd be surprised.  There are actually plenty of black men in our culture.
Speaker 1: As a black female I don't care.  I will tend to disagree with you but we won't go on--
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Okay, you can't say that in too many circles--women--women--you'd be in trouble.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but a lot of these fellas need to quit doing that mess to get there in the first place.  Prison is not a place of great innocent--innocency.  The reality for us is that there has to be as, men in particular, a behavior change in many respects for us as men.  It--there are--first of all, the strikes are already against you.  I'm more likely to die than any other man in America, period.  The average life span for me as a black man, 58 years old.  Paying a whole life in his social security and won't receive a dime, on average.  That is the average life for black men in the United States.  58 years old.  You and I--black men die from prostate cancer.  We die from sexually transmitted diseases and other kinds of things at such an alarming and disproportionate rate that it would shock most people to look at the raw numbers.  We have got to change and the change has to come from leadership, in particular, among black men.
Story_ID: 55656
Speaker 1: You are getting--you're getting ready--you're mounting a run for Congress.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Why are you excited about that?
Speaker 2: I'm excited about running for Congress for a number of reasons.  First, is the chance to fight for Colorado and a chance to fight for Colorado in a whole new way.  Being one of 435 members of the United States Congress who represent 283 million people in our nation.  Representing our continental United States and, frankly, territories in our hemisphere and throughout the globe.  It's a remarkable opportunity and, in particular, there's a great deal of pride associated with me and this running for Congress.  As you know, I'd be the first African American in the history of the United States ever elected to the United States Congress from a rocky mountain state.  Literally, you have some eleven states in this entire region of the United States that have never been represented by an African American in the United States Congress.  And I'd like that to be a reality.  It's a golden opportunity to go to Washington [D.C.] to fight for the things we care about, not only here in Colorado but, frankly, throughout the entire country.  It's a chance to stand up for these things, to stand up for families, a chance to fight for a stronger education system.  Clearly, for our pre-eminent position economically in the world, a chance to focus on those things that matter for every day families and to strengthen the country.  At the end of the day, that's what service ought to be about, finding a way to improve the quality of life for everyday people.
Story_ID: 55657
Speaker 1: I have two questions left for you.  One is, what do you think you're grandfather, Reverend Streeter, would say if he could see you now?  And then my other question is, what you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: My mother would be the best question--person to ask about that.  My mother would tell you, in particular, that my grandfather, she told me, your grandfather would be so proud of what you've done.  And I'll never forget, for me, when I took the oath of office for Lieutenant Governor, I walked out, it was a cold crisp, cloudy day, here in the state.  I walked outside and we were out there with our family Bible that we've had since 1886 in our family.  And as we walked out there, I whispered to Juanita, I said I wonder what my grandfather would think today.  And the reality, I think, my hope, would be that not only my grandfather but many of our people all throughout the country, would look at that moment with a sense of pride to say at one time, we couldn't even walk in this building.  And now one of us governs here and governs over this great state.  My hope for the same thing would be true in the context of me running for Congress.  The good book says that, "Too much is given, much is required."  I've been given a great deal by my grandparents, by my parents, family and friends and others who've cared.  And I've got a responsibility to the good Lord, to myself and, somehow, to our family and others to find a way to make a difference.
Speaker 1: And your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh, goodness.  I'm thirty-seven years old.  I don't know that I have a legacy.
Speaker 1: Okay, what do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: I'd hope that people would say that this kid tried to do right by people.  That he ultimately fought to make things better and he opened up doors of opportunity that people had not seen opened previously.  And the kids somehow had a different vision for what they could do, be or become, as a result of having watched this man live his life.  That would be my hope.
