Story_ID: 12081
Speaker 1: Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: I'm Bernice Johnson Reagon, B-E-R-N-I-C-E, J-O-H-N-S-O-N, R-E-A-G-O-N, no dashes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, and I'll erase the one that's here.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 4, 1942, Doherty County, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an historian, singer and composer.
Speaker 1: And you are currently at--are you at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] still?
Speaker 2: This is my second year working on Fine Arts Programming at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].  I'm the [William H.] Cosby Chair in Fine Arts this year.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is September 22, 19--2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're Room 484 at the Capital Hilton in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 12082
Speaker 1: Ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  I like okra, and I like watermelon, and I like greens.  That's as close as I can get.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I like teal and I like raspberry.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 12083
Speaker 1: Can you give me your parents' names and spell them for us?
Speaker 2: My mother was Beatrice Wise Johnson, B-E-A-T-R-I-C-E, W-I-S-E, J-O-H-N-S-O-N.  My father was Jesse Johnson, Sr., J-E-S-S-E, J-O-H-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was your mother's birth date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in Worth County, September 20, 1920.
Speaker 1: Now, Worth County what?
Speaker 2: Georgia.
Speaker 1: Georgia, okay.  And your father?
Speaker 2: My father was born in Lee County, Georgia.  What's his birthday?
Speaker 1: Okay, and what--?
Speaker 2: Wait just a minute.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: March 29, 1909.
Story_ID: 12084
Speaker 1: All right, tell us what you know about your mother's side of the family and how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I don't know a lot about my mother's side of the family.  It is the side of the family where we have family reunions.  My mother was a Hill.  Her mother was Frances Hill.  My mother was a twin.  And I never knew my grandmother because she moved to West Virginia to live with her brother.  I knew my aunt who was her sister.  But my mother talked about her grandfather, Jordan Hill, as a person who was almost like a scholar.  He loved to read.  That was her image of him.  And then she also talked about her grandmother, Hanna Hill.  And Hanna Hill was the organizer in the family.  Hanna Hill had, the family had land that--when the boys got old enough to court, they each got a buggy.  My grandmother had been packed to go off to school cause the children went off to school.  And Hanna Hill died.  And my grandmother never caught the bus.  My grandfather married again, but that, the strategizing, organizing mind in the family was never replaced.  My sense of the Hills come from my mother talking about her aunts and uncles, Green Hill, Fred Hill, Charlie Hill, Uncle Dump.  She just talked about them all the time.  When she married my father, she married--she moved into the Johnson enclave.  And I always saw my mother as a Johnson.  And my father died in '76 [1976].  And we had a reunion.  I'm very grown by then.  I'm actually a program at the Smithsonian.  We had a reunion.  And the Johnson's are the Johnson's and Williams.  So I'm going home, and I think I'm going to be seeing the Johnson's and the Williams.  Well my aunt, Fannie Williams, came across the road cause she lived across the road, but that was the only member of the Johnson's who were there.  Everybody else there was a Hill.  And it was the first time I got to like, see how my mother saw herself.  And she didn't go very deep.  It was like her brothers were there.  Her children were there.  Her cousins, of this aunt that I knew, was there.  But there were no Johnson--other Johnson's there.  And there were no other Williams there.  And I thought, oh, wonder who the Hills are (laughter)?  So she started a family reunion, and it's the Hill Family Reunion.  And so I go into this place, and everybody in this place is connected with the Hills or the Billingsley's.  Now, some of these people I knew.  I knew Aunt Mollie because my mother would go visit Aunt Mollie.  I knew Roger Drake's wife because I was baptized with Roger.  But I didn't know she was the daughter of my mother's cousin.  It was just really, really interesting.
Story_ID: 12085
Speaker 1: And my father, Jesse Johnson, was the oldest male child surviving, of my grandmother and grandfather who lived right down the road.  And her--my grandmother's name was Emily and my grandfather's name was Ed.  And they were--they were the daily grandparents in our lives.  And my oldest aunt, who's older than my father, was Aunt Fannie.  So she married first.  And they, they built a house--and it was a two-room house.  And so Aunt Fannie and Elijah Williams--she married a Williams, they moved into that house.  So they stayed, he, she didn't, he didn't take her.  He brought her to the Johnson's enclave.  Now, they got a certain--then my father married my mother.  And they built a house behind that house.  I think that other house had three rooms, but my mother and father went into that first house.  My father's youngest brother got married.  My father built a house, four rooms, and then Aunt Fannie's daughter, Fannie, got married.  She went into that two-room house, which now had a third room.  It was like, this little house was the first house of the married couples out of my grandparents children.  And I never thought of it as a compound house growing up.  I had no association with it until I started to read about African villages and clusters and family structures where in some cases you get married, most of the time you think the girl goes off with the husband.  In this family, no matter whether you were male or female, you actually stayed with the Johnsons.  My grand--my mother [ Beatrice Wise Johnson] died, and at her funeral--we've got these children now.  We're all grown.  So we've got children.  So, so none of my mother's children spoke at the funeral.  We sat, and the grandchildren spoke.  And their names are like Dunson, you know, they got different names.  There're a few Johnsons, but, you know, the girl children are Reagon.  And Mike Dunson got up, and he talked about knowing my mother, his--knowing my mother because he knew his mother.  And then he ended, he said, I, "I'm glad to be a Johnson."  Now, his name is Mike Dunson cause he's got his father's name.  There were three or four of them, these grand--and they would do, say what they had to say about my grandmother [sic, mother].  And they would end and they'd say, "I'm glad to be a Johnson", (laughter) their names weren't Johnson.  And, and Fannie, who is the oldest sibling was sitting next to me.  And we just looked at each other and said, "woo, woo, woo, what is this?"  So, I mean it's, it has something to do with growing up in something, and being fed by it.  But you have to do a lot more living to know what it was.
Story_ID: 12086
Speaker 1: My father [Jesse Johnson] was a minister, I think in his early thirties.  I never knew him when he wasn't a preacher.  My mother [Beatrice Wise Johnson] married him when she was seventeen.  She said she never wanted to marry a preacher.  They're eleven years apart.  And she said, she could hear him, when he would--chopping wood.  And he'd be preaching on the wood pile, and she thought, "Oh, Lord, I have married a preacher."  So he finally, you know, went into the ministry.  Before that he was a quartet singer, and he was a bass quartet singer.  I never heard him sing quartet.  But I heard my Uncle Charlie, who was a bass, sing quartet.  My father was a country pastor.  He had one church for every Sunday, so he had four churches (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So he was like a circuit rider, a circuit preacher or--
Speaker 1: We would never call my father a circuit preacher.  That's something you might read in books.  But it had, it, it doesn't feel grounded enough.  He actually pastored four churches.  He actually pastored four congregations.  He actually went to the hospitals, buried people, married people--they were all over the place--from those congregations.  And he stayed at churches for lengths of time.  And then he would leave.  And he said one time that you should never stay at a church long enough for them to vote you out.  If you're a good leader, you're supposed to know when it's time to go.  And I remember the church I joined, which was Mount Early Baptist Church, he was pastor.  And I remember him saying "If I can get this pump built, I'm gonna leave Mount Early."  And I never knew what the tension was or what it was.  But he got the pump built and paid for.  And he left Mount Early.  And somebody suggested to my mother she should follow him.  And she said, she wasn't following him.  He--she was gonna stay right there.  So all of us kept our membership there.  But he moved on to, to other churches.
Story_ID: 12087
Speaker 1: He [her father, Jesse Johnson] considered it insulting to be circuit minister?
Speaker 2: It's not a word in our, in our vocabulary.  One of the things I do as a historian, I made a, I make a very big distinction between terminology that shows up in people writing about people's culture and what people call themselves.  And I pay particular attention to, if I'm talking about my parents or the community I grew up, if I've never heard him call himself a circuit preacher, I don't, I don't reference him in that way.  And I don't know what he would have thought about it, but it never came up.
Speaker 1: Well, it's interesting, the song--it comes up in, the song 'C.C. Rider' is about a country circuit preacher.  That's what it's really supposed to be about, that's what I've been told.  But, you know--
Speaker 2: I like the train (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, I meant that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The C.C. Rider, that's the train.
Speaker 1: That's a train?  Or, there's a tradition that maybe it was a train?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I like the C.C. Rider that's a rider in the sexual idea of a rider.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's a different connotation, I guess, but, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I feel like one of the things I've learned is--a lot of times these things mean whatever they mean.  And people tell you to them, if, if you're dealing with somebody and they're singing a song, and you ask them, "what is that song about?"  And they tell you a story.  Then you go three states, and you--somebody else sings you, you know it's the same song.  And you say, "what's that song about?"  They tell you another story about what that song is about.  And that song is whatever it is for the person who's using it, which means it has a, it has a moving functionality to it, almost to the point that it only has meaning when somebody gives it life in performance and then talks to you about what they're trying to say.  For that point in time, that's what it is.  And that's the only way I've been able to deal with some songs where people will say, they'll sing a song and say, "I wrote it" (laughter).  And I know they didn't write it.  I might actually know who wrote it, you know, but like, for some reason you cannot separate from them the song from their sense that they created it or they made it up.  So you just sort of like, write that down and say this, he says he wrote the song.  You do a footnote, and you say what you know about it.  But you actually allow them to give their representation of it so--
Story_ID: 12088
Speaker 1: Now, how--let me, the way you described your father's [Jesse Johnson] family, the Johnsons and they, they sort of started creating a basic political unit with the family in some ways, I guess, you know, just building on that--you can see that almost as like the basis for a larger political system if it keeps going in the perpetuity, the people keep, you know, living there and bringing (unclear) there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It didn't, it didn't.  I'm not sure, like if you, if you ask me about my grandparents [Ed and Emily Johnson] and whether they were powerhouses enough to keep that pull, I, I wouldn't say they were.  I--by the time I knew them, my parents [Jesse and Beatrice Wise Johnson] were the powers in the family.  But there was something with these grandparents and their children that, when their children married, they brought their wives, their husbands in.  And they raised their families as closely in that cluster as possible.  Right down the road from us were the Logans, the Lees and the Dotsons.  And that was another cluster coming out of the Logans and the Lees.  There was one school, and the school was positioned between the Johnsons and the Williams and the Logans and the Lees.  And there were other families who went to these schools, but those were the central, you know, populations that were served by the, by--by that school.  And they were two extended families.  As my generation grew up, we left.  So if you go to that community, my sister is still there.  And there is one person living in the Williams house.  But all of the others, some of them are in Albany--this, this is Doherty County.  The county seat is Albany, Georgia, but they're everywhere, all up--we're, we're everywhere.  So that, that it is almost like a two-generational geographical cluster.  And the head of it were my grandparents.
Story_ID: 12089
Speaker 1: My grandfather [Ed Johnson] was a farmer.  He was not a sharecropper.  He was a renter.
Speaker 2: Was there a story about how he got land?
Speaker 1: --He didn't get land.  He was a renter, which means he didn't have land.  But if you're a renter, you actually have enough independence to make your own decisions about your crop.  You're paying rent for the land, and you grow your crops, and then you sell your crops.  And so it's a step above sharecropping.  But what I knew about him more than that, was that he pulled my father [Jesse Johnson] out of school after the third grade and--to, to work in the fields.  I never liked it.  My mother [Beatrice Wise Johnson] didn't like it, and it gave you--I talked about my mother coming out of Jordan Hill [Reagon's great-grandfather], who was sort of the scholar's scholar.  Education was very important for my mother.  My mother's family were sharecroppers.  My mother's mother's [Francis Hill] husband died when she was three.  She said sometimes they moved twice in the same year because the owner of the land they were sharecropping on wanted her brother to go into the field, and her mother would never allow the brother to come out of school to go into the fields.  And because she was a woman, she only got one third of the crop as opposed to fifty percent, which was the usual if there was a man in the family.  So my mother came out of a sharecropping side of that farming thing, but she came also out of a family where education was never allowed to be interrupted.  However, she had to walk seven miles to school every day and ran into a really tough principal who, if you were late, sent you back home.  And she finished the sixth grade and was promoted to the seventh, and didn't go back to school.  So my parents, my father completed third grade and my mother completed sixth grade.  We ended up being a family where school and church were just bonds in terms of the way these people thought about what their family would need, people who worked all the time.  My mother actually thought her work or her life's work were her children.  She had eight children.
Story_ID: 12090
Speaker 1: Did your parents, either one of them tell stories about the nineteenth century, about slavery or, or any stories in the family--are there any stories in the family about Africa or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, no.  We got stories in school from--one, one teacher talked about her grandmother who would show her where she'd been beaten as a child.  I learned "Wade in the Water" from my teacher, and when I learned that song, I also was told it was Harriet Tubman's song.  I was told that Harriet Tubman was the conductor on the Underground Railroad.  I was told that she carried a gun, and she said, anybody who wanted to go back would die right then.  This is elementary school.  This is not in the Georgia curriculum.  But it was a part of what I learned.  I was told that black people did some part of the creation of the electric light.  It was not in any book we read, but those teachers told us that.  So the, those stories were sort of a link, the Sojourner Truth stories, they really came from, from these teachers.  From my parents, my father [Jesse Johnson] was the storyteller, and--but he would tell stories with his brother or his cousin.  It was one time when I heard him laugh.  I mean they would be telling stories, they would be laughing, and we were like, so, but he wasn't sitting down telling us stories.  They would like sit down, and they'd start talking, and we would just sit there because here were these men, they were having such a good time.  And they were laughing.  And sometimes it had to do with hunting or swimming or all sorts of stories about growing up in the woods and what happened.  And it was really wonderful for me because it was a time that I saw my father laugh, out loud.  It was very much a part of enjoying this sitting down, storytelling.  And we would--our parents did not usually sit us down and talk directly to us.  But whenever adults would get together, they would talk to each other, and we could sit as long as we didn't say anything.  And we loved it.  It was just incredible to listen to these adults talk, talk about whatever it was they talked about.  And sometimes, it was gospel, sometimes it was when they grew up.  My mother [Beatrice Wise Johnson] would tell us sometimes stories about growing up.  It never was about slavery.  It was always about growing up.  She played basketball.  She was a guard.  And it made me think, "ah, I can play basketball," but I'm very short for basketball, but those were the kinds of stories we got.
Story_ID: 12091
Speaker 1: Tell me about what it was like growing up--well, some more about what it was like?  What were some of the sights and other sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Church was really important for us, and a strong image was that my father [Jesse Johnson] always has to be on time.  So church was supposed to start at a certain time.  We would be there.  We'd have to wait an hour (laughter).  But never failed, he was always on time.  And I, I really learned something about having standards, to order your life, that might not be replicated in your community.  But you actually didn't have to go drifting if this was something that kept you steady, let you know what you were doing.  And it was interesting seeing him as a leader, we did--during the summer we would pick cotton.  School was very important.  I went to a one-room schoolhouse, one teacher for the first four years, one teacher for seven grades.  And then they put a second teacher on; playing with, playing games and the games we played, our teacher played the game with us in the yard of the school.  So recess was never recess where we went out and played by ourselves.  The teacher was always out there with us.
Speaker 1: So, it had instruction and structure to it.
Speaker 2: No, you know, if we were gonna play the games.  She taught the games, she taught us how it was supposed to be played.  These were always traditional black games.  These were not games she learned in school.  These were the games she grew up with.  And so they were passed.  We always had plays.  We (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What were some of those games, I'm sorry?  What were some of those?
Speaker 2: All the, jump rope, all of the verses for jumping rope or running, the hiding games--
Speaker 1: Double dutch?
Speaker 2: Yeah, jumping rope is the same as double dutch, but double dutch is much more city than country jump rope game.  The other thing we did was--there were always times in school when you could sing, or say a poem.  Bible verses were done every day.  And we all had to have a bible verse when we came to school.  And you know, you'd--sometimes you'd forget your bible verses, you'd say "Jesus wept" (laughter).  And she didn't like that at all (laughter).  So, those were some, those were the things I remember because my elementary school was in the country.  My junior high school, my father and my uncle--this is Fannie's [Johnson] husband, Elijah Williams, were coached by my teacher, Mamie Daniels, to go to the superintendent of schools and ask them for a bus so that we could actually get to junior high school.  Up until that time, we actually had to provide our own transportation.
Story_ID: 12092
Speaker 1: My father, Jesse Johnson and my uncle, Elijah Williams, were the two people who went to the [school] superintendent whose name was J. H. Cordell, and asked for a bus for black children to be able to go to the--to be, get transportation to go to junior high and high school.  They were coached by my teacher [Mamie Daniels], and it was not--she stuck herself out to do it because it would not have been good for her if they had known that she had put the parents up to it.  But up until that time, when you finished seventh grade in the county [Doherty County, Georgia], and you wanted to go to junior high school, you had to provide your own transportation or you had to have a relative or somebody who lived in town or your education stopped.  And therefore, getting a bus was very different from the way people think of it now.  It was, it was a, it was not--neighborhood schools actually were never expected to, to take care of your education; that if you got your elementary education near you, if you couldn't travel to go to junior high or high school, you got no more education.  And so we watched white kids ride buses past our house every day, and getting a bus for us was a very big thing.  And they got that bus.
Speaker 2: Okay, so it was more than just transportation involved.  It's access to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it, it actually has to do with the fact that we lived in a part of the country where white people got certain services because they were white.  And there was not a thought that black people needed those same services.  My mother [Beatrice Wise Johnson] started to try to get a telephone when we were in elementary school.  And she would apply and apply and apply.  It would never happen.  The woman she was cleaning a house for asked her once why didn't she have a phone?  And she said, she could never get the phone company to put it in.  The woman called the phone company, and the company phone put it in.  And that was the language of the system I grew up in.  There were just--from the point of power, access to resources, opportunity, a very clear sense that black people absolutely did not need what white people needed.  And I grew up in a family where my parents did not agree with that at all.  Also, my parents understood that black people did not pay less taxes than white people.  But you couldn't get lights in your community in the city.  You couldn't get your streets paved even though you were paying the same rate of taxes as whites.
Speaker 2: And when you were growing up, you all didn't have electricity or did you?
Speaker 1: We got electricity with the Rural Electrical System during [Franklin D.] Roosevelt's administration.  So these, these were cooperatives formed during FDR's time.  Our electricity was much more expensive therefore, than city electricity.  And it was that way--so if you lived on a farm and you had electricity, you, your electrical rates were very high.  But before that, we actually had, in our church, gas lanterns, kerosene lanterns in, in our house.  So we had--I grew up first with kerosene and gas lanterns.  And then we transferred to electricity
Story_ID: 12093
Speaker 1: Well, how did you like school?
Speaker 2: I loved school.  It was amazing.  Mamie Daniels was my teacher, and she told the parents. "When they stop peeing in their pants, send them to school."  So I went to school when I was three.  And so I passed first grade that year.  So I just loved school.
Speaker 1: Okay, was Mamie Daniels the teacher that told you about black people in electricity and about Harriet Tubman and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: It was Mamie Daniels and Darnell Lee.  After the fourth grade--we had about thirty students in that school, seven grades, and so after about fourth grade, they gave a second teacher.  And these two teachers would put in these stories.  The spirituals I learned in that school were sung to me by Mamie Daniels, who was not much of a singer, but she really had us to learn those songs.  And we knew those songs came from slavery.  Those songs helped us to get through slavery.  And some of those songs were similar to songs that we sang in church.  A few of them were the same songs.  But they actually had a difference to them in terms of the way they were sung.  In church, there was sort of a different kind of energy and spirit you were reaching for.  And you were using the song to get to this place.  That was not what we were doing school.  In school, it had much more to do with, these are things you need to know if you're going to be educated.  And these teachers felt, you have to know something that our parents gave us.  We have to give it to you, and it has nothing to do with the Georgia state curriculum of education.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in terms of the difference between the way a song is sung in church and the way it was taught in school, it's passed down through generations, can you give us an example?
Speaker 2: No, I can't really do singing at this point because I, I'm actually pretty hoarse because of allergies.  So I can't, I can't do it.
Speaker 1: Okay, you don't have to sing, but you can tell us what the difference might be between a song, sung in church or one sung in school (unclear)?
Speaker 2: The biggest difference in school is you have almost no passion in the singing, some of the sorriest singing you can ever hear is the congregational, you're in your classroom.  And you get everybody to stand up, and they're singing 'Wade in the Water' or 'Did My Lord Deliver Daniel'.  It's sort of a limp sort of thing.  It doesn't have a lot of body to it.  If you are performing, if we're in a play, then the song--the singing in school moves to a different level.  My sense in church was that there was so much business that had to be taken care of through these services that the singing was a way to get to something in yourself or with your community.  And so you were dealing with a much more high-powered force, and you were also dealing with--my sense was you were dealing with something that didn't exist before it happened in the service.  It wasn't like somebody was trying to sing a song like they sang it the last time.  When they sang the song the last time, that was the song.  This time, you're starting from zero.  You may know the song, and you may know the tune, but there's something, something you have to do in that singing that has never happened before.  And that kind of first time, every time you sing it, I got from church.  And it actually marks the way I operate as a musician in performance.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're saying the difference is in the, the creativity and the feeling against the church setting as opposed to what would be in school.  I thought you were--at first I thought you were referring to the meaning of the song itself and, was actually--there was a different meaning imparted in school than it was in church.
Speaker 2: The function is different.  Church had something to do with storing up and creating a certain kind of reserve that you could only get from people who shared what you shared.  And that reserve was what you left to get through the next period.  And school had to do with being sure we knew the stories.  And the singing never had the same kind of high-powered charge it had in church for us.
Story_ID: 12094
Speaker 1: It sounds like you had some teachers who were really trying to specialize the education they were giving you above and beyond what was required.  They were trying to give you something you needed.
Speaker 2: I think I had extraordinary parents and I had extraordinary teachers.  I thought all teachers were like my teachers.  I was really surprised to find that there were teachers whose lives were not totally defined by their sense of mission.  These teachers felt they were solely responsible for putting us in a position where we could operate well beyond what they had or what would be possible if they didn't do a good job.  Now, this was strong in elementary school teachers.  I saw it again fiercely with the high school teachers.  The high school teachers had a strong--there was a strong school, strong spirit in Monroe High School, and those teachers modeled for us.  For instance, I was shocked as an adult to find out what teachers made.  I don't know how they could dress the way they dressed.  And sometimes it would be a skirt and a blouse, but the skirt would be fitted, and the blouse would have ruffles on it.  It would be so neat.  They would have on makeup.  Their hair would be done, and then they would have on stockings with heels.  It was like--we looked at them in the, you know, the men would always have on ties.  And the cars were big cars.  We didn't see no teachers with raggedy cars, at the most four years old.  I actually don't know economically how they did it.  But it was incredible in terms of like, pointing us--and they never said things like, "Well, this is the way you're supposed to dress or, you know, be like me."  It was just--they were just like that every day.  And we would sit, "Oh, did you see Ms. Hawe's (ph.) hairdo.  Isn't that pretty?  Oh, look at that shade of lipstick.  Ms. Davis doesn't wear lipstick.  But, blah, blah, blah."  I mean we just talked.  And this is more than what they taught us in class.  And when you come out of an environment where you grow up in the country, your only teacher for the first four years is one person.  Then the next three years, there's one other person.  Then you go to church on Sunday, and you see people who are farmers, basically, and they wear what they wear.  And that's dress up.  You go to high school, you're teenaged, and you see black people running, totally running the high school.  I'll never forget graduation, Mr. Heard (ph.), the principal, made some remarks and introduced the superintendent of schools, Mr. Cordell--the same one that my parents [Jesse and Beatrice Wise Johnson] went to for the bus.  And Mr. Cordell comes up there, and he started to talk.  And, oh, my God, he talked like he had never been to school.
Speaker 1: He was a white man, right?
Speaker 2: He was white. And I'm going, "How can he be the superintendent of schools?  How come he don't talk like Mr. Heard?"  And it was integration before I knew that black teachers had more master's degrees in high school than the white high school teachers.  They had more education.  But when integration happened and those schools combined, they found those white teachers elevated over them.  But I, I was very, very blessed.  These were some fierce black people in southwest Georgia.  It--just fierce, against incredible odds.  And it was just stuff that--whatever white people thought black people should be, they didn't just pay no attention to it.  They pointed us someplace else.
Story_ID: 12095
Speaker 1: What were you like when you were a youth, when you were on your way to high school?  What were you like and what were your aspirations?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know.  I was, I started first grade when I was three.  My birthday's October so I turned four.  So when I finished first grade, I'm four.  When I graduated from high school, I'm sixteen.  So I am two years behind my class.  So socially, junior high and high school was very difficult for me.  You know, the girls had bras before me.  They had their periods before me.  They had boyfriends before me.  I joined the glee club because I was too young in my family to wear stockings.  My mother [Beatrice Wise Johnson] had a age for it.  But if you sang in the glee club, you had to have stockings (laughter).  I was too young, freshman in high school.  I was too young to wear lipstick.  My mother wouldn't let me wear lipstick until I was singing for commencement with the choir that first freshman year, you know.  So I, I found myself, when I think about my teenage years, really out of step and with some stress, social stress.  And then I grew up with very strict parents.  You know, there is no sleeping over with other people.  The other kids would be talking about parties and we never went to that stuff.  They didn't--we wore them down, our parents, so that those that came after the first three of us had a easier way.  Initially, my parents wouldn't let us go to the movies.
Speaker 1: Now, how many of you all were all together?
Speaker 2: Eight.
Speaker 1: Eight children?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And you were amongst the first three?
Speaker 2: I'm number three.
Speaker 1: Number three, can you give us the names of all the--?
Speaker 2: My, my oldest sister is Fannie.  My brother is Jordan, me, I'm Bernice, Mae Frances, Aaron, Aaron is dead.  Mae Frances is dead, Aaron is dead; Delores, Tosu (ph.) is Jesse, Jr.
Speaker 1: Tosu?
Speaker 2: He has an African name.  So his name is Tosu, but his, his birth name is Jesse Johnson.  And the baby is Mamie.
Story_ID: 12096
Speaker 1: Now, when you were in high school, were you a pretty good student in terms of grades and so forth?
Speaker 2: All my life, I've been an excellent student.  I've never not been an excellent student.  There have been times when I'd, I'd gotten into a course or something I was not interested in, but I've always had a lot of confidence in my ability to do school work and love school work.  To this day, my favorite pastime is reading.  So school was wonderful for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, what were your favorite subjects in school?
Speaker 2: It's interesting.  I'm not sure because I took French and Latin from Ms. Wright.  I took algebra, geometry and trigonometry.  I took English.  I did typing; I took history.  I, I loved it all.  I did not like biology and chemistry in high school, especially didn't like chemistry.  But in college, loved algebra, geometry, trigonometry and loved biology and zoology, and thought I might actually be a scientist.  But I had to take chemistry and physics.  I got through chemistry.  I just got to physics, and I said, this is not my name.
Story_ID: 12097
Speaker 1: Now, were you noted as a singer when you were a youth?
Speaker 2: Ms. [Mamie] Daniels in elementary school said I was a contralto.  I didn't know what that was.  And she said--I said, "What is that?"  And she said, "You have a low voice."  Now, I'm two years younger than anybody in any grade so like, she must have heard me singing.  And she brought a--she was extraordinary, she brought a contralto singer out to the school (laughter).  She was Nurse Jolly.  Nurse Jolly gave us our shots.  We didn't know she was a singer.  So Nurse Jolly comes out, and Ms. Daniel has her to sing.  And she sings the spiritual, 'Talk About a Child Love Jesus, Here is One'.  And I wasn't so sure about that contralto after I heard her singing.  I said, "I don't know about this," but I remember, because Ms. Daniels said, "You sing low," I actually sang low to, to do that.  Ms. Daniels didn't know a lot about music.  And I tended to sing first, second alto, and when I started to take voice, my voice teacher said I was probably a second soprano, you know, capable of much higher.  And he had me--I could vocalize the high C's and they--I never, in my mind, never imagined myself operating with that kind of range.
Speaker 1: Okay, did the people at your church and stuff, you know, were you considered special because of your singing ability or were you just--was everybody--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: In my church, there were great singers.  So, so you, you don't get set aside as a one.  There were--Mae Frances [Johnson] and I would learn a song.  And then after church was over, we could sing it.  Everybody would stay and listen if we had a new song.  So, we'd be singing, and they would say, "Go on up there, child."  Well, there was, Deacon Dunn's (ph.) grandchildren also were singers.  And so they would also do the same thing.  And they would come up, and they would sing their song.  Everybody would stay at the church to hear these children sing their song, and just, you know, say, "Oh, go ahead."  So I think we grew up in a community where we got a lot of support for singing.  We got support for doing poems at Easter and at Christmas.  And adults would stay late--it wasn't a part of the service, but they would stay after service just to hear some child do something, and be pumping you up every minute.  We started--I joined the church at eleven and Fannie [Johnson] was the pianist for the gospel choir.  It was the first gospel choir in this church.  And so the church buys a piano, starts a choir, because that year, they had baptized about six people under fifteen.  And they decided, just to keep us interested, they had to not simply do this nineteenth century-style repertoire, which is all we did up to that point in that church, they had to have a gospel choir.  Now, by that time, we were listening to gospel.  Everybody loved Mahalia Jackson.  We loved all of the quartet singing and things like that.  But in that church when we had service, it was all nineteenth century.  So we--at eleven, I'm in the gospel choir.  And I'm a lead in the gospel choir, and I can sing harmony.  Mae Frances is in the Gospel Choir.  But we were in the gospel choir also with the Drakes.  Everybody in the Drake family could sing.  So that choir was the Johnsons and the Drakes.  We were one of the baddest little country choirs in southwest Georgia.  Everybody could sing.  So I was not set aside at all.  In fact, the Drakes had better lead singers, like Mary Drakes and I are the same age.  Mary could out-sing me any day in the week.  So I didn't see myself as a great singer.  I knew I could sing, and I enjoyed singing.
Speaker 1: It's amazing to hear this because we just, you know, those who have heard you sing, you know, it's just amazing that somebody, you can say that, you know, you can say yourself, just one of the group, and (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: Just one.  And it's--
Speaker 1: --in the community that you grew up in.  But I guess, so many--well, I remember going to church in the country with my dad, and people sang with a lot of gusto, but they weren't that good, you know.  They sang loud, and they sang, and you--they were singing with all their hearts.  Their hearts were in it, but they didn't sing that good, you know.
Speaker 2: Is there a--do you think it's the, was it the teaching?  Did people teach or was there already a culture singing there, that made you all sound a little bit better or--(simultaneous), cause here's a town (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: I come out of southwest Georgia.  And it was very difficult to find a church where you didn't find good singing.  You know, if you had a church that had at least sixty people, you've got really solid singing, which meant you had probably twenty-five of those people who were almost virtuoso singers, either in lead or being able to harmonize.  Then you had another twenty who could stay on the melody.  So the last ten could really go for whatever they went for, you--that the sound was set by good singing.  And most of the congregations I went to were like that in southwest Georgia.  And I thought all black people in a group--if you got a group of black people together, there would be enough of them to be able to support the few who might not be able to do more than relative pitch.  And, of course, as a scholar, I have actually found that that's not the case, and that you can go into some congregations and find, you know, not enough quality singers, solid singers to actually set the standard for what that congregational musical experience is like.  But I didn't, I didn't hear it in churches I grew up in.  And, boy, I just didn't hear it.  I just, I just had it in my mind--and we would talk about the people who didn't sing so well because sometimes they would get the spirit and start a song, and they couldn't quite raise the song.  And somebody who could would just come in and lift it, and it was, it was the most wonderful thing because it was never anything that made you thought, "Oh, so and so can't sing."  Sometimes, afterwards, somebody would say, "well, she caught that song wrong.  But so and so saved it."  And it was all right for anybody to start a song cause it was the only--nobody announced songs.  It was--the only way you could get a song you wanted sung was to raise it yourself.  And if you couldn't catch it strong, somebody would just slide in.  The next thing you know, the church would be rocking.
Story_ID: 12098
Speaker 1: I grew up in a school where you sang every day.
Speaker 2: Now, where--(simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: Now, that happens--that does not happen now.  You can go to school, your kids can go to school.  They don't sing everyday--
Speaker 2: And they don't sing at all, really.
Speaker 1: We sang, we sang every day in the morning.  Then we sang all of our games.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I agree with you there.
Speaker 1: And so if you grow up in a culture like that, you don't even think about it.  And everybody was singing, whether they carried a tune or not.  Every--nobody did not sing.  So I grew up in a culture where there were no auditions, and I still like that.
Speaker 2: So it's like anything else, if you do it, if you engage it, you get better at it, I guess, the more you sing or the more you engage in it--
Speaker 1: Well, given a group of human beings, if you have certain kinds of equipment and capability, if you're in a singing culture, you can learn to sing very well.  And then you can also have less capability, but if you grow up in a singing culture, you do fine in a group.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I can actually talk to a person and say, "if I, if I want you to hold a tune, and somebody's sitting next to you singing something different, can you do it?"  They'll say no.  I say, "You do better if you you're singing the same thing?"  They say, "yes."  Those are people who don't have a strong capability, but they've had enough music in their lives to enjoy singing in a group.  And, you know, if somebody gives you fifty people, you ought to be able to get a good sound.  If you don't get a good sound, that says something about singing in the culture they grew up in.  We did a program at, this was Sweet Honey [in the Rock], Goshen College [Goshen, Indiana], that Mennonite.  And we broke for intermission.  And they said, "we would like to sing a song for you."  I said, "what?" "We would like to sing a song for you."  And I looked at, I said--"and we have someone to direct us."  And it was so odd, you know, but I said, I said, okay.  This little--old lady, older lady came out.  And she says, "We will sing 'Six, Six, Four.'"  And she did (imitating range).  This, this was a room full of people, all ages, you know, high school, college, they sang in four-part harmony.  They not only sang four-part harmony, they did arrangements so that the basses would take off here.  And I knew nothing about that growing up.  But these people in their culture, from the time they are born, they don't just sing, they sing parts, and they sing arrangements.  I never saw anything like it.  Boy, I just sat there--and we just sat there.  And I said, "Good, goodness," it was so exciting.  It was so exciting.  It was a totally different vocal culture.  It was not congregational.  It was what we would call choral singing, organized, go to rehearsal; sopranos are where they're supposed to be; basses are--amazing.
Speaker 2: These are Mennonites, right.
Speaker 1: These, it was a Mennonite community.  It's amazing.  So I think it has to do with what, what holds your culture together and what shape that culture is in as time passes.  When you live in a culture like the United States of America, where you have options beyond the culture you're born in, there are two things that happen.  One, some of your strongest people choose other options.  And they--
Speaker 2: Like the jazz singers or--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: I could become a opera singer or something else or country-western singer.  I mean I'm in America.  I can do anything else.
Speaker 2: Like that movie "The Jazz Singer" where the Jewish cantor, you know, in training decides to become a jazz singer--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and shakes up the--.
Speaker 1: Then, it's, it's as simple as, if I had stayed in Albany, Georgia, my part would be in my early Baptist church congregation.  My part--I, I'd be in my beginning of my seventh decade, and I'd be sitting some place, singing my part.  If I'm in [Washington] D.C., I may have done--gone on to do great works, but they miss me in that church.  They can't replace me.  So there are two things that happen when you move out and you're sent out and you're pushed out and you actually hear things that say, hum, that's nice.  It offers you new opportunities, but it does something to that base culture.  And they don't always replace and replenish when young people make other choices, other than to become deacons and the mother of the church in their home churches.
Story_ID: 12099
Speaker 1: When you were a senior in high school, did you have an idea of what you wanted to do with the rest of your life or?
Speaker 2: By the time I was a junior, I was a contralto soloist.  And people began to talk to me about whether I wanted to be a singer.  I was singing.  I sang in the doo-wop group.  I sang with a sextet.  I was a contralto soloist.  I sang in the gospel choir.  So music was just in every avenue of my life.  But I had not considered becoming a singer the way Sam Cooke was a singer or the way the Five Blind Boys from Mississippi who sang all the time, or the Staple Singers was a singer.  I really didn't have that in my vision, and actually, some of my teachers began to talk to me about it.  They thought they heard something.  And then I actually was sent places to be in competitions as a contralto soloist and got offered scholarships.  So I get--slowly began to, to consider--music might be important.  But when I went to college, I was much more oriented toward fields that had something to do with being able to get straight As in all my math courses.  Maybe I could be a lawyer or a doctor.  That's what happens with you, and you're black.  You make As in certain courses.  You, you're oriented that way.  And I wasn't sure.  I actually studied music and I studied science in college.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you came out of high school in '58 [1958], was it?
Speaker 2: Fifty nine [1959].
Speaker 1: Fifty nine [1959], and you said, you were seventeen?
Speaker 2: Sixteen.
Story_ID: 12100
Speaker 1: Now, you went Albany State [College, Albany, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, now, it was right there, right, in Albany so it was (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had an offer of tuition scholarship from Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama]--I wanted to go, and a tuition scholarship from Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], I wanted to go.  But they were only fifty percent scholarships.  There were three people in my family in college.  I was the third.  I had a sister [Fannie Johnson] and brother [Jordan Johnson] in college.  I had two scholarships to Albany State which would pay for the first two years.  There was no question--
Speaker 1: No question, right?
Speaker 2: --that I was going to Albany State College.  And so I went to Albany State, and it was local.  And, and having a college in the local community is a very important thing because more percentages of blacks going out of high school would go to college if you've got a college that's that accessible.  In a state school, the tuition then was $52.00 a quarter.  So you needed a $156 a year to go to school, which was a tremendous amount for most black people in the South.
Speaker 1: And the average person that you knew, what--about how much would you think they were making a week?
Speaker 2: I, I've never known what my father [Jesse Johnson] made as a carpenter.  My mother [Beatrice Wise Johnson] made $2.50 a day to $3.50 a day.  So, you know, five days a week, that's $15.00 a week.  And you worked sixty--six days a week is $18.00.  So that the--
Speaker 1: And you grew your own food and so on, basically, or a lot of it?
Speaker 2: Some.  My father got his leg broken, and so the farming changed.  He moved to being a carpenter.  And we shift--and my mother kept a garden.  And we had corn and sweet potatoes, but we shifted more and more as they got older to, to buying food from the store.  So my parents needed money in order to feed us and to cloth us.
Story_ID: 12101
Speaker 1: Well, in college at Albany State [College, Albany, Georgia], then you are looking towards maybe a medical de--doing something in the sciences or something, and, but you're encouraged to sing, right, by people (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: I started in music the first year, and I was the contralto soloist there.  And, but I took a course in biology from Joe Darden (ph.), and I just loved it.  And I loved math.  So the second year, I switched to science.  And I was thinking about maybe medical.  I was still in the choir, still the soloist, but I wasn't a music major.  And I, I was still in that when I was arrested during the Albany Movement.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about that Albany Movement.  What happened?
Speaker 2: Last year of high school, we formed a Youth Council of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And moving into college, we had gone through the 1954 Supreme Court Decision [Brown v. the Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas], the assassination of Emmett Till, the assassination of Charles Mack Parker, Little Rock, Arkansas, Arthurene Lucy at the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], and lining those things out, the Montgomery [Alabama] Bus Boycott because the '50s [1950s] in the South for a black person was the place to be.  You just knew--now, in '54 [1954], I was born '42 [1942], '54 [1954] I am twelve.  But I am in junior, I am first--freshman in coll--in high school.  I could not wait--it was just.  We were in the papers.  It was just incredible, and it just felt like I might have a chance to be a part of this thing that seemed to be happening.  My biggest fear was that it might end before I had (laughter) a chance to participate.  I need not have worried.  But our teachers were telling us about this Supreme Court decision because, you know, it said, "all deliberate speed."  So nothing happened initially.  They said, "this is going to happen.  And you need to be prepared to be sitting next to these people because it is going to happen.  It may not happen next year.  It may not happen before you finish, but this is"--they could see it.  At Albany State College [Albany, Georgia]in '60 [1960], the sit-ins hit in February.  And the sit-ins were in Greensboro [North Carolina].  Then there were sit-ins in Nashville [Tennessee] and in Atlanta [Georgia].  I was on student government representing--I was a member of the student government, and Julian Bond, who was then one of the leaders of the Atlanta sit-in movement, he was in school at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], he called all of the black schools in Georgia, student government departments, and asked them to support the sit-in movement.  And we went to the president and asked for full support, all the way from the administration.  And he said, "we will speak tomorrow in Caroline Auditorium."  So there was this school-wide meeting.  And he made statements that made it very clear that he was not going to support it.  The next thing you knew student government was banned.  So when we ended that year, there was no student government.  During that summer, the dean of students who supported us resigned.  So when we opened up in 19--the fall of 1961, it's an interesting thing because I had been--I was a part of student government.  I had challenged the president, but I was still on campus.  I was actually hired to help register, and I was a freshman dorm counselor.  See, even though there was already some signs that I was a problem, there were people who were still making sure I got jobs.  And as I helped people to register, Charles Sherrod (ph.)came up and asked me Terrell County.  And Otis Turner said, started talk--"I'm from Terrell County," said--he was a student.  "I'm from Terrell County."  He talked about how bad it was to grow up Terrell County racially.  Well, Charles Sherrod was a field secretary of the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee [SNCC].  And he and Cordell Reagon were in southwest Georgia to start voter registration drives.  And they had gone first to the counties where blacks outnumbered whites three to one.  Albany, we were forty percent of the population, but they found out very quickly they would be dead before they would get anybody registered.  So they came to Albany to organize in Albany because there were actually more activist structures.  There was an adult NAACP.  There were life members of the NAACP.  There was a Youth Council of the NAACP.  There was the Criterion Club that had met several times with the city commissioners over, you know, lights, paving, different kinds of issues.  So that set the basis for the Albany Movement.  And the mass demonstrations were triggered by an ICC ruling.  Robert Kennedy is the attorney general.  This is 1961, and the Freedom Rides had taken place.  And the ICC is the Interstate Commerce Commission.  He issued an, a ruling that said any commerce that crossed state line could not participate in segregated facilities.  So in Albany, it was decided that students would test the, that ruling at the Trailway bus station.  And our students got arrested, and we began to march in support of them.  Then there was a SNCC train ride down to Albany.  They got arrested and we supported them.  And in December, there were demonstrations, and in one week, over 700 people were in jail.
Speaker 1: Was that the week that bus was burned in Anniston, Alabama?
Speaker 2: No, Anniston, Alabama is the Freedom Rides, and that actually had happened earlier, the spring before.  But Albany is December '61 [1961].  And the ICC ruling is after the Freedom Rides.
Speaker 1: Okay, right.  So, now, you were, you said the student government was closed by the president of Albany State, and he should have known, you're saying, that you were kind of a troublemaker (laughter), in terms of, as far as trying to keep the status quo together is concerned, I guess?
Speaker 2: It's interesting to me now that I was still able to function and have access to opportunities to work within that system, even after I had been one of the leaders who had, had ban--had been a part of the banned student government.  When I got arrested--I was arrested in the second group, when we got out of jail, forty-nine of us were suspended from Albany State College for behavior unbecoming an Albany State College student.  So I did cross the line eventually, and they said, "you have to leave."
Story_ID: 12102
Speaker 1: Well, what did you do then?  I mean, did you--?
Speaker 2: It was December.  We were marching every day.  My life had to do with, nothing but the [Civil Rights] Movement.  I didn't have any--it was, I had, there was no big problem for me that they had suspended us.  I remember my father [Jesse Johnson] saying that he felt like we had messed up because we had gotten kicked out of school, and that we had started the Movement.  It was a good thing--he was the chaplain on the Albany [Georgia] Movement Executive Committee, it was a good thing, but we needed to let the adults handle it.  And I told him, you know, he could be in the Movement if he wanted to, but I was gonna be in it for myself (laughter).  And I wasn't getting out.  And, but those people in Albany were very disturbed because some of us were not gonna be let back into Albany State College [Albany, Georgia].  So that second semester, eleven of us were in school in Atlanta [Georgia] at Spelman [College], Morehouse [College] and Morris Brown [College] [all school in Atlanta, Georgia].  And, so I finished out that semester, but it was interesting--
Speaker 1: Where did you finish at?
Speaker 2: At, at Spelman.
Speaker 1: Spelman, okay.
Speaker 2: It was interesting because the student movement at Spelman, I tried to get involved in it, but it did not have the energy that the Albany Movement had.  I would go to mass meetings.  I would, you know, I went on some demonstrations.  I went down to volunteer, but it really was a campus-based and the culture of it was very different.  Albany was a community based--even though we were college students, and we were involved in it, the culture of Albany was shaped by that older, black culture that comes out of the black, black church.  And so there was a power to Albany that I never found in Atlanta.  So next semester, November the 11th, right after a benefit at Morehouse College for SNCC [Student Non-violent Coordinating Committee]--Pete Seger did a benefit, and we sang.  I left school.  And by the end of December, I started a tour with the Freedom Singers.
Story_ID: 12103
Speaker 1: Now, whose idea was it to create the [Student Nonviolen Coordinating Committee] Freedom Singers?
Speaker 2: My understanding is that Pete Seeger, who came down to Albany [Georgia] and heard the singing, told James For--Forman, who was the executive director of SNCC, that the singing was so powerful, that he ought to think about starting a group.  And he referenced the Almonite singers from the labor union period, and the Weavers, groups that went around to meetings.  He says "you could get the news out if you could start a group."  Forman talked to Cordell Reagon, Cordell's a tenor, and asked Cordell if he would put together a group.  And so Cordell put together the first group, group of Freedom Singers.  I was the alto in that group and Rutha Harris was the soprano.  We were both out of Albany.  And then Cordell had met Chuck Neblitt (ph.) in the Cairo, Illinois sit-in movement.  And he was a bass.  So that made the core of the first group.  There were other singers in and out, but that was the core of the first group.
Speaker 1: And what was the repertoire?  What did you sing?
Speaker 2: The Freedom Songs that came out of the [Civil Rights] Movement.
Speaker 1: I know.  I just wanted us to name them for the purpose of people listening to this, and who may not even know them.
Speaker 2: In a Freedom Singing Concert, we would open with "We'll Never Turn Back."  That song was written Bertha Goldba (ph.) after Cordell and [Charles] Sherrod told us the story of Herbert Lee, who had been killed in Mississippi because he was supporting voter registration, and--
Speaker 1: Killed by a [Mississippi] state legislator.
Speaker 2: E. H. Hearst, and who was never brought to trial for that.  And that song says, "we'll never turn back."  Even though we know that our presence in these communities as organizers put at risk anybody who says, "we're glad you're here, we are ready to move," we still would not turn back.  And, and we would start that.  We would sing "This Little Light of Mine," "We Shall Not Be Moved."  Out of Parchment Penitentiary [McComb, Mississippi] where they locked up the Freedom Riders, came two--three important songs.  One was the Harry Belafonte hit, "Calypso Freedom," or what people might call "Banana Boat Song, Adeo."  They changed that song to freedom verses.  And then--
Speaker 1: What were the verses that they changed to--I mean what verses did they use?
Speaker 2: The chorus would be "freedom's coming and it won't be long" instead of "day delight and I want to go home."  "I took a trip on a Greyhound Bus to fight segregation, this we must, over to Mississippi with the speed we go, the blue shirt police will meet me at the door; I rode on the bus down Alabama way, met a lot of violence on Mother's Day; judge say local law must prevail.  We say, no, we land in jail."  And then we also sang "A Ballad of the Sit-Ins" which was written in, first, in sort of an Appalachian ballad style by Guy Carowan (ph.).  And then the Nashville [Tennessee] students took that ballad and put it in sort of a doo wop setting.  And so it says, "the time was 1960, the place, the U.S.A., February first became a history-making day; from Greensboro across the land the news spread far and wide, silently and bravely, you took a giant stride."  So that we would have some songs like that, that were documenting events.  And then we'd have other songs that were these great choruses.  And we always ended the concert with "We Shall Overcome," teaching "We Shall Overcome" to the audience.  And we started out December 31st in a concert at the YM [YMCA] and YWCA, Combined Convention at the University of Illinois campus, Urbana-Champaign [Illinois].  And we performed to those, those people coming from those college campuses.  And Toshi [Toshi-Aline Ohta] Seeger, whose the wife Pete Seeger, had agreed to book us.  And so we just gave her name out.  And a few weeks later, she says, "you'd better go to the bathroom now because these people are saying, they want you to come to their campuses."  So she booked us into these college campuses out of that convention, and in addition to that, there were all sorts of other people who would just have us--sometimes we did concert halls like Carnegie or Town Hall, Orchestra Hall in Chicago [Illinois].  But we also sang in living rooms.  We sang in schools, churches--any place people would get together to hear us, we would sing.
Story_ID: 12104
Speaker 1: And I remember there're some stories about how the song played a role in the Movement.  One story in particular, I think it was a song called "Oxford Town" about Oxford, Ohio, about three Civil Rights people [James Chaney, Andrew Goodman, and Michael Schwerner] being killed--before the group leaves Oxford, going to Mississippi.  And there's a story about the meeting they had before they went, and, where I think, Bob Moses and some others described the meeting they had before they left.  And they told people they didn't have to go if they didn't want to go.  And there was silence.  And then a song rose from the back, somebody started singing.  And the people just marched out and got on a bus.
Speaker 2: Well, there was, that song was, we--"They Say that Freedom Is a Constant Struggle."  And that song came, began to be heard after the three people turned up missing.  And it was almost like a mantra, and I've talked to a few people--I was not there 'cause this is 1964.  And my first child was born January of '64 [1964].  So I didn't do Mississippi Summer, but people told me about watching Bob Moses sit all day long on a porch after word came that they were missing, and also said that nobody went home.  And I still get chills when I think about that because these were young people who had had no experience in the South by and large.  And, but they were actually putting their lives on the line.  And they were not gonna let this particular American statement be made without their presence.  Incredible, an incredible kind of statement, which shows like how much that Movement meant, not just to the black people who were at the core and bore the brunt of the Movement, but it captured the imagination of people all over this country who didn't want to be in a racist society.
Story_ID: 12105
Speaker 1: Sometimes people ask me about music and its role in the [Civil Rights] Movement.  And the way I come to it is different than talking about the [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] Freedom Singers, which is an organized group that takes it, and commodifies it as a information product and a support-gathering product, a spreading-the-news product.  But I come to the, to music out of--in the Movement, out of my participation in activities that I thought could get me killed.  And so singing becomes a way of balancing some of the stuff that comes up in you when you begin to change your behavior.  And everything you do that's different, is challenging everything you've been taught you have to do to stay alive as a black person.  And so you actually are going through a transformation, and you're putting down stuff you've gotten from people who love you, who know the system, who know what white people will do if a black person steps out of line.  And you are putting that down, and you're saying, "I'm stepping out of line.  I'm not going to follow those rules.  I want those rules down."  And you can't really just do that without a lot of anxiety and fear.  And singing is an amazing way to transform energy.  So if you have anxiety or fear running through your body, you raise a song, that energy is transformed because singing is energy.  And so I come to singing in the Movement, not as if it's separate from an activity.  The--for me, there would be no way to actually execute the moves we made without the singing and the song.  There would be no way to stay in jail, stay together, with people who are not your running buddies.  There would be no way to get a march going.  There would be no way to make people feel the newness of a new time for themselves.  That was--the speeches were important, but the singing is you, using your voice, running through your body, letting yourself know, your name has been changed.  You are actually stepping out of line.  And so when I talk about music in the Movement, it has to do with something that's transformative.  And it's also like an instrument you can use.  I tell people to this day, "I don't care how you're feeling, if you could sing--in the shower, sing when you step out, you will feel different."  And sometimes, you can get that listening to music, but if you run music through your body, your own sound, when you finish, your mood is different than before you started.  Now, a lot of people don't know that.  And it's almost like a, you know, taking a herbal remedy.  But for black people, it's not like a taught lesson.  You don't get to be who you are without the constant exercise of it.  So in church, I got these songs full of passion, coming from black people who had to live the next week in hostile territory, and they needed something.  That's the function of the singing.  In school, I got the songs and the songs were songs that I was supposed to know if I was black.  And I was so surprised in college, the first time we had a big rally at Albany State College [Albany, Georgia], somebody said, "sing a song," and me and Marion Blunt (ph.) looked at each other.  Marion Blunt is a tenor.  And he said, "what we gonna sing?"  I said, "let's sing 'Lift Every Voice and Sing.'"  So we jumped into "Lift Every Voice and Sing" (singing).  It was the first time I realized that every black person alive didn't know the song.  Now, I would, I could understand if you'd never gone to school.  I don't think my father [Jesse Johnson] was taught the song before the third grade.  And, but I think my mother [Beatrice Wise Johnson] knew--
Speaker 2: It may not have been written before he was in the third grade to tell the truth--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: But absolutely, it's 1961, and you're in college, which means you've been taught by black teachers, elementary school, junior high and high school, and you don't know "Lift Every Voice and Sing."  It was the first time I knew that I got something from some black people who had notions of what we would need to stand and, and, and be constructive in this nation of our birth.  And singing was a part of that.  And so when I try to talk about music in the Movement, I try to say that story.  Then I talk about the [SNCC] Freedom Singers who pulled from that--we couldn't recreate that for those concerts.  But we pulled from it, and we could get people to sing "This Little Light of Mine," all over, in places all over the United States.  We could say "Stand up," or we could say, start "We Shall Overcome" and teach them how to sing it.  These were people who were in that room because they wanted to know more about this Movement that was trying to say racism should not be in this country.  And if there's a Movement that's gonna challenge racism, we want to hear about it; we want to support it.  What can we do?  And singing was--we called ourselves sometimes the 'singing newspaper.'
Story_ID: 12106
Speaker 1: Now, you say you were married by '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: I married in '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Sixty-three, okay.  All right, and you married Cordell Reagon?
Speaker 2: Cordell Reagon.
Speaker 1: Cordell Reagon, right.  He was an organizer in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]?
Speaker 2: Cordell was the youngest SNCC Field Secretary.  He came into SNCC out of high school.  And he participated in Nashville [Tennessee] sit-ins [1960].  He went to Amit County in Mississippi for the first Mississippi Voter Registration.  He went on the Freedom Rides.  He did Parchment Penitentiary.  He--by the time I met him, he had worked in Cairo, Illinois.  He had been in Talladega, Alabama.  He had been Tuskegee [Alabama], Selma [Alabama].  He had been arrested over twenty times so that when he came into Albany [Georgia], he was young, but he had had a lot of experience.
Speaker 1: And he lived about five organizer lifetimes in that period of time, it sounds like.
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that happened with the SNCC workers, the SNCC organizers, was that they really did go into a community and join the community.  And they tended to be targeted very quickly.  And in Albany, Cordell must have been arrested about ten times over a one-year period.  They would just pick him up and he'd be in jail.  If he rode in a car from Albany to Atlanta [Georgia] to the SNCC office, that car would be followed.  He could end up in jail.  He'd be calling somebody saying, "I've been locked up in this jail or the other jail."  So one of the things that happened with the SNCC field secretaries is that they did a lot of jail time.  They were arrested many, many times.  So part of the structure of SNCC was having phones, having lawyers, trying--having different ways to keep track of staff and being sure there was somebody open at all times to hear where people were because jail was part of what you--what happened to you.
Speaker 1: Okay, during--now, did you follow him into these areas when you were married?  I mean were you together at all times or was he out separately from you?
Speaker 2: The Freedom Singers began December 1962.  We were married that year.  Therefore, we were traveling together.  We had gotten together in Albany as a, girlfriend and boyfriend.  And we got married in '63 [1963] while we were on tour.  We toured all over the country, doing concerts.  At the end of that year, I came back to Atlanta, and then Cordell helped to form a second group of Freedom Singers.  And they went out on the road, this would be the second group of Freedom Singers.  And then my daughter was born in, in '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you back involved in the Movement in '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: I had--Toesha (ph.) was born in '64 [1964], Quan was born in '65 [1965].  So those years for me were keeping house, mothering years.  I worked in the SNCC office.  I did things in Atlanta.  I did a few concerts out of town, in particular, I did some work with Pete and Toshi Seeger.  I worked with Guy Carawan organizing conferences where singing, singing organizers could get together.  So that it was a time when I could not work steadily in the Movement as an organizer, but I actually found that I could book, that I could organize a conference.  I could do budgets.  I could put on programs.  I had a talent for creating cultural programming.  And this would be the first time I did it, and I did it working with Toshi Seeger, and with Guy Carawan.
Story_ID: 12107
Speaker 1: The programming you're involved in kind of spread the culture of the Civil Rights Movement, did it not?
Speaker 2: It, these conferences--one of the first ones we did, we brought together song leaders from Movement campaigns all over the South.  Then we brought topical song writers from New York.  These are the people who are writing these popular songs.  Then we brought in older, black singers, Georgia C. Allen Singers, Doc Reed, who had done time in the Texas State Pen [Penitentiary].  And together, we swapped songs and stories.  And it was a time when I had a chance to listen to Bessie Jones, John and Peter Davis of the Georgia C. Allen Singers.  They actually told us stories about songs we were singing that were slave stories.  And some of my richest slave stories came from Bessie Jones and John and Peter Davis.  They taught us work songs that prison, people in prison sang, and, and then the meaning.  And so the [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] Freedom Singers also went to Newport [Rhode Island].  And we had influence on what would be the popular song Movement because almost everybody who performed at Newport, and we're here, talking Bob Dylan, Joan Baez, Peter, Paul and Mary, Odetta, all of those different singers, they actually--usually would do an a cappella song, and then, this is guitar Movement part, it's, everybody's got a guitar and singing.  But we would do an a capella song.  And then we'd do a Freedom song.  And so it was really a very, very cross fertilization period where, that music culture of the Civil Rights Movement had an impact on the pop culture.  Now, the theme song of the Movement, which is "We Shall Overcome," never hit the Top 40 chart.  There was sheet music.  Nobody looked at the sheet music.  There were some recordings.  We did a recording of it.  But the recordings never broke any records.  "We Shall Overcome" would be the most well-known song in the world.  But its dissemination is through the news media.  It was an important lesson for me as a singer about music not having always to go through the industry; that I could be a field secretary of the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee [SNCC], making my contribution to the Movement as a singer.  That was really important, that I could be a singer and not be a star.  I could be a singer.  I could make a record, and it wouldn't sell, you know, 200,000 copies; very important lessons for me that mark and shape the kind of musician I became.
Story_ID: 12108
Speaker 1: Where did that song come from initially and how did it really get launched into national prominence?  I mean was it the March on Washington [1963] or--?
Speaker 2: No, "We Shall Overcome" is, begins as a church song in Baptist and Methodist congregations.  It seemed to have been around late nineteenth century.  In 1901, Charles Albert Tinley, a Methodist minister in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], writes a song, and he sort of uses this chorus and puts verses, and it's "I'll overcome someday, I'll overcome someday, if in my heart, I do not yield, I'll overcome some day."  Very, that text is very, very much like that traditional chorus that many of us heard in our communities.  And we think that Tinley actually used what was that folk chorus to create a composition.  Now, this is the first time it was copyrighted.  And this song eventually be--was a song used in union meetings in the South, as people organized for the picket lines and things of that sort.  It was very strongly associated with a union struggle in Charleston, South Carolina.  And when I did interviews about this song in Charleston, some of those leaders talked about this song being the strongest song on the, on the picket line, and that they took this song to Highlander Folk School, which was a labor folk school, organized in 1932 by Miles Horton.  Zilphia Horton was the music director at Highlander.  She learned the song and kept it in all of her workshops.  Pete Seeger was taught the song by Zilphia Horton when he went to Highlander in, I think, 1946.  He began to sing the song in all of his labor thing--song, rallies all over the country.  He taught the song to Frank Hamilton, who taught it to Guy Carawan.  When Zilphia Horton died in the '50's [1950s], Guy Carawan came to Highlander.  He already knew the song.  The song was already in the Highlander's sort of workshop repertoire.  The Nashville [Tennessee] students come to Highlander in 1960, and they are taught the song.  But before them, in '57 [1957], the Montgomery [Alabama] Movement, with [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and some of the young people go to Highlander, they learn the song there.  They take it back to Montgomery.  So the song is song in mass meetings in Montgomery.  SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] has an organizing conference at Shaw University, Raleigh [North Carolina].  And according to Cordell [Reagon], Guy Carawan, he's white, he plays guitar, he has participated in the demonstrations in Nashville.  He's been all over the place.  He starts to lead freedom songs.  He starts to lead this song, and Cordell said, everybody in the room stood up.  And they joined hands, and they crossed right over left, to join hands.  And he said, that's the first time that song moved from being the freedom song to being a theme song.  And this, this is 19, 1960 in Raleigh.  And this is the formation of SNCC.  And the song, when Cordell and Charles, Charles Sherrod and Charlie Jones came to Albany [Georgia], I had heard the song over the TV sung by the Nashville students.  So we would always end our NAACP [Naional Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Youth Chapter meetings with songs.  So we already knew, you know, they're freedom songs, you know.  So one day, I said, I, "I got a song."  And so I sang the song, but I sang the church song I already knew and just threw in some of the freedom verses.  So when, when the SNCC people came to town, they said, "you all singing any freedom songs?"  I said, "yeah."  So I sang this song.  And Cordell stopped us cause the church song was an "I" song, "I'll overcome, I'll overcome, I'll overcome some day."  So Cordell said, "you don't say, 'I', you say 'we.'  And 'we' means the group.  'I' is individualist."  And he said, "you don't sing it sitting down.  You sing it standing up."  This is 1961, fall, "and you join right hands over left."  So it had become a ritual then.  And like, okay, so he is telling me how we're supposed to sing the song.  I don't even know when I learned the song.  He clearly learned it at Highlander.  It was not a part of his Methodist church repertoire.  He learned it from Guy Carawan.  And then it had sort of moved.  So we said, okay, "we want a Movement, you need us to sing 'We Shall Overcome,' we'll do it, stand up, we'll do it."  And it was like, "okay, whatever you say.  We just have to be in the Movement."  The first mass meeting at Mount Zion, we closed it with "We Shall Overcome."  But into that singing was all of the energy of those black people who knew they had stepped out of line, and they poured everything they had into it.  And it went southwest Georgia.  It was like, we sang "We shall," we crossed our hands.  But we had no, "oh, oh, oh, my Lord" (singing) in between the lines.  The song was totally transformed by southwest Georgia.  And from that point, wherever it went, it kept a lot of that nuance from southwest Georgia in it.
Speaker 1: There's a difference.  I remember hearing it the folk song way, and it's a nice song because they say it kind of like "we shall overcome, we shall over come one day"--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Like it, it sounded like that.
Speaker 2: Well, the song, when I sing it now to an ordinary audience, it could be students or it could be adults, it will come out pretty straightforward.  They know it, they've heard it all of their lives.  "We shall over--".  And what's missing is any sense of passion and commitment cause it's really a song that is structured to be filled.  It is not enough to sing melody.  It is not enough harmonize.  You can have the tune right, but the song is not there, if you cannot fill it up with your commitment to be a part of a community of justice in the world.  So I'll stop the song.  I'll tell the story of Raleigh.  I tell them--and Cordell said, they started to sing it, and everybody stood.  Everybody's still sitting, right.  I said, "and he said, everybody stood."  And a few people will stand up.  And I said, "he said, everybody stood," and then finally people will get up.  And he said, "they crossed hands right over left," and then people have to do that.  You can't do that in a group without moving.
Speaker 1: What's the significance of crossing hands right over left?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I never questioned it, I just done it.
Speaker 1: Just done it, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you don't go left to the right.  So, so then, then I said--will say, "you have to use full body sound."  Somehow you're wanting a better world.  You're wanting a world of peace.  You're wanting a world where people are not discriminated against.  That part of you that wants that, has to be in this song.  And it has to replace you.  So for a, for a minute, the only "you" that exists, is the sound of your voice.  And that's what you have to be saying in this room.  Then we start it, and then you can get today, a powerful rendering of the song, but only if you share that lesson in that way so people are taken to understand the difference between learning the song and singing the theme song.  It's very different.
Story_ID: 12109
Speaker 1: '65 [1965], were you around--well, I know you were around, but were you part of the voter registration activity in Alabama--I mean in Georgia and--no, in Alabama in '65 [1965], yeah.
Speaker 2: No, by '65 [1965], I am working a lot more with culture.  And I'm doing a lot more cultural organizing.  I actually have two children, and in '65 [1965] my first child, my second child [Quan] was born in '65 [1965], first child [Toesha] is born '64 [1964].  And so I actually am doing many, many more things in Atlanta [Georgia], and it has a lot more to do with black culture.  It has to do with organizing and teaching about black culture, doing workshops, organizing festivals, singings, conferences, and I actually do not go out again as an organizer after my children are born, in terms of going to Alabama or Mississippi and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Now, let me take you to 1966.  Now, you went to Senegal, didn't you in '66 [1966]?
Speaker 2: --(no)
Speaker 1: You didn't go?
Speaker 2: --(no).
Speaker 1: I was--there was a group of Freedom Singers that went, but I thought that you--
Speaker 2: People in--Harry Belafonte organized a trip.  He felt that SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] had to actually go to Africa.  And it was very important.  And there was a very big decision about who would go in SNCC, and that Fannie Lou Hamer, it was the first time she went.  And so, so people went to Africa.  I did not go to Africa.  My life during '65 [1965], '66 [1966], '67 [1967] is really about becoming a cultural organizer, and I am looking at my experience as a Freedom Singer and those freedom songs.  And I'm looking at both new songs and old songs.  And I'm really interested in the lessons I was learning from the Georgia Sea Island Singers.  So a lot of the festivals I put on during that period, you would have people, some leaders from the Freedom Movement, but you'd always have older people doing older songs.  I also started to bring in gospel groups into those gatherings, like a gospel choir.  I would also bring in a blues singer into, into those environments.  I started an organization with a woman named Ann Romaine (ph.).  Ann was white, and we called it the Southern Folk Cultural Revival Project.  And what we did was put together a group of singers, white and black--we did the first integrated concerts in the South.  And it was harrowing.
Speaker 1: Harrowing?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you threatened?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Our cars would be followed.  It was very, very dangerous.  You did not have integrated concerts in some of the places we sang.  And it was, it was dangerous sometimes for the people who were inviting us.  We were invited to white schools and black schools.  We were invited to churches.  We went to Hazard, Kentucky, and many times on the, in the same campuses, there were hostile groups.  We would do a concert, and we would, we would drive out.  We'd be followed by people.  We were bumped in vans sometimes.  So it was, and I usually traveled with both of my children.
Story_ID: 12110
Speaker 1: Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: I'm Bernice Johnson Reagon.  B-E-R-N-I-C-E, J-O-H-N-S-O-N, no dash, R-E-A-G-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, what is today's date and--?
Speaker 2: Today is Friday, November 21, 2003.  We're in Washington, D.C. at the Capital Hilton, and I don't know what room this is (laughter).
Speaker 1: 487--484 for history, right.  Okay, so we're continuing an interview we started July, I believe it was?
Speaker 2: No, it was September.
Speaker 1: September.  Okay.  All right.  Okay.
Story_ID: 12111
Speaker 1: Atlanta, during the mid-60's [1960s] was a wonderful place to be.  This is when I really started to buy my first black books.  I still have some of them, some of them, [W.E.B.] Dubois' 'Black Reconstruction,' $3.95 (laughter).  And it also, there is a tremendous community there.  And I don't know if people can even imagine what it's like.  I had two small children, and we would go to poetry readings.  And you would see all of the writers, all of the poets of the day, there would be black national conferences.  I lived on, on the corner of Ashby and West Fair, right across from the Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] gym.  So we could like walk across the street and we'd be at the Nina Simone concert.  It was just a magnificent time.  During that time, I was really focused on the survive--survival of my family.  I had married Cordell Reagon, and he had left.  And so I focused on how I was gonna get from one place to the other.  But it was inside of this cultural community--SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was still headquartered there.  And we started a school.  And we started a festival to raise money for the school.  Vincent Harding wrote the script.  And he was the narrator. And we went to the head of music at Morehouse, Wendell Whalum, and he trained a group of singers.  And there was a dancer at Spelman [College, Atlanta Georgia], her first name is Shirley.  I can't think of her last name.  Maybe it will come to me, but she actually found dancers in Atlanta, and she choreographed people.  And I put together a group of singers.  And we put on this festival and we charged a penny.  And when I went around to these people in Atlanta and said, we want to charge a penny so anybody can come, you give us some money so we can charge a penny.  And that's the way we raised money for the school.  But the, the week before there was a school opening, and the place was packed.  We had it in Vine City, which is like the poorest section of Atlanta.
Speaker 2: Now, what was the name of the school?
Speaker 1: It was Martin Luther King, Jr. Community School.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we had the event at the Magnolia Ballroom.  And nobody went to the Magnolia Ballroom anymore because it was in Vine City.  And everybody thought we'd be in one of the bigger churches or on the campus.  I said, "no, we're going to the community."  And so we opened up, and there's this--it was an incredible experience.
Story_ID: 12112
Speaker 1: These women who had sung with me knocked on my door.  And they said, "we don't want to stop singing."  It was Mary Ethel Jones and Mattie Casey.  And the three of us began to form what became the Harambee Singers.  We usually were five to six black women singers, a capella and it was my first experience actually leading because when I sang with the [SNCC] Freedom Singers, Cordell Reagon was the leader of the group.  And I was the contact with the booking person who was Toshi Seeger.  So I knew a lot of the business part, but actually forming a group, keeping the group together, making the decisions, the Harambee Singers was my first experience.  And one of the first things I had to deal with was, were we going to cost our families anything to do this group?  So the first thing we said was, "we'll go anywhere if we can get at least $50.00, plus $50.00 for the group."  So there were five people.  Then the fee was actually $300.00.  And $50.00 would do your ground transportation, your babysitter, and it really didn't impact your family fiscally.  And we used that as a base.  And the extra fifty went into a bank account for the group.  And you'd be surprised about a formula like that, in introducing it where you never took anything in without giving it to the community that's holding you together.  And I'm not sure where I got that from.  There was something in Kwanzaa, where you were supposed to bring the first harvest home.  So the first thing you feed is the thing that sustains you.  And it was something you really had to talk about because it was unusual, but it actually ended up being a formula for what I did with Sweet Honey in the Rock.  And it really worked for this group.  And we, we would perform for schools.  We would drive any place that was in a two hundred mile radius, doing concerts.  If it was longer, they had to fly us.  And it was a wonderful experience.  It was a wonderful time to be a group of black women singers.  And we were singing for blacks, the first Black Studies programs that were being formed in the country.  And all of the black conferences we would, all the protest rallies, we were there.  And it, it was an, it was an amazing experience for me, and a learning experience for me as a leader of singers.
Story_ID: 12113
Speaker 1: Well, we were doing Kwanzaa.  All of us knew some Swahili words.  There was a tremendous effort in the country, in black communities to reconnect black people to our base as an African people.  Some of that was intellectual in terms of reading and studying and going to lectures.  I still remember going to hear John Henry Clark, hearing my first lecture about any kind of African history.  And there were, there was also the Institute of the Black World, who had speakers coming in all of the time.  But the other part was the impact it had on yourself.  So I had been wearing an afro.  I wore an afro in the [SNCC] Freedom Singers.  So I was one of the early afros in our community.
Speaker 2: Cause that--that was in the early--in the mid-'60's [1960s], I guess, '64 [1964]?
Speaker 1: This would be '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Sixty three [1963]?
Speaker 1: The first time I tried it was '62 [1962], '62 [1962], '63 [1963] would be when I started to investigate taking a shower and walking into the street.
Speaker 2: Now, this is interesting because hair is a big issue.  I mean it, it has been anyway in the black community in terms of trying to alter it to look like the majority or, or to be in style or whatever.  Were you inspired by--did you see someone else with a natural before you decided to do it, or?
Speaker 1: There were two people who came to Albany, Georgia during the [Civil Rights] Movement.  One was Peggy, Peggy--her married name was Day, and I can't remember her name before she married, Day.  And the other was Ruth Howard.  And neither one of them straightened their hair.  And I had gone with--to school, with a woman who belonged to a church where they didn't straighten their hair.  And--
Speaker 2: What was the name of that church?  Do you remember?
Speaker 1: Well, we treated it as if--there was a, it was one that had one of these leaders, who was a charismatic leader during the time.  So I graduated from high school in '59 [1959], so I'm talking about my high school experience from '55 [1955] to '59 [1959].  This young woman was the only person I saw who had nappy hair, kinky hair, who never straightened it.  And she said that her pastor said, they didn't need to straighten their hair.  They didn't need to really wear make up.  They were beautiful the way they were.  And she wore dresses--this is the crinoline period, you know, you had to have three--we could never in my family afford more than one.  So my skirts never stood out long enough.
Speaker 2: The petticoats.
Speaker 1: That's right, petticoats.  And, but most people would have three on, and they would be different colors.  And you'd have your gathered skirt, and you'd have your three--and you could actually see as you walked down the hall, the whiff of these colors.  It was, it was quite an amazing time.  And there would be me with my one that didn't quite do that, but it was the best we could do.  And then there would be Venetta, who did not wear them, and who, no matter what the hemline was, her hemline was longer, no make up, and she did not straighten her hair.  And I remember she did her hair in the same style, so she didn't cut--it wasn't the Afro.  It was clear she would roll it up, and then when she unrolled, it would be sort of in a hairdo, the way we were wearing hairdos, but, of course, it didn't look the same.  And I actually remember us feeling sorry for her, that she could not straighten her hair because of her religion.  That's the way it felt to us.  Civil Rights Movement, there was a white guy from Ohio, who was on staff with us, with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].  And he would say, "why do you change your hair?"  And then I was looking at Peggy and Ruth.  Peggy had quote, quote "good hair."  Ruth's hair was not as kinky as mine, but not as good as Peggy's.  Black people understand these grades who are listening.  Peggy could afford to sit up there and say, "I don't straighten my hair."  Ruth was a little shaky.  So I was really listening to her.  But what was really striking was I am looking at a white guy, who's been put out of his family 'cause he has to be in the Movement.  And he basically wanted information.  He wanted to know what it did.  And I couldn't answer the question.  Nobody had ever--I never in my life asked myself why I straightened my hair.  You're born, when you're young, you don't put the hot comb in the baby's hair until the child is old enough.  And it was a ritual of passage.  You get to a certain age, then you get your hair straightened for the first time.  And then you, you still don't get it done for school.  You get it done for Easter or big days at church.  You get a hot comb, and you go across the street.  And they put curlers in.  This is like maybe twice a year.  You cannot wait until, you know, you get to be a teenager and your hair is straight all of the time.  So it's just ways of getting older.  And somebody says, who's not a part of this culture.  "Why do you do it?"  And I had no idea.  And I guess, looking back, it had something to do with the power of culture.  You, you're born into a culture, and you move along the road that is structured for you.  And you usually do not question, you aspire to take on all of the symbols so everybody will know, "I am here now."  I mean wearing stockings, wearing heels, your first lipstick, going to the hair dresser twice a, a month.  That meant you were a teenager.  And so Civil Rights Movement is when I started to question and make my own decision because there were not many adults telling me I should be marching and risking my school to be in the Movement.
Speaker 2: So you were already off the track.
Speaker 1: I was sort of stepping outside of the safety zone.  And I was bothered that I didn't have an answer.  And then I was looking at these examples.  Well, that's Albany, Georgia.  I moved to Atlanta [Georgia] in '63 [1963], late '63 [1963].  And so I'm there '64 [1964].  And we are looking at Odetta and Miriam Makeba .
Speaker 2: And I think Abbey Lincoln around that time?
Speaker 1: Well, Abbey Lincoln didn't come to Georgia, neither did [John] Coltrane, (laughter).  When I went to New York the first time, people were, "you don't know Coltrane?"  I said, "he didn't come to Albany, no."  I know him now, but I had to leave the South to discover him.  But--
Story_ID: 12114
Speaker 1: The woman was Peggy Diamond, and--but the two people who were markers for me was Odetta and Nina Simone--not Nina Simone, but Odetta and Miriam Makeba.  And I remember just looking at their hair.  And it was always the same.  And I read something where Odetta said, she went to camp, and she couldn't go swimming every day because her hair was straight.  And she wasn't having it.  And I thought that was really amazing that somebody would stop straightening their hair because it was inconvenient.  Straightening your hair was very inconvenient and keeping it straight was inconvenient.  And so the next thing was I actually left Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] as a student to sing with the [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] Freedom Singers.  And I decided I wanted to cut my hair.  I think this is still stepping outside of--being more and more independent.  And so I expressed it to a friend who was in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] named Doris Derby.  She's an anthropologist now.  And she said, "my sister cuts her boy's hair."  And so I went over to her house and she cut my hair.  And that was my first Afro.  Well, when I came south again, it was really quite a major trauma (laughter) for everybody.  I remember Ruby Doris saying, "I don't think I could do what you did."  And it just, I just--"Bernice, I, I really admire you.  I don't think you could"--and the second person in, in SNCC who did it was Joyce Ladner (ph.).  So that environment was very much a transformative environment for me in Atlanta.  And if you think of me growing up in Albany, Georgia, there is nothing that had been my--in my life that would think that one night I would go to West Hunter Baptist Church and take my two children [Toesha and Quan], and we would see C.L.R. James.  And, of course, C.L.R. James is old, and I sat them down before we went.  I said, "we're going to see C.L.R. James."  And they said, "C-L-R James."  I said, "no, we're seeing C.L.R. James."  So we'd practice, "C.L.R. James."  And they--somebody'd say, "where y'all going?"  "We're going to see C.L.R. James."  And then we go, and they sit there, and he is talking.  They, and, they are--these are pre-kindergarten pre-school kids, and they're looking.  And they're looking at his long fingers.  He smoked constantly.  And they're looking--he has white hair, and they're just looking at--they never took his, their eyes off him.  And when we left, they said, "Wow, Ma, C.L.R. James has these cool hands."  And it was so amazing what you could do with your family.  There were, you didn't have to have any money.  And everything was walking distance.  And the Harambee Singers came out of that culture.  And a part of that was Africa.  And you actually changed your dress.  You changed your idea about colors.  Everything shifted for us, and we were--it was almost like trying on a new context for who you were.  And the first time you dealt with the fact that dark skinned black people looked really good in bright red, that was a violation of the rule.
Speaker 2: And people used to say that they shouldn't wear red, right?
Speaker 1: You know you'd be "'bama," you know, you're "country," and what--that's interesting because it meant country people still maintained the African palette aesthetic.  And they loved bright colors, but boy, you'd see some man with a--there was a deacon who would, might have on a pink shirt with a lime green tie, and we would go "'bama," this is Albany [Georgia], "'bama."  This means you don't know how to dress.  All of that changed with the black consciousness, black power, black cultural movement, black studies movement of the mid-60's [1960s] forward.  This paralyzed, this paralleled, all of the rebellions also going in the '60's [1960s].  It began the first time we began to get black people elected to lead some of our urban communities where we really held a huge size of the voting popu--populous in these cities.  And the Harambee Singers were a part of that.
Speaker 2: Now, do you remember the Congress of African People, in '70 [1970], were you there for that in Atlanta?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Now, that was one of the major political gatherings-- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: We sang in that.
Story_ID: 12115
Speaker 1: How long did the Harambee Singers last?
Speaker 2: They still exist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Atlanta [Georgia], they still exist, yes.  I left them.  I moved to Washington, D.C. after returning to school and getting a degree at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and I did my graduate work at Howard [University, Washington, D.C].  I applied for and received a Ford Doctoral Fellowship.  And so I packed my two children up, and we moved to Washington August '71 [1971].  And before that first semester was over, I was in the history department, but I also was vocal director of a new black theater called the D.C. Black Repertory Company.  At that time, at that time, it was interesting.  I lived in Southeast Anacostia.  And I--when I moved there, I didn't know what it meant.  I would go to real estate people, and they'd say, "we don't have, we have something in Southeast."  I said, okay.  And then they would give me the address.  I kept driving to the river.  And I could never find out how to get to Southeast.  I could just, I'd just get to M Street, and then I'd be at the water.  So finally, I asked somebody, see, you have to go across the bridge.  So I go across the bridge, and there's another part of D.C.  And that's where I could find a house, apartment.  And, but when it came to where my children, where we would go on the weekends, I was looking for that Atlanta experience.  And I found it in a group of families, centered--sort of around Howard University.  And there was something they were calling Ujiji.  And so on Saturdays, I would put my kids in the car, and we would drive to Ujiji.  Ujiji is the village.  It's like a black community we had for our children.  And we spent all day long together, doing things with the children, eating.  And it really was new for me that your community, not be right next door.  You might actually have to get yourself together and go and invent your community.  That was a first for me.  And it was very important because I repeated it many times--and I taught it to my daughter, Toshi.  So when she moved to Brooklyn [New York] to extend her music career, she set about forming a support community that would support black women in the arts, who were not discovered.  And the first time I went to something they had, I said, "ah, she did ujiji" (laughter).  It was, it was just wonderful.
Speaker 1: How do you spell ujiji?
Speaker 2: U-J-I-J-I.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Swahili again.
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am, now what does ujiji mean?
Speaker 2: Village.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, and so you kind of retreaded or found a way to recreate the Atlanta experience here in D.C. or found that community?
Speaker 2: It was already being done.  I didn't form this group.  I was just invited to come.  And it was just incredible.  We did Kwanzaa together.  It was just an incredible experience for me, having some transition that, that had some recognition for what was happening to me in Atlanta with my children.
Story_ID: 12116
Speaker 1: Now, the history department at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], what are your reflections on the history department at Howard when you came?  I think Robert Harris was there and there were some other people--
Speaker 2: Now, this is after '68 [1968], they had actually shut down the school, demanded curriculum changes.  When I came, Lorraine Williams was head of Howard.  Andrew Billingsley was vice president for academic affairs.  Steve Henderson headed up an Arts and Humanities Institute.  Sterling Brown was back on campus.  Boy, we had a wonderful time.  And Lorraine Williams was able to get a grant for improvement and expansion of the history department, which included, I think, ten graduate fellowships that were doctoral.  So James Early (ph.) and I came in with four doctorial fellowships, and I think this grant was a Rockefeller grant.  And so when we came in, our class, there were about twelve people working on graduate studies, masters and Ph.D.  And that was a huge expansion for any department to suddenly have very serious structure for doing graduate history.  And she invited Rayford Logan out of retirement to teach this group.  Chancellor Williams was there.  It was just an incredible--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Joseph Harris is who I meant, not Robert Harris, but Joseph Harris.
Speaker 2: Joseph Harris is after me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But I'm, I finished under Lorraine Williams.  And that was a very, very powerful History Department.
Speaker 1: Okay, what period of history did you concentrate on?
Speaker 2: It was interesting.  My main focus is U.S. History after 1865.  That means I have an automatic minor in U.S. History before 1865.  I have a second--a third minor in Caribbean-African-Latin American History, and another one in Research Methodologies.  And that would be, I did interdisciplinary history.  I did oral histories.
Story_ID: 12117
Speaker 1: The history department was led by Lorraine A. Williams.  And I think that's important because she was in that position because of her relationship with students, and because of the way she responded to the demand for curriculum change.  She was not afraid of the, what was perceived as the radicalness of the Black Studies demands.  The other thing was she was not afraid of a strong faculty.  She was not intimidated to have faculty who actually had CVs [curriculum vitae] that were more powerful than hers.  So she was very aggressive in understanding as a chair, her legacy had to do with how strong she could make that department.  And she brought in Dr. Arnold Taylor in diplomatic history.  She had Dr. Rayford Logan to come back.  And Dr. Rayford Logan taught me to be a historian.  Lorraine A. Williams was my chair, and she was my advisor.  But my principal teacher is Dr. Rayford Logan.  At this point, he was still the Rayford Logan who would not say black.  He only said negro.  And so I fussed all of the time, and when he had us talking about the 'talented tenth,' and there was something strange I picked up about what he thought about who the most brilliant people were.  And he showed us a picture of the 'talented tenth' and said something about the shades.  I said, "Dr. Logan, are you trying to say that it has something to do with the blood mixing, and blah, blah, blah."  He said, yes.  I said, "Dr. Logan!"  I was just like, we would just be at it.  People said, "Bernice, don't be fussing at Dr. Logan like that."  I said, "well, some of this stuff is really weird, you know."
Speaker 2: So what was the point, though, I'm losing--I almost got, I think, but what's the point with his--he was trying to show that the 'talented tenth' was a certain shade?
Speaker 1: Dr. Logan was very light skinned, very, very, very light skinned.  And he actually was suggesting that the mixed race people had a leg up intellectually.  And it was not a class statement.  And he was saying something, I thought, about genetics.  And I just really wanted to do him in.
Speaker 2: Okay, so he was suggesting that all the 'talented tenth' were the lightest tenth or?
Speaker 1: Well, there were just one or two dark people in this picture he showed us.  And I just thought, ah, this man is, you know.  We were actually going the other way, right.  But the point is that, it is very rare for a student who's trying to get a doctorate to have a relationship like I had with Dr. Logan.  It did not faze him one bit that I thought he was off-the-wall.  And I came into his classes, and I would say, blah, blah, blah.  And I'd say, "you know."  And he'd say, "you know what?  I don't know."  And I didn't even know I used "you know" as a connector.  And my first year, we had to present to the history department, and I was one of the presenters.  James Early (ph.) was one and John Flemming (ph.) was one.  I came--I finished my statement.  Dr. Logan came up to me, and he said, "you didn't say 'you know' once," and he was so pleased.  And the value of working with people, teachers who did not have their egos involved in being sure they were not challenged by anything.  I mean I worked with teachers who were not afraid of students who questioned everything they did.  Everybody was not like that in that department, but most of the people in the department were so grounded.  And I remember Phyllis Boynes who was in the class with me saying--she got her graduate work at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], but undergraduate was at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and her masters was at Howard.  She said Howard taught her to think.  That was not her experience at Northwestern.  And if, if some, if a place teaches you to think, you can always learn.  And what I understood about the Howard experience is that Howard trained me to do all of the work I had done as an intellectual since.  I've never found myself unprepared for any task I had.
Story_ID: 12118
Speaker 1: Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] actually went into a meeting--I did a three-paste--three page, single-spaced statement about what I thought I wanted to study.  And the question was, could they train me because I was talking about something I was calling 'oral history.'  And I was saying, I want the history of the people, which isn't exactly the way oral history is done in this country.  So I was sort of appropriating the name, but I would--I kept talking about group history, collective history.  And I said, "I don't mind studying about the leaders.  I don't mind doing archive, about what people have written, but I feel like there is something in the history of the group.  And I want to be able to study that, and I think studying oral history would do it."  They had a meeting, and they identified that there was already a oral history project at Howard on the Civil Rights Movement, that we had the Library of Congress here.  They just felt like there were resources.  And they just, they said, "yes, we can train her."  There was no oral history course in that department when I came.  There was no independent study category in that department, and there was no interdisciplinary history in that department when I came.  All of those things came on board the first and second year I was there in direct response to what I was trying to do.  I had independent study courses every semester.  I usually had three professors on each project.  I would--I had to have a historian.  If it was music, it was probably Veda Butcher, but it was the--if it was the oral history project, it was somebody there.  And so by the time I did my dissertation, I'd done four or five projects with only three professors reading.  So like the dissertation committee experience, I'd been through since my first semester.  My first semester I did a paper on the Civil Rights Movement oral history project.  And I wanted, and they said, "if you're gonna do oral history," this is the history department, "you have to do--you, you do a paper on this project.  You figure out how it's put together, what they did, how they did it, what the structure is, so that you will know how to put together a project."  And I, I, I spent the whole semester there.  I wrote a paper, and I gave it to Dr. Williams.  She looked at it.  It was 168 pages.  And she looked at me--this is my first seme--quarter as a graduate student.  She said, "this is a thesis size."  I knew, I didn't even know what she was talking about exactly.  I just knew I'd gone through a process.  When I finished that process, I knew how to put together a oral history, history project.  And what I learned that first semester has never shown any flaws as I've studied oral history as, as it evolves in this country.  There was a new association called an Oral History Association being formed.  First semester Howard grad in history, they send me.  They were so serious about being sure that I was trained to do what I said I wanted to do.  I've been to some other departments since then.  That's my first grad department, you know, I thought all graduate departments was like that.  Absolutely not.  It was just amazing.  Then this, this, this group of students, all of us on fellowships, there was like--we would leave class, and there was like a little restaurant on Georgia Avenue.  We would go to the restaurant, and we would just run our mouths.  I would go home, feed my kids, get them in bed, get on the phone with James Early, and we would just talk until it was time to go to sleep.  It was four years of incredible transformation for me.  In the development of scholarship.  And it had to do with the faculty.  It had to do with the transformation that had come about because of the struggle.  It had to do with the students who came in my year, and there was something in that history department that saw us as cutting-edge scholars.  John Flemming organizes the National Afro-American Museum in Ohio.  George Reed is the president of a college, university in Kentucky.  People just--we just thought we were supposed to be doing things.  I moved straight out of the department, went into, into Smithsonian [Washington, D.C.].  And we were not going, all of us, to the regular PhD academic tracks.  We really were pushing on where ordered knowledge was in the culture.  And it was not always in the classroom.  And, and that's Howard.  That's the Howard history department, phenomenal, phenomenal experience.  And it's not there now.
Story_ID: 12119
Speaker 1: What things did you learn at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] in this experience that were the most profound things about our history?
Speaker 2: The truth of the matter is, my revolution in history takes place in Atlanta [Georgia].  John Henry Clark, Vincent Harding, Lerone Bennett, A. B. Spelman, Steve Henderson, I'm talking about--and it's all community based because I'm not enrolled in classes.  That is when I learned the most phenomenal things.  I read the 'Autobiography of Malcolm X' during this period, the first time I read a book that changed my life.  I didn't know books could change your life.  I was a reader from a very early age, but reading a book, and on the other side of the book, being actually different.  The thing I was startled by was that the most consistent thing about Malcolm X was that he changed.  And most of the time people don't see change as consistency.  It seems to be the antithesis, but every time I looked around, he was reinventing himself.  And I closed the book, and I just thought, sometimes if you change every time somebody sees you, they say, "well, why don't you just, you know, make up your mind and figure out what you're gonna do?"  And I just never entered a life biography where I was moving along and I could barely, emotionally, keep up with the revolutions that were going on.  It was incredible.  It prepared me for [W.E.B.] DuBois, which was the biggest thing, I think, that happened to me at, in that history department, because that's another person that every time you're looking at DuBois, as you move through his life, he is actually operating out of another context in order to do what he has to do in the world.  And it's almost like, to stay the same, sometimes you have to change.  To do the work you have to do, you don't always stay in the same place.  And the biggest other thing that happened was my getting a sense that there was knowingness within the people who are the holders of black culture.  They knew something.  They had documented it in the records they keep and create.  And as a scholar, it was my work to work with that material, and that, that material needed to be archived along with all of the other kinds of research we, as historians, do. That those--I think W.E.B. DuBois and my sort of finding myself as a, a scholar who would work with cultural artifacts as historical documents, would be the strongest things that happened to me at Howard.
Story_ID: 12120
Speaker 1: Can you give us an example of cultural artifacts that inform history?
Speaker 2: My father [Jesse Johnson] sang a song on the porch.  During the summers, he did revival meetings.  So he would be at home.  And I don't know who the baby was, but he had the baby in his lap.  And I don't know if he sang this song every day, but I knew the song.  I'd never sung the song, but as an adult, I knew the song.  And it was about the Titanic.  And it actually taught me something about what's a lullaby.  It's whatever puts the baby to sleep (laughter).  And the song went, (singing) "Many hearts surrendered on the sea/oh, the sea/ many hearts surrendered, right near my God to thee/ fourteenth day of April, nineteen hundred and twelve/ thousand five hundred/went down in the ocean to dwell/ left Southwest Hampton, all that spirit and gain/ when they hit that iceberg, I know their minds were changed/ mother told her daughter, this trip you may go/ when they hit that iceberg/she never was seen no more/ mothers tried to save their children/husbands tried to save their wives/ after all they could do/thousands had to lose their lives/ tell me Jack Johnson tried to get on board/captain just looked at him and said, 'boy, we don't haul no coal'/ many hearts surrendered." Now, at the time I heard this song, I did not know the Titanic.  I had never heard of Southwest Hampton.  I didn't know anything about the fourteenth day of April, 1912.  I don't think I knew anything about Jack Johnson.  All of those things came to me in that song.  When I started to do projects at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], looking at songs as historical documents, that song came to me.  And I was scared--because my father had been singing it.  And there was a stuff--there was a lot of stuff in, in folklore, in the field of folklore about the spirituals.  And there was a debate as to whether the spirituals were really about what slaves were saying about their daily, material lives or whether spirituals are just about going over yonder.  Were the spirituals protest songs?  And, you know, there were people like Sterling Brown who was just like, absolutely.  But there were all of these new fields, young folklorists, who were like just saying, "this song can't really be described as a protest song."  So here, I've got my father's song.  Am I gonna do a research paper on this song?  If I do a research paper on this song, I've got to find out if this data is accurate.  So I do it.  I go and I pull up the newspapers.  And I read.  And the ship left Southwest Hampton.  And it went down April--fourteenth of April, 1912.  They thought 1500 people died.  Jack Johnson was the heavyweight champion of the world.  And he was a symbol that they wanted to destroy.  The Titanic was a ship that was called 'The Unsinkable.'  It was a model of, of Western invention, capturing the, the nature.  Now, the black people say that's, that means you, you, you actually are in charge of, of God.  You're in charge of the ocean.  You're in charge of everything.  You have created something that is not manageable anywhere.  On the first time it took off, it went down.  And for black people, 1912--NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] is 1909, 1910.  Urban League is 1911.  Black people are responding to terrorism at this time because things were so bad for us.  It was very important for us that on its first voyage, this symbol of the same culture that we perceived to be the culture oppressing us was set back.  And that this ship went down on its first voyage. How?  It didn't have sense enough but to run into an iceberg.  And so black people--I had collected three songs on the Titanic.  There was one song that said, (singing) "God moves out on the water/God moves out on the water/God moves out on the water/the people had to stand and pray." I mean black people really saw a greater power, signaling that the world was not totally being run by white people who thought they were superior and thought they could grade everything they found.  And it was an important sign.  And so that, that particular document and the exercise of testing it was amazing for me.  And I picked a song that had dates in it 'cause I figured all of my history professors would understand it.  But the verse of, the why the song existed, the why black people were pulled by this moment, in order to do that as a historian, you have to back off the event and, ring a period of about eight years and show what was happening to black America at that time.  And that there was a organized response beginning, where black people were saying, you know, "the system is not helping us right now.  But that does not mean we are helpless."
Speaker 1: Now, the portion about Jack Johnson, now, can you explain that a little bit?
Speaker 2: Jack Johnson was married to--I think he was married to a white woman.  You would see, if you see pictures of him, he's like getting into the car, and the lady is blonde.  And the next one, he's beating some white man in the, in the ring.  And they were looking for a white man to beat Jack Johnson.  He was a target.  And the, the whole notion that there was no tolerance at that time for a champion to be black who also was not deferential, who would not stay in his place.  It was, it was major, it was major.  And the Titanic was a racist, classist ship in terms of where people were on the ship and how they were treated at different levels of the ship.  And then all the way to the bottom, the poorest, hardest working people.  And it was a luxury ship for that time, but in, if you can just imagine what those workers had to do to keep the, the engines going, twenty-four hours a day.  And, and that, that particular--it was a rough, it was rough picture to see.
Speaker 1: In the context of the song, is Jack Johnson denied passage on the Titanic or how does that--I guess I was asking?
Speaker 2: I did not find a story about that verse.  So I could not actually verify whether he tried to get a ticket.  He wasn't on it.  He was not on the Titanic, but he was in Europe at the time.  He was in England at the time.
Speaker 1: But it sort of reflects what people felt about, you know, the times, I guess, about the ability of Johnson to--?
Speaker 2: When I found a verse like that, "Jack Johnson tried to get on board/and Captain Smith look at him and said/'boy, we don't haul no coal,'" I found the name of the captain.  That was okay.  And I couldn't find a story in black papers or white papers.  I usually hold a verse like that because if everything else holds up, I don't know why this one would not.  But I don't need to have all of them.
Story_ID: 12121
Speaker 1: The other thing is, as I moved as a historian, I realized the first time somebody told me that dark people had something to do with the electric light bulb, it wasn't--it was black people, it was in the culture that pointed to a traffic light to say we invented the traffic light.  That was in the culture.  The shoe lacing machine.  It was in the culture.  It wasn't in any book I ever studied.  So I went, I went to the Smithsonian [Washington, D.C.], when I started to work at the Smithsonian.  They got this big electric--history of electricity exhibit.  I go to the Bell Lab, pictures.  I'm looking for some dark person 'cause, and, you know, I don't see, I don't see it on the picture.  And he certainly didn't get a plaque until the Annacostia Museum [Washington, D.C.] did an exhibit on black inventors.  And I went to an exhibit, and for the first time, an establishment institution actually had the name and said exactly what he did around the filament, that allowed the light to burn.  And I remembered how long I had known it.  So, I learned not to throw away stories that I learned through the oral culture.  I learned also to go through processes of evaluating material.  But I, I learned not to throw it away because the longer I live--I mean it was back then, people said "Thomas Jefferson had black children."  And I'm from Albany, Georgia, you know, I'm going to forty--I started to school '46 [1946], '47 [1947], elementary school.  We're studying Thomas Jefferson, ain't nothing in my history book that said he had some black children.  But that's what my teachers were whispering.  And then I went through years of being trained as a historian with that statement being dismissed by the major scholars of Thomas Jefferson.  Thank goodness for DNA, you know.  But then I remembered how long I'd known it.  And sometimes going to school makes you mistrust the stories you've gotten from your people because it's not been tested and it's not convenient.
Story_ID: 12122
Speaker 1: Well, black people are never used as a frame of reference in--well, were very seldom used as a frame of reference in academia anyway.
Speaker 2: But also in the process of studying history, I actually began to understand.  There is something called intellectual integrity and that there are periods when historians actually violate it.  When you look at what the schools of Columbia [University, New York, New York] and Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] did with the story of Reconstruction, there is no intellectual integrity driving what they were doing.  They were taking care of some political, alignment business, which suggested that these people who had been freed did not have sense enough to be full-standing, first-class citizenship.  Historians assisted with that.  And so, but it was like a chapter in black reconstruction where [W.E.B.] DuBois talks about historians and analyzes the schools of history.  And he says, what he has trouble with, he says also, those parts, those historians who made a contribution, and I learned that I could be a historian.  I could use of the stuff.  I also could critique my own historiography.  I could critique the way my field developed.  I could critique the way the history of slavery was written that disregarded what we had to contribute.
Story_ID: 12123
Speaker 1: --he had a wonderful chapter on the general strike. It's like black people walking off the plantation behind the [Civil War] Union troops should be considered a strike which puts it within labor history. And people just went bat-shit over that chapter. they just thought that was just not the way to define that action. I loved it. I loved it. And even now I use that [Abraham] Lincoln quote where Lincoln said "you pull these people off the field." This was by the time he finally decided he had to let us help save the Union, and people still criticized him, he said "you pull these people off the field, in two weeks we would have lost the cause."
Story_ID: 12124
Speaker 1: When you gradated from, when you got your degree from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], you said you went directly to the Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C].  How did that happen?
Speaker 2: When I came to Howard, within the first year, I, I became vocal director of the [Washington] D.C. Black Repertory Company.  So I'm working my graduate work, and I have another part-time job, as vocal director.  I had already been associated with the Smithsonian Folklife Festival because with the [SNCC- Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] Freedom Singers, I--we had gone to Newport.  Ralph Rensala, who was the major director of the Newport [Music] Festival [Newport Rhode Island], came to Smithsonian, created a national festival at the National Museum.  And so he--I'd already, before I came, had done work with him.  And they came to me as they started to do the, what would be the Bicentennial Festival.  And they had a concept called "Old Ways in the New World".  And the way it would work, would, they would go to Italy, and they would go to Italian American communities.  The same scholars would do research in the folk oral culture of both communities.  They would select a delegation of performers and craft people from both places, and put them together on the mall.  And what you would see, one hour you would see the African and--you would see the Italian American, and the next would be the group from Italy.  You would see similarities in instruments, repertoire, you'd move down a little while and there would be food.  And it was almost like in celebrating the 200th anniversary of the country, you were actually walking through the peopling of the country, through immigration.  One of the questions that came up was. "what do you do about black people?"  The scholars they had consulted said, yes, there are things, but other than like syncopation, it's, it's gonna be hard to put together a similar statement for black people.  And then the question--Gerald Davis was deputy director of the festival.  He was African American.  He was pushing on the question.  Well, what do we do about black people?  One folklorist suggested that when we go from England with the ballads to Appalachia to Bill Monroe and bluegrass--we have to go through blues because the difference between the, the country string band and blue, bluegrass is the influence of bluesmen, on Bill Monroe, who's considered the father of bluegrass music.  And they did a few of those things of, you could put in some, black people into--that's putting us inside of the evolution of their story, which meant we still didn't have a program.  So Gerald Davis  came to me about that, and I actually went to a meeting.  And they asked me, "could it be done?  Could there be an African American program?"  And I said, yes.  They said, "how would you do it?"  I said it would be the biggest program because with the model you have, you have one, the mother country and, and the American community.  For the African American statement, we'd have to have the African American community.  We'd have to have a Caribbean or Latin American component, and we'd have to have an African one.  So it would be three, and if you have fifty people in this program, you would have seventy five, except if you've brought twenty-five people from an African country and twenty-five people from a Caribbean country, I'd have to have fifty from the U.S. because there is something about exotica that, for the general public, I'd have to have enough African Americans to actually balance that statement.  And I still don't know how it is that formula was approved, but that's what we did.  From 1974 to 1976, we did an African diaspora proj--program.  Which was the first establishment program, by an establishment institution that actually even used the term African diaspora.  And we had it as a part of the 'Old Ways in the New World's' program.  And it was so successful.  In '76 [1976], it was twelve weeks long.  There are black people in Washington, D.C. who had never gone to the festival, who never missed a day.  They just walked through all of these aspects of knowing that African American culture belongs to the world family of culture based in Africa.  And it was there.  If you ate hoppin' john, which my mother [Beatrice Wise Johnson] made, black-eyed peas and rice, and you ate the same day pigeon peas and rice, and you ate the same day, black-eyed peas, cooked by a cook from Ghana with goat or fish, you could tell, almost with like chills, that the connection was still there.  Now, of course, the people are a document, you know.  You look at, you look at us, and you know we didn't disappear, but we really thought something was broken.  But in this festival, you could eat your way through it.  You could sit, look at dance steps and see it.  You could look at night life and see it.  You could look at woodcarvers, an Ashanti woodcarver, a Rastafarian woodcarver and a George Farrell from Atlanta [Georgia] with his son, Juju, woodcarvers.  And you look at them working all day long, and you know, all self taught, you could see it.  It was there.  And it was the most amazing experience for me as a scholar to provide, not just to African Americans, but everybody came to see this program.  And two of the scholars who had said it wasn't possible actually said, came and said, "I absolutely did not think you could come up with a statement about black Americans and their home nation that would make sense to the general public."  And he said, "I honestly never thought there was that much because with a festival, you're not looking at archeology."  You're looking at people who are alive in all places at the same time.  The basket weavers from South Carolina were there, basket weavers doing the same weave from Jamaica were there; basket weavers from Ghana, same weave.  They were all sitting there doing the same weave and putting together the same baskets.  It was just an amazing opportunity for me.  And it was an amazing opportunity for, for the festival and for the people who came.  And I then also began to see the festival as like an opportunity to teach people in this country who Americans are.  And it's a festival, and you go there, and there are Native Americans here, and you walk a little while, and you see Italians.  You go a little further, and there's Indian Americans.  And you had to tell yourself, every time you'd go someplace, this is about the United States of America.  You might really think this is a white country.  But you walk through the festival, you get a chance to say, "this is America?  This is America too?  These are Americans?"  You're looking at all these costumes, all of these religions.  And, of course, it's a festival, so when you get in your car and go home, they're not living on your block.  So it's almost like a course, and it began to define what I understand--stood, museums could do for the general public.  Everything we do is supposed to be accessible to the general public.  But it could be driven by primary research and analysis.  And it marked the work I did as, as a historian.
Story_ID: 12125
Speaker 1: Now, we haven't talked about the D.C. [Black] Rep [Repertory Company] much and that's--out of the D.C. rep. came 'Sweet Honey in the Rock'?
Speaker 2: The D.C. Black Repertory Theater was founded by Robert Hooks, who was an actor.  He had a role as a detective on a TV series.  He's from Washington, D.C., and he was disturbed by the absence of black people, in the generation under him, there was nobody coming--there was no expansion.  So he actually set up the theater as an interesting model. It wasn't just a black theater, it was a professional theater, and everybody who entered the company would become a card-carrying member of AFTRA and SAG [Screen Actors Guild].  And there were black theaters all over the country, but this was one that actually--when people left that theater, they could go to any audition any place.  And it was so amazing to me to like watch my TV and see these people show up.  It really worked.  I was the vocal director.  Sweet Honey in the Rock comes out of that workshop.  Some of the students in my workshop said, "the songs you're using to train our voices ought to go on concert stage."  And I went, "huh?  What, what am I using?"  Well, if it's a, it's a church scene, you do church music.  If it was a funeral, it was a funeral song.  If it's a children's song, it's children songs.  If it was a train whistle, they blow trains with a whistle, what are they talking about?  Is this a concern format?  And they did it once or twice and I called the first rehearsal.  I named the group in the first rehearsal.  It probably took another four months before I found myself sitting in a room with three women, having called a rehearsal.  And only three people showed up.  There were four of us, but I never allow my time to be wasted.  We started singing.  Every song worked.  And I said, this is 'Sweet Honey in the Rock,' and that was our beginning.  Our first performance was Howard University [Washington, D.C.], Arts and Humanities Institute, November 17, 1973.  And the group trajectory, it's thirty years old now, was formed by the Civil Rights Movement, and me being a [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] Freedom Singer, by the black consciousness movement and the Harambee Singers.  There's a strong protest tradition, and singing songs that name you.  But there was also being exposed to people like the Georgia Sea Island Singers.  A older black musician had sent me to the oldest repertoire I had.  And that became also a repertoire, of the 'Sweet Honey in the Rock'  What was amazing to me was what this combination did, where you would go to a Sweet Honey concert, and you'd be having history, but you had also very contemporary information.  You, you would hear songs in at least six genres.  And you would hear three or four different performance styles of, of singing.  So it was a very, very unusual group, and people responded to us.  And I think we exist today because people made it very clear to us that they were glad we existed and hoped we would continue to do the work.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what are some of the genres that you--you said six different genres.  What are some of those genres?
Speaker 2: Spirituals, hymns, blues, traditional gospel, doo wop, ballads, rap, you know, you name it.  Jazz, African traditional, Caribbean traditional music.  We did, we did it all of it, we do all of that material, and then our own original compositions.
Story_ID: 12126
Speaker 1: I think the people are impressed by the way you all look on stage, the colors and the visual--I mean just visual image of you on stage is powerful.  Do you spend a lot of time thinking about that or I don't think you do, I just sort of--?
Speaker 2: For me, it was instinctive.  I had gone to Africa, and I was surprised to find women selling pots.  And they would have their pot on the street.  They would be in a full squat, and the pot would between their legs.  And they'd have lots of cloth, but their legs were open.  And it took me to women in church.  There was always cloth drap, draped over the leg, but the leg was always open.  Women on the porch, legs always open, dresses long, and there was this thing we were being taught about women sitting with your legs together, and with your ankles crossed.  It's a most uncomfortable way to sit.  And anybody can knock you over in that position.  I'm, I could, I'm in that position now.  You can knock me out of this of this chair.  (Changes sitting position) You cannot move me out of this chair.  Which is why men sit like that.  So the first thing I say is, in the churches I grew up, the songs came from the pews.  People didn't stand up to lead songs.  They started the song from where they were, and anybody in the church who needed to raise a song could raise it.  And so Sweet Honey [in the Rock] would come and sit down.  And I said, if something happens, you can be pulled out of your seat by the singing.  But the other thing is, if you're gonna sit down, you're actually gonna hold a power position.  And what that means is that we had to have certain kinds of costumes so that we would be sort of covered because we were not doing split-leg pornography, which is what people do now in ads.  Toni Morrison is writing in her new book about the period when she noticed through the ads that split-leg women was the point.  And we were sitting wide legged, but we actually, actually had to have a kind of dress, and the buba was the first.  And we began to like look at working with designers who had watched us sing, who came up with ideas.  And so when you see us dressed, we're dressed by artists.  And it's been an incredible collaboration.  And it was a while down the road before I noticed that everybody who wrote about us, wrote about what we looked like.  We had not picked the range of sizes, the range of colors.  But I was--I've, I've been so grateful, if you walk in and you see a Sweet Honey concert, you see everything from the tall skinny body, light skinned body to dark skinned body, short, stocky, in-between, everything's there.  And I realized that sometimes people brought their little girls to Sweet Honey concerts to see us on stage because we were all on stage.  We were all different, and there was a way in which we were all radiant.  And it was really, we were well into doing it before we recognized it.  And the audience taught us because people started to dress to come to Sweet Honey concerts.  And there got to be a time when I said, "okay, we cannot out-dress the Sweet Honey audience.  So we are not going to be competing with this audience.  We will try to look nice.  We will try to get costumes, but there is no way we can out-dress a Sweet Honey audience."  And I had a chance to interview people because we're doing a film about the thirtieth year.  And I said, "how do you get ready for a Sweet Honey concert?"  And they said, "well, you have to think about it."  I said, "think about what?"  "What you're gonna wear."  I said, "why?"  "Because Sweet Honey has let us know we are beautiful just the way we are, and we have to show her, we have heard the message.  So when we come, we're coming saying, 'we have heard you.  We know we're fine.'"  I just thought, gosh, what a residual (laughter).
Story_ID: 12127
Speaker 1: There is an aspect of bringing children to see you all because you're beautiful on stage yourselves.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and then the kids could sing the songs.  We did a concert at the University of Illinois [champaign-Urbana, Illinois].  And a teacher brought her class of thirty girls.  And we started, we sang some songs, and they said, "they're singing our songs," and we sang 'No Mirrors in Menana's House' and 'Ella's Song,' which they sang in school.  And those, they, they said, "they know our songs."  And I loved hearing that.  I loved hearing that teachers find in our material things they can work with their children with.  Sometimes, I'm in the airport, and I will meet a mother, and they say, "that's somebody with Sweet Honey in the Rock".  She said, she said, "you know the train?"  And I go, "You know 'Little Red Caboose?'"  (Head nodding yes).  I said, "do the train with me."  We're in the airport.  "Whooooo." It's just wonderful.  It's wonderful.  The work has been amazing.  And the thing I try to share with young artists is that we possibly can be a model.  We cannot teach you how to be a star.  We cannot teach you how to make it in the music business.  We can teach you to be a working musician, like a teacher is a working person, like a plumber, like an electrician, like a carpenter.  We can teach you how to be a worker, and to build a life creating music.  You have to do the music you hear.  You have to not chase what's selling, and you have to watch other people become shooting stars.  But you'll last.  You'll build something, and if you are good and people can use what you offer to help them get through their life, there's no telling where you'll end up.
Story_ID: 12128
Speaker 1: What do you think about some of the spoken word art that's out today, the popular stuff that's out.  And--?
Speaker 2: I deal with it the way I deal with blues.  Some of it I can stand, and some of it I can't.  I deal it with the way I deal with anything else.  A lot of times when people ask me a question--they don't use 'spoken word art,' they'll say 'rap.'  "What do you think of rap?"  And they're talking about gangsta rap.  They're talking about a genre of that field that is misogynist, that seem to name the most intense, negative element without looking beyond it.  And it's almost like exploiting the cesspool without suggesting that you shouldn't be there.  And I come from--my sense about art is redeeming, showing you who you are, where you are, naming where you are, suggesting that transformation is possible.  And I think people are concerned about art that uses this cesspool.  It is present in every culture.  When we messed around with the dozens, which my daughter called the 'joneses', which is--it was like saying some of the nastiest things you know.  And you say it with each other, and if an adult hears it, you are just dead.  That's the way it was.  It doesn't mean it doesn't exist.  It means every culture has that strata of activity.  It's present in the poetry, it's present in the songs.  I always tell people, most houses have a toilet.  Now, you get a baby.  The baby needs to go to the bathroom, and they just go.  They don't go to the toilet.  They're in the living room.  They don't have a diaper, they'll put it on the living room floor.  And then you say, you train the baby, and when you train the baby that, "baby, this is where we do this."  And then you close the door cause it's not in the living room.  It's not at the dining room.  It's not coming out of your TV set.  So you're not saying we don't have cesspools in our lives.  We don't say, in my brain, I don't have no words like that.  You actually recognize the words 'cause you have them.  The question is, do you say them?  And do you assume responsibility for what comes out of your knowledge base.  And are you strategic about it?  And so one of the things I think the question avoids is the impact of the mul--multi-billion dollar industry, using that strata of performance for a source and commodifying it as a product.  And it doesn't say anything necessarily wrong with the culture, the black culture.  It might actually not say that much wrong with the people who are doing it.  These kids get discovered when they are doing it.  In the early days, if you're a rapper, you made a rap, you see me the next day, you'd better not throw the rap on me you threw yesterday.  You wouldn't be able to stand on the block.  So the whole thing was about changing.  But that's not it if you begin to buy and sell it, you have to learn the poem, and you have to do the poem every night, on every show for the next three years.  Do not say, "I've been doing this for ten years, and I actually have something else I want to say."  So I think that the way we look at that, that area of expression, which triggers this question the most, does not get enough discussion about a music industry that is driven by people who don't like music, don't understand music as healing; don't understand music as serving and supporting life and advancement and could care less.  And if you look at an artist like Stevie Wonder, and you hear what he sounded like at first with his little harmonica, suppose he had to turn that up ten years later?  Suppose twenty years after that, he tried to come in with an idea, and he had to still be doing that.  He was allowed to mature.  He was allowed to change.
Story_ID: 12129
Speaker 1: This is the thirtieth anniversary of Sweet Honey in the Rock.  What have been some of the highlights of--?
Speaker 2: We did a new recording called 'The Women Gather.'  And what was interesting about that is, as we worked on the material, 9/11 happened, Enron.  All sorts of economic collapses happened.  The sniper [Washington D.C/Virginia sniper murders] happened in Washington, D.C., and we were singing to a different America.  And it was like we were walking into rooms where people had brought all of the grief, trauma and with progressive audiences, how were they going to deal with both being traumatized and not liking some of the way the country was responding to these challenges.  And we were a voice that said, you know, when people, when there's a bombing that wipes 3,000 people away in a few seconds, that is major.  That is major.  And there is a way that that kind of death that almost leaves just dust, just really transforms a society.  And the way it happened, the next time I got on a plane, I knew that I was entering a bomb.  Before that, I had never even thought of a plane as a bomb.  And so we sang into that trouble.  And when we'd stand straight up and say, if you're gonna be responsible, if the democracy is going to be strong, you have to ignore all suggestions that being patriotic, it means don't criticize your leader right now.  If you have a question that comes up, you must find the courage to discuss it in the spaces you live, with the people you work.  If you are nervous about that, that is a sign that the democracy is weakened, weakening.  And that's what we do with 'Women Gather.'  Toshi Reagon, my daughter, who's a rock musician was nine when I started Sweet Honey in the Rock.  So we created a musical theater piece called 'Evening Song,' and it a cross-genre in terms of Sweet Honey being a cappella and Toshey being a rock music band expression.  It is also cross-generational.  And the idea that this is thirtieth year, it is also my last year of performing with Sweet Honey, but that if you do a work that long, are you, at the same time, in dialogue with the younger generation, because doing work just for yourself is not the point.  And so it's been a wonderful piece that we performed about, in twelve cities this year.  And in addition to that, Stanley Nelson, who is the head of Far Light Media, he's a film producer, and he just got an Emmy for the Emmett Till film.  He is doing a film of Sweet Honey in the Rock--Thirtieth Year.  So he's been actually traveling around with us this year.
Story_ID: 12130
Speaker 1: A few years ago you received a MacArthur Foundation Grant.  How did that affect your work?
Speaker 2: 'Wade in the Water, African American sacred music traditions,' which exists as a twenty-six, one-hour radio series produced by NPR [National Public Radio] and Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.] and as an exhibition, produced by Smithsonian, and a four-CD album set on Smithsonian Folkways, is the result of that grant.  Receiving that grant allowed me to propose to the Smithsonian that I be given a chance to see if I could move that database that I'd been working on for about fifteen years, into mediums that would be accessible to the general population.  And the first thing I wanted was a radio station--a radio series.  And National Public Radio, at the same time, was looking for a way to offer something different to its membership stations.  And so it came together.  What was amazing was that we were able to raise the money for the series.  And you had not found gospel music research production funded in this country before that project, but that's what, what happened because of the grant.  Oh, yes, and I got air conditioning in my house.
Speaker 1: And that can be useful in a hot city, you know--?
Speaker 2: In Washington, D.C.,  I told the head of the museum, and I told--we talked, I said, "I'm think I'm gonna get my house air conditioned."  He looked at me.  I thought he was gonna faint.  He says, and it was like, "your house isn't air conditioned?"  (Laughter).  This was '89 [1989].  I'd lived here since '71 [1971], and up to that point I'd never lived in an air conditioned house.
Story_ID: 12131
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: I think we are greatly challenged as a people, as we come into this new century.  And we've got a number of epidemics, violence, drugs, and violence and drugs used to be linked, but they're separated now.  And there was a transference where young people who were into drug selling usually had weapons.  And the weapons left those sellers, and now young people either have weapons or have access to weapons, so that you almost can't get in a fight with anybody.  And when I think about, you know, going to school as a kid and, you know, almost like, at like certain upper elementary, you know, there'd be one or two fights a day that were nothing.  They'd be broken up and "he's the one." and then you'd get some kind of punishment.  And that would be nothing.  Now, you're dead?  Very concerned. And it's frightening for me to see that leap. So that it is an element in youth culture.  I'm very concerned about it, very concerned about AIDS.  The way Sweet Honey in the Rock was a part of singing about AIDS and opening it up to dialogue.  The black church, so far behind on this question.  Almost repressive, dangerously repressive.  There is a Balm and Gilliad project now, where people are saying, the black church has to enter this dialogue because the information has to cross generations.  You cannot have teenagers thinking, you know, whatever it is they think or don't think as they get sexually active.  And I'm very concerned about us trying to continue a people being hit with this kind of intensity.  At the same time, we're being pushed out of school.  When I think about what tuitions cost when I went to college, and I think about what tuition costs today, and I think about the way Congress is doing things with things like PELL Grant, not expanding it, not raising it.  I think about, I have a PhD because it was funded by a Ford doctoral program for minorities.  And I, in the graduate programs I've taught in, I'd see a diminution of minority students going for the, the doctorate.  And I never expected, when we came out in the '70's [1970s], that there wouldn't be an expansion.  It's not a given.  So those are my concerns.  And I am an optimist.  I--history tells me that this people will continue to be a voice for transformation for itself and the culture it lives in.  And there--when I've studied the turning of the century--Rayford Logan talked about the turning of the nineteenth to the twentieth century as the nadir, as low as we could get.  So as I come into this new century, I think about that.  At the same time that thing happened, you began to get black organizations, churches, schools, instead of just locating yourself in one church, coming together in associations and conventions to actually visualize black power and presence in an organized fashion.  Many people say the Civil Rights Movement began with Plessy v. Ferguson, and we got to participate in a mass expression of it during the '60's [1960s], but as soon as it was clear that the nation was saying, "here they are--to the South, do with them what you will, let's get back to making money."  As soon as that was clear, black people didn't just sit.  We actually began to do more than try to go to school.  We actually said, no, in every possible way to the things that were happening.  And we had to do it inch by inch, movement by movement, and I think we have some challenges we have to address in this century.  And I hope that as a person who is older, the stories I tell will remind people that you actually have a life to give for what you believe.  Sometimes they'll take it and sometimes they won't, but whether somebody kills you for, for your stances or lets you live, actually isn't your decision.  Your decision is, what are you going to offer with the opportunity that life affords you?  And I, I hope that in some way, in the stories I tell, I remind people that you can look around you and not like where you are and change it.
Story_ID: 12132
Speaker 1: At this juncture, and you're on the, right on the edge of retirement, I guess, from singing, from performing anyway, what would consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I don't consider it, and I don't need to.  And I use retirement because it's a term.  But it has nothing to do with being alive and having some health and not being productive.  I think without planning anything specific, because I don't want to, because right now, I'm too tired.  But I have this feeling of a period where I actually can move slower.  I might operate more with projects that I can see the beginning and the end, with a different kind of rhythm, and that I will not be as involved in doing my work inside of a bureaucracy.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would do differently when you look back on the things that you have done?
Speaker 2: No, I use up every minute I live in.  There's nothing in it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: That's not mine (laughter).  I don't know.  I don't have any of that.  I am amazed sometimes when I have to contend with what I've been blessed to do.  We had a tribute for Sweet Honey [in the Rock], and there was, I think like a six-minute slide show.  And, you know, if you work without stopping in a consistent way for thirty years, you actually create something, and I thought--I was a bit taken aback at this voice that I've helped to maintain so that it would be a part of the culture through which I and my children and people in this country and in the world live.  But I really leave assessment and, you know, epitaphs to the people who are left, who, who'll be doing that after I'm gone.
