Story_ID: 300121
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please.
Speaker 2: Yes, [HistoryMaker] Judith C. Rice. J-U-D-I-T-H C R-I-C-E.
Speaker 1: What does the C stands for?
Speaker 2: Carol.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, C-A-R-O-L.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July 30, 1957 and I was born in Cook County, City of Chicago [Illinois] at Presbyterian St. Luke's Hospital [Rush University Medical Center].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Currently, I am the treasurer for the City of Chicago and I have been with the city for about sixteen years, since about 1989.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 7th of (laughter), I'm sorry.  Today is July 18, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Presently, we are in [Chicago] City Hall, 121 North LaSalle [Street]--room 106 in the city treasurer's office.
Story_ID: 300122
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that I am always supposed to ask and they just require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Pizza (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes.  This time, summertime is my favorite time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's blue.
Speaker 1: Alright.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Just about anywhere in Mexico.  I like warm weather, but I would say probably Puerto Vallarta, Mexico.
Speaker 1: Okay and the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I don't think so.
Story_ID: 300123
Speaker 1: Well, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [HistoryMaker Fred Rice, Jr.] side.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Her maiden name is Thelma Martin [Rice], Thelma Dean Martin.  T-H-E-L-M-A, D-E-A-N, M-A-R-T-I-N.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born December 5, 1926 and she was born in a town called New Willard, Texas.  She started her life in Texas and then moved to Arkansas and then back to Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, New Willard, Texas.  What can you tell us about her--the ancestors on her side of the family?  How far back can you trace the ancestors on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: I can go back to--I still have a living grandmother.  I can go back to her mother [Lillie Martin] and father [William Martin].  And I can go back to my great-grandparents.  I met my great-grandmother.  She was still alive.  When I was a child she lived on to her late nineties, and that's about as far back as I can go.  Her father, I know his side of the family.  Her mother had probably, I think there were six sisters and brothers in that family.  And I had occasion to meet only three of my grandmother's family members.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories about what the family was doing in the 19th century or, you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.  My mother is an only child, but my grandmother was born as a sharecropper down in East Texas.  That's where her family came from.  And her father sharecropped on a farm.  My grandmother actually picked cotton.  She was born in 1907 so I think slavery had only been over with for about forty years at that point or so.  And in the South, what she said was that they could not afford to buy the land, so they would live on the land with the white landowner and they would have to pay back for everything they utilized.  All of the supplies, all the food stuffs that they had.  But for the most part it was a very rural life.  They ate from the land, they grew vegetables and fruits where they could.  They got birds out of the trees.  My grandmother tells stories of her brother actually shooting blackbirds out of the trees and her mother would bake them or cook them.  They had their own chickens.  They would kill the chickens and fry them up to have chicken dinner, and they had their own pigs.  So it was a very rural life.  I actually got to visit my grandmother down in Texas.  She'd moved to a town called Seven Oaks [Texas] and they--it was named for that because there are actually seven oak trees that went into the town.  And they were on well water, they did not have running water in the homes there.  Everybody went and got their water from central well.  And my grandfather, my mother's father, was born in Shreveport, Louisiana and then moved to Texas.  He was in the lumber profession.  He cut down trees.  He actually sawed logs and lumber mills.  So he kind of followed around various places in the South that he could get work as a lumberjack.  And he had only one sister, Hattie [ph.].  And I got a chance to meet her, and I didn't meet his father.  And my grandmother was his fourth wife, so he was about twelve years older than my grandmother.  And his other wives he either divorced or they passed away.
Story_ID: 300124
Speaker 1: Are there any stories that were passed down from that [maternal] side of the family?
Speaker 2: Yes.  There are quite a few.  My grandmother [Lillie Martin] just talks about how, you know, rural their life was and different things ways that they got food.  She talks a lot about the fact that, none of the things that we have today that they have.  You know they didn't have.  They didn't have--have automobiles per se, they didn't fly in planes, and they didn't travel.  They would have lunch for--my grandmother would be--baked sweet potato her mother would bring them out for them while they were working and they would have baked sweet potato.  And, so just stories about real rural life that they led.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any Juneteenth stories since they're from the East Texas side?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  That was a big day for them down there.  It's amazing we don't celebrate that in the North.  Or really--or a lot of northerners don't really have a since of Juneteenth.  Think more of it is becoming so now.  But, that was a big day, lots of picnics.  All the family members on my grandmother's side, they would either be Davises [ph.], Jeffersons [ph.] and they had kind of common names and they would all come together.  And the interesting thing is that there is a lot of oil in the land that they were on.  They called it bottom land.  And if you go down there it's very kind of rich dirt.  Almost swampy looking and a matter of fact, one of her nephews made some money on the oil that was on his land, when the oil companies came in and he was able to get a ranch.  And I would always thing probably had he'd been a little more sophisticated or had some people giving him some knowledge, he may have been able to make more on the transaction to allow people to take over some of the land that he had.  But, yeah they had a lot of Juneteenth parties, picnics things like that.  My grandparents were church goers.  They were Baptist.  As a matter of fact, my grandparents met at church.  My grandmother was nineteen and my grandfather [William Martin] was in his thirties, and they were singing in the choir and he invited her to go on a date and she got in trouble, because--he did have a car and she got in his car to ride off with him (laughter), without asking permission of her parents.  So she started off on a bad foot with him.  But things.  They did get permission to get married.  And they had a very happy, I think they were probably married about fifty years and, you know, good relationship, good partnership and built up a lot over the course of time in their relationship.
Story_ID: 300125
Speaker 1: --Did your mother [Thelma Martin Rice] talk about growing up and going to school and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My mother, being an only child, she was always a dreamer.  She still is.  There's always something bigger and better for her.  And she saw the inequities of growing up in the South, being a black girl.  She was very doted on by my [maternal] grandparents [Lillie Martin and William Martin].  My grandmother made her clothes, made her dresses, and my mother is a very petite person.  She was very pretty as a girl.  I've seen pictures of her, and so they gave her everything.  And their whole view in life was they wanted to have their child educated so that she would not have to live or grow up the way they did.  So she had piano lessons.  They bought their first home in Arkansas when she was a child and so, but my mother always was a little rebellious.  She did not, she didn't see why she couldn't--she had to sit in the balcony of a movie theater instead of going down unto the main floor.  She didn't see why she couldn't get into certain schools.  When she went to college, there were even African American schools that wouldn't take her because her skin was dark brown.  And so, she just felt that this as an inequity and always wanted to reach and to continue her education and to prove that she could do anything that she put her mind to do.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story around that color rejection from school?  Can you tell us that story because that's interesting--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, you had to mail in your photo and with your application.  And she always felt, the only reason that she could have been rejected was because of her photo.  Because--
Speaker 1: These were from black colleges?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh, historically black colleges [HBCUs] because she did well in school and did well in high school.  And so she saw the way that racism can be internalized.  She saw it on so many different levels.  She couldn't get in in terms of white society to certain things and then she saw the effects of, you know, internalized racism as well.  And, so I think that she vowed as a young person that she was going to be educated, she was going to make herself the best that she could be so that she couldn't face rejection on any level.  And it's interesting, because you would think that people that came out of that type of history would have a lot of anger.  My mother doesn't really have that, she has, in her mind, you have to be proud of yourself and stand up for yourself and stand tall.  And she always stresses that you have to have goals.  And once you reach a goal, don't feel satisfied, set another one and keep setting the bar even higher.  And I think her philosophy, that philosophy, is one that has really helped me in my own life.
Story_ID: 300126
Speaker 1: So what did she [Rice's mother, Thelma Martin Rice] do?  Now she was trying to get into college and stuff (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Did she finally--
Speaker 2: She finally got into a small college in East Texas and I'm trying to remember the name of that school.
Speaker 1: Is it Bishop [College, Marshall, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Bishop.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Thank you.  She got into Bishop College and she attended Bishop College for a couple of years, and then she switched to Texas Southern [Texas State University for Negroes; Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] later on.  But she was able to get enough education to become a teacher, and she taught school down in East Texas.  And she talks about, at that time, if you're a school teacher you had to move to the town where you got a job and she talked about these towns being very backwoods (laughter), small towns and, a matter of fact, we took a drive down to one of the towns she worked in and the school was in like one of these little white painted school houses, with two or three classrooms and that's where she started teaching.  And then she went out to California for a while and I think she went to New York for a year and didn't like really either of those places and decided.  She always has this thing in her mind she wanted to get out of the South.  Because she had heard that there were more opportunities for African Americans in the North and that if she wanted to be a teacher, and go into a bigger school or high school, she'd have to come up north.  So that's when she decided to come to Chicago [Illinois] and I think probably her first couple of years in Chicago she met my father [HistoryMaker Fred Rice, Jr.] at that time.
Story_ID: 300127
Speaker 1: --Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Fred Rice [HistoryMaker Fred Rice, Jr.], F-R-E-D, R-I-C-E.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born the same month as my mother [Thelma Martin Rice], December 24, 1926.  Matter of fact jokes that he married an older woman because my mother is a couple of weeks older than he is (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what do you know about that--and where was he born, he was born he in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: He was born in Chicago.  And I think he was born at Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].  But born here in Chicago.  He was raised about 51st [Street] and Dearborn [Street] and went to DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois], and then he went to Wilson Junior College [Woodrow Wilson Junior College; Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now are there any stories about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: I don't know as much about his side of the family. I did--I knew my grandfather [Fred Rice, Sr.], his father, we used to call him Papa.  He--even though my father is the third boy in his family.  He's one of nine, they didn't name him Fred.  They didn't name a Fred, Jr., until they got to him.  And I've always found that mysterious.  They had Alonzo [Rice] and Alphonso [ph.] and then they got to Fred, Jr. and but it's funny that they named him Fred, Jr., because of all the boys, he was the one that did look exactly like Papa and had his mannerisms and all of that.  So.  But I never met my grandmother, his mother, Leola Rice because she died the same year that I was born.  She died in the winter of that year, of '57.  I saw--I still have pictures of her.  Saw a lot of pictures of her.  I knew her sister, my Aunt Virginia [ph.] used to babysit me when I was a child.  And so, but I didn't know as much about my father's side of the family in terms of his ancestors.  I knew all of his sisters and brothers, but I don't know my great-grandparents from his side of the family.
Speaker 1: Is there a tradition about where that side of the family is really--is from?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They are from Alabama and my grandparents met each other in Alabama and then decided to move north.  My grandmother did not work.  Obviously having nine kids would have been difficult for her.  My grandfather worked on the railroads.  He was gone a lot because he would work on the rail lines and then return home after that.  But they were very poor.  My father talks about living in the [Great] Depression age and he experienced a lot more poverty than my mother did.  Even though she was in the South, they were here in the big city, nine kids.  I've seen pictures of the home--it was leaning.  Frame home and--he said that he would talk about really not having meat every day.  He said that they ate so many beans (laughter) it's hard for him to eat, you know, beans because that's how they would get their protein his mother would put a piece of salt pork in a pot of beans and that was supposed to feed the whole family.  And so he always talks about his view on life is more of survival of the fittest.  You know how they had to scrounge for everything that they had and get things.  And you had to have a boardinghouse reach.  If you sat back and waited for somebody to give you something, you were not going to get it.
Speaker 1: A boardinghouse reach?
Speaker 2: Boardinghouse reach to get your food (laughter).  And probably the most devastating thing that happened to them as children is, my Aunt Pat [ph.] got infected with polio--the polio virus, and they had to quarantine the home.  And so they were quarantined for a number of weeks and then a lot of his childhood.  For some reason he had a very close bond with her, was helping Pat, and she had to be in various sanitariums and then helping her get back and get through high school and things like that.
Story_ID: 300128
Speaker 1: Did he [Rice's father, HistoryMaker Fred Rice, Jr.] talk about growing up and going to school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He did.  He talked about the fact that, he feels that he received a great education in Chicago [Illinois].  And he talks about the fact that we have to make sure that the public schools have qualified teachers.  And I think he feels that that somewhat slipped over the years, and now he's happy that we're trying to get back to that and push emphasis that--because he was teaching, after he retired, and he felt that--felt very discouraged that a lot of the young teens come into his class couldn't write.  They--their organizational skills were poor, their spelling was poor, sentence and grammar structure and he said, you know, why I should be a college instructor having to focus on helping people get basic skills.  And so that's something that I think that he emphasizes, is education and how do we get our kids to have basic skills.  Basic math skills, reading skills, writing skills.  And I think that he talks a lot about receiving that in the [Chicago] Public Schools [CPS] and that being very important for him and his family, because many of them could not afford to go on to college, so they had to come right out of high school with the requisite skills for life.
Story_ID: 300129
Speaker 1: Tell us how your parents met.
Speaker 2: My father [HistoryMaker Fred Rice, Jr.] had been away in the [U.S.] Army, and he came back home.  And I always tease my mother [Thelma Martin Rice].  I think she kind of stole him from her friend (laughter) because she had a friend Maxine [ph.], and she was visiting her friend.  And my dad lived in the apartment below Maxine, and Maxine invited him up and was talking.  They were talking.  And my mother lived a few blocks away.  At that time all the African Americans that were in Chicago [Illinois] at a certain age lived kind of close to each other.  And my mother lived a few blocks away from this apartment building.  And when it came time to live her friend's Maxine's house, my father asked if he could walk her home.  And she said yes.  So he walked her home and then he asked her, I think, if he could call upon her and take her out.  And she said yes.  She said, "I don't know why I said yes, because I really wasn't interested in him.  I though Maxine was more interested, and he just was a nice guy that I met."  And then they went on a date and they kept going out and it just clicked.  She said she felt that, that he was just a good man and a good person and that she trusted him a lot.
Story_ID: 300130
Speaker 1: Your father [HistoryMaker Fred Rice, Jr.] became the first black superintendent of police for the City of Chicago [Illinois], right?  Can you tell us about and how it affected, I guess the rest of the family, you know?
Speaker 2: Sure.  I think the road that he took to achieve that position really affected us most of all because, when I was a small child, my father did a lot of different jobs.  He was a taxi driver.  He worked for the post office for a while.  And he didn't seem to really have his foot in anything.  And he applied to the [Chicago] Police Department and to the [Chicago] Fire Department.  And he always says that, that in his mind whoever called him first was where he was going.  And he felt that he could push into either of those departments.  The police department called him up first and he went through that process.  But at the time he was hired on the police department, blacks were not just part of the whole department, city-wide.  He had to go into the park district police [Chicago Park District Police Department].  And so he went into the park district police and worked there in the park system and then somewhere, I think in the early '60s [1960s], the police department expanded and allowed African Americans to come a part of the general force.  And he was a patrolman for a while.  All through my childhood he was a patrolman and then my mother [Thelma Martin Rice] said, "You know you've been a patrolman for a long time, and you're not going anywhere in this department, and you need to start taking the tests to get some rank."  And he kind of you know poo-poo her, I don't need to do that, that's one thing.  So it was my mother that really got on him to take the tests.  And he took the sergeant's exam and scored very high and became a sergeant and then he went on to take the lieutenant's and captain's.  And I think his first kind of break in the department was being named district commander.  And he was named district commander, I think of both the Fillmore [Police] District and Englewood Police District.  And Englewood, that's when he really started to get into things and become part of the higher echelon of the department.  So the night that he was named.  And I think the other opportunity--opportune thing was Harold Washington becoming mayor.  Because Harold had the same background as my father.  As a matter of fact, they knew of each other all their lives.  Harold was a bit older than my father.  But they came from the same place and knew the same people.  And so I think it came down to three final contenders, and he hung out there a few days, not knowing what the result would be.  But I remember being at home watching television and the night that he was named and he knew but he would not tell any of us (laughter) until it was official.  And just the excitement of all of us that were there.  And I think a couple of his sisters and brothers where over.  And it just--just felt such a since of pride in him and his accomplishments and kind of the road that he had taken to get to that position.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this was in 1984, '83 [1983] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah it would have been '83 [1983]--I think '83, '84, somewhere in there.  Because he retired in '87 [1987].
Story_ID: 300131
Speaker 1: How did it feel having your father [HistoryMaker Fred Rice, Jr.] as superintendent of police in a city like Chicago [Illinois]?  It's not famous for great relationships between the police and the black community.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think, it felt exciting to me because I realize how important it was to him and how important his commitment to Chicago was and is.  He just, I think.  My father loves Chicago.  He loves everything about this city.  My mother [Thelma Martin Rice] because they are both aging now, has tried to get him to move down south, back to her home, or to Florida.  And he says, "I don't live in Florida, I live in Chicago."  And the people of Chicago, the streets, the neighborhoods are so important to him and to see him have an opportunity to serve a city at a very high level in a city that he loves.  I think that was the most thrilling thing for me.  I never viewed it with any much importance than that.  You know, because I grew up as a police officer's child (laughter).  And police officers' children, I think, are kind of like minister's children, people either look for you to do more wrong (laughter) or that you would have to stay in a certain line because you, know you have a police officer in your family.  But I think, for me, it was important because it was so important for him to be able to serve the city in the way that he was able to in those years.  And to be a part of an administration.  I mean he loved being a part of the [Mayor Harold] Washington administration.  And being able to be a support for Harold.  And you know have that piece of history along with him.
Story_ID: 300132
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have one brother, he's about three and a half years older than I am.  And his name is Lyle.  Lyle Anthony Rice.  And that's it.  That's just two of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Who do you think you take after the most, your mother [Thelma Martin Rice] or your father [HistoryMaker Fred Rice, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Oh, by far, my father.  People who meet both of them.  It's interesting, I have my mother's face to a certain degree but my outlook on life and my mannerisms and just kind of the way I am is more like my father (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My earliest childhood memory is being afraid to walk into the house.  Maybe I was three years old.  We lived at 79th [Street] and Champlain [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] and getting out of the car and my father stood behind me and said, "You better hurry up and get in the house because graja is out."  And--
Speaker 1: Garaja (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm like, who's graja?  (Laughter) And graja was this mythical monster that he made up to get us into the house (laughter).  And I remember looking around, you know, this darkness is out.  You know how the street lights are out and you can't quite see, thinking that this graja was going to come and get me.  And you know I beeline into the house.  And I don't think--I may have been five years old before I realized that there was no graja and that this was something that he just always made up (laughter) to get us into the house.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How would you spell graja?
Speaker 2: I don't even know.  G-R-A-J-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or how he came up with that word for it.  But it just sound like the name of a monster could be graja.
Speaker 1: Did you live in the same place, you know, most of the time growing up, or did you move around a lot (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we moved a bit.  We lived at 79th and Champlain [Avenue], I think until I probably was about five, and that was an apartment that my parents rented.  It was in a two-flat, and the owner lived on the bottom.  And then we moved to, did I say 79th--75th [Street] and Champlain we lived.  Then we moved to 79th and Yale [Avenue].  Lived there until I was about nine and then we moved over to 83rd [Street] and Kimbark [Avenue] to a neighborhood called Marynook [Chicago, Illinois].  So it was kind of a Chatham, Avalon [Park, Chicago, Illinois] area there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then in later years my parents moved out to Beverly [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 300133
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I felt I had a very good childhood and that, I was, always felt lucky compared to other kids and I did have both of my parents [Thelma Martin Rice and HistoryMaker Fred Rice, Jr.].  And that both of my parents had very active lives, and they always wanted to make sure we had plenty of everything.  They wanted to own their home.  Make sure that we had plenty of food, fun.  Both of my parents were a lot of fun.  We--my mother paid a lot of attention to the house in terms of--I remember the backyard a lot and grass and trees and playing outside a lot.  Those were the days when kids were not programmed in terms of, you know, you've got soccer now, you've got ballet now.  We just, you know she'd had opened up the door at nine o'clock in the morning and we come back and we had to be home by street lights being out.  And you know, we might come back home for lunch or something through the day but, you kind of had free rein of the neighborhood or the parks of different friends.  I went to public grammar school.  Went to Avalon Park Grammar School [Avalon Park Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] so I have a lot of memories of grammar school.  But my father had a rule that school let out at 3:15, you had to be home by 3:30, and the walk from school was about four blocks.  So he didn't care rather you walked or ran or whatever, but we had to be in the house by 3:30 and no exceptions to that.  And generally, my father would be at home because while we were smaller kids in grammar school, he tried to work nights and get assigned to a night shift at the [Chicago] Police Department.  So very happy memories of my childhood and growing up in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 300134
Speaker 1: Now you went to Avalon Park grade school [Avalon Park Grammar School; Avalon Park Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]?  Is that where you started?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I started at Avalon Park, which was on Kenwood [Avenue], about 81st [Street] and Kenwood.  And one direction you walk in Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] store was at and the other direction you walked to our house.  Very--I felt I had a very good public school--public school education.  Most of the teachers there were people from the community.  I remember I had one teacher, Mrs. Rorex.  And she was just like my mother [Thelma Martin Rice], whatever she said do, I had to do.  And those were the days were teachers could spank you with the ruler, and the only question that you would get when you got home was, what did you do to cause the spanking?  You know, they weren't going to yell at the teacher, they were going to yell at us.  So, a very strict discipline is what I remember.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Rorex?
Speaker 2: R-O-R-E-X was her last name.  And she was an African American woman.  She lived maybe three blocks from us and so if there is a problem, I knew where she lived.  She was my sixth grade teacher.  And, I remember that.  Just very strong, strong adults.  Strong sense of community.  And each neighborhood, where we lived, I knew all of our neighbors.  My parents had relationships with our neighbors.  If someone else's mother told you to do something, you better do it.  Whether you agreed with it or not.  And that's just the way that we grew up.  Real since of community.  More so, than I have in a lot of ways as an adult in Chicago [Illinois].  It was very, very strong since of community and being involved with other people's family, their children and so forth.
Speaker 1: Was Avalon Park [Chicago, Illinois] fairly organized in terms of the community?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yeah we had a--the park had a day camp in the summertime.  Almost all the kids went to Avalon Park day camp.  The community had a community group.  We had block club.  My parents belong to the block club.  They belong to the Avalon Park community group.  They would go to meetings for each of those.  My mother was one of the sponsors for the block club party.  Organizing the food and they would have a deejay and all that kind of stuff.  So they were--felt it was very important to be involved in the community.
Story_ID: 300135
Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Not really.  My parents went through some things with regard to church.  Both of them were raised Baptist.  My mother [Thelma Martin Rice]--I think both my mother and my father [HistoryMaker Fred Rice, Jr.] felt a little bit like their--people in the black community had an over reliance on God working things out for us. (Laughter) And that we needed to work things out for ourselves, too. They were very religious people and very spiritual people and that we be taken to church and we had to learn the Ten Commandments and things in the Bible and the way that you treat people.  And that there was a right and wrong and these are things that you needed to keep in mind.  But as far as going to church every Sunday, they did not do that.  And I think they probably do that now more.  When I was in high school [Mercy High School; Unity Catholic High School, Chicago, Illinois], my mother wanted me to go to a Catholic high school.  And we were told at that time that you had to convert.  And so that's when they converted to Catholicism so I could go to Catholic high school.  My brother [Lyle Rice] went to public high school.  And so I did that at about eighth grade.  And--but I think spirituality was stressed more than actually that you had to go to church and stay in church on Sunday.
Story_ID: 300136
Speaker 1: Was music a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Music was a very big part.  A very big part.  My mother [Thelma Martin Rice] had all types of albums.  She loved Ray Charles.  When we were like--tended to like the blues or jazz singers, and so that she had certain favorites that she liked.  And she would play this over and over and over again.  So I think musically sometimes I feel like I'm stuck in the '30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s] (laughter) because that's all that she listened to was those artists, you know.  Sarah Vaughan, she loved Sarah Vaughan, an artist from that time period.  My father [HistoryMaker Fred Rice, Jr.], same way.  He liked music.  Liked it in the house.  He was a--what do you call it--shower singer (laughter), and always encouraging us to sing.  We had to take piano lessons.  We had the song books.  My father would buy song books of standard type songs and sing to us.  So both of my parents relied a lot on music.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about television?
Speaker 2: Not too much TV.  They were not proponents of TV watching.  When I came home from school.  My mother was a schoolteacher, so we got home at 3:30, she would get home a little later.  If my father was home, the first thing you did was to sit down and do your homework.  You did not turn on the TV, and you did not talk on the telephone.  That was big with him, too--TV and telephone.  So it wasn't until we got a little older that we were allowed to watch TV and usually it would be in the evening type comedy shows that were popular.  On Sunday, we'd watch like Ed Sullivan ['The Ed Sullivan Show'] all those types of shows, but when we watched TV generally it was more all of us watching it together.  I--they probably--I was a teenager before you were able to watch TV on your own.  Because they just--that just wasn't their thing.  We had to sit and talk to each other.  My parents insisted on dinner time being--everybody being at dinner.  And I remember I used to hate that because my father wouldn't get home, if he was already home from, you know, working evenings, the times when he worked days we had to wait 'til he got home before we ate anything.  And it was always what he wanted to eat.  My mother would ask in the morning, "Fred, what do you want to have for dinner," chicken or meat, beef or pork chops, or whatever.  So that's what we ate, rather we liked it or not, we ate what daddy wanted to eat and we had to wait until he got home before we would eat.  So that was very big for them that we had dinner time and then after dinner time where we kind of sat around and talked a little bit.
Story_ID: 300137
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little girl?  What were you--what was your personality like?
Speaker 2: Very quiet.  I think I have always been kind of a quiet person.  And I like to read.  I spent a lot of time reading.  I had--I never had a lot of friends.  I always had a few close friends.  And so I would go over to their house or they would come to mine.  But we, we played quietly.  We didn't have a lot of noise.  I was never wild.  Even when I went to high school, I was never wild.  I was kind of the quiet one in high school (laughter) and kind of kept to myself more than anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any other teachers in grade school [Avalon Park Grammar School; Avalon Park Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] that made an impression on you?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. I had Mrs. Reed [ph.], Mrs. Flagg [ph.].  Probably Mrs. Reed the reason I can read because I had trouble learning to read.  And I didn't read until about third grade.  And I don't know why I was having trouble, but I did and she made it click.  And I have loved to read ever since then.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to--it started as Mercy High [School, Chicago, Illinois] and then midway, the time I was there, they merged with Loretto High School [Loretto Academy, Chicago, Illinois] and it became Unity High School [Unity Catholic High School, Chicago, Illinois].  So it was a Catholic girl school 81st [Street] and Prairie [Avenue].  And that was an experience because I had never experienced nuns before I went to high school.  And I thought my parents [Thelma Martin Rice and HistoryMaker Fred Rice, Jr.] were strict, but I really learned what (laughter) strict was being educated by Mercy nuns.
Speaker 1: So it becomes Unity High School, is it still called that now?
Speaker 2: No, it doesn't exist anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Catholic church withdrew support for the school, and my understanding is that's happened to a lot of the high schools that serve the African American community.  And Dempsey Travis [HistoryMaker Dempsey J. Travis], who was a developer, bought the property and land that the building was on and put up townhouses there.  As a matter of fact, I have a friend who lives in one of the townhouses, and I always tease her that your house is about where the gym was (laughter) for me in high school.
Speaker 1: So it was around 83rd [Street] and Indiana [Avenue]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 82nd [Street].
Speaker 2: 82nd and Prairie.  Indiana is on the other side.  And it's a beautiful townhouse development there.  I think those townhouses go for like six hundred thousand [dollars], but, that was where the building was.
Story_ID: 300138
Speaker 1: So you say you were quiet in high school [Mercy High School; Unity Catholic High School, Chicago, Illinois], too?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Did you join clubs in high school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I was in choir and--'cause I did like to sing.  I was in choir.  And then I joined the drama club and we did a production of 'Hello, Dolly!' and we did a big production.  It was an all-girl production, and I won the lead as Dolly.  And so, that took up, seem like a year in my senior year in high school, working on that.
Speaker 1: Now that's really something for a shy person.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So how did--you kind of had like a side that was really out there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wasn't even going to try out for it.  But friends said, "Well you can sing, you should try out for this."  And so I did.  And I was shocked (laughter) when I got it.  But it did.  That brought me out of my shell a little bit more in high school and, you know, started talking to people, meeting people a little bit more, but (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Did you run for class office or anything?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't even remember if we had class officers, but I didn't get into anything like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any special teachers in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I had Sister Madeline [ph.] was very special to me.  She was our choir teacher, music teacher.  I don't know what's happened to her.  And that was interesting, too, because I had African American teachers in grade school [Avalon Park Grammar School; Avalon Park Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] but I didn't really in high school.  So it was a first time that I was educated by nuns or lay teachers that were not African American.  Just thinking about that experience.  But Susan Tarinizo [ph.] was a teacher.  She still keeps up with me.  She emails me.  She's in banking now.  She emails me or calls when something happens that's on the news.  And Mary Jane Schram, I had a teacher who taught Spanish.  She's a good teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you were.  What where your favorite subjects in school?  I mean, what did you--what did you think would be your career when you were in school?
Speaker 2: I really didn't know.  I didn't have a direction in terms of career in high school.  I thought a bit that I wanted to go into the medical profession and when I went to Northern Illinois [Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois], the college, that's what I decided to do and I wanted to become a physical therapist.  But I liked to read a lot.  Any class involving history or reading, I loved that.  I loved history.  I still love history.  What else?  Music, drama, I like the arts.  So I really had no idea what I wanted to do career wise and I think the reason that I chose physical therapy is because my mother [Thelma Martin Rice] taught deaf ed [education] and so she would bring me a long and I got exposed a lot to deaf children and many times deaf children have other disabilities that go along with the deafness.  So I was pretty used to dealing with kids in wheel chairs and--or who had hydrocephalus, or something like that.  And so, I think that's why I decided to choose that profession.  I was not smart enough in the math or sciences to get good enough grades because you had to get A's or Bs to get in the physical therapy school and I didn't make sure I had a tutor, so.  That--those parts of things I struggle a little bit more.
Story_ID: 300139
Speaker 1: How did you choose Northern [Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I--somehow I don't think I was ready to go to college then.  I don't think I was ready to really face an adult life and get out of the house and move far from my parents [Thelma Martin Rice and HistoryMaker Fred Rice, Jr.] and my family.  My brother [Lyle Rice] did.  My brother went two years of college and then dropped out and decided to go into the [U.S.] military.  And so he got far, far away (laughter).  But I don't think I was ready to go to college.  So I was looking to stay close by and so with that, I looked at all of the Illinois schools.  And I knew my parents really were not going to afford to send me to a place that was very expensive, so I think the ability to go to a state school that wasn't too expensive and was nearby, was why I chose Northern.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well what--how did you like it?
Speaker 2: I liked college a lot.  I liked the fact that I got to live away from a home for the first time in my life.  I liked the classes.  But I got a little.  I think I got a little lost there because I was not ready to go to school and I dropped out after about a year and a half and decided I didn't need to go to college (laughter).  And I had no idea what I was going to do.  But I thought maybe I could get a job at a bank or something like that.  And quickly, quickly got all the rejections that you could get in getting a job.  And I think, my friend Kathy's [ph.] father worked at a grammar school, and he got me a job cleaning out the grammar school, and--after school.  And I did that for probably about four months, and my father came to me.  I was living at home again then.  He came to my room and he said, "You've got three choices.  You can continue to try to work and you can pay me rent, or you can go back to school, which I will pay for and finish your college degree, or you can get out."  And he said, "Within a month, you need to pick one of those three things."  And so I said, hm this job thing (laughter) is not working out like I thought so, let me go back to school.  And that's when I went back to school, went to Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and finished (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what was the year that you graduated from high school [Mercy High School; Unity Catholic High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so you were at Northern from '75 [1975] to '77 [1977]?
Speaker 2: Six [1976].
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976], okay, okay.  And did you go back to--when you went to Loyola that was in '76 [1976]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah that was in '77 [1977] when I started Loyola.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And I almost had to start all over again.  Because I had switched gears so much and time had gone by, so.
Story_ID: 300140
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you major in at Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I majored in corporate communications at Loyola.
Speaker 1: Corporate communications?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh, uh-huh (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I didn't know that was (unclear). All right. Is that out of the business department?
Speaker 2: No, it was out of the communications department.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. All right. So how did you decide on that as a major?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I think again it was I did not have any special interest.  And whether it be accounting or business or to be teaching.  I just didn't have a special interest, so I thought that communication was the wave of the future.  Media, particularly within businesses.  I think, probably I thought at that time my dream job would be at a company like Kraft or something like that in their in-house communications.  And so I just still just wanting to finish a degree and get a bachelor of arts but still was lost as to what I would do, as a career.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well--
Speaker 2: And that didn't really salsify until I had my first professional job.
Speaker 1: Okay, where there any teachers at Loyola that you remember, I mean any highlights of your?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Sammy Danna in the communications department.  Kay Felkins [Patricia Kay Felkins].  A lot of people were very helpful in terms of wanting to help me career-wise.
Story_ID: 300141
Speaker 1: The job I actually got--had nothing to do with communications.  My first job, actually my father [HistoryMaker Fred Rice, Jr.] helped me to get it.  Which was with the [Cook County] State's Attorney's Office.  And I don't know if you remember Winston Moore.  He was with the county [Cook County, Illinois] and he helped me to get into the county and my first job was as a victim witness assistant for the Cook County State's Attorney's Office. And--
Speaker 2: This came before you went to law school?
Speaker 1: This came before I went to law school [The John Marshall Law School, Chicago, Illinois].  And Mayor Daley [Mayor Richard M. Daley], who was currently mayor, was the state's attorney when I entered there.  And his focus was on helping crime victims get to court, understand the court process and helping the--their time that they had to testify be a little easier for them.  So that was my job, was to notify victims when to be in court.  Actually had to pick them up.  Had--I remember the case of Robin Gecht.  I don't know if you remember him but he was a serial killer and his MO [modus operandi] was that he would kill prostitutes along North Avenue [Chicago, Illinois] is where usually he operated.
Speaker 2: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 1: G-E-C-H-T.  And one of the victims I had to work with at the time, was a young woman that he picked up and he brutally--he mutilated her.  He took a knife, he removed both her breasts, terrible, terrible things to her and left her for dead along the railroad tracks behind North Avenue.  She cried out in a haze and one of the railroad workers heard her and picked up.  And fortunately she survived and so we had to get her through the whole process of testifying against him and it was really horrific what he did to this young woman.  Basically ruined her life.  Because at the time I met her, she did not want to be alive.  She had a lot of reconstructive therapy to go to through.  And then to have to sit in court and look at him and point him out and talk about how he had lured her and what he did to her.  And she was just a victim all the way around.  Her boyfriend had got her into prostitution and that's who she was out there working for.  And so, we had some really pretty serious cases that I got to work on.  But cases like hers and a few others allowed me to sit in the court room with her and go through the whole process and I would listen to the state's attorney's and the way they would formulate things and so forth.  And somewhere it clicked in my head that I could do this.  Because at the preliminary hearings, I would always almost know what to say, even as a victim assistant.  And, so I had a friend whose father was a lawyer and she signed up to go to John Marshall Law School [The John Marshall Law School, Chicago, Illinois].  I met her at Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and she was taking the LSAT and she said, "Why don't you take it?"  And I took it, not thinking that I would do very well.  I did pretty well and then that's when I applied to law school is after having that job for a few years.
Story_ID: 300142
Speaker 1: You decided you could do what you saw these attorneys do.  Yeah so you got in--you enrolled into Loyola, I mean at John Marshall Law School [The John Marshall Law School, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) John Marshall.  I applied one place (laughter) John Marshall.  Again, this is all on a fluke because I'm thinking okay.  I did okay on the LSAT but who--I don't know who's going to accept me.  And I did not do well enough to get accepted by Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois] or U of C [University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois] and boom here comes the letter back saying you're in.  And so my whole time, my whole first year and half I was there.
Speaker 1: Now what year is this?
Speaker 2: This was in--this would have been about '84 [1984], '83 [1983], '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the whole first year, I'm still thinking, I'm just going to try this.  I don't think I'm going to make it through.  And things kept happening the right way.  And, although the first class I ever failed in my life, was in law school.  I had never failed a class.  And I was in shock horror when--they post the grades on the wall.  And the Fs would be in red.  And when I saw a big red F (laughter), and I knew that I would have to take that course all over again, because in law school, you get one final at the end of the semester.  And, so--but other than that that was the only setback that I had while I was there.
Speaker 1: So what course was that?
Speaker 2: That was--it was actually torts.  And I don't know.  I just don't know how I failed it, because when I took it again, the concepts were crystal clear to me.  But there was a professor there, Arthur [J.] Sabin taught it, and he was real rough on the class and he pride himself on giving convoluted exams that you'd have to pick through a lot of different facts to come up with the right answer.  So his tests where almost like a puzzle.  And I just blew it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what was your favorite part of law school?
Speaker 2: I think, at that time, it was meeting African American people who had gone back to school, who were going to try to be a part of a profession.  And I had not had that experience before law school.  And I became very involved in the BLSA--the black--the Black Law Student[s] Association [National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)].  And just met a lot of people that--I had study partners and really felt for the first time I was receiving support from a community within a community.  And so, just kind of getting together with people, studying.  A lot of these people are judges today.  Are women especially that keep me involved, even though I don't practice law anymore, many of the women that I met in law school, that were a part of BLSA, always called me to keep me involved in the legal community.  And so, these were just lifelong relationships that formed there.
Story_ID: 300143
Speaker 1: There's a whole generation of women I know around town involved in things that went to school here in the city--a lot of them involved in the justice system (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Justice system, um-hm.  I think it--that happens because A, African Americans becoming part of major law firms in any city just hasn't happened to the level that it should.  As a matter of fact, a lot of the law firms, big law firms that are out there, you know they have maybe one or two people that are partners.  So African American attorneys tend to group in government sector.  Either corporation counsel's office, judges, attorneys for State's Attorney's Office, the State of Illinois, that sort of thing.  At least from my experience here in Chicago [Illinois].  Other cities may be different, but that's been my experience here with people I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So anything else about law school [The John Marshall Law School, Chicago, Illinois] that significant?
Speaker 2: It was a challenge.  And what's interesting is because I think that, I think that anybody who has reasonable intelligence can get through a lot different types of professional schools, but what was challenging is having something that was difficult that you had to keep at it, that you had to work with other people to finish.  And so, I'd say that the experience was fun for that reason.  Not so much as class time, but the fact that you had this camaraderie that you were building with other people, because you were all trying to pull each other through and experience.  And so, I kind of knew during the time I was going to school that if I could get out successfully, if I could pass the bar, that I would be able to get a job with the State's Attorney's Office.  I was still working there during the day and going to school in the evenings.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was, I guess, how many black students graduated with you, out of how many?
Speaker 2: Let's see, my graduating class probably would have been around somewhere about two hundred.  And I would say, there were probably twenty, thirty African American students.  Or minority students that graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where most of them women?
Speaker 2: Most were women.  A few males.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But most were women.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it just seems like for some reason that it was just a flood of black women who are attorneys now.
Speaker 2: And I know those numbers have increased over the years.  I was really excited to learn that [HistoryMaker] Patricia Mell had been named dean of John Marshall.  And she brings a lot to the school.  A lot of professional experience.  Diversity and I have had a chance to have lunch with her, meet with her or different occasions.  And I think that's very exciting for the school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's right, we interviewed her (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She's from Case Western [Case Western Reserve University School of Law, Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Yep.  She's really happy, too, about it (laughter). I've never seen a happier person on a job, other than Damon Keith [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith] in Detroit [Michigan], I think (laughter).  Those are the two I always give as examples.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, it's an honor.  I mean, you know, you've got a school that's a bastion of not going in that direction of naming, a young, African American woman who's had success in her career to lead the school.  It was a step.
Story_ID: 300144
Speaker 1: You graduated [from The John Marshall Law School, Chicago, Illinois] in--
Speaker 2: Eighty-eight [1988].
Speaker 1: Eighty-eight [1988], okay.  So you did go to the [Cook County] State's Attorney's Office?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.  I graduated.  I took a month off to take the bar review, to pass the bar.  And that was a real stressful time because I knew that if I didn't pass the bar, it would be another half a year before I could try again and could get into a job that was assistant state's attorney.  So a lot was riding on me passing the bar.  And I just--remember I had, I was living on my own then and lot of stresses with that.  And studying and working full-time, so I could take some time off to--really participate in the study group.  But it was a very stressful time and the day, the two days that I took the bar exam, just sit for two days, I just thought that this (laughter) is horrible and at that time, you would get a letter back in about six weeks.  And they told you that if the letter was thin, be happy because it was one that was going to show you passed.  If it was thick, be upset because it was your rejection letter, plus the application to take it again.  And, I remember going to the mailbox when I knew the letters were on the street and just praying, praying every time that I opened the mailbox.  And opened the mailbox and there was a thin letter.  So that was it.  Then I was able to apply.  I got interviewed, I had to be interviewed again to become the assistant state's attorney, and I think that's probably the most exciting part of it, was being sworn in as an assistant state's attorney.  Because that was the beginning of me having a dream to do this, was watching them.
Speaker 1: And that's in 1988, too?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 300145
Speaker 1: So what was the [Cook County] State's Attorney's Office like in 1988?
Speaker 2: It was interesting.  It wasn't completely diverse.  There, the first place I started was in narcotics and I did preliminary hearings in narcotics.  And I was the only African American there, outside the police officers that we dealt with.  And it's been interesting because a lot of the police officer I dealt with then, now have moved into the upper echelon of the [Chicago] Police Department.  So I see them again on a different level.  And then I went to appeals, criminal appeals and my job was to write the appeals where it was alleged that an assistant had made a mistake during a trial.  So I had to defend that.  And I also got to argue a few cases in front of the [Illinois] Appellate Court.  That was very exciting for me.  And that--there was a little more diversity in the office at that point, in the appeals division.  And I got to work with a few people there that I keep contact with.  But some--the office was stressful to me in this regard, I often felt like something more could be done to help prevent black on black crime and that a lot of the people that I were prosecuting were African American males.  And that disheartened me.  You know, and I just kind of felt like, is there something else that we can do in our communities to prevent this from happening.  To prevent a cycle of crime and prevent people from having lives where they felt this was there only alternative.  And a lot of the other assistants would be, "Yeah, yeah, we got them, we won," and I you know I hated that since, that feeling, that I was participating in that in any way because that was not my thinking.  My thinking was, how sad for our community that these things are happening and I wasn't quite sure that prosecuting people, and putting them into jail was the answer.  I mean, don't get me wrong, everybody has got to pay for their behavior and their choices, and criminal behavior.  But I think that, what I saw, was a lack of understanding of how systems and, you know, racism and other things have contributed to people's lives winding up at a certain point.  And, you know, it's easy to judge people from here.  But until you have walked in their shoes and lived a certain life, you just don't know.
Story_ID: 300146
Speaker 1: When you reflect about--on those days, and even on what's going on now, with so many young black people being incarcerated on dope-related--dope possession charges, you know, for long periods of time, is that the kind of thing you're talking about (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, what I'm talking about.  Even when I was in narcotics, I mean, we were putting people in jail for--they had you know a few grams of cocaine dropped out of their pocket.  And sometime they were repeat cases.  We had an initial cases that could get drug schools and they could go to drug school.  But sometime they were repeat cases or they were young men who had gotten off into dealing on the street as a way to make money.  And I just always felt like yes, okay, they've been arrested, they've been prosecuted, now they go to jail, but what a waste.  What a waste of a human being.  How do you turn that around and give a person the message that this society has something for you down a different road and you can make yourself into someone that has a respectable life.  And you can still support yourself and support a family and other things.  And you saw so much anger in teenage kids.  And so, I felt that, it was in one way doing a service in that people who committed a crime, and in some cases violent crimes, where called accountable for it.  But in other ways it was a disservice because this is not enough.  This is not what's it going to take to turn this around.
Speaker 1: Did you have any thoughts about the laws in terms in how they structured, in terms of--Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and others have criticized the laws of the United States that puts somebody away for possession of crack for longer than if he had cocaine or something.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And this is a problem.  We have mandatory sentencing.  Judges can't even use digression on a lot of cases.  Because if you're caught with a certain amount of drugs, you get x number of years.  And is it really the right thing to do, to get teenage kids, or young adults who are caught with drugs, and incarcerate them and put them into a system that you know, that's not going to make their life any better going through that system (laughter).  And when they come out, what are they going to be able to do with themselves.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think, probably, I get this message a little bit, my father [HistoryMaker Fred Rice, Jr.] has spent a lot of time with the Safer Foundation [Chicago, Illinois].  And as a police officer, he had to arrest people obviously, but I think he felt that there--some more had to be done to help people who had been arrested, been incarcerated to get out, and say I've paid a debt and make a different type of life for themselves.  And to turn their life around in some kind of way.
Story_ID: 300147
Speaker 1: Guess in the past ten years or so, there have been, I don't know, fifteen or twenty people released from death row that were, you know, convicted of a crime in the '90s [1990s] by the Cook County state's attorney, but they--they're now shown through DNA evidence not to be a guilty person.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have a since in those days and that maybe there was like an over-aggressive prosecution of people, or that it wasn't what--
Speaker 2: Not so much over-aggressive prosecution because I think that prosecutors had to work with facts that they were given.  I think in some cases, you know, members of the [Chicago] Police Department, not all, but there were members of the police department that had a reputation for almost deciding that because a person was in a gang or because they had been involved in something in the past, that this is probably the most likely candidate.  And sometimes information comes out of the community that supports this.  This is the person you should look at, and so there is an over-zealousness and pinning things on this particular person.  And so, I think most of the prosecutors I worked with, they had a sense of, if there was something wrong, they were not going to go down that road in the prosecution.  But there were many, who, it was just about winning, it was about winning the case.  And so, and that's not what it should be about.  That's not what being a prosecutor or being a police officer should be about.  But it happens.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It happens.  I mean, I think Governor Ryan [Governor George Ryan] proved (laughter), you know, that he saw so many people being sentenced to death row, and it was coming out that they were not involved in the crime at all, and he had to do what he had to do.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  You know, that was something that really surprised a lot of people when he did it.  But it, you know, it seemed to make sense.  Well, I shouldn't even comment on it at this point that it makes sense to me that he did.  But he's still catching flak for it even though he's not in office (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Right.
Story_ID: 300148
Speaker 1: Any particular stories that stand out from your days in the Cook County Prosecutor's Office [Cook County State's Attorney's Office]?
Speaker 2: I just--remember being before some of the judges there, judges like Lynn Johnson [ph.] and just a sense of being proud to be part of an office that I can stand up in court and represent the citizens of Cook County [Illinois] in that way.  But, pretty much it was a fun office.  I didn't spend a lot of years there.  I stayed until--actually I worked at 7-Eleven [The Southland Corporation; 7-Eleven, Inc.]. I should clarify that. 7-Eleven was what I did when--at the tail end of your law school, and right before you take the bar, you have enough credits where you can work as an attorney with supervision.  So that's how I initially started in the office.  But I didn't stay--I left almost at 1990 late '89 [1989] was when I left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So a lot of my years in the State's Attorney's Office where as a non-attorney.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, which is unusual I thought.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what did you do after the State's Attorney's Office?
Speaker 2: I got a job with the city [Chicago, Illinois] in the corporation counsel's office.  And I represented the city against slum landlords.  And I was just starting to get in the--a groove doing that, prosecuting slum landlords when I got a call from one of my old bosses in the State's Attorney's who had been brought in by the mayor [Mayor Richard M. Daley] to redo the whole parking ticket program.  And I don't know if you recall, but there was a scandal in the late '80s [1980s] with the judges, called Operation Greylord where they, many of them where accused of taking bribes to throw parking tickets and other minor violations in the Cook County courts.  So when the mayor became mayor, he decided that he would try to decriminalize a lot of those cases and bring them in as a city violations, and he started with parking tickets.  So I was part of a group.  Now they housed us in the [Chicago] Department of Revenue, and so my job was to put together the administrative court system for the city.  And that court system now still exist today over on Sedgwick Avenue, but we put together the first city court system out of the Department of Revenue. And then I got into collecting revenue on behalf of the city and I became revenue director in the early '90s [1990s], the mayor appointed me as revenue director.
Speaker 1: About, what year was that exactly, do you know?
Speaker 2: Probably, that would have been around '93 [1993].  I became revenue director and I stayed in that spot until '95 [1995], and then I went into the mayor's office for almost a year as part of his staff as assistant to the mayor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As I think about it, a lot of my careers followed various scandals (laughter) because I was in his office and the water commissioner, at the time, asked to see the mayor and disclosed to the mayor that he had been indicted as part of Operation Silver Shovel.  And he was accused of taking bribes for the water department [Chicago Department of Water Management] on trucking violations.  And so at that time, I was sent to the water department to kind of see what was going on over there, level the field a little bit and I was supposed to stay anywhere from four to six months over there and wound up staying four years and became commissioner of water.  So the mayor appointed me as the first woman to run a major infrastructure department.
Speaker 1: And that's in 1995?
Speaker 2: That was in '96 [1996].
Speaker 1: Ninety-six [1996], okay.  So you were there until 2000?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 300149
Speaker 1: As revenue director--now this city [Chicago, Illinois] I mean, it's really made--I mean, well, there are probably some good reasons.  But you can't park anywhere in the Loop [Chicago, Illinois] (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, no.
Speaker 1: If you have good sense, you'll keep it at home. Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Keep your car at home or go to a lot. Right. Well that's the goal, the goal of any major city is to get people to take public transportation in.  You would be shocked about how many things we get from the EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency].  You've got to improve your air quality and one of the ways to do that is to get people out of their cars and to get people on the trains and buses and not have everybody driving into a downtown area.  And--but more importantly, from a revenue collection standpoint, we went from collecting 25 million dollars in parking violations to today, I think they collected about a 125 million [dollars] a year in parking violations, so this is revenue that might have been out there, but the city was not getting because they did not have the structure to either give violations where appropriate, or bill people or collect on it.  And so, even with--I mean hate to see what our property taxes would be today if we didn't have some various sources of revenue that are due the city being collected on the right way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you think the key was the structure, I mean improving how it was--
Speaker 2: Yeah improving the structure--
Speaker 1: --how to collect the money.
Speaker 2: --I think my face was on a dart board for a while (laughter) first starting putting this program, cause people didn't have to pay parking tickets.  People would routinely get parking tickets in Chicago [Illinois].  I mean I got a few myself--you knew you didn't have to pay them, and how were they ever going to catch up to you and how where they ever going to find you.
Speaker 1: Well, we have to pay them now, I know that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, I brought the boot in and all those other things--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Story_ID: 300150
Speaker 1: Now in the neighborhoods [Chicago, Illinois], now this is a question I finally have my chance to ask (laughter)--but in the neighborhoods, like I lived in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois], which is typical of a lot of places in the city [Chicago, Illinois] where there are a lot of apartments--it's hard to find a parking space and then if you have a parking space and you leave your car at home, and you're working in the Loop [Chicago, Illinois], say, and you leave your car at home, there are many days that you can't leave it in front of your house because somebody--the street sweepers gonna come by, he'd give you a ticket.  The tree trimmer will give you a ticket.  I mean there are so many, you know, that keep you constantly moving that car around (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: You know, you can't really--I mean it's hard to have a car if you don't have a lot of income.
Speaker 2: It's tough owning a car in the city.  Because you've got to park it or you got to find--pay for a garage or you've got to make sure it's licensed properly, from the state and the city--
Speaker 1: Now that's the easy part--
Speaker 2: --you have to make sure your parking tickets are paid.  Yeah, so it's--to me, it's very expensive to own a car in the city.  Most people feels it's necessary and some ways you think about it, it probably isn't as necessary as we think it.  Or we don't need two or three.  But that's just the way it is.  If you're going to own the car, there's a lot.  I mean you've got make sure you're insured now.  Now they're cracking down on that so there's a lot that goes along with it.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  But, well.  Okay.  There are some neighborhoods, too where you can't park unless you have a permit.  A neighborhood permit.
Speaker 2: A parking permit.
Speaker 1: And if you don't have the permit, you are subject to be towed, or.  I remember when I worked for Chicago Alliance, we'd go to the North Side [Chicago, Illinois] in certain neighborhoods to community meetings since our car wasn't from that neighborhood, we really couldn't park in the community (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, you had to go find, you know, on the street and the meters are meant to turn over every two hours.  And a lot of places it's fifteen--it's a quarter for fifteen minutes.  I mean the city is now getting into the habit of getting into technology, where you could put your credit card in the parking meter or a debit card in the parking meter because it's gotten so expensive to even have on-street parking.  So yeah, these are challenges of a big city.  But we also are over reliant on cars in our culture.  I don't say that I'm not a part of that.  I use my car.  Sometime I think about it, why am I driving to go to the gym (laughter).  You know, why not walk there, or why not take a bike there.  But this is the way we live.
Story_ID: 300151
Speaker 1: Now you were commissioner of water from '96 [1996] 'til 2000, now what does a commissioner of water do in the City of Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, the city has the function of providing fresh drinking water to the city, so all the water's taken out of Lake Michigan and purified, so the commissioner's got to make sure that all the com- staff is in place to do that.  All the infrastructure is happening, all of the projects that surround providing fresh drinking water are done.  So, we're more--I think I (unclear) as more of a planning phase and project manager and implementation in that department [Chicago Department of Water Management].  One of the things we did was we privatized the whole engineering division because they were coming out with only a couple of projects a year, and so we got a private company in to help us to really spit out different projects that we had to get done to get the whole water system modernized.  And we moved up to replacing like fifty miles of water mains in the City of Chicago.  Tried to keep the infrastructure tight, keep it current.  And it was--it was an awesome job.  I mean I attended a lot of water management programs all over the country.  And got us involved with different water management groups that tried to bring new technology to the city.  And there are still plans sitting there that probably will be implemented in the future, that we participated in bringing to the table.
Speaker 1: Okay, so really what you have developed, I guess, is a reputation for being--manage well--
Speaker 2: Yes, I think if anything that is the way I look at it.  And even being treasurer I look at, what things need to happen in this department to make sure that we are a protecting the revenue in terms of getting it into the right banks and being--maximizing the city's revenue.  How are we going to get the biggest return for the monies that we have.  And how are we going to have the systems in place that are going to be able to help us do that?
Story_ID: 300152
Speaker 1: Has law school [The John Marshall Law School, Chicago, Illinois] really been helpful for you in terms of--because it seems like what you've done is, you're an outstanding manager, but I don't know, has law school been a help to being that kind of manager (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Law school was very helpful for that.  And I always say to people who might want to go to law school that aren't even interested in practicing law, you don't have to, because the training it gives you is to analyze problems and to look at specific outcomes for problems.  And to go where--figure out where you can go to find the information to solve those problems.  And so I think, if anything that was the benefit for me and my career in going to law school is to think analytically.  To think strategically so many times rather its government or business, we want to simply react to a problem from our gut and run off that way (laughter).  You know, and I even how to prevent it myself.  Law school teachers used to sit back, okay, what's the issue here.  What are the issues and what are some possible solutions and possible outcomes and how do you get to those?  And I think that training has been very beneficial for me in working in government.
Story_ID: 300153
Speaker 1: Now you were at the water department [Chicago Department of Water Management] until 2000 and then what happened in 2000 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually, I was at the water department until late '99 [1999].  And then, if you remember, Tom Walker, who was commissioner of transportation was appointed--the mayor [Mayor Richard M. Daley] wanted to appoint him as commissioner of aviation.  And I was asked to come and manage the transportation department [Chicago Department of Transportation], another big infrastructure department.
Speaker 1: Now what does transportation do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They do all of the work on the city's streets.  All the medium planters, all the roadways, all the bridge work on the city streets.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's not [Chicago Department of] Streets and Sanitation?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: That's the Department of Transportation.
Speaker 2: Department of Transportation. And I did not feel that that department was a good fit for me.  I felt that way from the beginning.  I think that--I think that I wanted to do some different things and almost get back to where I was when I first started with the city.  And the interesting thing that happened was, I know you probably know the story of our former treasurer, Miriam Santos, but Miriam resigned and then the mayor appointed Barbara Lumpkin [HistoryMaker Barbara Ann Lumpkin] to take her spot.  Barbara served for about eight months, and Miriam's case was overthrown.  And when the government decided that they were going to prosecute her again, she decided to plead guilty, and resigned again.  And so, at that time, Barbara Lumpkin had already gone to take another job at Northern Trust [Corporation].  As a matter of fact, I saw Barbara this morning, she's been a mentor and a great deal of help to me. And the mayor was looking around for who to appoint as treasurer.  And I think, remembered that I'd served as revenue director, so I knew the city's cash flows and how revenue was collected.  And this is really the other side of things.  And so, he asked if I would if I would want to be appointed.  I said yes, I thought that I would serve in this capacity for two years and that somebody else was going to run for office (laughter).  And eventually people started talking to me to say, "Why don't you run?"  And the mayor have you as a running mate.  Of the three elected citywide offices, the mayor, the city clerk, who's Jim Laski [James J. Laski, Jr.], and city treasurer and so I had to make that decision as to whether or not to put myself out there and to put my hat in the ring for that race.  And fortunately, I had best case scenario.  Best case scenario.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So best case meaning?
Speaker 2: Meaning that no Democratic candidate filed against me.  That the only candidate that filed was a Republican gentleman, who was on the northwest side of the city, was not very well known, he was not supported by the Republican Party even (laughter), I don't think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's the kiss of death in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  So (laughter) when I saw that I had no major challenge with the Democratic Party, it was a sigh of relief.  We then went on a campaign mode.  This gentlemen, as it turned out, filed incorrectly, so the court ruled that he could not even appear on the ballot.  So I knew the last, I say about three or four weeks going into the election, that I would be the sole name on the ballot.  And so if I went and voted for myself (laughter), I'd be in.  So.
Speaker 1: It's hard to lose that race.
Speaker 2: It's hard to lose that race.  So, again, best case scenario and all the stress that I had about running and was able to run a campaign, and really freedom, because I did not have a real viable challenger at the time.
Story_ID: 300154
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were elected in--
Speaker 2: Two thousand three [2003] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two thousand three [2003], okay.  Now, tell us what the city treasurer does and what some of your challenges are at this job?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's--we--the treasurer's office [Chicago Office of the City Treasurer], is basically the banking arm of the city [Chicago, Illinois], and so officially, I am the city's banker and create and establish all the banking relationships that we have in the city.  We work with about thirty-two banks that are--you have to become a municipal depository.  That's a process that you go and get approved by the [Chicago] City Council, to be a bank that the city treasurer can deposit money into.  And there--a lot of policies around which banks can become municipal depositories, so that's one challenge, getting all of that done every year.  And then we have to invest the money.  Once it's banked we have to invest it.  So we work with broker dealers, we buy fixed income investments here and try to get a higher rate of return for all the city's money.  And when I first came here and learned that this office handles almost $6 billion a year, I mean, even the number itself was frighten to me.  I couldn't get my mind around it (laughter).  Because it's a lot of money that have to keep up with.  And of course people come into the treasurer's office and think we have cash in here, and we have nothing but data on a computer, and that's one of our challenges is to make sure that we have a system in place that's monitoring that data properly.  One of the other roles that I have is, that I sit as trustee on four of the city's pension funds.  And so we manage about $20 billion through the pension fund system.  Hiring asset managers, working with broker dealers, making sure that all of the public employees' pensions are safe and well invested.  So I spend about forty percent of my time on that.  And finally, I'm trying to take the office in a new direction.  And that's saying that, you know, if we just do our back office functions here of accounting and investing, it would be doing a disservice to the public not to have some outreach, and one of the areas that I'm trying to create outreach is in financial literacy.  We see so many people losing their homes in the city because of predatory home lending.  So many people who are in trouble.  You know one out of ten families filing bankruptcy because they're in trouble with credit cards.  And so I've tried to create a lot of programs around financial education--financial literacy through the office.  Also, we are doing things with small business.  We have a link deposit program.  Where we reward the banks for making loans to small businesses in the community.  And we have forums for small businesses.  We put on an expo every year--small business expo--and try to grow a business or get a new business created out of our expo program.  So, the focus is more on education and financial education.
Story_ID: 300155
Speaker 1: I met with [HistoryMaker] Chancellor Wayne Watson of the City Colleges [of Chicago], a while back, and Wayne has been a good friend and he said, "You know, you should do something--the City Colleges is a perfect venue to get out a financial literacy program."  So we partnered together to do a six-week class called Our Money Matters, and the people--we've had four thousand people go through the class so far in the last few years.  And the people that write me always say, the emphasis on credit, and credit repair and understanding your credit rating was so important to me.  And most people don't even know their credit rating.  I didn't even know my credit rating really until I got into this job and started to thinking about it.  And, I mean that's got to be your starting part, from any financial transaction whether you're buying a car, whether you're buying a home--anything you do.  And so the emphasis that we've placed on education has been very exciting for me.  We've got a program now, where we are in the grammar schools teaching kids about the stock market.  And to listen to them talk about banking concepts.  To learn about the stock market and how to invest in a company and playing a stock market game.  I mean, it's phenomenal, because I did not have anybody to teach me about these things when I was growing up.  I mean, money was taboo.  It was a taboo subject, and you have a lot of people that become adults and they are in their early adult life, and they don't understand how to manage their money and how to acquire personal wealth and how to have things.
Speaker 2: So, your--your ability to deal with money matters is something that developed once you started working as an adult.  There's no foundation for this when you were (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, my parents [Thelma Martin Rice and HistoryMaker Fred Rice, Jr.] were savers but that's what we were taught.  Get your money, take a certain percent to the bank.  Save it.  I did not have any idea about all of the financial vehicles that are out there in order to create and grow personal wealth.  The stock market, mutual funds, real estate investing.  I mean these are all concepts that I had to learn later in life.  And I know that there are people who have the foundation for some of these concepts when they're teens.
Story_ID: 300156
Speaker 1: How does what you do affect the city's [Chicago, Illinois] bond rating, or does it?
Speaker 2: It's critical to the city's bond rating.  Unless we are able to account for and grow the money properly, and we don't pay the bills here from the treasurer's office [Chicago Office of the City Treasurer], it happens from the Comptroller's Office [Chicago Department of Finance], but we meet weekly with them, in terms of cash flow.  How is the city paying its bills?  How is the city going to pay for various projects?  Can we invest the money from bond deals that the city does properly so the city can do more projects?  And so, we are integral to a whole financial system with the city, in order to keep the city's credit rating as high as it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now anything else about the treasurer's office, and how long do you plan to--do you have a--
Speaker 2: Well as an elected official, you can only have plans (laughter) through your term because if I'm going to keep this job, the citizens of Chicago [Illinois] have to tell me that I can.  So the next election is 2007, and we're just trying to keep things in place and get as much information out until then.  And obviously, I have--will have a crossroad shortly and will have to decide whether or not to run.  And if I run have to see who runs against me and how that all turns out.  So, you know when you're in elected office that you can have all the plans in the world, but they can be very short lived unless you are successful in a campaign.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you like being treasurer?
Speaker 2: I love it.  It's a great job.  It's probably my best fit since I was in the [Chicago] Department of Revenue.  The things that I get to work on, the people I get to meet--there are some very talent people across our country who are in the area of financial services, investments and so forth.  And, you know, it doesn't sound like you know, sexy job on its face, but just meeting these people and learning about some of the concepts and things that they are working on.  It's phenomenal.  And, to me, I think if I had to start all over again, business--in the business community would be where my focus would be.  Because that's what it's going to take for younger people to get involved in the business world and even create their own businesses.
Story_ID: 300157
Speaker 1: Do you see yourself running for other political offices in the future, or what do you--
Speaker 2: It's interesting, because overall, I don't see myself as a politician.  I have always seen myself more of--I said being on the part of the scenes of trying to get things done.  So that's been the personal challenge for me is to try to put myself out there more in a political office, because that's not where my mind is thinking.  My mind is thinking of, well as a city we have XYZ to get it done. And so, I can't say that I have been thinking, well, what's the next office that I'm going to jump into or try to get into.  It's more of how are we going to improve things in a city.  So if there's another office out there that would be a challenge where I could continue to do that, that's what would attract me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: More than just running for a political office.
Speaker 1: Okay, just one more question about the treasurer's office [Chicago Office of the City Treasurer]--do you have a philosophy about investing the city's [Chicago, Illinois] money?
Speaker 2: Investing the city's money?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes. I do. People work very hard to have their homes and a lot of our revenue comes from property taxes. And so, they want to make sure that it's not wasted and it's safe. I mean, that's our--my job here is to make sure that the money is safe and it's not wasted. I don't decide how we spend the money, that's up to the mayor and the mayor's budget director. But in terms of making sure it's accounted for, making sure it's safe, making sure it's working in the right way, that's a part of my responsibility. And so I take that responsibility very seriously. I mean, if I get gray hairs at any given time, it's about are we making sure that we having the proper insurance in this office. That everybody's doing the right thing and that the people are being accountable.
Story_ID: 300158
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I think probably, my largest, and I spend a lot of time on this in personal boards that I belong to, is somewhere the message that I feel, that I received, and perhaps my generation received, is being lost.  And that is be proud of who you are and your heritage and be proud to carry yourself a certain way.  And to know that you have a right to participate in this society or any society that you choose and that you can have things.  And you can--I won't say it's the American dream, because someone might choose not to live in America.  But you have a right to a quality of life that other people have. And so, teaching, giving kids that message, that you are important and that you can achieve and you have a right to achieve is somehow what I think we've got to get back to in some kind of way.
Story_ID: 300159
Speaker 1: What do your parents think of you being treasurer?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know.  I think they are probably are amazed.  My mother [Thelma Martin Rice] is always amazed (laughter).  You know, I think she still views me as ten or twelve or something like that.  So, she's amazed that I even have a job or a professional career.  My father [HistoryMaker Fred Rice, Jr.] is just more of a mentor.  You know, if I have a bad day, or if I think something's not going the way it should be, he's the first person I'm going to call and say, "What do you think about this, what would you do?"  And just sage, sage advice.  And so, I think it's a mixed bag for them, depending on which one of them you talk to.
Story_ID: 300160
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing you would do differently if you had it to do again?
Speaker 2: I would be more confident in my choices and make the choices a different way.  I think--it's interesting because I think a lot of things in my life have happened to me and around me, and I've been very fortunate, but I think I've got to be a lot stronger in making those decisions.  And feeling like I'm making those decisions with full commitment.  And that the outcomes are going to be as I want them to be.  So, that's, but otherwise, you know, I have a great life.  I don't regret anything.  There have been so many people that have helped me in my life.  And I think that's what always constantly amazes me is help can come from directions you didn't think it would and you want to think you create all these things on your own, but you don't.  There's a lot of other forces working out there that help shape your life.  And maybe, you know, that's--maybe a spiritual belief, in part, and a belief in people.  Because many people have helped me in a lot of different ways that I never would have expected but they do.
Story_ID: 300161
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look back over your life to this point, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: If I can be helpful and I can give back in some way and I think right now, I do that through people or boards that I am affiliated with.  I don't have children, so I'm not able to give in that way, but if I can give to someone else's children, or if I can get a message to children.  I try to do a lot of things where we bring in teenagers, particularly young women to this office [Chicago Office of the City Treasurer], to look around, to see what we are doing.  I make sure we try to hire at least five or six kids every summer, mentor them.  And so, I think that that's what I want to be said is that I gave back to my community in some way.  I try to make sure that we are open, and who we are hiring, in terms of brokers dealers, in terms of asset managers.  We have the highest volume of work with minority and women owned broker dealers that this office has ever had.  And so, those are things that I feel are important to me is in how can I make sure that the next generation behind me is successful.  And has opportunities and has doors opened.  Because I know that a lot of them will get closed for African American men and young women.  And so can I help open one, even if it's for one person, that's important to me.
Story_ID: 300162
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we haven't asked you that you think you need to address before we ask our final question?
Speaker 2: No.  I think (laughter)--I think that's pretty much it in a nutshell.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well our final question, is similar to legacy but it's a little different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: That I used any personal accomplishments or power that I've achieved in those accomplishments to help somebody else.  And I don't want to keep it all for myself.  I think there are a lot of opportunities out there that are great and I'd like to help some other people experience them.
