Story_ID: 127617
Speaker 1: Okay.  My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please.
Speaker 2: My name is Earl Stanford Richardson, E-A-R-L, Earl Stanford, S-T-A-N-F-O-R-D, Richardson, R-I-C-H-A-R-D-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is September 25, 1943.  I was born in a little town called Westover, Maryland, in Somerset County on Maryland's Eastern Shore.
Speaker 1: Okay, Eastern Shore is the birthplace of Frederick Douglass and Harriet Tubman and [HM] Maulana Karenga--(Simultaneous)--a lot of people--right?
Speaker 2: It is, it is, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation sir?
Speaker 2: I'm the president of Morgan State University in Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Sep--(laughter)--November 12, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are indeed in the William Boucher Conference Room of Truth Hall at Morgan State University.
Story_ID: 127618
Speaker 1: Okay.  Before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type lightweight questions we always ask and they just require and deserve a short answer.  The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I love all kinds of food, but I guess my favorite food would probably be interestingly enough, turkey.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably blue, navy blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I'm terrible at vacations, but I suppose if I were having one, it would be near the water.  Not so much because I swim, but simply because it's soothing, so, probably Ocean City [Maryland] or any coastal area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Whatever you do, do it well.
Story_ID: 127619
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna--I wanna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side and--and your father's side of the family.  Let's start with your mother's side.  Can--can you give me your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother's full name is Lena Mae King, L-E-N-A, Mae, M-A-E, King, K-I-N-G.
Speaker 1: Right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth, I believe is June 7, 1901.  She was born in Westover [Maryland] as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what--what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: I think I probably can trace it back to her grandmother and perhaps by reference only, to great-grandparents.  Her great-grandparents were slaves and her grandmother was also in slavery until they were sold and the family separated.  So we have some persons living in basically the Eastern Shore area, but some who may have grown up only about thirty miles apart without ever knowing that they were relatives.  So the name of the person would be her father's mother, which was Mary Jones.  And, I can remember my, would be my great grandmother.  When I was just about two to six years old, somewhere in that range, age range, Mary Jones that was my grandfather's mother, which would make that person my mother's grandmother.  (laughter)
Speaker 1: And your great-grandmother.
Speaker 2: My great-grandmother, she lived to be 116 years old.  So, we grew up knowing our great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Did she tell any stories about--about life in those days?
Speaker 2: I think the one that either, I remember either her saying or my mother telling me of it, I don't recall quite which.  But, they told of how my great grandmother was sold in slavery, they separated, the children were separated.  And my great grandmother would talk about how she, as a little girl, thirteen or so, would have to stand on a box to wash dishes for her white caretakers and, I guess that's the story that I--I--I remember most and I didn't know those that she was referring too.  I--in other words, I grew up in the same area and while the white families were older, much older then, I do remember the people for whom she worked.  Judge Nelson and the Spatche [ph.] but Judge Nelson in particular. Judge was the name, not a title.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I'd--I remember that story very vividly, that she told and I'm sure that my sisters and brothers who are much older than I am could remember many more about my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 127620
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your fa--well--take--give--give us your father's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: My father's name was Philip Richardson,   P-H-I-L-I-P, Philip Richardson, and he was born in Virginia, North Hampton County, that's the Eastern Shore of Virginia, down there Onancock, Accomack [County], Painter, Belle Haven, and Exmore, in those areas on the Eastern Shore of Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was born to the parents of Lillie Richardson and Thomas Richardson, my grandfather's name was Thomas Richardson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And grandmother, Lillie Richardson.  They resided in Exmore [Virginia] for most of their lives, as long as I ever knew them.  And I can remember, of course, the travel back from Westover in Maryland, down to Exmore, which is about sixty miles, many, many, many times.  (laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you--you'd visit on holidays and other times.
Speaker 2: We'd visit it--not necessarily holidays, it was whenever my father felt that he needed to go down to see his mother, because I never knew my grandfather.  He died much before I was old enough to realize his presence, but my grandmother lived until I was about eighteen years old, seventeen, eighteen years old.
Speaker 1: Now, there--are there any--any stories from that side of the family about what life was like way back in the 19th century?
Speaker 2: Well, I suppose, not so much of their lives, other than they all worked in the fields.  My whole family background is one of the farms and the fields.  But, I do know that when I came to know them, and many of my visits to see her, were in conjunction with our going down to work in the fields in Exmore, and after working in the fields we would often be taken over to see our grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--now, what kind of crops were you all working?
Speaker 2: Strawberries, beans, potatoes, you name it, tomatoes. We harvest all the time and my father, when he came to Westover, took up the same profession and that's how he made a living.  He was a tenant farmer, and we were a part of the field hands as they would refer to them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 127621
Speaker 1: Alright, now how many people were in your household when you grew up?
Speaker 2: There were fourteen.  I'm the last of fourteen living.  Actually, my mother [Lena Mae King] had seventeen, but the other three passed before they were six months and of the fourteen living, I'm the youngest of them all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, that's something, that, you're the youngest child of fourteen.
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm the youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My oldest brother's eighty-one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, in your--in your household, there're like fourteen children?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And then, your mother and father [Philip Richardson], were--were there any other members of the household, in the immediate household?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother also raised a niece and a nephew, and so they were with us.  But, because of the wide age range, perhaps there were never more than about twelve or thirteen in the house at any given time.  (laughter) Some would be gone, but even some of the adults, they would get their start, they--if they married, the first residence would be with us, they lived with us until they were able to get the monies to move into a house of their own.  So, there were always several people in the house at once.
Story_ID: 127622
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm probably getting ahead of myself, so let--let me go back a little bit.  Now, how did your--well, tell me about your mother.  What was she like, and what did she do?
Speaker 2: My mother [Lena Mae King], actually was, I think a great lady. She was, as some people would describe, a housewife, but she was much more.  She worked in the fields with us, and then came home, and then was a housewife.  A woman of great strength, very supportive of my father [Philip Richardson], but also a woman of great values. Very religious, believed very much in a higher being and sought to teach us the same values she held.  Little formal education, only went to the sixth grade, but probably taught us as much as any educated mother could ever teach her children.  Day in and day out, always telling you what you should do, and only on occasion what you should not do.  And that was very, very important to us, but another interesting thing and I was trying to--(laughter) think a little bit about this before I came into this interview.  What was one of the things that you remember so much about your mother, other than the constant love and affection that she gave you no matter how many scoldings, how many reprimands she had to give you, and I guess for me it was because we were so many, there were so many parents always or so many people I should say, who did not have children, who always approached her to let them adopt one of us.  And I remember the reaction she would have to that, the visceral reaction-- how dare they ask if they could adopt one of my children.  I suppose that the assumption was that because we were so many, and because we were not a well to do family, that it must have been difficult and certainly she would be relieved to give up one of her children, and she would react vehemently when someone asked her that or when anyone even suggested that.  That said so much to us about her love for us, it said so much to us about what she thought about the family structure, it said so much to us of what she--we thought was a respon--or what she thought was a responsibility of a mother and a parent.  And, it's those kinds of things, probably she never even knew that we paid attention to that.  But, I think that every sister or brother that I have would repeat that to you, that they remember that so vividly, because it came often and I suppose as I see now all the adoption agencies and all those kind of things, those things were kinda foreign--foreign to us.  We couldn't--we could hardly believe anyone would give up their children.  Now, of course, you and I understand the circumstances of some of these things, and perhaps it may be better off, but my mother would never have entertained the notion, and I remember that very vividly.
Story_ID: 127623
Speaker 1: Okay, did your mother [Lena Mae King] have very much opportunity when she came along to advance herself or to get an ed--education, that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: No, I think that we were the typical poor family or she came from the typical poor family that was uneducated and therefore, did not always appreciate the true value of an education.  Did not always or could not always discern whether it was better to work in the fields for the immediacy of the money to support the family, or whether or not in the long run, it would be better to forego the working in the fields, to short-term finance for the long-term benefit, to the family and to the child.  And so, my mother did go to the sixth grade, but she did not complete the middle school and the high school.  But, it was a typical poor family that have to--that often times has to make the decision whether or not we go for the short-term finance or the long-term quality of life.
Speaker 1: And, did your mother come from a large family too?
Speaker 2: Actually, there were, I believe four of them, three sisters and a brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is--is there a story about how your mother and father [Philip Richardson] met?  Will you share it with me?
Speaker 2: Well, my father had come from the Eastern Shore of Virginia, to the Eastern Shore of Maryland, again working in the fields and on the farm.  By that time, my mother had been married, two children by her previous marriage and then after the death of her husband, she returned from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], back to Westover [Maryland] and it was there that she met my father and they married.  I'm not sure of the specific details of how they met, but it was after her return from Philadelphia and the death of her first husband.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she--she lived in Philadelphia for a while.
Speaker 2: She did live in Philadelphia, some of my grandmother's, her mother's relatives had migrated to Philadelphia.  And so, my mother and her sister, Ammar [ph.] Walker also went to Philadelphia as well, and it was there, I believe that she met her first husband had two children and then after his death returned to Westover.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's kinda unusual when black pe--people migrated and come back, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Those days especially.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: They--they stayed away once they moved.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 127624
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your father [Philip Richardson].  What was he like and what did he do?
Speaker 2: Well, my father was an interesting person.  First of all, he went to school only two weeks.
Speaker 1: In his whole life?
Speaker 2: In his whole life.  And the story goes, and he told the story--my mother [Lena Mae King] would embellish on it from time to time--is that his mother [Lillie Richardson] thought that there was nothing as great as her little son Philip [Richardson].  And that she sent him to school and the teachers corrected him and he came back and told his mother and she said she was not going to have these teachers correcting her son and discipline her son and so she wouldn't send him to school.  And so, he didn't go to school anymore.  He only had two weeks of formal education, as I said.  But the amazing thing was, is that, he had an inner determination, an inner sense of competitiveness, an inner sense of drive, that really made him a very successful farmer and I would say an excellent provider for both my mother and then later, his entire family and he was amazing with numbers.  My mother use--would call him in when she was trying to make out the list for the grocery store and she wanted to make sure that she always had enough money and not to be embarrassed when she was in the store.  And so, she would sit him down and tell him to count.  She would tell him what the item was and then tell him what the cost was, and she would go down the list of items, at the end of the list of items he would have the number without pencil, without calculator and wou--he had a very interesting scheme for doing it.  He'd count it in tens and always carried the extra number and held the extra numbers until the end of a certain amount, added those numbers to the tens and then came out with a number.  So, if he were counting an item cost fifteen cents and another one cost eighteen cents, he would do the ten and the ten and then the five and the eight, so he could up with the thirty-three.  That's just the way he counted, and he would do this for a long list of items, and we always thought that was just amazing to see our father come up with these numbers, but that's the way he did it.  He had his way of coping with his lack of education.  For--he had all kinds of ways of--of doing this.  Very few people knew that he could not read.  He could write his name, but he could not read, but he would do it in such a way that he'd get you to tell him what it was without your realizing that it was because he could not read.  He'd say, "Do you see that sign boy. What does it say?" and we'd think that he was testing us out, but he was really getting us to read the sign for him.  So, he was amazing, quite a fellow and I say that though he was never formally educated, that he was probably one of the best psychologists that I had known.
Story_ID: 127625
Speaker 1: Do you have an example?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things he [Richardson's father, Philip Richardson] was telling you, he was always telling us that he, he had some people that could do better than we could do.  And so he'd pick just anyone and say, they could do this item or that item, one of which was plowing in the fields, because that's what he was very close to and of course, my brother, when he would tell them that, he'd say, "He can't plow better than I can."  From what would happen this competitiveness would start building, and boy, my brothers would go in the fields and wouldn't they do perfect rows and plow and what not.  And he just thought that was the greatest thing. He'd then take pride about it.  When some people would talk, he'd say, he did this, he plowed this, or he did that, and I think it was that.  And then he would, when I came along, he would ask me what I wanted to do, and I would say to him that I didn't know.  And he said, "You don't know?" Well he knew--knew that I hated working in the fields, although I was good at it. I hated it, and I said, "I know that I don't want to do this for the rest of my life."  And so, after I graduated from high school, he asked the question, "Okay what are you gonna do?"  I said, "I don't know."  He said "Well, no problem, Lena [Richardson] and I are going over to Pocomoke [City, Maryland]," that was the next little town, "to get another tractor.  And we're going to--that'll be your tractor and the next day we will go out into the fields and we'll go from there." And I said, "No way, No way. I've done this too much now, I can't, I've got to do something, I've got to do something."  And, I went to my mother [Lena Mae Richardson] the next day and said, "Mother, I must go to college. I have to go to college." She said, "Are you sure?"  I said, "Yes."  She said, "Well, I'll talk to your daddy. I don't know where we're going to get the money, but I'll talk to your daddy."  Well, she talked to him, and the next morning he took me to the local state senator, Senator Harry [T.] Phoebus [Jr.]. He was a Republican, and he told him, "My son wants to go to college," and Senator Phoebus said, "You say the boy wants to go to school?"  My father said, "Yes."  He said, "But hasn't school begun?"  My father said, "I don't know. All I know is, he says he wants to go to school."  The senator then picked up the telephone and called the president of the local college, Maryland State College [now University of Maryland Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, Maryland] on Maryland's Eastern Shore.  And the president was John Taylor Williams, and he said to Dr. Williams, "Dr. Williams, I have a young man here who says he wants to go to school," and Dr. Williams--about 6'8"--said in a roaring voice over the telephone, "No, he doesn't. This school started two weeks ago. If he were interested, he would have been here.  He's not interested in going to college."  And Senator Phoebus said to him, "No he does want to go to school," and the president said, "What kind of place do you think we run over here?" Remember we were in segregated times then, and he was reacting to the senator who was white, just thinking that you can send someone any old time into our schools.  And he said, "What kind of place do you think we run here?"  The senator said to Dr. Williams, "Dr. Williams, you're coming for your budget hearing next week, aren't you?"  And Dr. Williams said, "Send the boy over."
Speaker 1: He didn't have to say anything else?
Speaker 2: He didn't have to say anything else.  Now, I said all of that to say that he was a psychologist--my father was a psychologist without formal education.  He knew that if he told me that I had to work in the fields, I was gonna do something better. I was gonna do something different, and nothing was going to stop me.  And he was absolutely right.  That was a major motivation behind my going to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because, my father said to me, "If you don't do something differently, then we'll be in the fields the next day."
Story_ID: 127626
Speaker 1: Sir, can you give us a sense of what some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up were?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, as I mentioned earlier, I was born in a very, very small segregated, I want to say village [Westover, Maryland], but I think it might be better to say settlement, (laughter) because, it was less than a one thousand residents there, but it was one of coexistence.  Of course, a white community on one side of the road in the country and the blacks on the other side. Always friendly, but we always knew our places.  I went to a one, or a, two room school, for elementary school for first through sixth grade, and incidentally, my teacher for the fourth through sixth grade was also the same person who taught my mother [Lena Mae King] in the first through sixth grade, which is amazing.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: The school was Westover Elementary School [Silver Spring, Maryland] and the teacher was Edna Thomas Smith, and she had taught my mother and so I didn't have the advantage of many young people of being able to go home and tell them all of these terrible stories about how bad our teacher was.  She knew that this was a fine lady and that if she said you were misbehaving, you were misbehaving.  So, you could find no comfort in going home and telling your mother that Mrs. Smith, did you wrong somehow.  But, that was a very, very interesting thing, but I came to appreciate that very much because of the kind of teacher Mrs. Smith was.  But I then went to high school, segregated high school again in Princess Anne [Maryland], it was called Somerset Junior-Senior High School [Princess Anne, Maryland]. The white school across town was Washington High School [Princess Anne, Maryland], but I graduated from Somerset Junior-Senior High School I believe in May of 1961.
Story_ID: 127627
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did you--what were you primarily interested in, in school in terms of subject matter?
Speaker 2: I guess history was my strongest suit, if you will, and for a very interesting reason, one that has been instructive for me as I became an educator myself, and it had to do with the personality of the teacher.  Early on, ninth grade I began to observe this person even though he was not at that point teaching me.  His name was Lester Pilot. He was our history and civics teacher.  By the time that I had gotten to the eleventh and twelfth grade, he was by then, my homeroom teacher as well as my history teacher and he was one of the most extraordinary persons that I've ever met.  He had a way of getting the best out of you. No matter from what side the track you came from, he always made you believe that you were the greatest person in the world and not only that you were the greatest person, but you could achieve as well as anyone else.  He treated you more like his child, then his pupil, and it was out of that relationship that the interest in history really took hold, as a matter of fact, so much so that, that was my major subject in college.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was the--what aspects of history fascinated you in high school [at Somerset Junior-Senior High School, Princess Anne, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Well, I--I was very impressed with American history of course, and at that time I don't know whether it was so much because that was the emphasis in the curriculum or whether or not I really had a deep and abiding interest in it.  I'm not so sure that when I was in high school that I appreciated enough the full value of education or where I wanted to go and do with it, that I had any particular interest. I just simply knew that I was interested in history because I did well in it.  But the truth of the matter is, is that, depending on the teacher I did well in every subject, and I don't mean so much in terms of the expertise of the teacher, as much as the relationship I had with the teacher.
Speaker 1: So you were affiliation oriented, I guess.
Speaker 2: I--I was, and I still am very much a people person and deal with relationships.  I think they're--that's so important.  It has helped shaped my philosophy in terms of the worth, the value, the potential of people.  I simply have come to know that given the right relationship that people can achieve so much.
Story_ID: 127628
Speaker 1: Now, was church a big part of life when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Church was a big part of life, was something we didn't have a choice on.  Our parents [Lena Mae King and Philip Richardson] went to church every Sunday, and it was just what you were to do too.  No one questioned it, you simply would get up on Sunday morning, and everyone would get dressed and go to church and then I think what happened after church was just as important as what happened in church.  Everyone would come home and sit around the table and eat dinner, have dinner. Sunday was a time that was for family.  You didn't run off anywhere. You didn't go out to play a whole lot. It was around the house with family, and while you may not have been discussing anything in particular because, my family, as I said were not educated people, nevertheless, there was togetherness, one family sharing the same values, sharing the same space, very powerful influence.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have like big responsibilities in church, or I mean?
Speaker 2: I had no responsibilities at church as much as responsibilities at home.  We--we were not just persons who would get up in the morning, get dressed and go to school, come back and then, take out our homework, there were several things in between. For example, in the morning, we did not have central heat so in the morning the first task was to get up and make the fire, to heat the house, before my mother and others would get up to help cook the breakfast and what not.  In the afternoon, we would go and actually cut the log wood to bring to the house to then have the wood that would keep us warm for the rest of the evening. That was in addition to going out to help earn money for the family.  So, we had great responsibilities, but again, I think that, that was the most valuable experience for me and I think served my brothers and sisters well, served them well.  One, for those who didn't want to do it for the rest of their life, it's a motivation to do something different.  Two, we knew we just couldn't idle away our time. We had to be productive all the time and keep moving ahead, so it was a great experience for me, and if I had my druthers, I'd probably choose the same thing again, given my circumstances.
Story_ID: 127629
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well when you were in high school [Somerset Junior-Senior High School, Princess Anne, Maryland] you had this great history teacher [Lester Pilot] and so we--were you active?  And did you have time for any high school activities?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have a whole lot of time for high school activities, except those that were built into the curriculum, I guess it would be extracurricular. We'd have the clubs and the debating societies. We'd have the yearbook staff. We'd have the scrolls, some of the journalistic kinds of things and I belonged to most of all of those, most of those.  But, other than that, I was not athletic so I was--I didn't participate in sports, except to the extent of getting a passing grade and that was it.  But, we were active in other extracurricular clubs around the high school.
Speaker 1: Okay so this is like--this is the late '50s [1950s] early '60s [1960s] that you're in school--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Story_ID: 127630
Speaker 1: The Civil Rights Movement at this time is heating up. Were there--were there re--reverberations of the movement on the Eastern Shore of Maryland?
Speaker 2: Yes, you may remember the name Gloria Richardson [Dandridge]. Not a relative of mine but out of Cambridge, Maryland, just about thirty-five miles west of Princess Anne [Maryland], where I went to school at Maryland State [College; University of Maryland Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, Maryland].  And during the mid '60s [1960s], I believe during '63 [1963], '64 [1964], somewhere in there we had then the civil rights protest all over Maryland, but particularly on the Eastern Shore.  Gloria Richardson and others came to the Eastern Shore and worked with an individual who later became the president of the city council of Washington, D.C. and passed about five years ago, John A. Wilson.  Johnny Wilson was in school with me down there and led the protest from the college.  It was a very, very interesting experience, again--
Speaker 1: What exactly happened?  What did Johnny [Wilson] and--and Gloria Richardson do?
Speaker 2: --Well--
Speaker 1: And who was Gloria Richardson?
Speaker 2: --Yes, it--Gloria Richardson was leading national efforts to protest against public accommodations, segregated public accommodations.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was she with CORE [Congress on Racial Equality] or--or wha--?
Speaker 2: I believe she had some affiliation with that, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--and she came down and worked with several of the campus leaders to stage the protest in Princess Anne [Maryland], and I remember those times very vividly, very much caught up in those times.  I being a local resident as opposed to many of the students coming from Baltimore [Maryland], I knew many of the white families that were participating on the other side of the protest.  Those who washed us down the hill with the water hoses, those who had their dogs really attacked us. I knew all of those families and at one point I called some of them by name and said, "Mr. Foxwell, how could you let this happen," because an interesting thing happened on the Eastern Shore. I suppose that when you are in a mode of coexistence, you learn to live and respect people on either side and you think that well, this is the way society is, but that doesn't mean that these are bad people.  But, on that day, I kind of changed my mind.  I said, no this is not just the way society is. These are bad people and when I said to one who knew my family and who had spoken to my family in many, many instances, I said to him as they were dragging one of my fellow students and beating him, I said, "Foxwell, how could you do that?"  The state police's name was Thomas Foxwell, and I said, "How could you allow him to do that," and he said to me, "If you don't get out of the way, I'll do it to you too."  That was a turning moment in my life because the people I had thought were good and decent people, I knew would do me just as they were doing others and that was a traumatic time, but I never forgot that. I always tried to see people through and through for what they are and who they are, as opposed to any relationship at any given moment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is when you were in college that these--
Speaker 2: In college--
Speaker 1: --Demonstrations took place?
Speaker 2: That's right, I was in college, and I was in my junior year, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 9--1963 or '4 [1964]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about '63 [1963], '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's correct.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 127631
Speaker 1: Well tell us about University of Maryland Eastern Shore [Princess Anne, Maryland], was there--what was--what were the highlights of your--
Speaker 2: Well, the University of Maryland Eastern Shore at that time was, I believe a campus of about five--six hundred students, very close knit, very committed to educating African Americans.  You had some of the best professors that you could find anywhere. Remember there were not opportunities for these very brilliant professors at other institutions and so they had come and to be fortunately with us, and they were the kind of professors who said, you will be in class and if you're not in class and I see you on the campus, I want to know why.  It was that, that I think that showed you that they cared. It was also that which kept you a little in fear of what they might do, and therefore, kept you coming to class and doing your very best.  It--I guess, for a poor country boy, coming from uneducated parents [Lena Mae King and Philip Richardson], it was the best thing that could have ever happened to me. It was really just an oasis of opportunity for me because I was committed to doing better than my parents had done, I literally gave it everything that I had.  I discovered then, that you don't have to be the most brilliant person in the world, but if you resolve to do well, and are willing to do whatever it takes, if it takes others one hour and it takes you five hours, so be it, if you have learned it.  And, I was willing and committed to give it every hour that it took just to ensure that I was successful, and I think that my professors saw that I was that kind of person and they just opened all kinds of opportunities for me. I was the commander of the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]. I was the comm--the president of the sophomore, junior and senior classes. I--every leadership position that they had to give out, I--I was basically in that, so it was a great opportunity.  I went through the ROTC program there, went into the military, served my time in the military, which I think was a great period in my life. Seldom will you find another opportunity where you're a young immature fellow coming out of college, thrust into a leadership position, in charge of several people and then have the opportunity to lead those people.  It was just a very, very great period in my life and really was a foundation for whatever I am today.
Story_ID: 127632
Speaker 1: Now, you were in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], but--did--I know that you're an Alpha [Phi Alpha Fraternity] now, but did you join a fraternity in college [University of Maryland Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: I did join a fraternity, I joined--I became an Alpha in 1964, April 1964, while I was in college and contrary to some of the stories that you now hear, rather than my grades dropping, when I was in the pledge period, my grades increased significantly, never to drop again.  (Laughter) So it--it--
Speaker 1: So, it kinda--what--what encouraged you about--I mean the--was it the--?
Speaker 2: Well, all of my models at Maryland State, professors included, were Alpha persons. That interest in history I took to the university and the model that I found there in the history department was a person by the name of Augustus Wilson Lowe.  Augustus Wilson Lowe was an Alpha person had gotten a Ph.D. at age twenty-one years old and was a most brilliant individual and again, had great impact on my life, my interest, my direction, just as Lester Pilot had done in high school.  I pursued the Alpha fraternity and it was again, a great experience in my life and even until this day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, now was there anything else about--about college at the University of Maryland Eastern Shore, did--did you run for class office or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Well, I was president of the, as I said, of the sophomore class, the junior class, of the senior class.
Speaker 1: Wow that's (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: --That's three of them (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's right, (laughter) and I guess that almost anything that I wanted, it was a decision that we made as a little group in terms of the president of this student body.  One of my good friends, was president of the student body and I chose not to run against him. He later became the president of Paul Quinn College [Dallas, Texas], and he's now deceased, Warren Morley, but I suppose that if I had really wanted to go after the president of the student government, I, I could have done it because I was just being successful then and I was enjoying the experience.  It was a tremendous experience for me. I didn't live on campus. I was a commuting student, but it--it was as close to a residential college experience that you can get because I spent an enormous amount of time there, made many, many friends that I cherish even until this day.  And, the relationships with the professors, I think were some of the best that any student could have.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you graduated in--six
Speaker 2: '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: --'65 [1965] and--
Speaker 2: May '65 [1965].
Story_ID: 127633
Speaker 1: You went--did you go directly to the [U.S.] Air Force?
Speaker 2: Yes, I went in October of '65 [1965] into the Air Force and stayed in the Air Force until '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Now, did you have to do any tour in Vietnam at all?
Speaker 2: I did not, as a matter of fact, just as the war [Vietnam War, 1955-1975] was really heating up, I came out, my four years were up, but I did go to, I almost said the godforsaken place of Greenland, (laughter) but compared to some of the experiences in Vietnam, it was really a vacation when I hear some of the horror stories of some of my friends who went to Vietnam, but I served a tour in Sondrestrom, Greenland. One year tour there and then I served at Dover Air Force base in Dover [Delaware]. That's where I left, separated from the service.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, another great experience in my life here now, obviously I have an ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] program at the [Morgan State] University [Baltimore, Maryland] and I say to the young people all the time, use this experience for everything that you can get out of it.  It's one of the greatest opportunities you will have to mature, to lead, to see the world and many of those things.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, '69 [1969] you're out of the Air Force and you--now you were in the Air Force when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed, right?
Speaker 2: Yes I was.  As a matter of fact I was in Sondrestrom, Greenland, that's exactly right, and--and that was a terrible moment for us all. The pain was just as great in Greenland as it was here in the states.
Speaker 1: Were there very many blacks--airmen there in Greenland?
Speaker 2: Not a whole lot, but I would--I would say that, probably a representative of the larger population of African Americans in the Air Force.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were also there during I guess, the rioting and all of that that took place in the United States. You weren't around for that?
Speaker 2: That's right.  I, I--we were in Greenland and I returned, I guess, in February of '68 [1968], I believe.  It was '68 [1968]. I believe that's when I returned to--to the states and still there was residue from the riots and everything.
Speaker 1: February of '69 [1969] you mean (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, I would--yes, February of '69 [1969], is when I returned, I'm sorry, yes, February of '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So it was still some discord but--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 127634
Speaker 1: Okay, well--what'd--now, did you go directly to graduate school when you came back?
Speaker 2: No, actually I came and served another year in Dover [Delaware] and then separated there, as I said before, and then I came--I left for a short period to work for General Electric [GE] in Lynn, Mass [Massachusetts], not more than six months, when I was recruited by my alma mater [University of Maryland Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, Maryland] to come and work.  And so, I came to work at Maryland State then, by then it's the University of Maryland Eastern Shore [Princess Anne, Maryland] and I came to work there for about two years and while I was on a trip, I was the placement director there, and while I was taking some of the students around to some of the graduate schools to try to get them scholarships and admission to some of the graduate schools, I was at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and I was making the case selling the students so--so very hard that at the end of my tour and visit there, they asked me, "Well, what about yourself. Wouldn't you like to come to graduate school?"  And I said, "Well, love too, but don't have time now or the money," and they said "Well why don't you apply."  I applied to the graduate school for education and then got a Ford Foundation Fellowship, and went to the University of Pennsylvania, where I got my Master's and then my Doctorate, but that's how I got there, because I was really taking some students from the University, from the University of Maryland Eastern Shore, to the University of Pennsylvania, trying to get them opportunities to go, when I was recruited to come myself.
Speaker 1: Okay, now were you sort of--it seems like--as though your own potential has taken you by surprise.  (Laughter) different, different--parts of your life, you know--
Speaker 2: I--I think that's a fair statement, even though I, I was always, I felt good about myself always, just didn't know any potential, didn't really know any opportunity and had to be educated to it. I think that's the best way of saying that.  I had to develop an appreciation for it, and as I developed that appreciation and was introduced to opportunities, I always seized them and not only seized the opportunity, but made the best of it. Worked and worked to make sure that it was a success. You see, once I was going to college and my father [Philip Richardson] had invested all of his time and whatever reputation he had, his relationship with the senator [Senator Harry T. Phoebus Jr.], I felt I couldn't fail him. I felt I couldn't fail him. I had to do this. You can't have your father going out talking to senator, and by the way we didn't have any money so my mother [Lena Mae King] and father went over to Beneficial Finance [Corporation, now part of HSBC Finance Company], the place where you never pay off the principal because the interest is so high and so you can only pay the interest and you owe them forever.  Well, they went and borrowed seventy-five dollars for my first semester and they did the same thing second semester, seventy-five dollars, and so I could not let my parents down, I could not fail and so I had to succeed, and that's the way I have been all of my life.  Once given the opportunity, I'm willing to invest whatever it takes to make it a success.
Story_ID: 127635
Speaker 1: Sir, tell me about University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], what--what was that like for you in graduate school and--and you--you went to graduate school and majored in education wasn't it?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was in Education Administration and Education Psychology.  It was a great experience for me. It was a great experience for a number of reasons, one that I like to talk about is, having gone to a historically black college [HBCU], we always wondered if, in fact, we were ready for the big leagues. I mean we never gave voice to that, but we always wondered.  And, because of that, once you're in the big leagues and you find that you perform as good and often times much better than those already in the big leagues, it's very gratifying, it's very gratifying, and I just had great fun. (Laughter) I literally had great fun. For the first time in my life, I could just study as much as I want, I could read as much as I want, I could just think as much as I wanted. It was just a great time. I guess if there was one thing about the experience that I wouldn't want to relive it would be the intensity of the experience.  University of Pennsylvania, as I--as you know is private, Ivy League. Tuition cost very high and I knew I could not afford to pay that myself. I was there on a Ford Fellow [Fellowship] that would pay for two semesters, total cost plus books. I knew that if I did not complete the degree in two semesters, then I probably would never, or I would have to go into great debt to do it.  And so, instead of taking the normal nine and at the very most twelve hours in graduate school, I took fifteen per semester.  I almost killed myself, but I got my Master's in two semesters.  At the end of the two semesters, I was so spent, that I just wanted to do nothing, but interestingly enough, I looked around and got a scholarship or fellowship that took me for the summer to England, and it was the way, that I just kind of recovered, by going on this--it was really an educational tour, because I did get college credit and everything for it and enjoyed it tremendously and it was during the summer that I received another invitation to continue my studies for the doctorate degree there with a continuation of a Ford Fellowship.  And so, while it was an intense experience, evidently that also caught the attention of those who were to sit in judgment for the candidates for the doctorate degree and I was selected as one to pursue the doctorate with cost paid.  I also benefited again from my military experience because I had the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], and it supplemented my living while I was there.  So, I really enjoyed myself. I could have stayed at the University of Pennsylvania on and on and on, but I guess in this world you have to go to work sometimes, and so, I had to return to work, but it was a great experience and it was during the period that University of Pennsylvania was going through great growth and it's a beautiful place, a beautiful campus and they have now, renovated and restored so much of it, as well as expanded it there in West Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but it was a great experience.
Story_ID: 127636
Speaker 1: You--you went to work back in, here in Maryland.
Speaker 2: I went to work at the University of Maryland Eastern Shore [Princess Anne Maryland]. I was on leave of absence and so I went to work there. When I came back to work I was--I didn't want to do, to go for any more jobs until I finished the dissertation, so while I was writing the dissertation, I was asked if I wanted to change jobs at the University. I became executive assistant to then the chancellor, which was the president at most southern universities and I worked as the executive assistant to the president at the University of Maryland Eastern Shore, from I guess 1974, '75 [1975], right up until about 1981, '82 [1982], the academic year, '81 [1981], '82 [1982], and after that I went to central administration for the University of Maryland System [University System of Maryland].  University of Maryland Eastern Shore, formally Maryland State [College], is one of the campuses in the University of Maryland System and I left the campus level and went to the system level. I remained there for about two years, and then was asked to come to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] as the interim president.  Incidentally, one of the things that in retrospect, I take great pride in, is that I have never applied for a professional position that I have not first, been pursued to come to.
Speaker 1: Well that pretty much guarantees you're gonna get the position.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right, and I think, or I'd like to think that it is because of my performance on the job, that--where I am, that it opened opportunities, other opportunities elsewhere and it works very well, and I--I--that's another one of my--the lessons I say to my young people. Whatever you're doing, do it well. Someone will notice and when they do, it will be your next opportunity. It will be your opportunity to the next level.  It has worked for me and I think it can work for others, and so I remind them, my students of that all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now--now you're at the University of Maryland Eastern Shore, as the--assisting the chancellor until '81 [1981]?
Speaker 2: 'Til about '81 [1981], '82 [1982]' academic year--
Speaker 1: And then you went to the University of Maryland System?
Speaker 2: That's right, the central administration there. I was special assistant to the president of the system then, [Dr.] John [S.] Toll and John Toll had been president at Stony Brook [University, Stony Brook, New York] up in New York and had come--returned to Maryland, I might add to be the chancellor of the University of Maryland System and I was his super--one of his special assistants.
Story_ID: 127637
Speaker 1: Okay, now you were with the University of Maryland System, I guess during the time period when [Dr.] Andrew Billingsley was president of Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] here--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --And he left in '84 [1984] right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--and you become the interim--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --How did that happen, how--what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, after Dr. Billingsley resigned, then the Board of Regents for Morgan State then sought out candidates for an interim president and one of the things they did was to come to the University of Maryland System to ask the president of the System there if he knew of any persons that might be interested, in being the interim president--
Speaker 1: Now.
Speaker 2: --At Morgan.
Speaker 1: When Dr. Billingsley left, he--he resigned--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 127638
Speaker 1: Since there was no replacement for him [Dr. Andrew Billingsley] was there like a controversy or something that he resigned from or--or was there a problem here that--
Speaker 2: Well, I think there were some issues, but not unlike any other institution where the institution may not be moving or progressing as well as, perhaps the board or the faculty and others may think it should be progressing, but I think that during his tenure here, his idea was to develop Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] as the urban university, and that was a direction that he had gone in.  I think that the circumstances during the time had a lot to do with the difficulty Morgan was having.  You're talking about a period when, first of all, Morgan had been doing very, very well. In 1968, Morgan was designated as one of the best liberal arts colleges in the Mid-Atlantic area and then after, I guess about, '73 [1973]--'72 [1972], '73 [1973], '74 [1974], there were some changes in higher education in Maryland, that led to the duplication of many of the programs that Morgan once had as unique programs.  There was also the exodus of some of our students and some of our faculty to the majority institution, now that we were beyond the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and there was a more open kind of opportunity for both students and faculty.  I think there was also the notion that because now our society was to be an integrated society and therefore, our public institutions fully acclimated there too, there was not a need any more to invest in some of our historically black institutions [HBCUs].  I think we remember the experience of what happened in the public school system.
Story_ID: 127639
Speaker 1: Right, right--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--Somehow the--
Speaker 1: --The black schools closed.
Speaker 2: --Yes, that's right.  Somehow the concept of integration came to be interpreted as the movement of blacks into white schools, as opposed to both ways, movement of whites into black schools and blacks into white schools. It came--became to be known as a one way street.  Move all of the blacks into our white schools so that you preserve the white institutions, and our black schools were closed.  I think, while that was never articulated publicly, that became the mindset also for our black colleges, versus our majority institutions. That somehow our black colleges would become anachronisms and there'd be no--no longer a need to invest in those campuses.  And so, during that period, there was very little investment in Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and with the very little invest in Morgan, then Morgan then was not as attractive and as competitive as some of our majority institutions for students regardless of their race.  But, what I now see was a set of dynamics that suggested that, here you had a faculty, a student body and alumni, a community that could only see an institution in which they had great pride, for which they had great love diminishing right before their very eyes and they were helpless to do anything about it and therefore, maybe struck out at the closest thing to them, the administration and that may have caused some of the ill will that was there.  I think what we did when we came, and I don't want to get ahead of your questions either, but I think what we tried to say is, look, let's focus on making Morgan as competitive as any other institution for students, regardless of their race, that whether or not we're talking black or white students, they are very unlikely to select you if they can get better somewhere else--if the quality of life is better, if the quality of programs are better, if the ambience is better. It is only a natural process to see them move towards that.  And so, we must build Morgan for the institution that it is, institution that it was, and that's really been our mission here for the last two decades and it's worked well.
Story_ID: 127640
Speaker 1: So, you had the benefit of an insight from the--from the state of Maryland System [University of Maryland System].  You may have been --you may be the first president of Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] that had such an insight when you took the job.
Speaker 2: Perhaps.
Speaker 1: Now.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you--I mean did you--and--wha--what was your--did you have--what were some of your per--perceptions in terms of how the black colleges were treated in the state system here in--in Maryland?
Speaker 2: Well, you must remember that my whole experience, educational experience was in black schools.  I'd gone to Maryland State College, now the University of Maryland Eastern Shore [Princess Anne, Maryland], and I'd done exceedingly well there.  And, because of my experiences there, had been able to go to one of the best Ivy League colleges [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in the country, so I knew what the potential of these institutions was.
Speaker 1: So you had a belief in what they could do?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Fundamental belief in the value and potential of them, but I also knew that they were not funded consistent with their mission.  Now, it's very important how I phrase that. Not funded as well as others, in terms of absolute dollars, but funded consistent with their mission, consistent with the task to--that has to be done, with students that may not represent the best S.A.T. [Scholastic Assessment Test] scores or even the highest grade point averages, but students who have the potential and if so motivated, can do as well or better than those with the great S.A.T. scores and grade point averages.  In other words, just average African Americans. I knew the potential of that because I was one of them, and it was with that fundamental belief that I believe if adequately funded for the mission they do, and the mission is quite different, but I think there's a lack of understanding of the real difference.  Often times, it's thought to be, well they just want more money than anyone else. No, they have a larger, much broader task to accomplish than the other institutions on the average, and so, I know the potential and I know if it's adequately funded, that is the mission is adequately funded, I have no doubt that these institutions, not only will compete with the best in the country, but will end up having a disproportionally higher impact on society than the others because of the numbers that they educate--persons who otherwise, may not have an opportunity for a college education. It's my belief that if institutions do not adopt the idea that it's in the society's interest to educate the masses, the average person, the low income as well as the middle income, then we will not achieve the democratic and learned society that we'd like to think ourselves to be.
Story_ID: 127641
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, well what were the first things you tried to implement when you--when you got here (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I came to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], the first thing was to get people believing good about themselves again, good about the university, getting the public to understand that this is a great university, great legacy, has educated some of the great leaders of our country. I mean, and the examples were everywhere.  So one of the techniques I used, was to just draw upon those examples. I began to publicize the Earl [G.] Graves of the world. I began to publicize the general officers that we have in the military. I began to publicize all the great scientists we have out there. I began to publicize all the--things--teachers in the school systems that we had out there and then use that while I was really remaking the university on the inside.  As we did that, we said to people, "Look you have done an excellent job of developing Morgan. I have come to take it to the next level and with all of us working together, there is no end to what we can do here," and I think people began to believe that, at first, a bit skeptical.
Speaker 1: I remember there was quite a bit of fear in the early '80s [1980s] about the demise of black colleges as we know them--
Speaker 2: --That's right.
Speaker 1: --And people talked about it, as--as you mentioned earlier--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --There was a--there was a thought that there was--in fact they thought there was talk about a federal plan to eliminate, you know, funding for black colleges and just either merge them into the state systems and the states--(unclear)--or--or to just--just let them die all together.
Speaker 2: Well, I think it grew out of that misinterpretation of what integration was about that I mentioned earlier.  The notion that to have an integrated society we must get rid of all of those things that represent black America. We must merge it in, submerge it in to majority institutions and I think that very early on we decided that's not what it means, so we change from the terminology of integration to desegregation. It made all the difference in how one approached the whole notion of diversity, because it said then, we're not talking about eliminating black colleges, we're talking about enhancing black colleges to the point that they are as competitive as any other institutions for students, regardless of race and the same thing on when it came to majority students, that we want to be able to attract majority students also on our merit, not because you are liberal, not because you have--you just want to make us feel good, but because of the merit, the quality of our programs, the quality of life, the attractiveness of our programs. That's where we told the faculty, staff and the students, we wanted to go and we're having fun doing it.  We're having fun doing it.
Story_ID: 127642
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, there's been a--I know there's been a great increase from what I've read in the number of students that are pursuing the sciences and technology--technological fields, and stuff--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well, Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] has always had a very rich history in terms of graduates in the sciences, but what happened in 1983, '84 [1984], is that we established an engineering program, so that combination of science and engineering really became a linchpin in the revitalization of the campus.  Right now of course Morgan is one of the leading institutions, black or white in the country, in the number of blacks that have graduated in the sciences.  In engineering, the three fields that we have, we're number one in electrical engineering, number one in civil engineering, number one in industrial engineering--that is the production of African Americans in each of those areas.  So, it--it's been a very, very--in computer science, information management systems, again we're about number four in the country in the number of African American graduates that we produce.  So it's been a major part of the revitalization, the renaissance, we like to say, at Morgan, but just as we've had successes there, we've had successes in all the other areas as well--in business, in education, in telecommunications, in the arts and humanities.  It has just been a great success story, our latest, I would say, effort, has been the development of our doctoral programs.  In 1976, Morgan was given doctoral authority, but it wasn't until 1994, that we had more than one program at the doctoral level.  We now have eleven, and the impact is extraordinary. Just to give you a little statistic, in the State of Maryland, we produce on the average of about 950 to 1000 doctorates per year, about thirty-nine, forty are African American. If you look in the sciences, you're talking in engineering, not more than four or five and about fifteen all in the sciences.  Morgan, for example, just five years ago, started a doctorate in engineering. This year Morgan produced four doctorates in electrical engineering, African American and one non-African American. Do you know what that does to, first the statistics from Maryland, in terms of African Americans with doctorates in engineering?  But then, even on the national level, it makes a major impact.  Really, as you look ahead, is really gonna be the impact of what will happen having these programs in an institution like Morgan, so we--it has been a great success story and continues to be.
Story_ID: 127643
Speaker 1: What's the toughest part of this job [President at Morgan State University in Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: The toughest part of this job, I think, others may disagree with me, is creating understanding within the majority community, of the true value and impact of the institution.  If there is one area, that I would love to have had and could have greater impact, it would be, how do we create greater understanding and appreciation of the real role value and impact on these institutions on our cities, on our states and on our nation.  We have tried to develop strategies for getting at that, without it being front and center. For example, we fought hard and got support to build a gorgeous new fine arts center here. It's two thousand plus seats in it. It is state of the art and can accommodate Broadway plays as well as major concerts--it has a concert hall. What we want to do is to use that as a gateway for persons coming to the University, black and white, such that when they are sitting there, it truly looks like America--a diverse audience, in a diverse city, in a diverse state, in a diverse society.
Story_ID: 127644
Speaker 1: You call ahead and when you get to the library they got like four or five people in there that'll help you, serve you hot tea and (laughter) we don't get that.
Speaker 2: That's right.  And therefore, people don't appreciate how much is involved in these scholars, then it is going somewhere else. I mean, they have everything laid out. They have all kinds of money, they have all these things, and I say unfortunately sometimes, it is interpreted that those scholars, black or white at the other institutions are somehow smarter. No, they have more resources over there. They have more time to think, to--they have more ti---assistance as you have just indicated. If we had those things, there is no telling where many of our professors and scholars would be.
Speaker 1: Academia is about connections.
Speaker 2: It's about connections, it's about federal support, it's about foundation support. I mean, that's what it's built on. I mean, many of these institutions will get a grant just because of their name that they then recruit these scholars from our campus to give authenticity to and they're the same scholars that they were when they were here, the only difference is, there's all the support mechanisms to give them the elevation and the visibility they need.  But, I have also determined that our black institutions must pay competitive salaries, must develop, competitive labs, must do all those kinds of things so that you recruit those same kind of people here, and that's been part of my mission, that's been part of my vision.  We just built a twenty three million dollar research--science research center here on the campus [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], nothing but labs, there's twenty-six research labs in it, and that's to make sure that a professor coming here has the same access to research labs as anywhere else.  We've begun to pay competitive salaries, and it gets a little steep sometimes, but if you're gonna get those persons, you're gonna have to pay them.
Speaker 1: That's--that's true, I think--but it's tougher--
Speaker 2: We don't have all the--
Speaker 1: --Now to do it than it used to be.
Speaker 2: --Oh, absolutely.  We don't have all the perks yet, but at least we're doing it step by step.
Story_ID: 127645
Speaker 1: I asked about some of the major challenges, but I--what's the future of the campus in the--
Speaker 2: Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] in particular?  Well, I think there is--the future of it is in fact, as a major doctoral granting campus that not only continues to educate a diverse group of students, meaning students, regardless of race, but also students whose background ranges from average to the best, having the kinds of programs that are in high demand at the undergraduate to the graduate level inclusive of the doctoral degree and then being able to use that to enhance the larger community.  First, the physically contiguous communities to the campus and then the larger community, meaning the city, the state, and our nation. I still think that our historically black colleges [and universities, HBCUs], Morgan in particular, represents part of the untapped resource of this nation.  We have not used them to address some of the problems that they are so much a part of.  When we're talking in the public school systems in our urban areas, for example, we're talking about primarily, when we talk about the problems and the challenges, while we don't always use the name, we're really talking about low income African Americans for the most part. That's what is at stake here in Baltimore city [Baltimore, Maryland], all right?  When we're talking about our communities, we're talking about communities that are inhabited by African Americans in the main. When we're talking about some of the social issues, some of the social maladies, we're talking in the main about problems that are affecting our African American communities. The question then becomes, why not invest in those communities that are most identified with that population.  Institutions that have credibility in that environment, institutions that are composed of people that, but for some happenstance, could have perhaps been in the same set of circumstances--they know something about them, they are deeply committed to it, it is not outreach for us, it is in reach, it is us.  And, somehow, we have the notion, or too often we have the notion, that just having a big name, a reputation that you earn for something quite different from the issues at hand entitles you then to be the beneficiary of funding and support to address problems which you really have little or no experience with, and the institutions that really have the experience, the institutions that are embedded in the environment where the issue is most prevalent, the institution that has some track record with it have been overlooked and I'm saying we need to tap into that untapped resource because you may find that they are the key to many of the issues that we're now saying are intractable and cannot be addressed.  So, I'm saying the potential for a Morgan State University is to continue doing what it has done for many years past. It's to educate the masses and to do it so well that others cannot ignore it.
Story_ID: 127646
Speaker 1: Wha--what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today in general?
Speaker 2: My hope for the black community is that we will begin to educate our young people in the same percentages as our majority population.  I think that education still is a major asset for any young person black or white and that if we're gonna really have the exponential movement that we need that if we're gonna move on the trajectory that we need to move in terms of correcting many of the problems of our society, we're gonna have to rely on education because education can do what no other social program can do. It can do things that welfare, can't do. It can do things that Medicare can't do.  I look at our young people day in and day out. They come to us from impoverished circumstances. They get an education. They graduate and many of them in the process of getting educated meet a spouse, they marry, they go out, they have offspring. Those offspring are light years ahead of anything that any social program could have done for them.  Remember, they are now with parents who don't have to worry about making a living to feed them. They are with parents who now have health benefits because of the jobs they hold and so can give them the healthcare they need. They're with parents that understand and appreciate the value of an education and what it means in terms of improving the quality of life and they can impart that to their young people.  That's what education does to a society. It allows them to leapfrog many years into the future in terms of their circumstance and quality of life versus their previous generation.  And so, I think that that's the challenge for us in the black community. It's to do everything we possibly can to insure that we close the educational achievement gap--that we move our young people into colleges at a much higher rate than we are, a rate that is at least consistent with the rate that our majority populations get the baccalaureate degree.  Right now, African Americans are about half the percentage as a majority institution getting the baccalaureate degree. In other words, majorities get baccalaureate degrees at two times the rate of our African American students.  We need to correct that. We need to close that gap. That's a major challenge.  And somehow, I believe when we correct that, when we address that major challenge, that while it may not solve all the problems in terms of public safety, in terms of healthcare, it will go a long way and so, our greatest challenge is the educational challenge.
Story_ID: 127647
Speaker 1: Okay, now--now you have--you're married [wife, Sheila Richardson] and you have one son, coming from a family where you were the fourteenth child.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: I see you got one son.  (Laughter)
Speaker 2: I have one son.  (Laughter) yes.
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on your life, what--what do you see as--as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I'd like to think as trite as it sounds, and it's almost become a cliche, but I'd really like to think that I've made a difference in the lives of a lot of young people, young people who otherwise would not have gotten an opportunity had we not stayed the course, one in maintaining the mission of Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and two, in being committed to doing every single thing we can even when it is out of the ordinary. To do everything we can to find money, to counsel with the students, to provide them that extra push to get them through the college experience.  I think I've committed my life to that. I think that every May, I revisit it and if during the year I say, there is a moment where I get a bit tired, get a little weary, I only need to wait until the third Sunday in May, when I have my commencement to understand, you've gotta go right back out and do this again.  Look what the results are and when we turn out that many people that would not otherwise have had the most or not otherwise have gotten their degree, then I think all is well with me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you--you're still fairly young, but when you look back on--
Speaker 2: I'd like to think so.  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: --When you look over what's been done so far, do you--was--is there anything that you would do differently?  Listen, I know you still have time to--to make--make adjustments and so forth.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I constantly assess and reassess--adjust whenever I need to.  I can't think of a thing that I would have done differently. I try as best I can to think through every single decision I have to make.  I try to make sure I make decisions in a way that I would want them made if I were the party involved.  I try to be objective. I try to treat people with great respect and dignity and I think in doing that there's a great sense of satisfaction, great sense of pride, great sense of peace with that and I'm sure that if I thought about it long enough, there would be something I might say that I would have done differently but for the moment I think I'm pretty satisfied with the way my life has gone and the impact I've tried to have on young people.
Story_ID: 127648
Speaker 1: Okay, one final question and it's similar to legacy but different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. I'd just like to be remembered as just an ordinary fellow, born of impoverished parents [Lena Mae King and Philip Richardson] and who tried to do well for himself, to do well for his family and to make a difference in the world. Nothing more, just an ordinary fellow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well thank you sir.
