Story_ID: 12666
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm Dorothy Walker Runner.  And you spell my name, D-O-R-O-T-H-Y.  My maiden name was Walker, W-A-L-K-E-R, and I married a Runner, R-U-N-N-E-R.
Speaker 1: The irony of this does not escape us (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, I tell you, when I first decided to get married [to Charles Runner], I was at the university, the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And so Sophonisba Breckenridge was an old-fashioned social worker.  And she said, "You're going to get married?"  And I said, "Yes."  She said, "What will be your name?"  And I said, "Runner."  And she said, "Once a Walker and now a Runner."  And she had a cane, and it was shivering (laughter).  So that's how my name is.  Now you want to know when I was born?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: I was born May 6, 1920, and according to my history, I was born in Nitro, West Virginia, which is--I would call it a suburb of the time, of Charleston, West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell Nitro?
Speaker 2: N-I-T-R-O.  It was the area where the only black college was located.  I always say the environ of the black college.  And my parents went there for a short time, and I think until after I was born, and they moved to Charleston.
Speaker 1: Now, that's like West Virginia State University [sic West Virginia State College, Institute, West Virginia], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah--  Well, yeah, it was, at West Virginia State--.  And so we moved there-- they moved to-- this is what they've told me.  They moved to Charleston, and that's where I was reared.
Speaker 1: Okay, now I wanted to ask you another slating question, we're kind of slating this, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, I was trained as a medical social worker at University of Chicago School of Social Work [ Chicago, Illinois].  And that's what I got, I did my fieldwork in that.  But it was, I had been in everything else except medical--well, no, I worked for a while, that's where I met my husband, at the Provident Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] because here again, was segregation.  And the university sent me to Provident Hospital for doing some of my fieldwork and some of my material that I needed.  And, but that was soon cleared because the university changed its policy and there was no discrimination more in the dormitories.  But that was a year or so later after I had come into the program.  So, as an occupation, you worked for a brief period of time, but you've been involved in a lot of volunteer activities since?
Speaker 1: In the school--you mean while I was in school do you mean?
Speaker 2: No, I'm--
Speaker 1: Oh, after.
Speaker 2: --I just was asking you what's your occupation, and (unclear) (simultaneous).  I just need a short answer about that because we're just slating this.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, well, I was--I am a social worker.  And I would say I was a medical psychiatric social worker.  And--.
Speaker 2: All right, now, what is today's date?
Speaker 1: I didn't hear you.
Speaker 2: What is today's date?
Speaker 1: The 17th of March.
Speaker 2: I just want you to say it for the camera.
Speaker 1: Oh, 2003.  Yes.
Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: I'm retired.
Speaker 2: No, where are we at the present time?  Where are we right now?
Speaker 1: We're here in my home--in my daughter's home at--you want the address?
Speaker 2: We don't to have to have the address.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.  No, I moved here about a year ago.
Speaker 2: In Chicago, right?  Here in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  Yeah, we lived in our home, we sold our home, and--which was right near the university where I had been working.  And we were there in that place for forty years.  And it was a very interesting experience.  And I think that all of us learned a lot in the community.
Story_ID: 12667
Speaker 1: Before we get into depth, there are five 'People' magazine-ish type questions that we always ask.
Speaker 2: Oh?
Speaker 1: Yes, I'm required to ask these, and they just require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'll try it.  I'm kind of long winded (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, the first question is--,
Speaker 2: What.
Speaker 1: --what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I don't really have a--I like a lot of foods.  Maybe you can tell (laughter).  No, I do, I like beef and chicken, fish and all vegetables.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color?  I like bright colors, no favorite one, as long as they make the--I like the bright colors.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, I don't like summer very much because I don't like hot weather.  And I don't like cold weather, so I guess it's fall (laughter).  I like the fall and spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, we've been, we've traveled quite a bit, my husband and I.  But we have a place in Hilton Head [Island, South Carolina], and we go twice a year.  And we enjoy that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not that I can recall right this minute.
Story_ID: 12668
Speaker 1: Now, I want to ask you about your family history, not the whole thing right now, but I'd like to know how far you can trace your family back.  I mean how far does it go?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said that, it started when I was born in Nitro, West Virginia.  And my parents moved to Chicago--I mean to, Charleston [West Virginia].
Speaker 1: I'm--.
Speaker 2: Oh, you mean about the people?
Speaker 1: No, I'm talking about the origin of your family.  What do you know about the beginnings of your family and how far can you--do you know what they were in the 19th century, say or what they were doing?
Speaker 2: Well, this is, this has been one of the problems I think that I've been working on quite a bit, trying to find out about where the Walkers and where the Runners came from.  And I haven't been very successful in getting that done, although my efforts haven't been as great toward that as it had been toward other things.  But I did--I was able to trace some of my father--my husband's [Charles Runner] family to, way back, of course you know, what they tell you, that many of these names came from slaves, way back in the--like if you were a Runner or a Walker (laughter), they named you that.  So I don't know.  But I haven't been able to trace our family.  Of course, it hasn't been a great effort either right now.
Speaker 1: Now, on your side of the family, were your people, were your grandparents from West Virginia too or were they from some other part of--?
Speaker 2: Virginia was where my mother [Lillian Johnson] grew up.  And my grandmother on my maternal side.  I'm not sure what happened with my father [Hobert Walker], with my father's family, except that I guess my, mother met him at the time that I was telling you in, at West Virginia State [College, Institute, West Virginia].  But I know my grandfather, I know his name is Green Walker.
Speaker 1: Green Walker.
Speaker 2: And my grandmother on my mother's side--I did know my grandfather, was Hayes Johnson.  She was Lucy Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay, Green Walker, okay.  So are there any stories that are passed down through your family about what life was like back during the days of slavery or before the [U.S.] Civil War?
Speaker 2: There was a thing that I've been very much interested in, that the early days, my parents and, all of them were very--they didn't feel comfortable telling me about slavery and all those things, which I really regret because I'm sure they had some tales that I would like to have known about, but I almost had to pull it out of them, you know, because of their own, I guess, very strong feelings about what had happened to them and to their parents.  My grandfather, Green Walker, had three wives.  And so we, we've always tried to trace down some of those people.  And so far, I have one family that, who lives--they live in Maryland right now.  And they, are trying to work on a family tree.  And they've sent me some pictures that I have here now of them.  And, but it has been very difficult because I think that the, parents didn't want to talk about it, like I would like to.  I'd like to know more.
Speaker 1: That's a common, seems to be a common denominator for most people.
Speaker 2: Well, now it is.  I sent, one time, unfortunately, I sent to one of these programs where they said we'll trace your family tree.  Have you ever seen those in the magazines?  And I put down Runner and I had a response, and a large number of them were white (laughter).  And I didn't hear any more.
Speaker 1: Now, then you have to specifically trace down African American people to get a, you know--,
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --the correct answer.
Speaker 2: But I don't know.  And all of those older people in my family are deceased  And the--my, father's sister, whose name was Luella, I think that she was an extremely light-skinned woman.  And she never would talk about who her ancestors were.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is your father's sister?
Speaker 2: My father's sister.  I have a--.
Speaker 1: Did she think she had a different father or did she--?
Speaker 2: She never said.  And then, of course, she died before I got to the point that I could be extremely insistent upon finding out more about what did happen.  And it was, it has been the sort of keep quiet like thing that they, that happened.  I'm sorry because I wish I could.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you--can you tell us what Green Walker did for a living?
Speaker 2: I never was told.  No.  I never had a chance to talk with him the way that I would love to have done so.  He died before I became a graduate student, and--but I keep up with his descendants now.  And they're trying to work on something.
Story_ID: 12669
Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother.  Can you give us her name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Lillian, L-I-L-L-I-A-N, Johnson, it was, I suppose.  And she married my husband [sic. father] Hobert.
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell us about her though, first.  Then we'll talk about your father.
Speaker 2: She was quite an interesting mother.  She always had education and, interest in wanting me to be involved in things that were--as I was growing up.  And she--.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  When was she born?
Speaker 2: Nineteen--wait a minute.  Let's see, 1900, I think it was.  But the birth date is May 10--(correcting) March 10th, 1900.  She was 82 when she died, same age as I am now.
Speaker 1: So, you were saying--.
Speaker 2: But she was a very supportive mother.  And so was my father.  And my father--.
Speaker 1: Now, I wanted to stay with the mother first, and then I'm going to ask you about your father, I promise.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: I just wanted to ask you how she, you know, how did she grow up and where did she go to school?  What did she do?
Speaker 2: Well, she grew up in Clifton Forge, Virginia.  And she seemed to have had, and really, I think she probably did have a very good, loving mother because she always wanted me to go to Clifton Forge, Virginia to be with my grandmother in the summer.
Story_ID: 12670
Speaker 1: And this is when [during summer visits to her grandmother in Clifton Forge, Virginia] I learned a lot about some of the things that have become open now to society, for instance, the Ku Klux Klan and, and things like that.  And my grandmother took me to a parade once and told me that she wanted me to go to this parade.  And she didn't tell me why. And so when we got there, the streets were lined on both sides.  And down the street came these heavily masked people who were--I didn't know.  I was about six years old when this happened.  And they were running a woman out of the city.  And she was tied down to a horse and buggy.  And she was a black woman.  And evidently, they accused her of having an affair with a white man.
Speaker 2: Now, that's very odd.
Speaker 1: And this was a parade.  And my, grandmother [Lucy Johnson], I remember her holding my hand and said, "Don't let this ever happen to you."  And I said, "What is it?"  And I still don't.  But I remember that day, specifically, because--and even since then, if I hear about the Ku Klux Klan and all of those things that happened in those days, I just sort of have a very strong feeling about it.  And so it was--but I continued to go to, I've, I continued to--I went on for years to visit with my grandmother.
Speaker 2: Just to go back to that for a second.  That seemed like a very odd occurrence in the sense that there's a woman being run out of town for a black woman accused of having an affair with a white man, which is, seems to be just the opposite of what they usually do.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Well, usually you hear about black men being persecuted for having--.
Speaker 1: No, this woman had had an affair with a white man.
Speaker 2: Well, usually white men took it as their prerogative to do whatever they wanted to do.  That's why I think it's odd.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but this was a woman.
Speaker 2: Yes, right, that's why I think it's odd because women are (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well, of course, I had never seen anybody tied down to a thing before.
Speaker 2: She was tied down to a wagon?
Speaker 1: A wagon that had--was driven by horses.
Speaker 2: And she was in the wagon?
Speaker 1: She was laying flat on the, on the--tied down, by chains.
Speaker 2: By chains?
Speaker 1: Yeah, or something of, ropes, I, you know, I can remember that.  But she didn't seem like she was alive to me, but I guess she was.  But, they said they were just running her out of town.
Speaker 2: That does seem, that seems odd, it's horrifying and odd.
Speaker 1: Yes, it is.  And the thing that got me was that there were so many people out there watching this.  And, including us (laughter).  Nobody tried to do anything about it, I guess.
Speaker 2: Nobody.
Speaker 1: Do you recall--.
Speaker 2: It wasn't like in the days here.  If something like that would happen, then it'd be a mile, a road of people out there raising the devil about it.
Speaker 1: But do you recall what happened to her?  Did you hear what happened--?
Speaker 2: Never anymore.
Speaker 1: Never anymore, all right.  All right, I'm sorry.  I just wanted to ask about that.
Speaker 2: That was, that, is something that stuck in my memory quite a long time.  And then I got a feeling that, some of us in Washington [D.C.], when I went to, to school at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], that there was a separation sometimes of the lights and the dark because of fear the people had about the, being associated with someone who was black.
Story_ID: 12671
Speaker 1: Well, so your mother [Lillian Johnson], did she have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: As I said, she and my husband [sic. father Hobart Walker] met at West Virginia State [College, Institute, West Virginia].
Speaker 1: She and your father, you mean.
Speaker 2: I mean--I'm sorry.  My husband--my mother and my father met at West Virginia State.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did you mother do for a living?
Speaker 2: My, mother didn't do too much work because he--I don't know whether you have ever recognized that head waiters or waiters had very, very prestigious jobs if they were black in those days.  And he became a head waiter at the Ruffner Hotel in Charleston [West Virginia].  And he was always received with great esteem.
Speaker 1: So your mother basically--,
Speaker 2: She reared me.
Speaker 1: --spent a lot of time at home? Now, how many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have none.  I'm an only child--
Speaker 1: So you got a lot of attention.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.
Story_ID: 12672
Speaker 1: Well tell me about your father.
Speaker 2: My father--.
Speaker 1: Give us his name and spell it for us and the date of his birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He, his name is Hobert Walker, and it's spelled H-O-B-E-R-T, W-A-L-K-E-R.  And his father's name was Green Walker.  And where these names come for, I think I told you sometimes they come back from slavery because of the occupation that slaves had, which I had done a lot of reading on.  But he never--.
Speaker 1: He didn't have any idea where the (unclear) came from?
Speaker 2: No.  He had no--he had--well, as I tell you, at that time, parents were unable to articulate these kinds of things because they felt ashamed.  And their, own self esteem seemed to be marred by telling anything like that.  And even some blacks felt, if they were light and so forth, they were in much better shape.  For instance, look at our coloring, and they knew that perhaps it came from slavery, rather than from, Africa.  But it's, a very difficult thing.  I wish I could have gotten more from them but they never wanted to talk about it too much.  But I certainly have appreciated the kind of family that I had, in terms of their relationship with me because I never felt that I was not wanted.  And I never had any feeling that things were--that, my self-esteem would be destroyed.  I always felt that I had to keep working at it.
Speaker 1: Do you think that they really were trying to protect you?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do feel, and, they didn't want me to know any of these things.  And--.
Speaker 1: Well, ma'am, now, tell us what your father was like, you know, and--.
Speaker 2: He was an extremely handsome guy.  And he was very, very friendly and outgoing.  And he moved from a waiter to the head waiter, and in that society at that time, that was quite a prestigious thing.  And when I look now, in some of the places in our eating places, there are very few black people who are hired in that role.  And those used to be main jobs and prestigious jobs.  And he did have, I think, he and my mother both had about a year of college [West Virginia State College, Institute, West Virginia]  But that was it.  And, but they never, in any way made it clear that--as a matter of fact, they made it very clear that I had to go on and do what I had to do.
Speaker 1: Go to college.
Speaker 2: Go to college and further.  And they worked hard toward that.
Story_ID: 12673
Speaker 1: Now I want you to kind of reflect back on growing up.  Now, you say your parents [Hobert Walker and Lillian Johnson] moved to Charleston [West Virginia] when you were about five, I guess?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, when I was a baby.
Speaker 1: Oh, you were a baby.  Okay, so you grew up in Charleston, but let us, give us an idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, I was lucky in a lot of way because I had--even though I was aware of the fact that I was being segregated in terms of school, I always felt that I had someone who was telling me, like, Mrs. Norman and Mrs. Carter and all of them who said, "You're somebody.  And you go ahead, and you do this, and you're going to achieve," and, they always said, "You've got to do this," and so forth.  Then when--and it wasn't, in a way that was so destructive where I was beaten or anything like that, but it was communication that we would have with teachers and with my parents.  But they never--my parents never told me all the backgrounds, but maybe they didn't know either.  And I've often thought about that, that my mother perhaps didn't.  But, she was a very outgoing person and so was my father.  I remember one year when I came home from school, my, father said, "Would you like to earn some money?"  And I said, "How much?"  He said, "Well, I got you a job as a, for the summer as a check girl in my hotel."  And the people used to give me money to check their coats.  So, it was, it was quite a year, I mean years for me.  But I, think that many of them--I was able to grow into feeling pretty good about myself.  Therefore, I could give back to others.  And, that is one of the things that I feel that we still have to work on with our kids who are in very precarious situations now.  And I'm very much interested in early childhood education.
Story_ID: 12674
Speaker 1: Tell us about growing up.
Speaker 2: Well, what do you want to know?  As I said, I spent my summers with my grandmother [Lucy Johnson Walker] in Virginia.  And they were always a lot of fun because of her--my grandmother was a very loving person.  And on occasion, I found out that people in the neighborhood where she lived were always sort of like other parents.  If you--they saw you doing something wrong, they would tell on you.  And so I felt that I was kept in a pretty strong situation.  I recall one time that one of my friends who lived under the same circumstances as I did, like she lived in Huntington, West Virginia, and I lived in Charleston, West Virginia.  And she would come to visit her grandmother in the summer.  And we were city girls.  This is the way they--so one day we decided that we wanted to see whether or not we could smoke (laughter).  And we got up under the bridge, I mean the steps in our house.  And a lady named Miss Boles (ph.) said, "I'm looking right at you, and I'm gonna tell your grandmother."  And so we waved our fingers and our nose at her (laughter).  And she didn't like that very much, of course.  And so I'll never forget that one because I had to sit in the swing for quite a long time.
Speaker 1: Was that your punishment?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I never had anybody to ever hit me.
Speaker 1: That's saying something--,
Speaker 2: Never.
Speaker 1: --because so many people do, you know.
Speaker 2: --No.
Speaker 1: That's, was that odd then that you, I mean that you--.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that until, until I was doing my-- well, I will tell you about that later.  My master's thesis, and I had to work with some families.  And I saw the kinds of things that they do to their children to satisfy their own egos.  And it really upset me.  But at that time, the neighborhood, you were, you belonged to the neighborhood, and all the ladies would tell your mama on you if you didn't do right.
Speaker 1: But you didn't--most of--well, were you aware of how the other children were punished around you?
Speaker 2: I never realized that anybody--of course, this was mostly in the--I never stayed in Charleston much in the summer.  I would go visit my grandmother [in Clifton Forge, Virginia].
Story_ID: 12675
Speaker 1: But during the winter, I'm, we were in school all the time.  I could sit in the, in the--I do remember when I was in high school that I had to go on the streetcars, they called it then, to [Henry Highland] Garnet High School [Charleston. West Virginia].  And that was a long way, which I suppose at my age, going to high school, that might not have been so good at that time.  But I never had any problems.  I never realized that until, one time decided to take the train from, take the train to--from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] , I think it was, to West Virginia.  And I felt, I got into the train and I was seated, and a black curtain fell down in front of my face when I got to Virginia because of segregation.
Speaker 2: They actually dropped a curtain?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  A big black curtain came down to separate you.  And when, you know the thing happened to Rosa Parks [civil rights pioneer], is when she wouldn't get seated, I said, oh, my goodness.  But interestingly enough, the next time I took that train, I didn't sit down.  I just walked the aisle.  And the porters on the train encouraged me but I never was ever hurt or anybody ever said anything to me.
Story_ID: 12676
Speaker 1: So when you were growing up, you didn't have, they didn't use corporal punishment to-- did they use it at school?  Did they discipline the kids at school, like give them a spanking?
Speaker 2: I never did see anything like that.  As I said, in the schools, in Charleston [West Virginia], there were these teachers who had so much going.  And the kids were so busy with activities, they, all they did was go to school, get their homework and get it done, and then go home to your mother and father, if you had one.
Speaker 1: Now, you went to Dunbar Elementary School [Charleston, West Virginia; now Dunbar Primary and Intermediate School]?
Speaker 2: I, I'm not sure whether it was--I'm sure, I almost can say yes.  It's been a little while.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I know [Henry Highland] Garnet [High School, Charleston, West Virginia].
Speaker 1: Now, when you were in grade school, what were you interested in?
Speaker 2: In grade school, you mean high school?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Oh, you mean--.
Speaker 1: Elementary school.
Speaker 2: Elementary school.  It's hard for me to, to remember.  arithmetic and all of those kinds of things I did, and apparently, I did all right because nobody ever said I didn't.  And then I did all right in high school with my subjects.  And I got into Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] all right because I had the credentials.
Story_ID: 12677
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, I guess I should take you to high school--.
Speaker 2: I remember a lot about high school.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: Well, in high school--.
Speaker 1: You went to Henry Highland Garnet High [School, Charleston, West Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, as a matter of fact, I'm a member, I'm a member of their committee now that sends them funds because they're still working at trying to change things and work with their kids.  And they're doing a good job.  They're still in business because in their neighborhoods, that's where kids are who are black, and they go to school there.
Speaker 1: So they never tried to desegregate it or anything or close it because of integration?
Speaker 2: No, if you go to, if you go to another community to live--we have segregation here in Chicago [Illinois] with it because of where people live, you know?  And it's not that, that white people can't go to these schools, but I guess like white parents feel that their children should go close to their homes too.  Well, that's how it is.  But I think that the educational process should recognize the importance of all people, and, what these people can contribute to the world that we live in.  And these are the kinds of things that I work with now.  I always work hard with, for no pay, but since I'm in retirement.  But I'm very much interested in early childhood education and the impact that that has on the future of that child, to know that, first of all, that he can leave school and able to read and write because he cannot compete with the world out here today if you don't have all of the skills.
Story_ID: 12678
Speaker 1: What I did in high school [Henry Highland Garnet High School, Charleston, West Virginia], as I said, the B-Square Club [a 4H club, a youth education organizational arm of the U.S. Department of Agriculture], that one of the teachers organized.  And they were all, these were girls.  And we had to do a little charitable work and we had to read a lot and we had to discuss our reading and, and go on trips together and all that.  And I felt that high school and church--I was involved in the, Baptist church, at that time, my parents were in.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what was the name of the church?
Speaker 1: Ebenezer.  And I got baptized, and since I came to Chicago [Illinois], I'm not a Baptist any more, but it was very interesting how scared I was when they, the minister put me down in a hole to, (laughter) baptize me, cause I thought I was gonna drown (laughter).  But it turned out to be all right.  As you can see, I made it.
Speaker 2: So you're in the B-Square Club, and you're involved in church activities? Like--?
Speaker 1: The church had some things going.  And as an adult--.
Speaker 2: Did they have the BTU or the Baptist Training Union and all that?
Speaker 1: I don't recall that.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: But the ministers were very interesting.  They would always--the Sunday school always talked about how to get along with people and what to do and all that.  The social situation around you was, still pretty difficult.  But, I mean that is, when you go to stores and so forth, you still felt a little bit like you're not wanted too much, you know.  But on the other hand, there was always somebody that would help you, like families or your parents would give you that kind of support that you needed to make it.  Then when I went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], this was not much of a problem as it was in West Virginia.  And then the CCU, you had the sororities and, and so forth that kept you busy in college.
Story_ID: 12679
Speaker 1: Now who were some of your mentors in high school?
Speaker 2: This--in high school [Henry Highland Garnet High School, Charleston, West Virginia], Mrs. Norman, I told you.  And I can't remember the other names of the--but Mrs. Norman was, especially stands out because of her concerns and interests in what we were doing and working with the parents and all that kind of thing. She had a master's as I told you, from Columbia [University, New York, New York].  And she also was a person that was rather religious, I think, and now that I look back on it.  And she felt that she had a responsibility to take care of this young person or these young persons.
Speaker 1: Now, was it a pretty big high school class or--?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't terribly large.  They--I can think of maybe about twenty or thirty people in the class.
Speaker 1: In high school, in the whole high school, I mean in your class?
Speaker 2: It's hard to remember way back there too much, but the positive things I remember very well in terms of the way Mrs. Norman treated us and, and how she got this club together. And we took pictures of each other, you know, out in the--I wish you could see us.  It was terrible.  I have a copy of it in--but I haven't, as I said, I haven't unpacked since I've been here.  And I don't have them all.
Story_ID: 12680
Speaker 1: After four years of high school [Henry Highland Garnet High School, Charleston, West Virginia], did you know exactly what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I think I came about this, say after I got to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  I met with Dr. Thurman, Howard Thurman [religious philosopher, dean at Howard University], and he got me involved in a number of activities, plus the sorority also later on.
Speaker 1: AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority]?
Speaker 2: AKAs.  But the, interesting thing is that Howard Thurman got me involved with the Student Christian Movement which was an integrated program from the northern part of the United States.  And I would get sent as a delegate to it all the time.  And this was my first opportunity to negotiate and, be involved with other races.  And sometimes I would run into people who couldn't understand that I didn't speak, what do they call it, Ebonics?  (Laughter)  And I never have, but I was never around anybody who couldn't speak the English language correctly.  And, this is why I'm very concerned about education right now in terms of my pursuits.
Story_ID: 12681
Speaker 1: Well, when, as I--when I first came, I told you, to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], I could not live in the dormitories because I was black. And this was--this hurt me a lot because I thought I was coming north, and that everything was-- but I didn't let it kill me, you know.  And--.
Speaker 2: I think there's a more detailed story here too, and I think you've told us (unclear) [simultaneous]--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, the, hum?
Speaker 2: Well, you're trying to get to--.
Speaker 1: Oh, Howard?
Speaker 2: Yeah, going from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] to the University of Chicago, you--.
Speaker 1: Yes, that was something.  When, when the University of West Virginia, which was in Charleston said, okay, but we don't have [sic. accept] blacks, but we'll pay your tuition.  I know you've heard of the story before because a number of people have told me the same thing.  And so when I got to the University of Chicago, I was--I, couldn't believe that it happened here in Chicago, that, people felt this way about blacks, especially, I couldn't live in the dorm.  And I couldn't have white students when I got to the part where I was training in--they sent me all together with, say to Provident Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] where blacks were, and where I met my husband, by the way.
Speaker 2: Now, this is 1942 or '41 [1941], '42 [1942].
Speaker 1: Forty--no, I graduated in, let's see, where was I now.  See, I graduated from Howard in '41 [1941].  And, but, what I have noticed in education and political--the political situation has been such that many of the same kinds of things occur over the years that have strengthened separation of people.  For instance, the days that they built those big housing projects where all of the people who were unable to manage--well got to be, got together.  The gangs were there and all that.  And many of those things were put together because the politicians were interested in it.  But they didn't realize how much damage that they had done.  And also, segregation in neighborhoods where you couldn't live all over.
Speaker 2: So Chicago was a surprise, I'm sure to, you know, with all the segregation.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.  But it was, in some instances it was more subtle than others.  For instance, everybody thought that if you'd get one of the housing projects, then that was good.  But I don't know.  It's still a very difficult thing because it's not over.  And as I work with some of these schools, I work with about four different organizations, and many of them are very deprived in a lot of ways.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, I want to go back to the University of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, sure, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Let's finish that.  But you were majoring in social work there?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, and who were your teachers at the University of Chicago?
Speaker 1: Oh, I got a lot of them.  It's hard to remember all of them.  As I said, Sophonisba [P.] Breckenridge [educator/social activist] was one.  Let's see, you should have asked me this before.  I've got so many of them.  I just can't right off the top of my head--.
Speaker 2: I think now, isn't the University of Chicago famous for having founded the, the field of sociology or social work?
Speaker 1: Social work, yeah.
Speaker 2: Robert Park or somebody--?  Wasn't it Robert Park, I think that founded that?
Speaker 1: I don't remember.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I know it was established by the time I got there.  But I, can't remember their names right now.  I'm getting old.  But I never had any problem in the classrooms.  The only problem I had was when I first entered and was told that I couldn't live in the dorm, which separated me from many of my classmates with whom I was friendly.  And, but as I said, Howard Thurman [religious philosopher] and a number of people in the neighborhood were able to get me with families, including one of my roommates at Howard lives here.  And her family invited me to come and live with them during this particular period.  But as I said, the university--.
Speaker 2: Who was that, I'm sorry.  Who was that?
Speaker 1: Evelyn Afferson.  But she's married to a young man who is quite active.  His name is Groves, [Attorney] Harry Groves [professor emeritus University of North Carolina Law School, Chapel Hill].  And he has been most active in the community and so forth, and so has Evelyn.  But anyway, her family invited me to come and live them, and I lived with them quite a while until I went out on my own.
Story_ID: 12682
Speaker 1: And, but I did a study with one of the professors at the university [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  His name was Robert, Robert [D.] Hess [professor of child development].  It was called the Cognitive Environment of Pre-School Children.  And he was in the history department and so forth.  And he had me to, he divided his program and his pupil that he was going to interview--.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  Hold on.
Speaker 1: Oh, the cognitive environments.  And so, in selecting his sample for his piece of research, he did it on an economic level.  And many of the people who were selected to, as people in this to be interviewed were, black.  And I recall so much, one experience that I had in the, on the campus at the university, where a mother and her 4 year old son were--I was interviewing them.  And I said to this little boy, I said, "What color are the leaves on the tree?"  And the little boy says, "I don't know."  And she slapped him down to the ground, face down.  And I said, "What's the matter?  You scared me to death."  And she said, "He embarrassed me."  So we talked about it at length, about how important it is to, with a young like this, who is very open to trying to learn things.  "How about walking him down the street and saying the tree has green leaves or the leaves on the tree are green," we would say or this is that and so forth.  She looked at me, and she started to cry.  But I haven't ever forgotten that.  And when I go to-- even now, when I go to the supermarket, children naturally explore.  And they want to take things off the counter.  People bang them in the head.  But we were trying to get to the point where parents felt good about themselves so that they could give back to their kids.  But it's still existing, it's still existing.
Story_ID: 12683
Speaker 1: But back to the university [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] again, all of the things that I thought were destructive in my first year, like you could live anywhere on the campus.  And you have many open relationships with all kinds of people.  And I was--after I finished my thesis, and I'd gotten all these things together, I went to work with the Veterans Administration.  I went to Provident Hospital [Chicago, Illinois].  And then the university employed me as an assistant professor.  And I worked there until 1950--let's see, (chuckle), I had it down over there.  But anyway, I worked at that.  And since then, this has been my goal, to work with organizations that are concerned about early childhood education.  And I have seldom--I still feel that this is important for their growth and development and that the parents have to be a part of things.  For instance, I worked with a school in the Cabrini Green [housing projects in Chicago, Illinois] area called the Holy Family Lutheran School.  I'm not a Lutheran, but many of the ladies I had known through other contacts who are Caucasians and who have worked real hard to build up this little school in the Cabrini Green area.  And we had worked very hard together, and they asked me to be on the board.  And we worked very hard together.  And in the few years that we've been together, we've been able to get several of the ones who were going to high school and so forth and so forth.  Not only are they all going to college, where before they were perhaps involved in gangs and things like that, their parents were involved.  The kids could not come to these schools, to this school unless they were involved because children do have to go home to mother and father, if they happen to have both.  And, if not, they go home.  So this has worked out very well.  And then I have Urban Gateways [Center for Arts Education, Chicago, Illinois], which is--was, was founded by a black woman in the Hyde Park area, Jessie Woods.  And this was way back in the early '50s [1950s] [founded in 1961].  And we thought about how art and education was a terrible important thing in terms of learning other things about how to get along with people, how to learn things and so forth.  And, and, but the--as I said, we had about four [students] that were in [University of] Notre Dame and [South Bend, Indiana]--college, and, and they've all been beautiful.  And the parents have really worked hard at it.  Many of them don't have money but they have skills that they can use that are important.  We are able to show that they have so many positive things that they can give to their children and to themselves.
Story_ID: 12684
Speaker 1: Well, my husband [Charles Runner] and I were at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] at the same time, but I never met him because he was reared, was born and reared in Washington [D.C.].  And he was what they called at Howard, 'the city boy.'  So I never met him on campus.  And I was on the campus in the dormitory.  And as I said, there were restrictions.  As, a freshman, I had to be in by six o'clock, no matter what.  But with the mission, I could go to someone's house if I had very strong--at Howard, they kept you pretty much together.  So I never met him at Howard, because he was a city boy.  And so when we got to Howard--I got to Chicago [Illinois], the university sent me to Provident Hospital to do some work, and which was kind of a segregated situation.  And I was a medical social worker, on the way, and I had to do ward rounds with him on occasion.  And so, you know, Provident was one of the outstanding hospitals for medical, for doctors, that, and one at [Nashville General Hospital at Meharry [Nashville, Tennessee]].  And so I met him, and we became very much interested in the other's goal, one another, our goals.  And so we got married.  And we've been married now fifty-seven years.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, I want to ask you, now, he's a pediatrician, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 12685
Speaker 1: You were--during the break you were telling me a story about the public schools in Chicago [Illinois] and some of your concerns about the early childhood education, when you tried to enroll your daughter in school.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you want me to tell that story again.  Well, what happened, when we first came here, when she was--we always put them in pre--put both of them in pre-school, you know, the, I guess you call that nursery school.  And not only do they get an opportunity to relate to other kids and to have some discipline, and so forth.  And being a working mother at the time, I always felt that they needed to have more than just a babysitter, you know, that would be--so they all--both, of them went to nursery schools.  And so when they finished, they were ready for first grade, I started thinking a little bit about public school again.  And so I lived in Hyde Park--Woodlawn area [Chicago, Illinois].  And so I took my older daughter to the school.  And I don't know whether it was a teacher or who it was, but she said, she wanted to know what I wanted.  And I said, "Well, my daughter is going to be a first grader."  And so she said, "Come on in."  And she said, "I don't have a chair for her to sit in.  So she'll have to sit in the window until I can get one."  So I said, "Good bye."  So my husband and I decided that we would put her in the University of Chicago Laboratory Schools.  And she is the one that has this, the one that I live with here had, did not have any of those problems, but she still went to pre-school.  And the one who--that I said I took to the public school for the beginning, she is an oral surgeon in dentistry, of course.  And she graduated with honors.  And I was so surprised--so proud of her because at graduation, she had seven honors.  And she is now head of her department of oral surgery with the United States government, the--I can't ever remember.  It's the Department of--well, in FDA, I think it is.
Speaker 1: Food and Drug Administration?
Speaker 2: Yeah, or something like that.  And so she's responsible to--for the committee, with the committee to, that decides on the innovations in oral surgery.  And so she was in private practice for a while.  But she, when she had two children, she decided that she would like to have a job that was more amenable to her.  And this is when she went with the government.  But I am so proud of the things that she did.  Now, this one, who is eight years later, that's when I was on the board at Planned Parenthood (laughter), we decided that we weren't gonna have another child until we got through with all of the education and so forth.  And so she is now an MBA from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And she is doing a very, very excellent job in--she first started out with university, with the First National Bank [of Chicago, now Bank One].  And then she went to the Argonne [National] Laboratories [U.S. Department of Energy research facility in DuPage County, Illinois]as a business consultant.  So she's done a very good job, and this is her home that, they were very kind enough to invite my husband [Charles Runner] and me to come and live with them.
Story_ID: 12686
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about some of your activities, because you've had, an extensive, I guess, an extensive list of volunteer activities that you've been involved with.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm, on the Board of Trustees of the Art Institute of Chicago [Illinois].  And I'm on the Women's Board of the Art Institute of Chicago.  I am on the Board of Directors of Urban Gateways of Chicago [youth art education foundation].  And this Holy Family Lutheran School [Chicago, Illinois] that I work with.  I'm on the Vesting Committee of the School of Social Work where I graduated from at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And I wrote them all down too.  My husband [Charles Runner] is on the Lyric Opera [of Chicago] Board of Trustees.  And we're very much interested in things that they're doing in terms of outreach.  But the thing that is so exciting I think, is the kind of thing that I have been doing with black creativity at the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois], where we try to--I'm on that advisory board.  And what we do is to be sure that, that the public is aware of the contributions that blacks have made in science.  And now some of the larger museums have taken on an outreach program, which they had never did before, when I first came to Chicago.  And just recently they had one of the most outstanding programs of, which is very similar to what we did at the Museum of Science and Industry, where the contributions of black Americans in the arts.  And my husband and I are very much interested in the arts too.
Story_ID: 12687
Speaker 1: Now, how did you cultivate an interest in the arts?
Speaker 2: I was telling you back there in high school [Henry Highland Garnet High School, Charleston, West Virginia] when one of these teachers, after me all the time about going to see this and that and the other.  But many times, in Charleston, I couldn't go to the museums.  But they brought pieces in, you know--.
Speaker 1: They wouldn't let black people go to the museums?
Speaker 2: Many of them couldn't get, you know--I don't know what the problem was, but we, we were never--of course, we didn't have any decent ones much in Charleston at the time.  But when we got to, got here [Chicago, Illinois], I found out that there was not so much segregation as there had not been outreach, that you could go to all of them.  But nobody ever had programs of outreach where they would say, "You're welcome."
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: We were talking about your involvement in the arts.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, well, I got some of it at, in high school.  But as soon as I got here, people started to include me in some of the activities in the Art Institute [of Chicago] and a lot of places.  And the [Lyric] Opera [of Chicago] and so my husband [Charles Runner] became a member of the board, almost twenty years ago.  And I've been on the board of the museum [of Science and Industry, Chicago, Illinois] for a little while, and on the board of Urban Gateways [youth arts education foundation] because I believe through the arts, you can achieve a lot with children in education.  One time we built--at the museum, we built a canoe or a boat.  And the parents had to help.  And we talked about the science, what it meant to be a sailor and what, things that you had to have and what the construction involved and, all of those kinds of things and the parents were there as a part of the production.  And they loved it.  The parents really enjoyed being a part of what their children were doing.
Story_ID: 12688
Speaker 1: There was a time when I first came to Chicago [Illinois] that the public schools found it very difficult to let parents participate.  But even they now have started some outreach programs because they recognize that these kids have to have some kind of, relationships with the people that they live with.  Now, not that, that doesn't always work because many of these parents have been victims of some pretty bad experiences.  But some of them recover, and I shall--I, still cannot accept the theory behind putting all of the poor people in one spot like they did with these housing projects.
Speaker 2: You know, the big high rises in Chicago--,
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Robert Taylor [Homes], Stateway Gardens and--,
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, oh, yes.
Speaker 2: Cabrini Green.
Speaker 1: And, the gangs.  And I don't know, it--we're still in a muddle.  But--.
Speaker 2: Even as they tear them down, I mean--.
Speaker 1: Well, they've torn down a lot of them because they were just awful.  And so it's a long way.  I guess maybe my journey is about over because I'm eighty-two now, you know, and not as agile as I used to be.  But I still feel that there's a long way to go in this educational experience that would help kids compete on a level with all of the other kids of various races and so forth.  It's not easy.  It's not easy.  When I hear the gangs talking about--the boys--they're saying that it's kind of--you have status if you produce a baby, you know.  And, but the baby has to come here, and this baby has to be cared for in the right way in order to survive.
Speaker 2: So it's the production that they're proud of, and not the end result.
Speaker 1: That's right.  But I must say that over the years I have had some very positive things happening--I've seen, rather, some very positive things happen, but there's a long way to go.  And this is why I'm so pleased when my daughters are involved, in addition to their professional jobs, they have other things that they give to and work with.  And their kids are involved in a number of things.  And because I still say it all starts in the womb.
Speaker 2: So you can't start early enough trying to--?
Speaker 1: That's right, and if you're gonna have a child--.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) another generation.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 12689
Speaker 1: And I feel that, many of the religious organizations, the churches and so forth have become more aware of their responsibility too.  It's not just what you learn, what you read in the Bible.  It's how you produce it with, the people who are involved and who are in churches.  And many of the churches have social service programs that I think are just very wonderful.  I belong to the Good Shepard Church [Chicago, Illinois], and one of the programs that it has is to help young people who are interested in building skills.  And these kids have learned how to put up and rehab places.  And that's a part of the church.
Speaker 2: Now, what denomination is this church?
Speaker 1: This is a Congregational church.  Many of the churches have taken on this kind of, thing now.  And I'm glad to see this.  And when I go to church, which is not as often as I used because of various things.  But I still believe that church has some responsibility to work with them.  I feel that the schools have responsibilities to do outreach.  And I, feel that those of us who can should be participants in trying to help in areas where you can.
Story_ID: 12690
Speaker 1: For instance, years and years--I belong to a board called the Illinois Humane Society [provides support for projects that benefit disadvantaged children in Illinois.]  And now you'd think that was for animals.  Well, years ago, the lady lost her husband and so they were very much involved in pets.  And so after a while, it didn't last, that didn't last long because what they decided to do was that they would only give to children in a--and so, I don't know whether you recall in Chicago [Illinois], there were little, down by Water Tower, there's some little fountains where this lady set up these, the Illinois Humane Society and this lady set up these things for horses to be watered.  And that would be--and that would--I would think, I guess it was, at the point--supplied or to perform as the will had said, but now everything that comes in is for children.  And everything they give out of the fund is for the children, and their involvement.  And they have done a fantastic job.
Speaker 2: Now, what fund is this?
Speaker 1: Illinois Humane Society.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --And it's, hard to, it's hard to give to, as many requests as they require.  But we do it to the degree we can.  We're usually just to start off programs, you know.  We cannot go on forever doing it.  They would have to find other ways of supporting their efforts.  And if you show that you have this going that way, then we'll give you the start-up money, and if the project is new.
Speaker 2: What kind of projects are they doing?  Can you give an example of one or two?
Speaker 1: Well, they do a number of things.  And most of them, as I said, are all related to the needs of children.  We don't build houses.  We don't build bricks.  This is something that is for the child to grow.  And I'm trying to think of some particular--well, for instance, Urban Gateways [youth arts education foundation; Chicago, Illinois], they give to that too sometimes, if we have new projects.  And if we have something new in the, say Urban Gateways, or if, say summer camp program where many kids can get a chance to get away.
Story_ID: 12691
Speaker 1: I want to ask you a question, and, you know, I've often wondered about this, but the--most people are for, like outings and exposing children to--.
Speaker 2: Camp?
Speaker 1: Well, camp, to the symphony, to the arts and culture and, you know, tutorial programs and so forth, but there aren't--there doesn't seem to be, it doesn't seem to me to be that many people in the black community right now advocating the, I guess the disciplining children without hitting them, you know, or, it's the--,
Speaker 2: Well, you see--.
Speaker 1: --decision of corporal punishment, you know.
Speaker 2: But, you see, this is the thing that we're trying to get--this is why you involve the parents in many of the activities that you have because the children do have to go home to these, these child--to these parents.  And if parents feel that they are somebody and that they can be helpful, they, some of them, some of them can't go backwards.  I mean they, they have not--.
Speaker 1: They can't change.
Speaker 2: They can't change.  But I think in many instances, if we get the thing early enough, we can, we can change.
Story_ID: 12692
Speaker 1: Does it seem like it's [corporal punishment on children] a holdover from the South or, do you think it's a holdover from slavery itself or what do you think?
Speaker 2: I've never said, I've never felt that, that it's a holdover--well, maybe it is because in so many ways black people are not respected.  And there's a--it's a very--there's a lot of what you'd call subtle segregation that, perhaps--I don't know.  Some, that don't know how to change it because in so many instances, our schools are segregated because of where we live.  And it's unfortunate that, some people have had to go into private schools and, so forth.  But no child--if you live near the school, the place--if you live in a more integrated neighborhood, can get into any school.  I mean nobody's going to say you can't if you're in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was asking about corporal punishment though.
Speaker 2: Oh, corporal punish--.
Speaker 1: It seems like it's something that's, that people defend.  They speak up in favor of it.  Now, very few people would--.
Speaker 2: You mean about the death penalties and things?
Speaker 1: No, corporal punishment, being, the right to spank your children--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Corporal punishment, the right to spank your children and that seems, and defended by some as a sacred right.
Speaker 2: Oh, a lot of people, yeah--.
Speaker 1: "These are my kids," they say.  "I can do what I want to with them," and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: That's right, and they do have the right to do what they want to do, but if we can do--if we can get them to understand that there are other ways to handle this.  You don't have to hit and kill and do--the news is, everyday, somebody's throwing a baby in the, garbage can because it cried too much.  And another shouldn't have had a baby in the first place because they were not capable of taking care of the baby.  And so this, kind of information has to, has to get through, maybe even to the schools and every place else, that you cannot, you just cannot go along and abuse kids and, say, "I'm the mother, I have the right to do that."
Speaker 1: I don't think that most people think of it as abuse.  They think of it as discipline or correction.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it is an abuse.  And it is--there are other ways of dealing with this.
Speaker 1: That must be tough, tough job trying to teach people an alternative way.
Speaker 2: It is.  That's right.  But if you can get, if you can get whatever parents will accept, parents involved, as well as the children, and if our school systems and all emphasize the importance of learning, the importance of getting along with people and enjoying some of the things that are here in life that you can, for instance, through the museums and all of that, because each one of the museums now, each one has an outreach program of some type.  For instance, the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois] that I work with, they have just loads of things that parents can do with their children.  And our schools can do the same thing.  As a matter of fact, we have in the Museum of Science and Industry, during 'Black Creativity Month', we have a symposium, where the parents and the teachers and the--everybody is involved and on various subjects.  And they use the museums.  They use the space and that, and it has been most successful.  But it takes, a little effort and a little dedication or understanding of what it means to give your child an opportunity to explore their creativity without beating him to death because kids are--they reach out immediately.  And if they see this thing right here, they just turn it and maybe it'll fall down.  But if you work with them, and tell them that this is, you don't do that.
Speaker 1: Well, you've got to stop them, but you don't want to--.
Speaker 2: Well, you have other ways of punishing them.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: You do.  So I don't know what the answer is going to be.  But there's always going to be, as you look through history, we've always had cruel people, but (laughter), but if you can do anything, if you save one, maybe you'll save all of the lot.
Story_ID: 12693
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were just discussing how a lot of times some of the parents are, have never had a chance to really grow up themselves.
Speaker 2: No, many of them are babies having babies.  And they make--they don't know what's good and what's--they think that perhaps spanking and--but I don't, I mean just some of the violence some of them use is just awful.
Speaker 1: It's beyond spanking.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but if we could get to those parents, and if we could get to our educational systems and, some of the charitable agencies and help parents, churches, all of them have to be involved in this because it's going to be--it's so sad to see how many people are going to prison for just child abuse and all those kinds of things and murder.
Story_ID: 12694
Speaker 1: Now, this is a question we always ask.  And this is, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, a lot of things that I feel.  One, we have to get the home situation and to parents and help them to, work with their children and, not destroy the parents.  I mean not say I'm gonna kill you or something like that, but give them some opportunity to, associate with the group, the organizations that are trying to help.  Another thing is we, the educational system has to be such that a child is able to learn how to compete in this world with all the other people for jobs.  If you can't read and write when you finish high school, nobody's going to employ you.  It's bad enough because of racial prejudice when they don't employ you anyway, but when you know you have the equipment, and you have the resources, you have a way, of fighting back better.  But if you don't know how to read and write, you can't do it.  Another thing is that job situations, it's a lot of discrimination in jobs.  There's still a lot of discrimination in terms of women and what role they should play.  I wish I knew all the answers.  The only thing that I know to do is what I see and am able to do in terms of, early childhood education, and that's one of my emphases.  And, and I--and that does not exclude parents.  And that our educational system is really devoted to making these children able to handle the modern world that we're in.
Story_ID: 12695
Speaker 1: Now, Black Creativity, now, you were one of the founders of Black Creativity?
Speaker 2: I'm one of the, of the way that it is now, yes.
Speaker 1: And Black Creativity is a program of the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois], a Black History Month program?
Speaker 2: Yes, and it's all based on--what we try to do is to give the program to the museum's effort, which is the science in education.  Now, we have a program for about, I've forgotten how many years ago now, we set up an exhibit called 'Black Achievers in Science.'  And that has traveled all over this country.
Speaker 1: Now, who are some of the people that are highlighted in this exhibit?
Speaker 2: What do you mean by that?
Speaker 1: Well, what are their names and what do they do because there's a, I think it's a perception of, I think you were trying to combat the perception that there were, there were no black scientists or--I think youth have a perception.  I mean they couldn't--most youth can't name a black scientist, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can.
Speaker 1: But, no, most youth, young people can't name a black scientist.
Speaker 2: No, they--nobody knows--.
Speaker 1: But you can, that's why you-- yeah, right.
Speaker 2: I knew when I, I knew that the first heart exam was done by a black.  Many of the inventions, the stoplight that you, that stops us all down the down street, that was created by a black man.  And, oh, I'm getting older now.  I can't always get all the names straight, but I know what they are.  And that is a part of the thing that some of these kids to know and for all people to know that, black people have some talents and that they should be included, not just excluded because if you can't learn--if you can't get your food everyday, you go out and steal it.  That's what a lot of people do.  And then they get in jail.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this exhibit highlights the arts too, I mean--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we have, we have--that's part of the program, but the main part is this symposium for parents, children and teachers in the community.  Now, the Art Institute [of Chicago] has an outreach program to help children and parents to understand some of the feelings of--I mean some of the programs that would take them into different world where they can see what the artist is thinking about when he's, for instance, one--I don't know whether you remember the, one where the two farmers are standing.  And they have their farming tools--.
Speaker 1: Oh, 'American Gothic' by Grant Wood.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  We took a couple of, one of the docents and I took one little group of boys from one of the public schools.  And this little boy says, "He's not bad.  He's trying to work hard."  And so then somebody discussed this with him.  And so they look at some of the reasons why painting are done and what it means to the, to the artist.  And then they may feel their own talents.  Many of them are able to make figures and describe some of their feelings through their artwork.
Speaker 1: So they get hands-on experience.
Speaker 2: That's right.  It's not easy, and I, in no way, am trying to say that I have all the answers because I don't.  All I do is work with some of the things that I feel that I can handle.  And in terms of my beliefs and that is, that I believe that every child should have an opportunity to develop his greatest potential.
Story_ID: 12696
Speaker 1: Have you volunteered your services for any of the political activities in Chicago [Illinois] like--?
Speaker 2: I'm not, I'm not much of a politician, but I vote (laughter).  And I make up my mind for the, who I like because of what they have projected as their efforts.  But I'm not, I'm not quite a great politician.
Speaker 1: Well, were you involved at all in the Harold Washington campaigns [for mayor of Chicago Illinois] in '83 and '87 [1983, 1987]?
Speaker 2: Well, when I--when you say involved, I've never been in the streets, you know, marching and so forth like that.  But I make choices based on what I feel this person is bringing to the, job that he is running for.
Story_ID: 12697
Speaker 1: When you look back at some of the things you've done, what would you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: What do you mean by that?
Speaker 1: Well, when you look back at things you've accomplished, and what are the benchmarks or what do you think are the most important things?
Speaker 2: Well, that's for others to decide too, but for me, I'm still interested in early childhood education and I work very hard at trying to see that that is accomplished as early as--and I feel that every child has, as I said before, should have an opportunity to develop his greatest potential.  And, that goes for--that's for the school system, the churches, the politicians and all of them should have that kind of feeling because if you don't, you're gonna have many, many things that you're sorry for because people are going to--I said sometimes people are beasts (laughter).  And I don't feel in any way that I have any solutions to all of these, but I certainly feel that there are certain things that every person is--should have an opportunity to develop his greatest potentials.  And if he doesn't have it, then there's something wrong with our society.
Story_ID: 12698
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?  That's slightly different.
Speaker 2: Oh, God, I hadn't even thought of that, but, that--I don't know.  I hadn't even thought of that.  But if people go with what I've just told you, then that's the way I'd like to be remembered, as someone who cared about someone else and not just yourself.
Speaker 1: So you think to be concerned about issues and events beyond oneself is a growth?
Speaker 2: I think it's a growth in yourself.  I mean, for instance, if you can only think about yourself, then you're pretty, pretty limited.  But I think that each person has a responsibility to reach out in some way.  Perhaps you're not able to, but people are sick, people are, you know--but I think with children, that, should be a major thing with most people, to help that child to develop his greatest potential.  You'd be surprised at things that, my daughters do with their kids.  They, swim.  They go to church and do their own little activities.  They have their little birthday parties and things where they all get together.  And my older granddaughter, who lives here, and one of her classmates at the [University of Chicago] Lab[oratory] School [Chicago, Illinois] had a science project on bubbles.  It's a scientific process.  And they had to do a lot of reading.  They had to do a--and then they had to create a poster that would explain what they're doing scientifically.  And you'd be surprised the vocabulary that they developed as a result of this, that just even that--just that particular one.  And the six year old who lives here can read unbelievably because she has a sister who reads and her, and her schooling is geared toward it.  And she can, she can blow out the, the 'S's' and, all of these things, you know.  And see, in first grade, she reads better than I think a second grade or third grade.  Now, I recognize that every child does not have the same mental capacity, but I think you should use every bit that's there, as much as you possibly can.  And that, I know there are a lot of people who are much busier than I am or anybody who have--are giving a lot.  And not just money because money gets to be a problem too with everybody.  But if you have some kind of feeling that you want to help someone to help--and you really mean it, you can, and it doesn't--you don't have to get accolades all the time for what you do.
Story_ID: 12699
Speaker 1: Oh, now, this is a wedding picture.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a wedding picture, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness.  We look different, don't we?
Speaker 2: Okay, and that was 1941?
Speaker 1: '45 [1945].
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Runner with her husband Charles Runner on their wedding day.  From the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12700
Speaker 1: ...thetop left photo.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, that is members of the board of Urban Gateways [youth arts education foundation] that I belong to.  And the Oriental lady here is the chief executive officer.  And all the rest of us on there are board members.
Speaker 1: Okay, about what year was that taken?
Speaker 2: About two years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, 2001.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Runner and members of the Urban Gateways, 2001.  From the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12701
Speaker 1: This is John Hope Franklin and his wife.  And this is Mrs. Afferson--.
Speaker 2: In the center?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  And her--.
Speaker 2: So we're going left to right.
Speaker 1: And her daughter, her daughter and her husband.
Speaker 2: John Hope Franklin's wife, right?  This is--.
Speaker 1: That's Mrs. Afferson.  And that's Evelyn Afferson-- oh, Lord (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's her daughter anyway.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, that's her daughter and that's her husband.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Runner, John Hope Franklin and his wife, Evelyn Afferson and her daughter and husband, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12702
Speaker 1: I don't know what year that was.  My granddaughter, it was after, it's after we had an automobile accident on the, on the Outer Drive one time, I mean not, on the route to, oh, Washington [D.C.].  I notice he still has his scar like I do (laughter).
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Runner and husband Charles Runner, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12703
Speaker 1: Well, this is The Girlfriends [Inc.].  It's a national organization of women.  And we give to charity, but for the most part, we have a great time.
Speaker 2: And when was this?
Speaker 1: This was made in 19-- just this year.
Speaker 2: Okay, 2003.
Speaker 1: And, Larry [Crowe, interviewer], could you point her out in there.
Speaker 2: You can hardly see me.
Speaker 1: She is right there.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Runner and members of The Girlfriends Inc., 2003.  From the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12704
Speaker 1: Those were taken about three years ago.  I've still got on that same dress, as my kids says.
Speaker 2: Okay, it's The Girlfriends [Inc.] again?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Three years ago, all right.
Speaker 1: [Photo - Dorothy Runner and members of The Girlfriends [Inc.], ca. 2000.  From the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12705
Speaker 1: Those are the officers [of The Girlfriends Inc.].  This was (unclear).  Oh, shoot.  Jean, it's Ann Collins and Hutchinson and I can't think of the other two.
Speaker 2: I know this lady from somewhere.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you do.  I haven't seen her in a while.
Speaker 2: [Ann Collins and officers of The Girlfriends Inc., not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12706
Speaker 1: That's your mother.  When was this photo taken?
Speaker 2: Back in the '80's-- in the '80's [1980s] cause she died in '82 [1982].  That was taken in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: What was your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Lillian Walker.
Speaker 1: [Dorothy Runner's mother Lillian Walker, ca. 1970s.  From the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12707
Speaker 1: ...Ricardo Millett and that's their daughter, Maya.
Speaker 2: [Ricardo Millett's daughter Maya and unidentified woman, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12708
Speaker 1: Anne Steptoe, who is now deceased and Gillespie, Hanna Gillespie.  They're all good friends.
Speaker 2: [Anne Steptoe and Hanna Gillespie, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12709
Speaker 1: Want to just shoot the back of it?  I think all--.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Runner and unidentified group of women, not dated, from the collection of  Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12710
Speaker 1: When was that picture taken?
Speaker 2: We lived at 1367 East Park Place, which is over near the University [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Yeah, but when is it?
Speaker 2: Hum?
Speaker 1: When, what year?
Speaker 2: We lived there forty years--.
Speaker 1: No, I mean what year was this photo, shot, taken?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: [Dorothy Runner's husband Charles Runner not dated, from  the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12711
Speaker 1: When were we in Germany, '54?, '53, '54 [1954, 1953].
Speaker 2: Who is with you?
Speaker 1: Hodge is their last name, Margaritte.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Runner and Margaritte Hodge, ca. 1953-1954.  From the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12712
Speaker 1: The portrait of you, when was that done?
Speaker 2: Hum?
Speaker 1: When was this portrait--?
Speaker 2: God, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Can you give us an approximation date?
Speaker 2: I just don't know.
Speaker 1: Did your husband [Charles Runner] do it?
Speaker 2: Hum?
Speaker 1: Did your husband take it?
Speaker 2: I don't know who took that.  I think he did.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: [Portrait of Dorothy Runner, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12713
Speaker 1: Okay, and who's going to Germany in that photo?
Speaker 2: I am with my daughter.
Speaker 1: [Dorothy Runner with daughter boarding a TWA flight, ca. 1950s. From the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12714
Speaker 1: What's that say?
Speaker 2: 1951.
Speaker 1: Oh boy.
Speaker 2: So, what was the occasion for this photograph?
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: I think it's on here too.  See, it's in fine print, white print.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, the Mental, Mental Hygiene.
Speaker 1: [Dorothy Runner and members of the regional office of Soc. Serv. Mental Hygene, Chicago, Illinois 1951.  From the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12715
Speaker 1: (No narration)
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Runner and unidentified girl, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12716
Speaker 1: That's Veonas Bera, and she's Joe Louis' sister.  And it says, "To my best friend, Penny."  We called her Penny.
Speaker 2: She looks like him, too.
Speaker 1: Yes, she looks just like Joe.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Runner's friend Veonas Bera, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12717
Speaker 1: That's Hobert Walker and Dorothy [sic Lillian Johnson]--see you've got one of him already, so you don't need that one.  My husband--I mean my father.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Runner's parents Hobert and Lillian Johnson, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12718
Speaker 1: ...at our old house, with my African collection behind her (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, now, who is Denise Jefferson with?
Speaker 1: She's with Alvin Ailey.
Speaker 2: Dance company?
Speaker 1: [Dancer Denise Jefferson at Dorothy Runner's home, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12719
Speaker 1: Susan, my dentist.  This is Dr. Susan Runner Gold.
Speaker 2: [Dorothy Runner's daughter, Dr. Susan Runner, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12720
Speaker 1: What's your grandson's name?
Speaker 2: This is (laughter), this Ben, Bennie, Benjamin.
Speaker 1: [Dorothy Runner's grandson Benjamin, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12721
Speaker 1: What was this photo taken for?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Passport?
Speaker 2: Could be.  I've used a lot of them.
Speaker 1: [Dorothy Runner, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
Story_ID: 12722
Speaker 1: Let's see this is a convention, I think that was meeting here, of the Northeasterners [The Northeaterners Inc., African American social club], yeah.  Yeah, that's what it is, everybody's on there.
Speaker 2: Can you describe any of them?  I mean could you tell us who some of them are?
Speaker 1: Well, that's Dr. Jefferson.  He's a clown, I put a clown suit on him.  And let's see who else.  There's Dr. and Mrs., what's her name?  Joe Mitchell. And there's Charles and Sue Ish, it's, Etta [Moten] Barnett and her daughter.  You see right there under the clown.  That's Etta Barnett, yeah, and that's, below that is her daughter, Sue.  And let's see, I don't know when--boy, it's been so long ago.  There's Lou Hall right there and Irma Jefferson (ph.)--
Speaker 2: Right here?
Speaker 1: No, right, right here with the gray hair, right--looking at me (laughter) .  Who can I see?  I can't see it myself?  That's Harietta Matthews with the short dress on in the middle.
Speaker 2: This one right here.
Speaker 1: Harietta Matthews, and that's her husband.  He used to be head of Provident Hospital [Chicago, Illinois.]  His name is Henry Matthews.
Speaker 2: [Collage of Dorothy Runner and other Northeasterners, not dated, from the collection of Dorothy Runner.]
