Story_ID: 178087
Speaker 1: Now, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The History Makers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Ruby Nell Sales, R-U-B-Y, N-E-L-L, S-A-L-E-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July 8, 1948, Jemison, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And you spell Jemison?
Speaker 2: J-E-M-I-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, Jemison, Alabama.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What is your occupation?
Speaker 2: The director of SpiritHouse [Project].
Speaker 1: And what is SpiritHouse?
Speaker 2: SpiritHouse is a national social justice that uses research, action, arts, educations and coalition building to solve social justice issues.
Speaker 1: All right and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is August--I'm September 15--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --That's okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: --2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at the headquarters of SpiritHouse (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --in Wash--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 178088
Speaker 1: Well, before we go into depth, there are five light-weight questions that we always ask and they just require a short answer, kind of warm-up questions, and the first one is, ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite is collard greens.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, purple.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, spring and fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: All right.  And finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A favorite phrase or saying: beloved community.
Story_ID: 178089
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, let me ask you about your family history.  You can give me the names of your mother and father, dates, and places of birth and, you know, spell the names for us too.
Speaker 2: My father's name was Joe Sales [ph.] and he was born in Jemison, Alabama.  As a matter of fact, I was born in the same bed that my father was born and by the same midwife that delivered my father, so my father was born in about the early 1900s in Jemison, Alabama.  And my mother is Willie Mae Sales Griffin.  She was born 1928 in Jackson County, Florida.
Speaker 1: What--does she have a maiden name?
Speaker 2: Her maiden name is Baker.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She was born in Jackson County, Florida?
Speaker 2: Jackson County, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 178090
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about your father's [Joe Sales (ph.)] side of the family?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace them and what situation did they come out of and?
Speaker 2: Well, I can ideally trace them all the way back to enslavement where my father's family comes around Buckingham, Virginia--county Virginia, and migrated down to North Carolina, South Carolina and ultimately LaGrange, Georgia, where my grandfather, Jim Sales, migrated over to Jemison, Alabama, so they were part of the migration south after Emancipation Proclamation, after the Civil War.
Speaker 1: So they went south instead of north.  That's interesting.
Speaker 2: They went south, yes.  That was the trend a lot right after enslavement.  The trend was to move southward.
Speaker 1: Oh, and westward I guess too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from that side of the family, about what your ancestors endured, any good stories?
Speaker 2: Well, the only story we know is about my grandfather, Jim Sales, who was born in, I would say, somewhere in the 1850s or '60s [1860s], and he was a preacher, an itinerant, traveling preacher, who settled down in Jemison, Alabama when he met my grandmother, who was a school teacher.  My grandmother was born in Talladega, Alabama.  Her father was a postman and she was a school teacher, and she married my grandfather when he came through Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she have to stop teaching school after she got married?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  She stopped teaching school, and they moved to Jemison, Alabama, where they proceeded to have twelve children.
Speaker 1: Wow, that's a lot--yeah, it's hard to teach school and have twelve children I guess.
Speaker 2: And my grandmother's name was Ola Free Sales [ph.] and died when she was about 109 or 110 years old.  And they said that my grandmother was a little piece of leather who was well put together.
Speaker 1: [Laughter]  That's interesting.
Speaker 2: [Laughter]
Speaker 1: Did you ever meet her?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely when I was born, she was seventy-five or eighty years old and she came to Columbus, Georgia a lot when we were children.  Plus, I went to visit her every summer.  My grandmother died in the '70s [1970].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was really an important foundation in my life growing up.  I always identified myself through the Sales line, very little through my mother's line, but very much through my father's line.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories about her that you can share with us?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  She was a hypochondriac and if someone came to the house and they said, "Oh, Ms. Sales, I think I have a toothache," she would say, "Good, God, I think I've caught it too."  So she was a hypochondriac.  We would tease her and every day, my grandfather would come home, she would say, "Jim, I don't think I'm going to make it to see another day."  And, of course, she lived to a ripe old age, and my grandmother was a walker.  Even when she was ninety-five years old, she could out-walk you and she went to work until she was 100.  She was working in the house of a woman called, Mrs. Jeffries [ph.], and she called her "old lady Jeffries," and they really at some point were the only two people alive of that generation, so went not to work because she had gotten too to go to work, but more to keep Mrs. Jeffries company, to keep each other company because they had known each other for almost eighty years.
Speaker 1: That just speaks of some of the complicated relationships in the South--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --between black people and white people, even coming out of that almost the slave period--almost.  I guess she was came along during Reconstruction.
Speaker 2: She came--no, no, no.  My grandmother was born at the tail end of enslavement.  I am the descendant--my grandmother--I'm first generation--well, actually my father is first generation.  I'm second generation free person.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she was actually born during slavery?
Speaker 2: She was actually born during enslavement.  When she died, Jet magazine carried an article about her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any other stories about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, nothing I mean except they were very gregarious group of people.
Story_ID: 178091
Speaker 1: And my father [Joe Sales (ph.)] was highfalutin.  There are stories about my father.  He was in the [U.S.] Army, and he was a chaplain in the army.  And he was one not to want to take orders that he didn't want to do, so he had a way of manipulating one general against the other; and he would run--if somebody wanted him to sweep the floor, he would say, "My M.O. is not sweeping the floor," and then he would go to the general whom he had gotten to know very well and complained about being asked to sweep the floor.  And the general would go to the other person and say, "That's not his job," so my father was someone who didn't cotton to being reduced, dehumanized.  He was rebellious in that way--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --a fighter.
Speaker 2: He was a minister by profession?
Speaker 1: Yes, and he was an enlisted man in the army, and it didn't matter to him if someone was a general or a colonel if he didn't want to do what they said, he was going to find a way around it.
Story_ID: 178092
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your mother's [Willie Mae Baker Sales Griffin] side of the family, how much do you know about them?
Speaker 2: I know a lot about them--in the sense that my mother's mother died when she was twelve years old and she was reared by her sister.  And my mother came from a very, very large family, and my mother's family was very, very dark-skinned people.  And my mother was very, very light skinned and that created some conflict in the family.
Speaker 1: Was there suspicion that she had a different father than the others?
Speaker 2: No, their suspicion was that because she was always someone who was driven to improve herself to move up out of poverty, they associated that drive with her color--that she thought she was better than they were because she was yellow.
Speaker 1: Oh, well that was some of color ideas that was perpetuated by the slave condition.  So, I mean, did she have any notions that she was better, herself, because of her color?
Speaker 2: Absolutely not, but she certainly had a notion that she wanted to improve herself. She was very clear about that, and she wanted to try to have access to an education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, did she get a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: Well, she did go to school but not until she met my father [Joe Sales] and married my father, which is a whole other story.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, she was raised by her sister--(simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: By her sister, yes.
Story_ID: 178093
Speaker 1: How did she [Sales' mother, Willie Mae Baker Sales Griffin] meet your father [Joe Sales (ph.)]?  When did they meet?
Speaker 2: She met my father because after years of being brutalized and beaten by her sister, she finally ran away from home.  And she ran to her brother who lived in Alabama, Alabaster, Alabama; and her brother was married to my father's first cousin.  And my sister-- and my mother's sister sent word that she was going to send someone to get my mother because my mother was still under age.  And so she had been talking with my father, and he had impressed with his big words; and he was a very intelligent man.  He was in his thirties actually, very intelligent, and in the [U.S.] Army; and so when the conversation continued, you know, that my mother was going to go back and that her sister was sending very threatening messages to her, my father said, "You don't have to go back, I'll marry you."  And that's how their marriage began.
Speaker 1: How old was your mother at that time?
Speaker 2: My mother was eighteen years old--seventeen years old, going on eighteen.
Speaker 1: Your father was thirty?  You said about?
Speaker 2: Thirty-six.
Speaker 1: So about a twenty year difference, almost.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Almost, nineteen year difference.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 178094
Speaker 1: Any other stories about your mother's [Willie Mae Baker Sales Griffin] side?  Did they ever reconcile?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  Of course, they reconciled through the years and my mother and her sisters have good relationships.  And my mother's family is a singing family.  They can out sing anybody, and my mother is the only one in the family who can't sing, but her family is a singing family.  And her sister, actually, the one who was very brutal to her had a conversion experience and became an evangelist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her name was Big Sister.
Speaker 1: Her name was--oh okay.
Speaker 2: And, of course, she's dead.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, but they called her Big Sister.
Speaker 2: Big Sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did they have a formal, organized singing group as such?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, they had a singing group that went around Florida.
Speaker 1: What were they called?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the name.
Speaker 1: Oh, all right.  Well, that's something. That's important.  Okay.  Any other stories about them--I mean did you ever hear them sing?
Speaker 2: Yes, I've heard my cousin Clarence sing, yes, and we've gone to funerals.  Their family has sung at funerals--at family funerals, and my mother's family--need to say very clearly, we're migrant farmers.  In the south, at that particular time, black people followed the season and went from plantation to plantation following the season, and so my mother's family, some part of her existence, they were migrant farmers, who even came up north, but my mother never followed the season and didn't want to do that, and never did that.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: So when she married my father, she went from a very poor life to a reasonably middle-class life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, she improved her condition.
Speaker 2: Yes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --considerably.
Speaker 2: Considerably, yes.
Speaker 1: Um--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Another thing I'd like to add about my mother is that she was very beautiful.  People often compared her to Lena Horne; and I didn't like for her to come to school because people would she--make wise cracks about how beautiful she was when we were in high school, the boys.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They would do that?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 178095
Speaker 1: Do you have any sisters?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --or brothers?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have three brothers and one sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where do you fall in the group?
Speaker 2: I'm the second eldest.
Speaker 1: And can you name them for us?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, James Sales is my oldest brother, then there's me, and then there is Joseph Sales, who's now Yusuf Salaam, and then there is Rhonda Sales and Michael Sales.  My youngest sibling is my sister, Rhonda Sales.
Story_ID: 178096
Speaker 1: All right, now, tell us about growing up, what are some of the--what did your neighborhood look like?
Speaker 2: We grew up--we started out our life on a street called Thomas Street in Columbus, Georgia.  You must realize now that my father [Joe Sales (ph.)] was in the [U.S.] Army, so we started out in Thomas Street in Columbus, Georgia and that was the typical kind of shotgun house that you had in the South.  And, as I indicated to you, my father was highly ambitious and always to be "a big shot," so we were the first people on the block who got a toilet, a real inside toilet.  Then we moved from the shotgun house to the new subdivision called Carver Heights, and that's where all the doctors, lawyers, and teachers lived.  And so we lived on a corner, right on the corner, between the neighborhood where we had left and the middle-class neighborhood to where we had just moved, so I could literally stand in my backyard and see both worlds.  So I grew up as a corner person.
Speaker 1: So you see where you came from as--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Yes.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --as you stood in the yard.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was your neighborhood an all-black neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was an all-black neighborhood, principally a lot of GIs.  A lot of soldiers lived in that neighborhood because they had much more income than the ordinary person in Columbus, Georgia.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the base that was there?
Speaker 2: Fort Benning.
Speaker 1: Fort Benning, Georgia, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yes, I grew at Fort Benning, Georgia.
Speaker 1: My father and a lot of people have been through Fort Benning for basic training.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Okay.
Story_ID: 178097
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights, smells on growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, I grew up in such incredible neighborhood, community, of wonderful older people who really had a commitment to our growth; and I grew up in a community that was very vibrant with people sitting on the porch, and children playing outside barefooted and you could be five or six blocks away from your home, but when the sun began to come down, it was the responsibility of the whole community to make sure you got home.  So if I were playing in Thomas Street, which was like fifteen blocks away, and I'd act like I didn't want to go home, some older person would say, "Don't you see the sun is going down. It's time to go home."  Or if my mother [Willie Mae Baker Sales Griffin] were calling me, and I pretended that I didn't hear her, the whole community would say, "Ruby Nell, Ruby Nell, your momma is calling you," so we grew up in that kind of community.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so close community?
Speaker 2: Close community with high aspirations and very committed to education.
Story_ID: 178098
Speaker 1: My community thought education would be a panacea against injustice and we invested the greatest deal of our resources into education.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So I attended a high school called Carver High School [Columbus, Georgia], where in my high school alone we have five merit scholars.  In my brother's class alone, we had seven.  We were very much like Dunbar High School here in Washington, D.C.  Our physical education was an Olympic star, Isabelle Daniels, who had run with the Tigerettes.  She was our physical education teacher.
Speaker 2: The Tigerbelles from Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 1: Yes.  So my principal would go and literally raid black colleges for the best and the brightest and he would bring them to Carver High School.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And during integration, Carver High School's reputation was so incredible in the State of Georgia that white kids were bused to Carver High School.  They took over the school for the school's reputation.  And black kids in my community were bused out into another school.
Story_ID: 178099
Speaker 1: Now I want to ask you about grade school.  I don't want to get into high school just yet, but that is good information.  What were some of the other sights and smells of growing when you were a little kid?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the sights--church was definitely a part of--my father [Joe Sales] was a minister.  We went to the church every Sunday, so church, and singing, and the Amen corner.  That was a great part of our growing up years.  We did this thing called, "See Saw, Spring Board," those kinds of games, marbles; that was really great part of my growing up years.  A very democratic community where people of different economic positions lived next door to each other in some way; that was a part of the growing up years of being a young child.  I went to a Catholic school, Mary Mother Mission because my father did not want us to go to a one-room school house.  At the time, the school for African American children, elementary school children, was in a one-room school house.  And we went to a place called Mary Mother Mission, which was in [Phenix City] Alabama, not in Georgia.  So every morning, we would take the bus to go to elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was in elementary school that I was skipped.
Story_ID: 178100
Speaker 1: Tell me about--what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: My church was First African Baptist Church [Columbus, Georgia].
Speaker 1: First African Baptist Church?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That was an age when we were referred to as "Negroes" for the most part, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and before that colored. Was a very old church--(simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: --mainly negroes.  Yes, First African Baptist Church.--simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --So it was an old church?
Speaker 2: Very old, 18 something 1876 [sic, 1915] or something.
Speaker 1: Oh, because there was a period in time when black institutions were named African.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: African Methodist Episcopal Church.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: African Meeting House, and somewhere along the line, we started calling ourself, "colored."
Speaker 2: Yes, right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so First African Baptist Church.
Speaker 2: The oldest black church in Columbus, Georgia.
Story_ID: 178101
Speaker 1: What's the relationship between the people in Columbus, Georgia in those days in terms of black aspiration?   You say you had this fine high school.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: This Carver High School [Columbus, Georgia] which sounds like a tremendous achievement, you know, for that community.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: But what were things like?  I mean what was (unclear) way?
Speaker 2: First of all, our principal was Samuel Prince Charleston and we used to say that he was a prince of a man.  And he worked real hard to create a learning environment where you were encouraged to reach your fullest potential, so it was an environment where academics was really valued.  He didn't care how much money or how little money you had.  If you were smart, you were somebody, so that was the pervasive value in our high school.  Sports were significant but they were not as significant as being smart.
Speaker 1: Now, the historian and the pundit from New York, the late John Henrik Clarke.
Speaker 2: He's from Columbus.
Speaker 1: He grew up in Columbus, Georgia and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Spencer High School--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --yeah, he talked about the encouragement he received from people when he showed a proclivity to read--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and put things in order, and that sort of thing, and everybody encouraged him.
Speaker 2: --absolutely--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --he used to talk about that with tears in his eyes about all the support he got out there.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I'll give you a story.  My brother, who is headed toward being valedictorian of his class, who was probably one of the brightest minds that had gone through Carver High School decided that he would not take his college board exams, so the day the exams were scheduled, he shot hooky.  He decided, "I'm not doing that."  The principal had found out he had done that, was very upset with him for having done it, but he just didn't leave it at that.  He personally paid someone to drive my brother 300 miles to take his college board exams.  That's the kind of investment that our community had in their students.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they were aggressive about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Aggressive about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --about helping you achieve.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 178102
Speaker 1: So this is--well, I guess you had to like school.  That's why I asked you if you liked school but you--
Speaker 2: I loved school.  I was a cheerleader, in the student council.  I mean I was very rebellious, but some part of that rebelliousness, as Alice Walker points out, was encouraged among certain kinds of black girls, so I was rebellious and had a really fast, quick tongue, and rather than push me down for that, that was highly regarded and respected.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Was there a fear that you would get in trouble for talking too much?
Speaker 2: No, actually there were many times when I felt I was pushed out front to talk.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were articulate?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --And okay and seen as a leader in school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you run for class office or anything?
Speaker 2: Oh, all the time, yes.
Speaker 1: Did you always win?
Speaker 2: Sometimes, other times, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But most of the times, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, who were some of the teachers that you encountered?
Speaker 2: Mrs. Armstrong [ph.] was my high school teacher--my home room teacher from the seventh grade to the twelfth grade, and she was the motivating factor in my life.  She taught Social Studies.  We called her, "Big Red," and she was just an incredible teacher, whose work went beyond the classroom.  For example, my best friend, Josephine Davis, was extremely beautiful and was elected Ms. Carver, but came from a very poor family.  Mrs. Armstrong just simply went out and bought her all of the outfits that she needed without any fanfare, without any reducing her to any public spectacle. She just did that.  That's the kind of community that we were a part of.  Another one of my friends, Ernestine Summers [ph.] who is now the vice president of A & T [ph.] came from a very, very poor family, and Mrs. Armstrong just took her under her wing and really nurtured her ability that had been overlooked until she got into Mrs. Armstrong's class.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's really a special community, it sounds like to me.
Speaker 2: Excellent community.
Story_ID: 178103
Speaker 1: What about grade school?  Any teachers in grade school that stand out?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, Mr. Evans [ph.] who was our sixth grade teacher, Mrs. Knight [ph.].
Speaker 1: Why were they particularly helpful?
Speaker 2: All of our teachers just had this incredible spirit of achievement and they were very, very--a sense of reward when you had performed well and a sense of really making you feel significant, and meaningful in life.  And Mr. Evans taught me to have an ego enough to take a joke without personalizing because he was an artist and sometimes he would draw my picture on the board.  And I knew enough about the community and the environment that I knew that he wasn't trying to harm me.  So I didn't feel angry.  I didn't internalize it.  I thought it was funny also, so it was that kind of safe environment, where you were permitted to even laugh at yourself.
Story_ID: 178104
Speaker 1: Now, were there students who were not--you sound fairly happy and secure, and you're a smart student in a place where everybody cares about you, but were there-- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yes, of course, there were students who--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --students who had it rough, well I mean because this is the South.
Speaker 2: Well, they had it rough; let me say this though: this is what I think people miss when you talk about the South is that even if you were a poor parent in the South, one of the things that black parents did for their children was that they made the southern landscape very safe, and there was all that stuff going on out there dimension and the killings, they were able to create another world within a world.  So that you can't read the Southern black experience as absolute deprivation and the fact that the segregation and violence existed.  We understood that, but something else existed too, and it was the love of the community.  And that was the sustaining force in our lives, so you grew up in Columbus, Georgia as a black girl not wanting to be like Elizabeth Taylor, but more like wanting to be Lena Horne.  You know, your symbols of beauty were black symbols.  I did not grow up wanting to emulate any white movie star.  So I'm trying to give you a sense of what every kid in that community had access to, no matter the economic level.  You find someone like Bernice [ph.], who came from a very poor family, but I bet you that she will describe her experience the same way that I'm describing my experience.  Now, there were--in any situation, I think there were class differences, but the thing that made it so amazing about Mrs. Armstrong [ph.] is that in our homeroom class, one of her specialties was getting the guys that nobody else wanted, the throw-aways, the "students who would be dismissed as thugs," and she would take them into the homeroom class.  And they would no longer be throw-aways.  They would belong to Mrs. Armstrong.  And as such, they were worthy of respect.
Story_ID: 178105
Speaker 1: In high school, you said you ran for office several times--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, I--
Speaker 1: --you were a cheerleader--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You did a lot of different activities--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in high school.  What did you see as your career opportunity?  What did you see--what did you envision that you would do with your life?
Speaker 2: I didn't know what I wanted to do, but I know that I did not want to do something conventional.  And the best that I could understand what I was a beatnik.  You remember the beatniks?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So I thought I was going to be a beatnik, and I thought I was going to go to Greenwich Village and be a writer.
Speaker 1: Now, were inspired by a writer you read?
Speaker 2: I was inspired by my father, who really was an incredible orator and someone who read continuously.  So, in my family, all of us, we grew up with an incredible love of books.  And we all have some flare for writing, so I grew up not wanting a conventional lifestyle, not wanting to--I thought that there was something larger I wanted to do than to marry after college and have children.
Speaker 1: Oh.  Who were your favorite writers and what writers had you analyzed?
Speaker 2: Oh, God, I had read Virginia Woolf.  I had read Carson McCullers; I had read Langston Hughes; I had read Claude McKay.  I had read just, you know, tons of books, and I was really into Bloomsbury [Publishing Plc] and I had Richard Wright, so my reading was very eclectic.  As a high school student, I read anything that came near me.  I read it.
Story_ID: 178106
Speaker 1: Still about Columbus [Georgia].  Now, what were public accommodations like in Columbus; did you all really suffer like the rest of--(simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: --it was Jim Crow terrorism.  It was a schizophrenic--schizophrenia of living in Columbus, Georgia on the one hand, and on the other hand, going out on the base [Fort Benning, Georgia] for everything that we needed and riding in front of the bus out there.  So I had that very schizophrenic existence.
Speaker 1: Oh.  So you knew something was really wrong in Columbus, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely, oh very much aware.  I knew so much was wrong that my classmates--female classmates would go into white stores and break the taboo by trying on bathing suits, by pretending that we had some affliction, and carrying on so, you know, that so that we were always pushing the envelope around the segregation.  We understood.  We were not stupid.  We understood, and I talked back to white people who wanted to dehumanize me, and I refused to say, "sir" and "ma'am."  At a very young age, I refused to say that.
Speaker 1: So you were sort of agitating and pushing the envelope?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, and one man told my mother [Willie Mae Baker Sales Griffin], "You better talk to this girl."  And I remember when I was nine year old going down to the country, Jemison, Alabama, where my grandmother [Ola Free Sales (ph.)] lived, and my brothers and I going to the store, and putting our hands in the ice cream box; and the woman got furious, told us "Niggers don't put their hands in the ice cream boxes."  And we said, "My mother told us not to let anybody touch our ice cream, and if we can't touch it, we don't want it," and so she got so angry with us that she went and told our grandmother that we were too sassy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you have any stories in the community of people who were harassed by the police or people who suffered, you know, some indignity?
Speaker 2: Not in my community, you know.  There was a doctor who was murdered for his pro-integration stance, Dr. Aurora [ph.], but you have to understand that it was a sort of weird.  It was not so easy to intimidate a bunch of GIs.  Don't forget I lived with soldiers, who understood guns, who had been in wars, so it was not going to be the same thing intimidating a community of GIs as it was going to be in the rural south, intimidating sharecroppers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it was a little different attitude.
Speaker 2: It was a little different because don't forget I lived in a community where every other person was a GI.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it kind of set a different tone.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, and they had been to the Korean War, and some of them were World War II [WWII] veterans.  Well, you know they were not going to take only so much.
Speaker 1: So I guess hatred like water seeks its own level, and when you can't go any higher, it doesn't--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --is what you're sayin'.  Okay.
Story_ID: 178107
Speaker 1: All right, so, now, when you're a senior in high school [at Carver High School, Columbus, Georgia], did you graduate with honors?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I graduated with honors and received a scholarship to go to Tuskegee [Institute, later Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Which I didn't want to go to, but that's another story.
Speaker 1: Did you want to go to school in New York [New York], or where?
Speaker 2: I wanted to rebel and go to the school I had chosen, not the school that my teachers and my parents had chosen.  So I wanted to go to Drake [University, Des Moines, Iowa].  I didn't even know what Drake was, but I saw it on paper, and decided that's where I'm going.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, how was Tuskegee?  You went to Tuskegee.  Did you know Tuskegee students already, people who attended there?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't know Tuskegee students.  The only thing I knew was that my teachers had gone to Tuskegee, so the movement saved my life at Tuskegee.  I was very bored at Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: Did you appreciate the protocol at Tuskegee and the way things were done there?--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --no I didn't.
Speaker 1: I don't know, did you consider--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --they were very strict.  For example--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --old timey?
Speaker 2: Old timey and very defined rules for women--and you have to understand that the other thing that I was pushing the envelope against was gender definitions, that even as a young person, I was a tomboy; and I was not--and my mother did not contain in traditional feminine roles, so I was not the person in the house who had to wash the dishes just because I was a girl.  And when I left my mother's house to go to Tuskegee, I didn't even know how to make up a bed.  So I was not coming out of that traditional feminine role.  So to go to an institution that was going to lock me into a sort of a double-standard of boys can do one thing and girls can do another was just unacceptable.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was always pushing the envelope and doing what the boys were doing, like staying out all night and slipping in the window and things like that.
Speaker 1: [Laughter]  Okay. All the bad things.  What year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: I graduated from high school in '63 [1963] and I went to Tuskegee in the summer of--was it '63 [1963] or '64 [1964], '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Okay, you graduated from high school in '63 [1963]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now, you were younger than a lot of--?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was sixteen years old, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay, so you graduated in '63 [1963] and you started Tuskegee that fall then, of '63 [1963]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was sixteen, but pretty precocious.
Story_ID: 178108
Speaker 1: So well, what happened in Tuskegee [Institute, later Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]?  Now, you got involved in--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --I got involved with a bunch of--a group of students.  Our first involvement was sort of the typical rebelliousness, going down to the pond and drinking Catawba Pink, reciting poetry, being the renegades on campus, being the beatniks on campus; and then in the middle of that, the Civil Rights Movement came to campus via Gwen Patton [HM Gwendolyn Patton], who was the president of the student body.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Gwen Patton was the president of the Tuskegee student body?
Speaker 2: Yes, the first female president of the student body.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, she brought this information back from where?
Speaker 2: Well, she made a connection with Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [SNCC] members.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And don't forget Tuskegee had been the center of a very furious gerrymander fight with Professor [Charles] Gomillion at the heart of that fight, so Tuskegee had seen some political fight--fighting before we even came there as students.  And, in addition to that, the sit-in had taken place in Alabama.  So Gwen was probably influenced by those sit-ins.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who was that professor--what did you say his name was?
Speaker 2: Charles Gomillion--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who won that famous case.
Speaker 1: Charles Gomillion, okay.  Who won that famous case? (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --it was something about gerrymandering Tuskegee and breaking it up into small (unclear) districts, and he challenged them, and he won.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a political science professor.
Speaker 1: So this ensured that the community would be empowered at some level?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, could black people vote in Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: Some black people voted.  Other black people could not vote.  Maybe black people in Tuskegee voted, but black people in Macon County did not vote.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The sharecroppers did not vote.
Speaker 1: So the town of Tuskegee, was it dominated by the school basically?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Was there a significant white population in the town at all?
Speaker 2: Yes, but they always seemed poorer than the black professors at Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: That seemed like a situation ripe for some kind of problem, you know.  I mean I guess it's a problem that had endured for a number of years I guess.
Speaker 2: Right, now that was just from a very young perspective.  Maybe I didn't know the full white community, but, from what I could see, the black community seemed just as affluent or even better off.
Story_ID: 178109
Speaker 1: So Gwen Patton [HM Gwendolyn Patton] came back [to Tuskegee Institute, later Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  Did she organize a chapter at SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  She organized the Tuskegee students into our own organization called TIAL [Tuskegee Institute Advancement League], T-I-A-L, and I don't remember what that stands for.
Speaker 1: Okay, T-I-A-L.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And the first thing we did was to go to Montgomery [Alabama].  We went to Montgomery after the beating at the Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Edmund Pettus Bridge, okay?
Speaker 2: Yes.  A group of--three busloads of Tuskegee students with the dean believe it or not, [P.B.] Phillips, went to Montgomery to stage a sit-in with students at Alabama State.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Three-three bus loads.  Faculty members were there, Jean Wiley, Leslie Sheover (ph), Dean Phillips, so this wasn't a solo student event.  It was a community event.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And these were our young, radical professors.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you all went to Montgomery right after the beating on the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, and we went to the Capitol to stage a sit-in.
Speaker 1: Okay, that was a famous--like a massacre.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: The marches were attacked by state patrol--(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yes, yes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --once they got in the middle bridge, they were attacked on both ends--from both ends with horses.  That's where George Lewis got his skull fracture.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Bloody Sunday, it was called.
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: And that's when Dr. King issued a nationwide call for people to come to Selma.
Speaker 1: Now, Tuskegee, the tradition of Booker T. Washington and all that--I mean most people would think it was a conservative place and I guess it was on some level, but this call was heeded by the students and faculty, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, and it was not Tuskegee University then.  It was Tuskegee Institute.  It was still in that institute model, but, yes, it was heeded by both faculty and students, and administrators.
Speaker 1: Okay, so people went to the point of danger basically.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And the whole campus--you can imagine from that point forward, it was impossible to do classroom business on campus.  We became the center of protest activity in Alabama.  We became a major protest center activity.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Activity center.
Story_ID: 178110
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your experience going to Montgomery [Alabama] for that sit-in demonstration.
Speaker 2: Well, when I got involved in the Civil Rights Movement, it was a coming home kind-of-experience.  I was still naive.  I had not done the kind of political reading that one needs to do to be in a movement.  I was just moving on a pure sense of what was right and what was wrong; and I had grown up in an environment where I had not seen a lot of violence.  I'm setting the stage for you, so I go to Tuskegee [Institute, later Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]; I'm not fearful.  I'm excited.  I can hardly contain myself, and we go to Montgomery.  We go to the capital.  We stay there for a couple of hours, and suddenly we are surrendered by hundreds of police with billy clubs, with horses, with dogs; and they won't let us leave the Capitol.  They close us in the Capitol, and we can't leave to urinate.  And if you did leave, they would not let you come back.  So we were basically, in some real way, held hostage.
Speaker 1: Now the governor of Alabama--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --George Wallace.
Speaker 1: George Corley Wallace.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What role did he play in this?  Well, he was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, he was the one who sent them out there, right?
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what happened?  You all are (unclear)?
Speaker 2: We stayed there night and day.  We stayed there night and day, and then they saw that we were not going to be moved.  We absolutely were not going to move, so they charged us.  They charged us with the horses, with the billy clubs, with the dogs and the whole demonstration scattered.  We ran up in front of porches because black people lived, at that time, right up from the Capitol was a black neighborhood.  So we ran on the porches.  We'd try to run in the houses, but, you know, those horses actually came on people's porches.  And finally a group of us ran into Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, which had been the church of Martin Luther King.
Speaker 1: And what happened then?
Speaker 2: We staged a sit-in in that church.  We stayed in that church for five days.  And the deacons wanted us out of that church.  They turned off the water.  They turned off the lights, you know.  They wanted us out of their church.
Speaker 1: Now, what did Dr. King say?
Speaker 2: He was no longer at Dexter Avenue Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: And didn't he have influence over the church at all?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure what the conversation was.  The only thing I know was that we were surrendered outside by police; and they were not letting people bring food or anything in the church because they were trying to starve out of the church.
Speaker 1: Did you have any sense that the members--especially the leadership of that church should have understood on some level?
Speaker 2: The leadership was turning off the water and turning off the heat.
Speaker 1: These are the same people that conducted the bus boycott.
Speaker 2: I know, but they saw us as young renegades.  Don't forget we had long hair and overalls and the men didn't comb their hair.  And we were considered the radical branch of the Civil Rights Movement, and did not defer--was not as willing to compromise with white local people as Dr. Martin Luther King and other people had been willing to do, so we were definitely the radical edge of the movement.
Speaker 1: Okay, so we have to understand this is nine years after the Montgomery bus boycott--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --eight or nine years, and it's a different generation.
Speaker 2: a different generation.  The generation that has become more radical, a generation that's younger.  We have respect for our parents, but we're less willing to negotiate; it's at a whole different level.  We're into direct action, and direct confrontation.
Speaker 1: So what happened?  You were in there for five days.
Speaker 2: We were in there for five days.
Speaker 1: Did the deacon turn the water off?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And, of course, we had discussion after discussion about what we should do, and finally, we decided that we would come out of the church, and so we left the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what did you all do next; did you--?
Speaker 2: That was the baptism into the movement.  Many of us never became full students anymore.  You know, we sort of dabbled into being a student while we did full-time civil rights work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the net results of those activities that weekend made, I mean, national news at some level?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And people did talk about it on the six o'clock news.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Pictures were shown.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But did it change anything at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not sure you change anything by one event, that you change things to progressive struggle, and what changes--yes, there were changes, but they were not tangible.  A new level of consciousness is a change, where people make a concerted--an intentional decision that they will not stand for what once they stood for, but they're going to break through the veil of oppression.  So the territory had definitely changed, and the balance of power was slowly shifting.
Story_ID: 178111
Speaker 1: At that juncture, could you perceive that shift on some level, and did you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --oh yes, I could see it at Tuskegee [Institute, later Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --were you all encouraged?
Speaker 2: Yes, I could see it at Tuskegee with the joyous celebrations, and the absolute determination, and the fighting back, and the non-capitulation to rules, the willingness to put everything out there, your college degree, everything on the line for freedom.  Absolutely, that was a tremendous revolution happening in all of us, the willingness to go to jail.  Don't forget that we had been raised as people, as a generation, that the worse thing you could do was go to jail, but the willingness to go to jail, and not see that as disgraceful, but to see that as a badge of commitment.  We spoke of transformation and change--the people were in process.  We were in process.  And I could feel that I was in process.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You all were--you could see other people, I mean people seemed to be getting caught up in a movement I guess?
Speaker 2: People were building a movement and we were reaching beyond the narrow confines of Tuskegee Institute and working together with sharecroppers in Macon County, Alabama, Lowndes County, Alabama and Perry County, so our worlds were expanding, and we were interrogating our own assumptions about who we were as students, and who people were as sharecroppers, so sharecroppers were interrogating their assumptions about who they were as sharecroppers and who we were as students.  And this whole leadership was being called up out of the people's struggle, and the whole process of a new kind of leadership was really being made and forged in the movement.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Grassroots leadership.
Speaker 1: Some people--and I've heard discussions where people say, "Well, you need a movement to accomplish certain kind of things," and people say, "Well, what is a movement?"  And you have some that would say, "You have to wait for it to come along like a train to jump on or something,"  and some people think there is a way to actually start a movement, and they get it going, you know, if certain conditions are right, you know?  So do you have any feeling about that, having participated in a movement?
Speaker 2: A movement is not an event.  It's a constant and progressive struggle.  And even now as we speak, a movement is being built; and so it's not a static process.  It is a dynamic process that occurred over generations of struggle; and so that many hands make a movement, and many generations make a movement.  And the movement is the culmination for the people's work for justice.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's not any one thing, but it's precipitation of a lot things.
Speaker 2: Yes, like the return of the Korean War veterans; it has a lot to do with the Southern Freedom Movement.  Something as innocuous as President [Harry] Truman's desegregation of the Armed Forces made for the movement, the Brown versus the Board of Education decision [1954], the Emmett Till decision--I mean murder, massacre.  All of these forces, the work that black progressives had been doing up north that produced a Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and a Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses], and a Jim Forman [James Forman].  All of these forces came together into a movement.
Story_ID: 178112
Speaker 1: Now, what did you do next? Now, you said the movement was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I went to Lowndes County [Alabama].  I went to work to Lowndes County with Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], Bob Mants and [HM] Julian Bond.
Speaker 1: Now did you drop out of school?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't drop out of school.
Speaker 1: So you were still enrolled in school?
Speaker 2: I was still enrolled in school.
Speaker 1: You spent the majority of your time at Lowndes County?
Speaker 2: Absolutely and my parents, of course, did not know where I was.  That was the typical story.
Speaker 1: So did you go to Lowndes County and then come back to the campus or would you go for two or three days and come back?--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --No, I would go away for weeks.
Speaker 1: Now, how did your professors deal with that?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, they were not happy, but my dean, who I thought was a very wise woman, called me into her office and said, "You know, Ruby Sales by right, I should expel from school.  You have violated--(simultaneous)--[SIREN NOISE]
Speaker 1: Can you start that sentence again?
Speaker 2: By right, she said--(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, you said your dean called you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --My dean called me to her office and said to me, by right, I had violated all of the rules governing students at Tuskegee because, first of all, you're not supposed to be off campus without your parent's permission.  That's the first thing and you most certainly are not expected to stay overnight anywhere without your parent's permission.  So, essentially, I was absent without leave.  And she said to me, "But, I'm not going to do that.  I see something in you and I'm going to let it be," so she sent me back to the county, and nothing happened.  And I managed to get Cs and Ds that semester.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they passed you basically.
Speaker 2: They passed me, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that wasn't the route to a high grade point average, but it was certainly you had their support.
Speaker 2: I had their support and with integrity, they couldn't have given me A's when I hadn't been there and other students had been there, but they certainly didn't try to destroy by making sure I couldn't get into another college.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's significant because I'm sure that a lot of people don't know how that worked for those days, how students were able to be students and activists at the same time.
Speaker 2: The faculty helped you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a community-wide conspiracy and no one group of people could do it by themselves and that was the meaning of community because each of us who were students, by right, we should have been expelled the first time we went into the county without our parents' permission.
Speaker 1: There was a time when you would have been--(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: There was a time when we would have been expelled, absolutely.
Story_ID: 178113
Speaker 1: So when you got to Lowndes County [Alabama].  Lowndes County is the famous--(simultaneous--)
Speaker 2: --Lowndes County.
Speaker 1: --of all of the venues in the Civil Rights Movement.  Lowndes County is one of the most famous--that's where the Black Panther Party was formed.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean the original Black Panther Party--(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The original Black Panther Party.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that and how--well, don't let me push you ahead of the story, but tell me about Lowndes County.
Speaker 2: Okay, let me just add on to Lowndes County, bloody history, William E. B. Du Bois had done a study on Lowndes County in the 1920s or '30s [1930] and talked about the economic problems in Lowndes County, and talked about the violence in Lowndes County had a name.  It was "bloody Lowndes." When I went to Lowndes County, it was called Bloody Lowndes.  It was a black belt county, which meant that more than 50 percent of the people who lived in Lowndes County were African Americans, so they were ruled by and terrorized by white minority and because it was a black belt county, where the majority of the people were black, the terrorism was very virulent and very violent.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you got there, did you hear stories?--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Not only did I hear stories, when I got there,  Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], who was Stokely, took me to a gully and showed me the gully and the bones that were in the gully.  He told me they were the bleached bones of black men who had been lynched, killed and were thrown in this gully.
Speaker 1: A gully full of bones.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And if he knew about it, everybody knew about it, right?
Speaker 2: People--the local people had told him.  That's how he had found out.
Speaker 1: So this was--this gully was probably part of the mechanism of terror I guess.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And then we went immediately to register people to vote, and my second day in the county, the sheriff pulled the gun to Stokely Carmichael's head, and said to him, tonight he was going to be in hell; and Stokely looked him dead in the eye and said, "I guess tonight hell will be integrated."  And I thought my God, this is, you know, sheer courage.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: The sheriff backed off because the courage was so tremendous that it even terrified him.  Stokely was like someone he had never met before.
Speaker 1: Well, he was, and anybody that has heard Stokely Carmichael speak or been in his presence, knows that you had one intense black man in front of you.
Story_ID: 178114
Speaker 1: Ma'am, can you tell us about Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture]?  Now what kind of person was he and how, you know--what wouldn't we know about Stokely Carmichael from--?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, Stokely was very beloved.  He was very loved in Lowndes County [Alabama].  All of the local people loved Stokely.  He was a local legend when I came into Lowndes County, and he was a very gentle organizer, and a very respectful organizer, and this was before he became the chairperson of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and everything I know about organizing, I learned from Stokely, and contrary to some of this notion of him as being chauvinist, when I first came to the county after a week, he gave me my assignment and I was off and running, and there was no sense that because I was a woman, that there were any limitations to my being able to organize Calhoun County [Alabama] all by myself.  He sent me out to Calhoun County by myself; and what I would say about Stokely in Lowndes County was that he was very, very much providing the backups for local people to develop their own leadership.  He was not trying to be the leader in Lowndes County, Alabama.  He was a part of a community movement, where a community designated and named their own leaders.
Story_ID: 178115
Speaker 1: Now, that's classic organizing philosophy.  That's what a union organizer would tell you.  That's what a community organizer would tell you, that the organizer is not the leader.  The organizer goes out to the community and knocks on doors, you know, meets people in public places--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and, well, what is it they do?  Describe for us what the process is.
Speaker 2: Well, the process is you would go out in the fields and you would help people pick cucumbers or whatever it is they were picking, and as you were moving down the road, you were trying to get people involved in the movement, and we were living in the Freedom House that was owned by Mr. Jackson [ph.], who is very, very brave, and who had challenged the vigilantes in Lowndes County, Alabama to let us have the Freedom House, and so you were involved in the community activity.  You didn't sit back while the community was plucking corn or digging up cucumber.  You were a part of that process.
Speaker 1: Okay.  For instance, I'm picking cucumbers and you're beside me.  How do you get me to come to a meeting?  I mean I've been in Lowndes County my whole life.  I know how evil and vicious the racism is in Lowndes County, and I've seen that gully full of bones, right?  And my granddaddy told me--and people told me about lynchings, burnings, tortures and other manners of intimidation and offenses against a person's character and a person, and you're there picking cucumbers next to them.  Now, what can you tell me, or how do you get me to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: First of all, if I try to tell you the first time I go out and pick cucumbers with you to come to register to vote, I've lost you because you don't know me--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and I don't know you, and so the picking the cucumber establishes the intimacy, and you move from the cucumbers to going to have dinner with people, and you're not necessarily talking about the movement at that point.  You're just getting to know people, and somewhere later on in that process, you say, "It would really be nice to have you come to a mass meeting. I guess you heard" --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --And I'd say, "What for?"
Speaker 2: --I guess you heard that we're really working with Mr. Hewlett.  You know, Mr. Hewlett and Mrs. Logan that we're working alongside them to try to help them register people to vote, so we put it on Mr.--someone who they know all their lives, and who they trust.
Speaker 1: But I say, "Wait a minute, I know what happens when you go against some white people."
Speaker 2: But we would also talk about the fact of what's going to happen if we don't do it, that we're always going to be in this state, and that somebody has to take the risk to do it; and we don't pressure people.  We say, "Well, if you don't feel like you can do it this time, let's talk about it.  Let's think about it.  Let's talk about it.  We'll come back and talk with you about it."
Speaker 1: You ever hear somebody say, "Y'all go try it this time.  I'll wait and see what happens?"
Speaker 2: We have many people who do that, but you also have as many people showing up, you know, because somebody has reinforced what you've said.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, people just sit around waiting for an opportunity to do these things--for somebody to tell there is going to be a meeting, or do you have to agitate them to do something?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  People were geared up for the movement.  They were the movement in those areas.  It wasn't SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] because once you made a decision to be--to do this work, you put your life and your whole family's life at risk, and this was the courage of local leadership that has never been celebrated in Civil Rights history. It was really the local people.  Without them, there would not have been a movement.  And that's why in Lowndes County, Alabama when all of those black people were kicked off their land for trying to vote, we had to do Tent City.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: So people were tired themselves.
Speaker 1: They are already tired of the situation.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  They were tired.
Speaker 1: So SNCC provided like a structural framework for them to get involved or--?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't provide a structural framework.  We provided the backups.  We let them know that we had their backs.
Speaker 1: In what sense?  Now, if Mr. Charlie turned the dogs loose on me?
Speaker 2: We had the capacity to send out reports to the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigations], although the FBI didn't listen to us, but we had contacts.  And if people got in jail, we could bring the lawyers in.  In other words, we were their contact conduit to the outside world, and they knew that they were not struggling alone.  They knew that for the first time that if someone got murdered, the newspaper was going to hear about it.  There was not going to be another silent murder, where no one knew anything about it. We brought them some protection and guarantees.
Story_ID: 178116
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I know part of the strategy I think Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] and some of the leaders in Mississippi were credited to come up with that if they got white people involved in the movement--I mean on a mass level like the summer of '64 [1964], then that would like protect people in the sense that if they were threatened or someone got killed, I mean white folks would tell other white people, and they would also be in harm's way, which would cause the media to swarm around.
Speaker 2: That was in Mississippi, but you have to understand the Alabama movement was another kind of movement. It was another step up in terms of development of a movement, so you can't look at Alabama through the same lenses that you look at Mississippi.  We didn't have a massive freedom summer of white students coming into Lowndes County. By the time Stokely [Carmichael, Kwame Ture] and other SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] workers got to Lowndes County [Alabama], the pervasive sentiment was that it had to be a black-led movement.
Speaker 1: Yeah, no at the end of summer of '64 [1964], that summer, there were discussions about that.
Speaker 2: Lowndes County was beginning to live that out.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that being the very next year.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because there were discussions that are, I guess, similar discussions in the role of black and white people in the movement (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that were discussed in detail.  It was laid out and arguments and hurt feelings, and all kinds of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Right, and we were not a part of that--you see, by the time I get to SNCC, we're part of the third wave.  You can't think of SNCC as one organization without any differences.  It had developmental periods, and we were the third period.
Story_ID: 178117
Speaker 1: So of the leadership in Alabama at that time, Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Bob Mants, Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture].  Yes, Bob Mants was an important, steady, and consistent organizer in Lowndes County, Alabama.  He had dropped out of Clark College [later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: That's M-A-N-C-E?
Speaker 2: Yes.  No--M-A-N-T-S.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right, and Stokely Carmichael?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, was Ella Baker ever a part of what you were doing over there?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did Stokely ever talk about who trained him and how he got involved?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely.  The stories were there.  I mean we were no so far removed because we had removed because we had the intersection of people who were in Mississippi in Lowndes County.  For example, Bob Moses' wife, Janet Jemmott, who was Janet Moses now.  We worked together in Lowndes County.  You had people who had worked in Mississippi, Cleve Sellers, coming into Lowndes County to work, [HM] Julian Bond, Cynthia Washington, Martha Norman.
Speaker 1: Okay, so these are people who had been in Mississippi who came on over?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And the different set of circumstances in that Freedom Summer, but some similar goals, right in terms of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --register to vote.
Speaker 1: Right and forming a party and this was a seminal part of it.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Because in Mississippi, they formed a Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party.
Speaker 2: And we formed the Black Panther Party. Yes.
Speaker 1: So you all formed a Lowndes County--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Freedom Party--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --which the symbol was?
Speaker 2: --the Black Panther, the panther, yes.
Speaker 1: Yes, there was this symbol that inspired Huey P. Newton and Bobby Seal in Oakland--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that far away to form the Black Panther Party.
Speaker 2: Yes, but instead of focusing on the national leadership issue as the Mississippi Freedom Demo--and trying to be seated, what they were focused on developing local leadership within the context of the electoral politics because by then, '65 [1965] people had the right to vote, and so the question was on the table how best to use the vote; and the answer was to develop local, elected official--
Story_ID: 178118
Speaker 1: Okay, now in the fall of '64 [1964] it was, [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson signed the Voting Rights Act, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so by the time you got involved in '65 [1965], the Voting Rights Act was in place.
Speaker 2: No, I was involved in '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: In '64 [1964], before the Voting Rights Act was signed?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: So, you were in Lowndes County in the summer of '64?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I was, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--when all the national attention was on Mississippi--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --during that summer, you 'all were in Lowndes County in '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so when the act was passed--I know things don't happen instantly in terms of one day you can't vote and the next day, you can.  How did that transition take place?  And how did it take place in Alabama, in Lowndes County, where you all were?
Speaker 2: Well, the transition didn't happen overnight. The people were already galvanizing themselves, and were already organized, and so it was logical progression of actualizing what people had already prepared themselves and organized themselves to do.  The question of electing local official was a part of the talk because many of those local officials exploited, terrorized, and cheated black people and so there was a sense that the equality--the equality rested on up seating those leaders, who were the symbols of oppression and violence.
Speaker 1: Okay, but how did it happened underground--I mean what the white officials in Lowndes County allowed to take place?  I mean did they let you all register to vote--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was no--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --after Johnson signed the Act?
Speaker 2: Yes. I mean that was a federal offense by then.  It was a (unclear) plea, and although they made things difficult and tried to terrorize people, you have to understand by then, they had lost control--not because the federal government gave them--because of the Voting Right Act, they had lost control because black people who stood up and unseeded that terrorism, had changed the center of gravity in that community, so they were no longer mythological.  They were no longer to be feared.  Something amazing--the transformation that happened in the community that challenged lifelong assumptions about power, about fear (sirens in background)--about power, about who white people are and who black people are, and so that this was not power that was handed to black people by Lyndon Johnson.  This was power that had been struggled for through blood, sacrifice and the willingness to put everything on the line for freedom.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well just--I guess what I'm alluding to is just the summer before, in '64 [1964], people were shot and arrested and all that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But there were people who were still registered and though it was done under federal--you know, in a way where they didn't have to go to court as necessarily to register, but in Lowndes County, you say that the--basically, the jig was up for the white power structure?
Speaker 2: The--it was up.
Speaker 1: And it was because of that majority of black population--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --the growing--that's right, the growing black majority willing to step out there and to act as a cohesive force for liberation, who was no longer was willing to be intimidated, who no longer feared vigilantes, and so the gig was up, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 178119
Speaker 1: I don't know if this is the juncture when we want to discuss this, but one of your colleagues in the struggle was killed.
Speaker 2: Yes, Jonathan Daniels.
Speaker 1: Was that in '65 [1965], summer of '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you want to tell us about that right now, or am I missing something, a step, or?
Speaker 2: Well, Jonathan was one of the few white people, who we agreed to let come work in Lowndes County [Alabama], he and a white priest, named, Father [Richard] Morrisroe.
Speaker 1: Why were they allowed to come in?
Speaker 2: Well, we had a big debate and Stokely was at the center of that debate about whether or not we should let white people to come into Lowndes County.  And, ultimately, although we knew it was risky, we decided that if you built a movement that kept anyone out, then you were recreating the very structure that you were struggling against, and we thought the movement had to be an open space--that whosoever would, let them come.
Speaker 1: Now, the initial reason--I guess the disinviting of white people in the movement had to do with basic culture, and political clashes around certain ideas.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you explain some of those?
Speaker 2: Well, some of it had to do with the sense of what is appropriate even in something as common as clothes.  How is it that you dressed as a woman--a respectable woman in the South, and that black women--and that the community did not value.  It was an assault on the community to go to church in your blue jeans.  That was disrespect for the community, and so you had all of those kind of cultural clashes happening.  You had the whole issue of who was really in charge.  Many of the white students had certain kinds of skills that local, black people did not have, and they used those skills to leverage power.  So the question was really raised on a local level about, you know, who was making the decisions and who was in charge, and just a whole way of moving in life was very different in the South.  And although many people worked real hard to move further than their socialization, the truth of the matter, it was hard for some people to concede power to local people because they thought they were the natural leaders.
Speaker 1: Now, something Curtis Hayes said, on public television program called, 'Freedom on my Mind,' I think he said that he felt in Mississippi intimidated by some of the white folks that came down there because they did have much more like technical education than he had, but they didn't understand it.  They didn't know anything about Mississippi and he did.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And that was one of the--you know, it took a while.  Then in the summer, he was able to bridge that gap and say hey, you know this, but you don't know this.  He conceded that they were better educated and came from middle class backgrounds, had a worldly outlook, you know, that, for years, included the whole world, where he had only seen that part of Mississippi, but he did know Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Well, I think it was even more than that when you've been trained to understand white to be superior, and when you see yourself as a leader, it's very hard even when you stretch your imagination to imagine someone who you've been as inferior that you can imagine them as a leader, making a decisions.  So it's very complicated.  Just because people go to Mississippi, it doesn't mean that they let loose years of socialization and teaching, so they too must be in process and develop a different kind of consciousness.
Story_ID: 178120
Speaker 1: And then there was the whole loaded question of interracial dating.
Speaker 2: Now that--yeah, I read that that became an issue also.  I haven't read as much about Lowndes County [Alabama], but in Mississippi in '64 [1964], there's a book that Mary King wrote about that where she talks about how to walk down the street with a black man and hold his hand, could get him killed.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And a lot of the white women didn't understand--(simultaneous)-- .
Speaker 1: Didn't understand that, absolutely.
Speaker 2: --the liberal pursuit of trying to be--show that they were not prejudiced, actually putting people's lives on the line in a lot of instances, especially with the locals (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --the black man always had a choice not to walk the street and hold her hand because he did understand that, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  And people were dealing with--these are young people with high energy, and they're at the time in life where they're having highest sexual energy, and they're in a movement, and they've suddenly with white woman, they're told they could never be with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --well, you know, people--
Speaker 2: --and the opposite thing is true too, so you got--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --people have placed a lot of emphasis on the sexual, but I don't read it that way.  I think that it was more the question for the first time, gender relationships are changing and one is aware that one can have an intimate friendship with a man, and live in the same house, and not have a sexual relationship, so what was being broken was not sex intimacy.  It was some other kind of boundary-breaking.  Yes, there was some interracial sex, but that's not the intimacy that was happening in the movement predominantly I think.  It was the first time in my life, as a woman, that I understood that I could work with men and be very intimate with men, not sexually but as colleagues, as peers, and that that doesn't have to enter into the conversation.  It was safe to be in the Freedom House with Stokely Carmichael or in the Freedom House with Bob Mants and even share the same couch with them; and for the first time, I knew that, as a woman, I could be in an intimate space with a man and not be violated, and not have to fight for my life.
Speaker 2: That's important.  It has a different kind of prospective on that.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: But the tension between white woman and black women in the movement, and the class differences, and education differences kind of boiled down to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, many of the black women, like Judy Richardson and Martha Norman, many of those black women in Mississippi who had come from the north had gone to Swarthmores and had gone to Sarah Lawrences and so they came from an affluent black class.  I think the principle issue with black women and white women was this general sense of competition between women that exist beyond Mississippi, that white women see black women as their competitors.  In the same way there is a greater tension between black men and white men than there is between white men and black women.  So I think you got some of that social dynamic going on there.  And I think the other resentment that black women had was that sometimes we thought that white women crippled and coddled black men, and we were not into the business of doing that. So I think there was some of that tension about what we would and would not accept, and how annoyed we became when we saw that stuff being played out.  So it's very complicated.
Speaker 2: It's funny to hear that expression in that way because the men say, you know, really the black women were too hard on them; and here is somebody that's "give them the key to the car."
Speaker 1: And we say that as crippling.  We did not see that as pushing them to live up to their fullest potential.  We say that as creating a parasitic relationship where although the man thought he was in power, the truth of the matter was that he was being controlled through material things and reduced to boy.  So it was just--we saw it very differently than the men, and it was something that we didn't like.
Speaker 2: And this is the stuff of poems, plays, novels, and screen plays and thousands of other discussions that have happened since then.  I mean--I guess everything from 'Blues for Mister Charlie' by James Baldwin to you name it, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, yes--
Story_ID: 178121
Speaker 1: So the result was, we had these--there was a discussion in Lowndes County [Alabama] in '65 [1965] to allow two white men who were seen--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --white men to come into the county --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --who were seen to be dedicated men--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, one was going to be a priest and one was already a priest.
Speaker 1: Okay, the decision was to let them participate?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, well--tell us the rest of the story.  What happened?
Speaker 2: Young people from Fort Deposit [Alabama] came to us very upset because their parents were being cheated at the local store and they wanted to have a demonstration.  Now, you got to understand that Fort Deposit was very violent.  That was an area where very few people wanted to go and break in because that was really violent.
Speaker 1: Now, Fort Deposit is a town in Lowndes County?
Speaker 2: --a town in Lowndes County, but the young people came and said that they wanted to do a demonstration; and despite our reservation and even our fear, we felt that we had to support those young people.  And so there was a demonstration held in Fort Deposit on Saturday.  And you a group of white men vigilantes with baseball bats, guns, garbage can lids, anything that they could use to try to beat people with, menacing the demonstrators.  And I was one of those demonstrators and so was Stokely [Carmichael, Kwame Ture], and so was Father Morrisroe and Jonathan Daniels, and eventually, we were all put in the back of a garbage truck and taken to jail, where we stayed in jail for, I think, five days, let out of jail--all of us let out of jail, went to the county, went to coroner and no one was there waiting.  We were told that we were being let out on our own word and we argued.  We didn't want to be let out on our own words because we felt we were being set up.  Go to the corner, it's one of the those blistering, hot summer days; and we--Father Morrisroe and Jonathan Daniels, Joyce Bailey and myself are designated by the group to go and get water.  We walked to the very store that's behind the jail, where we have gone 100 times and we get to the front door on the step, and there is a Tom Coleman waving the shot gun, saying "Bitch, I'll blow your brains out," and I'm the bitch because I'm in the front, and I can't focus.  It happened so far.  I feel a tug and I fall back, and I hear a gun blast happens and it's Jonathan, and it happened so fast that I also thought I was shot, so I'm lying there, not breathing, not moving, and I hear--and I look over, and I see Father Morrisroe and Joyce Bailey running, and Tom Coleman shoots them in the back--shoots Father Morrisroe in the back.  And I hear him lying in the ground, yelling for water, and Joyce Bailey runs--you know how in the South, you have all these cars--abandoned cars, she runs over around the store to an abandoned car, and she is calling my name, "Ruby, Ruby, Ruby," somewhere in my consciousness, I hear her, and I crawled over to that abandoned, you know, I get on my knees and I crawl and I try not to be--because he's out there waving that gun, refusing to let anyone from across the street come over, and she and I--I make it over, and I run across the street, and as we're running across the street, he's running and threatening to blow our brains out.  This dude is so crazy.  He didn't even realize that I was the woman who was lying in the dirt.  He is just so filled with rage, wanting to shoot any nigger, any white person that he saw at that particular juncture.
Speaker 1: He just shot both barrels of his shotgun.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, just shot.  And we go back over, Jimmy Rogers--Jimmy Rogers, myself, and someone else--we go back and try to give Father Morrisroe water, and he tells us if we don't leave, he'll blow our brains out, so we leave.  And we run through the town to try to get help, and there's no help forthcoming.  It's just--so we make it back to the field.
Speaker 1: Did you appeal to different people?
Speaker 2: People would close the doors, they wouldn't let us in and we-Haynesville [Alabama] was very white.  That's where most white people lived, in Haynesvill.  And so we made it back to the Freedom House.  I don't even know how we got there.  I think somebody picked us up from the street.  I don't know how we got there, but we got back to the Freedom House, and by that time, Stokely had heard about what had happened.  He had run to town.  He thought I was dead, and the whole world thought I was dead actually; and he had run to town.  And they had swept the town clean just that fast, and there were no bodies.  We couldn't find the bodies.  It took us three days to locate where the bodies were.
Speaker 1: So two people were killed?
Speaker 2: No, one person was killed, and Father Morrisroe tells the story.  He lives in Chicago [Illinois].  You might want to talk to him.  He tells the story that he was put in the same hearse that Jonathan was put in, on top of Jonathan's dead body, taken to a hospital, where he was made to lie out in a hall, bleeding, and nobody would operate on him until this retired general said he would, and that's who saved his life.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: M-O-R-R-I-S-R-O-E.
Story_ID: 178122
Speaker 1: Tell me now, in the aftermath of this tragedy, how did this affect the beloved community?
Speaker 2: Well, the community really felt the blow of what happened.  The community was angry, and the community wanted justice; and we were in touch with John Doar.  We were in touch with other people.
Speaker 1: John Doar worked for the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice, DOJ].
Speaker 2: Yes, the justice department--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --under Lyndon Johnson--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --yes, and he told us--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --and he was constantly down there.
Speaker 2: Yes, and he told us that the world of justice moved very slowly; and so it was very clear that it was still moving very slowly because the day of the trial--well, first of all, let me digress a moment, and say that I had to leave the [Lowndes] County [Alabama] after then.  I had to be sneaked out of the county at night because there were a lot of threats on my life if I testified.  I went over to Columbus, Georgia to my parents [Willie Mae Baker Sales Griffin and Joe Sales], and they also received threats; and on the day that we testified.
Speaker 1: Now, how much time has transpired between the incident and the trial?
Speaker 2: About four months--about three to four months.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's relatively quick.
Speaker 2: --quick.  And on the day of the trial, all of the black witnesses were made to wait out in the rain like cattle.  We were not permitted to wait in the waiting room, where other people who will testify can go.
Speaker 1: Now, John Doar, you mentioned, he was a veteran of the struggles in the justice department.  He has been interviewed on television and in books and so forth, and famous and has sort of notoriety because of that if he is still alive, I think he is, but--
Story_ID: 178123
Speaker 1: We were discussing John Doar and the justice department's [U.S. Department of Justice, DOJ] role in the South, particularly in Alabama during the incident you just described.  It has been written and discussed when Doar, himself, as a rep from the justice department often didn't have back up.  He was out there by himself and with no back up, in terms of agents with guns, who could enforce something, nothing.  He was just out there with a brief case most of the time. When you say the wheels of justice moved slowly, sometimes they didn't roll at all.  So you all--I think this is one of the times--there had been other trials before, but did you go into this trial thinking you had a chance to win?  Or did the government's commitment--was it apparent, you know, that there was a real commitment to--?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think it was real apparent that there was a commitment, but we were not looking ever to the government for our source of power.  We thought the people had grown strong enough in our struggle that we had a chance of victory, just like people thought at that the Mississippi Democratic Party.  So it's not that we thought that the government was going to ensure that we have a fair trial.  We thought that the coalition forces in that community were strong enough to ensure that.
Speaker 1: Now, were there any black people on the jury?
Speaker 2: No black people on the jury.
Speaker 1: So I guess I would ask again, how could you have thought you had a fair trial in that situation?  Were you looking beyond just a trial?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think.  See I wouldn't really want to couch it, because when you're dealing with that kind of situation, one part of you knows that you're not going to have a fair trial, but the other part of you can't help but being insistent on justice, and so it's not that we're naive enough to think that white people are going to give us a fair trial, but we are not hardened enough that we don't feel strongly about injustice, and that we don't feel grief-stricken, that nothing is done about the fact that our friend, Jonathan, was murdered in cold blood.  So we have these two kinds of emotions; and when you're in a movement, you have to have hope, you have to have radical hope.  Otherwise, you can't do a movement.  You have to believe that there's a possibility of change, and that's why you're doing the work.  If you didn't believe that, there would be no reason to do the work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So at the time, it felt like this was something that you had to do--was to try to bring these people to justice.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, if nothing else, it was victory to the black community that he even had a trial because, historically, a man like him would have shot someone, he had already killed black people before, and he had never had a trial.  So you really have to really look at what is meant by victory.  The victory was not necessarily that he got convicted, the victory was that he was made to go to trial.
Speaker 1: Okay. Were there some within your group who wanted another kind of victory, who wanted revenge and really wanted to do something about this, or people you knew in that community?
Speaker 2: I mean I think all of us, I mean, we're human beings and that crossed all of our minds, that we wanted to do something to revenge their deaths, but, ultimately, we knew that if we opened up the can for violence, that we were letting--we were setting up a whole community to have people move on them and use our violence as an excuse to do that.
Speaker 1: So was this actually discussed?  Did people discuss this?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think--no, we would not have had that kind of conversation because we knew the dangers, and we were too much connected to that community to have been that irrational.
Story_ID: 178124
Speaker 1: How did the local black community feel about this white man [Jonathan Daniels] being killed, you know, trying to do something about their political rights?
Speaker 2: Well, they didn't feel like it was theirs.  They feel it was as much from his own liberation from whiteness--that segregation was something that contaminated both black and white people; and that white people could not be free and whole until they got rid of the encumbrance of segregation.  So we didn't quite see it as the black man's burden.  We also saw it as the white man's malformation as much as it was black malformation, so they saw themselves as members of a beloved community of which Jonathan was a part, of which we all had a stack in building up a new kind of world.
Speaker 1: So the risk was his own--I mean for his own--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --the vision--it was for the collected vision.  It was to remove the burden--the narrowness of segregation and racism from his own life, so that he could live in a community among other people, so that he could have a larger vision of God's creation, so that he could live in right relation with God, himself, and with all aspects of creations, so this was about his conversion as much as the conversion of black people; and that's what made the beloved community so powerful because it was not a paternalistic endeavor, where somebody was down there to free somebody.
Speaker 1: That's interesting because--so you're saying that he understood or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, he writes that--we understand from abolitionist history that we understood that the sin--like they knew that slavery contaminated the whole nation, we understood that segregation, terrorism and violence contaminated white people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he was doing that as much for himself as he was for--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Yes, we were all doing as much for ourselves as we were for others.  We knew that our liberation was inextricably linked to other people's liberation and building up a beloved community and learning to see each other brand new, and learning to challenge our assumptions about who we were with each other.
Story_ID: 178125
Speaker 1: So, well, tell us about the trial now--you're standing in the rain because they won't let you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yes.
Speaker 1: --so they won't let you in the courthouse--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so are all the people in the community standing in the rain?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, just the ones that are testifying.
Speaker 1: So they let other spectators come in?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Were there any black spectators?
Speaker 2: No, black spectators were not in the courtroom, absolutely not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So are you saying there were no black people in the courtroom until--(Simultaneous )--
Speaker 2: --until they brought, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So black folks weren't even allowed to come in and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --No.
Speaker 1: So they weren't allowed to come in, but they had white spectators?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, one of which threatened to cut my throat when I walked into the courtroom to testify--threatened to cut my throat and it was like they were having a picnic, yelling across at each other, and there was a lawyer there who was called a "bullfrog" because he came from a very affluent white family and he was considered one of the best lawyers in the state and he tried to break down my testimony, and he tried to intimidate me with his bullfrog voice, and I didn't bend, and I didn't break because I had come there determined to tell the truth about what had happened that day.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this scene, it's hard to imagine a scene of grosser intimidation than this, you know, all white room, and people--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I didn't feel intimidated because I had come from a family where I wasn't afraid of white people, so I didn't feel intimidated.  I felt determined.  I felt almost in my head that I would show that lawyer that I was smarter than him, that I wasn't a black person that he could tie up in knots, you know, the other witnesses got all tied up in knots, and so it was more, to me, it was who had the better wits.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he did have some success with the others in terms of---(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yes.  He didn't make them deny what happened but he just so confused them sometimes with words and badgering.
Speaker 1: And the atmosphere didn't help either with no support--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and the atmosphere didn't help either and they were from Lowndes County and they had grown up in that violence and terror, and I was from Columbus, Georgia.
Speaker 1: What was the result?
Speaker 2: Not guilty.
Speaker 1: Not guilty.
Speaker 2: And forty-five years later, he [Tom Coleman] said if he had to do it over, he'd do it again.
Speaker 1: Did he live a so-called natural life?
Speaker 2: He lived a natural life, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He was never retried or anything?
Speaker 2: And Jonathan was twenty-six years old and brilliant, and headed for a great life.
Speaker 1: What did Jonathan's friends, relatives, and?
Speaker 2: Heartbroken.  As Samuel Young's parents--you know when Samuel was murdered, he was also a part of the movement in Tuskegee [Alabama], my classmate, my friend when he was murdered trying to use the bathroom in Tuskegee, the whole campus of Tuskegee [Institute, later Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] went berserk with grief and with anger.
Speaker 1: And what did they do?
Speaker 2: Well, they went to--whole school left and went to the center of town and painted all the confederate statues black, and had a sit-in in the heart of town, almost ended up in a riot.
Speaker 1: This was in '64 [1965]?  Well, what year is this?
Speaker 2: '65 [1965]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --so all this happened in 1965?
Speaker 2: --January of '65 [1965], yes.
Speaker 1: The murder of Jonathan?
Speaker 2: Jonathan was '64 [1964], August of '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: That was before?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Samuel was in '65 [1965], January '65[1965].
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is at the beginning of Voter Register Movement.
Speaker 2: Yes, at the beginning, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Two people are killed, so it has a parallel to Mississippi--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: The three civil rights workers murdered before the organizing starts.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And this happened in Alabama just before you all eventually formed the Lowndes County Party.
Story_ID: 178126
Speaker 1: Well with that in your minds, as you went forward over the summer, you know, it's already serious work.  I guess it--I don't know if you can make it any more serious, but it must have had some effect on you.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, it had some effect.  I was somewhat mute for a long time.  I wouldn't talk.  I sort of shut down for a little while and I thought about going back to school, so I went to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and stayed for three months, and then went back to the county.  So I was in a transitional phase in my life at that point.
Speaker 1: So you were no longer enrolled at Tuskegee [Institute, later Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] at this point?
Speaker 2: No, I dropped out.
Speaker 1: So you went to Yale.  How did you end up going there?
Speaker 2: Someone gave me a scholarship, Mr. Johnson, who was with the National Council of Churches.
Speaker 1: You stayed there for a quarter?
Speaker 2: I stayed there for a summer, preparing to go in the fall.
Speaker 1: But you came back?
Speaker 2: I went back to Lowndes County.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about the--I guess--how the freedom--what was the full name the Lowndes County--(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Freedom Party.
Speaker 1: Freedom Party.  How was it formed?  I mean what was the process of doing that?
Speaker 2: It was really formed by local people, John Hewlett, Mr. Hewlett, who later became the sheriff of Lowndes County, Mr. Cosby, Ms. McGill, local people formed it; and it was formed for electoral politics to elect local officials.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so by the end of that summer, that party was formed and you had a number of black, registered voters in Lowndes County.
Speaker 2: Yes, and the first election, it was successful.
Speaker 1: What happened?  When you say it was successful, what happened?
Speaker 2: They unseated the white power structure and some critical positions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And one of the things that made it an important victory that was won was Mrs. McGill [ph.] became a voting commissioner, so there were some major changes that had happened.
Speaker 1: What were some of the major changes that had happened?
Speaker 2: Sheriff, important office, tax commission.
Speaker 1: So you elected a black sheriff at Lowndes County?
Speaker 2: Yes, a black sheriff of Lowndes County.
Speaker 1: Wow, now that's just thinking about the atmosphere around there, and here you have a black sheriff.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: He was on a hot seat, wasn't he in terms of some ways, being a sheriff of a county that had been so used to such a racist violence against black people?  How did that transition take place?
Speaker 2: Well, he was on the hot seat.  He survived it, but by the time he became really deep in his work, we had all left the county, including Stokley [Carmichael, Kwame Ture].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you don't know what--you know what happened, but you don't know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I had been to church with him, but I don't know the daily grind details of what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how long did you all stay in Lowndes County?
Speaker 2: I stayed there for a year.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you leave in '66 [1966], is that what it was, or--?
Speaker 2: I left at the tail end of '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Okay, so fall of--
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: --sixty-five [1965].
Story_ID: 178127
Speaker 1: Now when was it--there was a--when was the--were you present when Stokley Carmichael [Kwame Ture] called for black power?
Speaker 2: I was present and so I was still hanging around SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], but I was not in Greenwood, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was when he made the call for black power; and that was in 1965 or '66 [1966]?
Speaker 2: '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: So you were not in day-to-day contact--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I was not in Mississippi.  I had moved by that time to New York State.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had worked over in Georgia with Charlie Sherrod [Charles Sherrod], so I was doing different kind of things.  So I was sort of finding my way and figuring out what would be the next steps for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what did you do next?
Speaker 2: I worked in the anti-Vietnam War Movement.  I went to undergraduate at Manhattanville College [Purchase, New York] and I went to graduate school to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] to study history and I became involved in the feminist movement.
Speaker 1: What was it like going to school in the northeast and at Princeton?
Speaker 2: Well, by this time, I had met some of the leading, young, intellectuals of the country in Lowndes County and in Atlanta and everyplace, so it was like being in the same kind of conversation, in the same kind of discussion.
Speaker 1: And what were you training yourself to do?
Speaker 2: To be a historian.  What I noticed was that in white institutions, black friendships were not lifelong in the same way that they were--people I was in Tuskegee with, I'm still friends with.  It was a different experience for me at Manhattanville in a sense--I'm fresh from the South, and, in a real kind of way, I still have southern values, although I've lived in different places, and I get to Manahattanville, and I'm there with all these women who have come from the city, and they are all slick.  And they tell me they're hungry, and I give them all of my money, when I realized they were hustling me for money, so those differences.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a real difference.
Speaker 2: That's a real difference of how you live in relation to each other.  So I understood the hustle.  I began to understand that there was another beat going on, you know, that--and it was also very interesting for me to be in an environment that my teachers wouldn't expect me to be smart because that had not been the expectation at Tuskegee, that had not been the expectation at--my high school, Carver High School [Columbus, Georgia].  So that was a different--and it was very different for me to be in a class--an American history class where we were having debates about slavery, and people reduced black people to whores, mammies, tragic mulattoes, and sambos, so I was always in trouble because none of those descriptions sounded like anybody I had grown up with.  None of the stereotypes fit anybody in my community and so I had a very difficult time adjusting to that kind of language.
Story_ID: 178128
Speaker 1: Who were some of the historical luminaries at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], I mean, who were the teachers--?
Speaker 2: James McPherson, Arthur Link.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is the James McPherson--
Speaker 2: Who wrote the Civil War.  Yeah, Arthur Link--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --'Battle Cry of Freedom'--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --freedom, yes, yes, yes.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Negro Civil War and all that?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Martin Duberman.
Speaker 1: Martin Duberman.  Martin Link, you said?
Speaker 2: Arthur Link, who wrote all the volumes on Woodrow Wilson, Nancy Weiss, who wrote the book on Whitney Young, who was a Civil Rights historian.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How did you interact with that group?  Did you find them?
Speaker 2: I did very well with them in class, but they found me to be intolerable and arrogant, and disruptive.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  In what way, what kind of things would you raise that disrupted?
Speaker 2: I would refuse to debate whether or not black people were different than other human beings.  I would refuse to debate whether or not black people were Sambos.  I felt to begin the conversation there, gave some creditability to the Sambo mentality and I refused to make a decision between being an activist or a scholar, so I was out demonstrating for Shell Oil--against Shell Oil; and at that time, Jenson--the Shockley theory that said that black people were inferior, and they thought it was not becoming for a graduate student at Princeton to be demonstrating.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Alan Shockley?
Speaker 2: Yes, you remember him?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a physicist.
Speaker 2: Yes, a geneticist or physicist.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he wasn't a geneticist actually, that was part of the problem.
Speaker 2: Yes, a physicist--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --but he had a genetic theory.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yes.  A genetic theory.
Speaker 1: He was a doctor with another discipline.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you remember he debated Frances Welsing.
Speaker 2: Right.  Wilson, you remember that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yes, certainly, Tony Brown's Journal carried--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yes, yes, right.
Speaker 1: --the full debated and Dr. Frances Cress Welsing who now lives in [Washington] D.C.
Speaker 2: Up 16th Street, yes.
Speaker 1: She's from Chicago [Illinois] originally.
Speaker 2: Yes, right, she's from Chicago and her father was a doctor there, yes.
Speaker 1: She was a psychiatrist--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yes, a psychiatrist.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --a psychiatrist and physicist discussing genetics.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But I think, you know, she got the better part of that discussion at least on the air, but a lot of people still, you know--it just revealed--the debate sort of revealed to black people that white people in the north still could come up with pseudoscientific excuses for racism.
Speaker 2: Right, and that was the problem in history.  The problem in history was that one had to talk in a language that murdered your image in your eyes, and the image of your people in your own eyes and you had to be willing to concede to white people everything that was good and noble and everything that was inferior and bad, you had to accept was a part of your people, so that there was no critique that placed white people in the same microscopic scrutiny that black people were under, so we were not in class debating whether or not white people were psychopaths who could not do without violence, but rather we were debating whether or not black people were symbols and different than all other people inferior.  Well, I had just come out of the battle grounds of Alabama, Georgia, and there was just no way in the world that I was going to be at ease with that kind of conversation.  It was not a conversation that I could participate in and sit passively by because I did not think that a degree was more important than the truth, so I was constantly, you know, up against this force.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  You're talking about history department that represents largely the historical establishment.
Speaker 2: Yes, the citadel--the high priest of white culture.  I've written a piece about it, I mean what it meant to be a "long ways from home" is what I call it.  And in the South, I had been part of a movement, where black people were physically dismembered; and when I came north, I was part of a process of another kind of dismembering of the black self--was the intellectual dismembering of black people.
Story_ID: 178129
Speaker 1: Now, of the historians that you mentioned, there was one that I didn't know, but that you described as--Arthur...?
Speaker 2: --Nancy Weiss?
Speaker 1: No, Arthur--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Link.
Speaker 1: Link.  So he was the biographer of [President] Woodrow Wilson?--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Woodrow Wilson.  He wrote all his volumes on Woodrow Wilson.
Speaker 1: There are so many people that admire Woodrow Wilson, and yet he was the president that presided over the Red Summer of 1919, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He was also--Well, Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] admired him because he had been a president at Princeton, but he a real blatant segregationist.
Speaker 1: He's the one that changed the signs at the White House and made to put up the white--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --right, "colored" signs.
Speaker 1: --white, colored signs.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But he is seen as this international figure for peace and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: [Laughter]  These are some of the kind of things that you--
Speaker 2: Right and it was an important time to be there because it made me really question this whole conversation of Carter G. Woodson, about the miseducation of the Negro, and whether or not we could be expected in those universities to gain the knowledge that we could use to liberate ourselves and our communities or whether or not we were being educated to be co-opted and to be strangers at our parents table, so that was the conversation that I was a part of at Princeton.
Speaker 1: Now, James McPherson is considered the number one Civil War historians, at least one of the number one--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --right.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --one of the top historians, and his first work--published work was, I think, was the Negro Civil War--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --where he documented and people were grateful that, you know, someone had written about the black participation in the Civil War to an extent--I mean he wasn't the first to do it, but he was one of the first in that era to write about it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How did you find his classes?
Speaker 2: Well, clearly, he was a man who had a range of information at his hands and I mean he was not the worst; and he was not--I mean I wouldn't say he was the worst person that I had met.  And in some ways, I thought his heart was in the right place, but I still think that he suffered from white supremacy and that, you know, he bought into some of this whole U. B. Phillips notion that black people were better as slaves in America than savages in Africa; some part of that permeated, part of--I mean because John Blassingame wrote this thing to show that black people had not been deculturalized, that we did have community, that we did have a culture; and that there was this big conversation at Princeton whether or not oral history was viable historical tool for understanding historical issues; and so sometimes in the conversation, I sensed that he leaned more on the side where he didn't believe that oral history was a viable tool or that he tended to be more for U. B. Phillips, not that he bought everything Phillips said, but that he had definitely been imprinted by it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he probably represents a transition from--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --or some kind of movement away from some of the old history writers, but he doesn't go enough; you're saying he didn't go as far as he needed to go.
Speaker 2: I think he went as--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --as far as he could go--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 178130
Speaker 1: So we were talking about some of the historical community.  In John W. Blassingame's book, 'The Slave Community' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Blassingame was, at that point, unless I'm wrong, the only black person participating in the Ivy League who was a historian, right?--I mean in the Ivy League schools?
Speaker 2: Well, he started at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and then he got a job at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and he wrote 'The Slave Community,' yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then people like Mary Francis Berry began to emerge, but he definitely was the groundbreaker and a trendsetter.
Speaker 1: And now Nell Painter--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Nell Painter, yes.
Speaker 1: --is well-known to the community too.  Of course, John Hope Franklin was widely respected--(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, John Hope Franklin.
Speaker 1: --in Chicago.  And there were other black historians trying tell the story, but he was the only one in the Ivy League set for a while.  So, you had these struggles at school, but did you get out all right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I mean it was hard, but I--you know, resilience, survival.
Speaker 1: Were there any people on these campuses that encouraged you?
Speaker 2: No, absolutely not.
Speaker 1: And you say that there was such finality that I believe you.
Speaker 2: Absolutely not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you got a degree in history from Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 178131
Speaker 1: Do you remember the book--the controversy in the early '70s [1970s] about [Robert] Fogel and [Stanley] Engerman's book--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --'Time on the Cross,' -- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: 'Time on the Cross,' yes.
Speaker 1: --which claimed to be a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --quantitative study--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --computer-assisted--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --econometrics, yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, and what did you think of that?
Speaker 2: Just another sly way of missing the point--that slavery was a moral and social evil and that black people did not reap the benefits of our labor, and there is no way you can recalculate, miscalculate that.  That's basically the debate.
Speaker 1: Not even with new technology?
Speaker 2: Right.  That's basically the gist of enslavement and what did it mean to hold a people in captivity.
Story_ID: 178132
Speaker 1: Okay, who served as inspiration to you in the historical community at all if anybody?
Speaker 2: I read Charles Wesley, who was teaching at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  I read essays by black historians, but I was more impacted by generational black female poets who became my friends, Audre Lorde, June Jordan, [HM] Nikki Giovanni.  That was a community that I drew on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: [HM] Sonia Sanchez.
Speaker 1: These people would be part of--I guess what people who have come to term the black art movement?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In what way did they speak to your needs in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, the poetry had a political--had political meaning and social meaning and in the poetry, I found compatible political analysis and people that I could engage in intellectual discourse with.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite poem from that era or from those people?  They're still around--a lot of them are still around.
Speaker 2: Well, June Jordan is dead, but one of her favorite poems for me is the poem she writes after the students have been killed in Orangeburg, South Carolina and she says, you know, she's talking about how we value private property and how black people be less than the blade of grass that the last dog peed on.  I like that poem.
Speaker 1: Yeah, June Jordan--June Jordan and Nikki Giovanni--Nikki Giovanni achieved--like I said a higher level of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yes.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --a higher profile.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --but she was not my favorite poet.  My favorite poet was Audre Lorde and June Jordan.  They wrote a different kind of poetry.
Speaker 1: Okay, they did have a little exposure but not much on public--I think June Jordan was on public television once.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Black Journal--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and she says "Everywhere I go--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --soul--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --the tide seems low, everywhere I go the tide seems low," the great poem she wrote about South Africa and what was going on in Africa.  "I'm going to be a menace to my enemies."  Her poems were incredible.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Audre Lorde is dead too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, Audre's dead too, yes.
Story_ID: 178133
Speaker 1: So did you go on to teach history?
Speaker 2: Yes, I taught.  My first job was at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what favorite history--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I didn't really like being a college professor.  I began to search out--to continue to figure out how to use my intellectual knowledge with my activism and try to come up with a practice that bridged theory and action and so I put the greatest part of my energy into building organizations.
Speaker 1: Now, one thing that Stokley Carmichael, who later became Kwame Ture, used to always say when he spoke, he said, "I don't care what you do," he said, "after you hear me lecture, but I do care about you joining an organization,"  so you got to organize somewhere.  If it's the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], then organize.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: If the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], organize.  If it's CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], if it's the Boy Scout[s of America], whatever it is, organize because we don't live in a world by ourselves.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That was the message.  Did you kind of feel the same way?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So to be a teacher in an isolated situation wasn't going to work?
Speaker 2: I'd been too much imprinted in my early childhood by an activism and making the connection between intellectual knowledge and activism.
Speaker 1: Oh, was activism encouraged at Spelman when you were there?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Well, the students locked up the president.  That was the last year there was a male president, but it wasn't really encouraged in a very vigorous way.
Speaker 1: The students weren't encouraged to do that there by the president.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's probably why he was locked up.  [Laughter]  I would guess.  I don't know I wasn't there.
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was not.
Speaker 1: Spelman traditionally had a male president.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Story_ID: 178134
Speaker 1: What happened, did you--?  I mean was there an incident that took place or anything that made you just give up being a teacher?
Speaker 2: Oh no.  I just began to grow.  I became a feminist and became much involved in issues about women and devoted a great deal of my time to an organization called Women of All Colors that I developed and then from there, I went to divinity school because I felt it was really important to make a connection between spiritually and justice, and so I was looking for larger paradigms to continue to do my work.  And I never stopped doing my work from the time I began my work in Lowndes County, Alabama up until the present day.
Speaker 1: Now, do you see a difference between what--some people are now calling "womanism" and "feminism" or is that important to even discuss?
Speaker 2: It's a trick because no matter what you say, none of it really has to do with--it's neither one of those two things are authentic because womanism really is a response to racist feminism and it's a conversation between elite black women with white women about who black women are and the racism.  It's not a conversation where ordinary black women have access to the conversation or the symbols.  It really is a conversation that grew up in the academy.  It's not a community conversation.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you don't feel a need to be part of that conversation as a womanist as such?
Speaker 2: I feel a need to be a part of the same conversation as Sojourner Truth was engaged in and it was a conversation that grew up out of the suffering of black people in the community and that our words, and our theology was not defined or driven by white female theology.
Speaker 1: Now the organizations that you formed, what were the goals?
Speaker 2: To bring women of all colors together to try to break through systemic injustice.  And this organization does the same thing with people of all colors and it has a spiritual component.
Speaker 1: Oh, you mean the SpiritHouse?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Spiritual component in a sense that we understand justice to be not only a social question but a spiritual question, that has to do with right relations with each other, with God, and with all aspects of creation and in that sense it's a holistic spiritual question of how you live in the world.
Story_ID: 178135
Speaker 1: Who or what influenced you the most at Howard Divinity School [sic, Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: I didn't go to Howard.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry. Did I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I went to Episcopal Divinity School in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to the same divinity school that John went to--Jonathan Daniels went to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who or what influenced you the most there?
Speaker 2: I don't like to talk about a "who" because it was multiple conversations in ways that I hadn't heard conversations.  God talked and led me to read James Cone and I was influenced by James Cone.  I was influenced by a variety--mujerista theologians, Latin American female theologians, deeply influenced by liberation theologians out of Latin America.  A variety of theologians really influenced me and I began to understand black folk theology.  If I were to talk about a theology that greatly shaped me is black folk theology that grew out of the black folk church in struggle--the theology that gave birth to [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  When people talk about Martin Luther King, they act as if he was shaped by Boston University enclosure, but the truth of the matter is he was shaped by black folk theology.  The black folk theology that had--that talked about "I love everybody, I love everybody in my heart.  You can't make me hate.  You can't make me hate you in your heart."  That was a song that black people sang in enslavement.  That was a perfect example of agape, the ability of a people in chains to sing about love and the unwillingness to degrade themselves by hatred; or this whole conversation that the black church would have, "You better get right."  You know, these were the spiritual theological factors that influenced Martin Luther King's life as much as my own life and these ordinary people who did not have access to pen and paper created one of the most profound theologies in the history of this country, and that has deeply impacted; and that's reflected in the spirituals, and that's reflected in the sermons, and so that's where--if you talk about influence, that has had a deep influence on me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I mean even when we talk about--and it's true that the black church has been involved in the liberation struggle and forming a progressive agenda has also--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --not anymore, it's becoming more and more reactionary, yes, but I'm talking about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --well, even in those days, they were-- a lot of churches were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --but I didn't say in the churches, I said the black folk theology.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's the people--how the people talk about God, not how the church talked about God, so it's not how the preacher talked about God, it's about how my grandmother and the community talked about God.  That's what I mean about the God talk in the community, the symbols that say God is a way out of no-way, a lily of the valley and a bright and morning star--you know, the theology that talked about being so low down, I couldn't hear anybody pray; the kind of theology--that's black folk theology.  I'm not talking about institutionalized theology.  I'm talking about radical folk theology.
Speaker 1: Um, that's important.  You know, I hadn't thought about that until now--not very much anyway, but what you're saying is profound in the sense that you're not talking about quoting Bible scripture or verses, but quoting black people in the community--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --their observations about what's important and what isn't important.
Speaker 2: Tell me how you feel when you come out of the wilderness--that sense that we had to go through a process in order to be transformed.  We've come this far by faith.  I mean this incredible theological resonance that was able to wrestle out of the most humane, social meaning and context, a liberating God, who was always present in the conversation and the songs were the manifestation of that.  "I've got shoes, you've got shoes, all God's children have shoes," the recognition that in enslavement that said that black people were not human, did not have rights, the assertion, the ability to assert that you've got the right to have shoes and everybody that's talking about heaven, ain't going there, heaven, a critique of the slavocracy, profound black folk theology.
Story_ID: 178136
Speaker 1: Now what you're saying reminds of a passage in 'Beloved' by Toni Morrison.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Momma Suggs [sic, Baby Suggs] who is a minister and she can't read --simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --absolutely--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --she can't read the Bible--she doesn't know the verses, but she conducts church in some ways in spiritual gathering every week--
Speaker 2: That's right, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --amongst the people who had recently had been slaves.
Speaker 2: And this so moved [W.E.B.] Du Bois when he moved south and he wrote about the black spirituals.  You have to understand that the black spirituals contained the very breath of the black experience and it was our refusal to disappear and be silent, and invisible in a world that said that if we knew how to read and write, we would be put to death, and so that the black folk theology was a way for us recreating ourselves in a hostile land and building a community that was not only shaped by blood but also by the common experience and by the universality of God.  And that's what I mean.  I'm not talking about the black church now.  I'm talking about that thing that is comparable to the blues.
Speaker 1: It's interesting--just to bounce back to the movie again for a second--that that's the only scene in a book that's not fully acted out in a movie.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: I mean it was profound to me.  I said, well why wouldn't they--I mean that was the best part of the book--I thought was that.
Speaker 2: That's why the Civil Rights Movement--Southern Freedom Movement because it was more than the Civil Rights Movement.  When you talk about the Civil Rights Movement that you reduce a movement to a one dimensional reality when in fact it was a movement about how to be whole and fully in society that dehumanized black people and white people.  So it was the Southern Freedom Movement, not the Civil Rights Movement, but the reason why the movement was so strong was that it was folk--that black, common, ordinary, illiterate people had access to the symbols and the language of God talk because it was their language and their symbols.  And it was acted out not in the church, but the sacred space was a community in the streets, in the demonstrations, that that was the communal sacred place, not the church.  So they had moved--they had transformed the public space to a sacred space, where they were driving the conversation.  Does that make sense?
Speaker 1: Yes.  It does.  It makes too much sense.  It does.  It makes a lot of sense.  The kind of thing you over-stand rather than understand.
Story_ID: 178137
Speaker 1: When you finished school, did you--what you do now is part of a ministry.
Speaker 2: It's part of--it's a call.  Um, it's a deepening the call that I heard at Tuskegee [Institute, later Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] to work for justice, so it's work that I do, it's continuing that, but adding a larger way of doing that work.
Speaker 1: When those of us who were not direct participants in the movement, physically in the south, hear these stories and even as we saw them on TV from where we were in those days--I mean we can get a profound sense that something special happened that regardless of the beatings.  I mean something happened that was transforming I mean for everyone.
Speaker 2: Absolutely and it was a spiritual evangelical transformation.  Something had to happen in someone who could sing the song without fear.  "I'll do what the spirit says do, and if the spirit says 'die,' I'll die oh Lord."  It meant an effect that you had a different vision of death and you have a long meaning of understanding of life and creation and continuity, that killing me didn't mean the end of me as long as the movement was going on.  And my life was a part of something, you know, that was larger and greater than myself and so it was not that I would disappear if I died.  It was moving up to a different level of consciousness where one was renegotiating one's understanding of life and death.  You had to do that or you couldn't have stood before guns, or dogs, or anything of that.  Something had to happen in you that reordered how you stood on the ground, and so I believe that the movement and the spiritual, the God talk, and spirituality of the movement was so powerful because it had come from a people who had suffered, it had come from a people--that those words had come from their very essence and their very being, and so that--and they had met the challenge of having to move up a little higher and stand a little bit higher in a world that said that they were nothing--that they were chattel, that they were second-class people, so it was an ability--it was kind of a dual vision to not only be able to see who you are today, but the vision to be able to see who you might be tomorrow and that was powerful and that undergirded the movement.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sorry, I didn't mean to preach.
Speaker 1: That is wonderful preaching and it's good.  Don't be sorry about that.
Story_ID: 178138
Speaker 1: Tell me what is the project of SpiritHouse [Project]?
Speaker 2: The project of SpiritHouse is the spiritual and social call for us to break with the culture and legacy of U.S. violence and to build up a new world, and it uses art, education, research and action as tools that we might use in building up a beloved community.  We use art as a way of reclaiming culture voices that have been colonized and help creating to create the public space whereby colonized people can speak.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--do you--in terms like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --so we work on issues such as the U.S.A. Patriot Act.  We had an educational campaign on the U.S.A. Patriot Act when it first came out.  We worked on trying to show the churches the danger of the charitable choice bill because it subverted this very movement that I've been describing where the churches move toward social justice.  It was subverting them to charity and that meant that there would be no systemic change, changes that you would give people doles but nothing systemically would change.  Whereas in the Civil Right Movement--I mean during the Southern Freedom Movement, where the churches were involved in injustice, we were seeing systemic changes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in 2003, as we discussed this country is discussing--the discussion has begun to heat up over personal freedom has lost--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --civil liberties, yes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --yes, Civil Liberties lost as a result of the Patriot Act.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Patriot Act, which, you know, is ostensibly written to protect us from, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We are living in the midst of a right-wing Christian movement that uses Christianity, Jesus, and the cross as instruments of violence and oppression.  We are living in the middle of a new world order, who grapples with the question of how to maintain white supremacy in a 2/3 colored world and the answer comes out large and strongly through containment, whether you're talking about rounding up Arab men or Muslim men or whether you're talking about putting 700,000 African American men in prison, or whether you're talking about containment.  It's called low-intensity conflict designed to disrupt and destroy the whole other community, and those worlds are third-world community and we're living in the midst of this kind of activity.
Speaker 1: Well, what can we do about it?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, I think we got to understand.  I think we got to read and to be reflective on what it is we're dealing with on an everyday basis and we've got to make a connection between the public policy that has been created and the mission of this group of people, the right-wing people, President Bush and his allies.
Speaker 1: Is it hard to explain this crisis to people in a community--ordinary people in the community--is this part of your mission to explain what this is too?
Speaker 2: No, it's to disseminate information and give people access about the issues, but people in the community already know that something is dreadfully wrong because they live it every day; and part of what we try to do with people is to help them--to work with them, to build up a new infrastructure in their community and to repair the relationships that have been devastated by oppression whether you're talking about family relationships or you're talking about male or female relationships, or whether you're talking about relationships between people of color, relationships between blacks and whites, we try to get people to repair those relationships.
Story_ID: 178139
Speaker 1: Okay, often, now I'm going to ask this question because I see--this is just my own critique of what I see going on--a lot of times we find that black organizations or activist organizations will have high-level discussions and bring together all the same people that already are in the discussion to discuss these things.  And the kind of organizing that you guys engaged in, let's say in Mississippi, around voting, registration--I mean Alabama-- you, in particular, where you go door-to-door, you go to public places and meet people and develop a relationship them and that sort of thing and discuss these issues, it does not seem to happen as much.
Speaker 2: Well, there were two sets of circumstances.  The community was safer then.  I mean you could go from house-to-house and do that, and realize and know that you wouldn't be killed at the end of the night.  So that's one thing that's very different.  The other think that's very different--and let's be real honest now--since the Civil Rights [Movement]--since all of that, we've had COINTELPRO [Counter Intelligence Program].  We had a series of government manipulation that were designed to destroy and kill the spirit and the heart of the movement, and I think that we are just now beginning to move from under all of that terrible stuff and begin to reach out.
Speaker 1: I wasn't attempt to critique you for not doing that, I wanted to know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no, no--I know, I'm trying to tell you why--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --if you did it.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --organizations--oh no, we do it.  We're involved in a project in Lowndes County right now.  We're involved in 4 counties in the Black (ph) Bell (ph) south where we're trying to work with women, preachers, lay leaders and evangelists to try to gather together to try to provide the backups they need to repair the infrastructure and relationships in their communities.  I think it's important to do that at work, but what I'm suggesting to you is that part of what we got all led into that has stopped that work is this whole vision of territorial organizing and this whole vision that organizing can happen without ever coming in contact with people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that seems to be the (unclear) notion--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and that organizing is a career, a job and not a calling.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the idea of organizing as a job and that you can organize people just by announcing on the radio where the meeting is going to be and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and they just show up-- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Quite often,--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and then you have people who are organizing, who--oh I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: He's just trying to give me the signal--go ahead, go ahead.
Speaker 2: The only one thing that I wanted to say is that organizing in this country and funding are very neo-colonial.  We have many white organizations who are given big bucks to working communities where the communities don't know them and they don't know the community and that has sapped some of the organizing spirits in those organizing communities.  You cannot organize a community when members of that community don't know you and moreover, you can't lead a community by self-proclamation.  Leadership has to be called up out of the body of the people in a common struggle and vision for freedom; and you have to know the community either by proximity, by the common experience, or by blood.
Speaker 1: And many a would-be community leaders has been caught up in that dilemma, where they proclaim themselves the leader--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Absolutely.  And many black leaders think that they can be leaders because they got a college education; and they haven't been home in fifty years.
Story_ID: 178140
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you how you felt about the state of, I guess, faith in the black community now because--I mean, how do you feel about that now?
Speaker 2: Materialistic?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the black the mega churches.
Speaker 2: Mega churches, ministries of prosperity, bank--morally bankrupt, it reminds me of the state that the Israelites were in the wilderness, when they (unclear) for forty years after they had gone out of slavery into the desert.  So I think that the black church has lost its moorings.
Speaker 1: So you don't think that one can pray upon a better material situation but letting God handle--I mean the disconnection by praying to God, you're able to increase your wealth.
Speaker 2: That's not what we're here for.  The Hebrew scripture and the New Testament makes it clear, that we are here to let justice roll down like water, that Jesus did not come to give everybody prosperity and abundance, material abundance.  Jesus came to--Jesus was about transforming systems and relationships and breaking social boundaries; and so the black church, we didn't come all the way through the wilderness of enslavement; our ancestors didn't suffer through all of what they suffered through for us to come up and believe that the answer to the question is material prosperity.  Pharaoh had prosperity.  That was the problem.  You know, we have to imagine a new kind of freedom.  Freedom is not the right to live like Pharaoh or there wouldn't have been any need to have any movements.
Speaker 1: That raises another question on level.  You raised Pharaoh.  Should we now have a new kind of cultural prospective and, you know, should we continue to blame Pharaoh; and he was an African king--I mean monarch with a country that really wasn't that bad in terms of its moral.
Speaker 2: Well, I know that people try to sort of think that black is good, and there has never been any black radical evil, but the truth of the matter is we have to be willing, as a mature people struggling with freedom, to name black evil as much as we are willing to name white evil; and to understand--to call the question on someone like [HM] Colin Powell and someone like Condoleezza Rice.  When we were part of the Southern Freedom Movement, the whole world modeled-- the people of color around the world modeled their struggles.  And you can hear, "We shall overcome," sang in countries throughout this country--throughout the world, but, now, what does it mean for those people who were in that kind of freedom light to suddenly be foot soldiers for empire--to be the foot soldiers who are wreaking havoc in Iraq, who are not only destroying generations of babies already born with the uranium nuclear weapons, but that has the power to impact children into the ninety-ninth generation; and so what does it mean for us to be the people who are in that colored country wreaking havoc in that country?  How is it that the world will stand up for us when we need them again one day?  We're losing our moral authority around the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: People don't see us the same way anymore.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems there are pretty much a lot of demonstrations around the world.
Speaker 2: And so we have to say to Condoleezza Rice, we have to say to Colin Powell that we didn't fight all of what we fought for to lose our souls.
Speaker 1: So what I hear you saying is that power and wealth are not the two things we're fight for.
Speaker 2: No, we're fighting for justice, a relationship, a right relationship, a holistic relationship that placed us in right relation with our neighbors, with God, and with all aspects of humanity because what does prosperity mean in a world where 2 percent of the people own 80 percent of the wealth?  What does prosperity mean in a world where countries of color do not have access to their resources, where we're gobbling up everything all around the world?  How does one talk about prosperity?  Is it okay that I want to be rich while Africans--while we're gobbling up the resources in Africa, in Latin America--what does all of that mean?  I mean these are the questions we need to be asking ourselves.
Story_ID: 178141
Speaker 1: And we're mistaken if you think that black people stood the lashes in their backs and the 25 cents in their handkerchiefs to send their kids to college.  You're mistaken if you think that they thought they were creating a generation that would live and behave like Pharaoh and to worship money and materialism.  They always knew, as Zora Neale Hurston had said, that our eyes needed to watch God.
Speaker 2: Okay, because before I was alluding to the fact that Pharaoh wasn't necessarily that bad, but [laughter] historically, you know, but I mean we use him as a symbol of that, you know?
Speaker 1: But I think it's like saying that the slave master wasn't all that bad.  If there any truth in the story and people were oppressed in hell against their will, if there is any truth in the story, and if Pharaoh stood as a symbol of materialist, militaristic country, then we have to bring to bear the same critique on Pharaoh that we bring to bear on the United States; and just because it was a black nation, it doesn't mean that the nation wasn't corrupt.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it also may mean that the story is a little bit different too, but I'm not going argue about that, but the story is a little bit different than given in the Bible.
Speaker 1: But it's really a symbolic story.  We don't even know if a Pharaoh really lived.  It's really a symbolic story of enslavement, and liberation, and crossing over, and the possibility of people moving from one condition to the next in a story that we're not entrapped in our history, that we can all move out of slavery, and obeying the state, and that God has called on each of us because the story is really not about slavery.  It's really about the great gift of being able to break with the state, the violence of the state and have the opportunity to develop a new world.  That's really what Exodus is really about.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that we all have that power.  We all have that gift.
Story_ID: 178142
Speaker 1: Are you encouraged by young people that are--that you come in contact with through [the] SpiritHouse [Project]?
Speaker 2: These young people have known Republicanism all of their lives; and young people who have the calling to activism and who would make our strongest activists, all the Pell Grants have been cut out and the financial aid has been cut out, and so it thwarts their ability to develop a resonating activism because they have to make a choice.  The other thing that I would say is that it's hard to develop activism when you owe your soul to American Express.  The young people are given cards at seventeen years old that cut out their ability to be independent.  You can't have a movement and stay out of work like we did and move into a community when you owe American Express $3000.  You just can't do that.
Speaker 1: It's a new kind of sharecropping or a new kind of bondage, debt culture.
Speaker 2: Absolutely!  It's deliberately given to young people to cut out their vitality.
Speaker 1: I guess you suspect that you know that if you give a deprived person credit, they're going to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --but it's not just deprived kids; it's also my middle class kids, white and black, who come in here up to their neck in credit card debt.
Story_ID: 178143
Speaker 1: Tell me, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?  I know a lot of this conversation has been about that already--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that we take out of our struggle, out of our journey in this country a message about treating people right, and standing up for justice, and some sense of humble humility that God chose us to bring that message to this wilderness in America and so that I would hope that we remember the meaning of our journey in this country and that at the heart of that journey is agape and love and that we stand as a model for love and for respect and for justice.
Story_ID: 178144
Speaker 1: When you look back on the things you've done, and you're not that old by the standards of the folks we interview usually.  What would you say, at this point, is your legacy?
Speaker 2: I don't look at it as my legacy.  I am part of a community of people who believed in the possibility of building a new world and my legacy is the gift of being given that freedom, and that hope by the community that I grew up in and those southern black sharecroppers who were willing to do everything for freedom, and that has set my eyes.  That legacy has enriched my vision, so it's a legacy that was given to me by the community.  That's my legacy.
Story_ID: 178145
Speaker 1: And ma'am, is there anything that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I mean, anybody who would never do anything differently is a fool.  I would do a lot of things differently.  One of the which is I probably think I'd write more than what I've written, and I think that I'd be less critical of those things that are not important, and I think I would make better use of my time, and I think that I would try to develop a stronger inner life.
Story_ID: 178146
Speaker 1: And, the last question is--this is slightly different from legacy, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As someone who saw injustice and tried to right it; as someone who had the radical hope and the audacity to believe that we could be transformed; that we were not entrapped in history, and someone who really believed that and believed that.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 178147
Speaker 1: Okay, this is an evening called, 'Gonna do what the spirit says do,'  and this was a nine part series that we had that brought artists together--progressive artists in the community to share their works.  And this is a woman from New York [New York] called, Suheir Hammad, she is the leading American Palestinian poet, and she appeared in 'Def Poetry Jam' on Broadway.
Speaker 2: Can you spell her name for us?
Speaker 1: Suheir.  S-U-H-E-I-R, H-A-M-M-A-D.  Suheir Hammad.
Speaker 2: Okay and this is about what year?
Speaker 1: This is 2001.  That's me speaking at an anti-war demonstration with Black Voices for Peace.  That's about 2002.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's at a teach-in at that same event on the Palestinian Israeli war.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: Those are interns for the year summer 2002.  One woman is from Kenya; another woman is Indian, born in Trinidad, and two women born in America.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's the press conference that we did the interns 2003--I'm sorry 2002 did on the U.S. A. Patriot Act, and that was on C-SPAN; that's also Donald Smith, who is the head--the founder of Black Voices for Peace.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Outside of Spirit House.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Next.
Speaker 1: The celebration that we had for Rosemarie [Harding] and Vincent--[HM] Dr. Vincent Harding, and that's Dr. Harding, and the woman is Iris Hartshorn, who is a Mennonite, a Latina Mennonite, female Mennonite.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Who is the other gentleman?
Speaker 1: Her husband.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Do you know his name?
Speaker 1: Leo Hartshorn.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Next.
Speaker 1: The same press conference really.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Event in Philadelphia, called, "By the Other side Community" on the war in Iraq.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Date?
Speaker 1: 2003.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Any individuals besides yourself we should identify?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: Speaking at a public gathering at that event, the press conference.
Speaker 2: (Off camera discussion)
Speaker 1: He just did that one.  That's also in Philadelphia on that panel discussion.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  All right, next. Turn it toward you a little bit, Larry.
Speaker 1: That's speaking in August in Lowndes County, Alabama in commemoration of Jonathan Daniels.
Speaker 2: That's in August of 2003?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, no, that's 2001.
Speaker 2: Okay.  2001.
Speaker 1: (Off camera discussion)
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Say that one more time for me.
Speaker 1: This is at Virginia Military Institute, where President Jimmy Carter is receiving the Jonathan Daniels Humanitarian Award.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, are you presenting the award?
Speaker 1: No, we're shaking hands after the event.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: He and I are being photographed by the newspapers.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Did you give us a date for this?
Speaker 1: That's 2002, Nancy?  Yes.
