Story_ID: 657961
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2:  	Jacquelyn Elois Stone, J-A-C-Q-U-E-L-Y-N, E-L-O-I-S, S-T-O-N-E [HistoryMaker Jacquelyn E. Stone].
Speaker 1: All right, and mam, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2:  	January 7th, 1958, born in Williamsburg, Virginia.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2:  	I'm an attorney.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2:  	Today is December 5th, 19--2016.
Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2:  	We are in Richmond, Virginia.
Story_ID: 657962
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask as kind of a warm up and they only require a short answer.  First one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2:  	I do.  I love sweet potatoes and any kind of greens.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2:  	Red.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2:  	I'd say January is the--a very special time.
Speaker 1: Okay, very few people say January.  Is there a particular reason because it's considered by some the dreariest month and all that?
Speaker 2:  	Well, there's a lot to look forward to in my January, I'm not a fan of cold weather.  So, fortunately, in Richmond, Virginia it doesn't get super cold in January but, but some of my highlights are my anniversary is January the 1st, my birthday is January the 7th, my father's [William T. Stone, Sr.] birthday is January the 8th, my husband [HistoryMaker B. K. Fulton] is January the 10th, and lots of dear friends that are all January birthdays as well, so lots of, lots of reasons to celebrate and enjoy January.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2:  	Well, that's where the warmth does come in.  I, I do enjoy islands.  I think Cape Town, South Africa is one that really sticks in my mind as a wonderful place, and New Zealand is another, another great place that I like to visit.
Speaker 1: And, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2:  	I actually--I, I live by the phrase, live, love, laugh, but I was reminded of a quote that I really do appreciate.  I was listening to 'The Alchemist' [Paulo Coelho] just over the weekend and was reminded of a quote, "When you want something the--all of the universe conspires to help you achieve it."  And, and that's something that, that sticks in my mind as a, as a quote that I really appreciate.
Story_ID: 657963
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [William T. Stone, Sr.] side and we'll try to bring them i- them together, but we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2:  	My mother's name is Sara Elizabeth Cumber Stone, that's S-A-R-A, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, Cumber, C-U-M-B-E-R is her maiden name, and Stone is her married name [Sara Cumber Stone].
Speaker 1: And, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2:  	She was born December 23, 1930 in Williamsburg, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace that side of the family and what were they doing?
Speaker 2:  	We're actually working on tracing our ancestors, I probably don't have as much information as I hope to have but, but, as I know it, the entire family is from the Williamsburg area.  My grandfather [William Cumber, Sr.], my mother's father, I do know that there are some Charles City roots and what I've learned is that he was actually born in Williamsburg but his parents [Maria Cumber and Lacy Cumber] did not raise him.  He was raised by an aunt who lived in Charles City.  So, he, he grew up in that area.  My, my mother's mother, her last name was Pierce [Elizabeth Pierce Cumber] and she grew up in the Williamsburg area.  She and her sister both lived in Williamsburg for their entire lives.  And her sister, she, she died at age 100--over a hundred years old, and, and my grandparents were almost a hundred when they passed away as well.  But, lots of long Williamsburg genes that, that run.
Speaker 1: Now, are there any, any stories that have passed down from those long lived ancestors who lived in this area, which is the--I guess the oldest, one of the oldest occupied places in the United States other than St. Augustine, Florida, Jamestown [Virginia], Williamsburg all this, you know?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, well, one of the stories that my mother has shared, she shared a book with us that talked about an African American man in Williamsburg who had a, a store in the downtown area and earned so much money that he actually loaned funds to the president of William and Mary [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia].  And, it was interesting because there, there were schools like William and Mary and other schools that would do their best not to allow people of color to, to be in professional programs there but to, to have learned that, that a, a man of color was wealthy enough to, to give a loan to, to someone at--of that stature at William and Mary was interesting history.  One other reminder that I was given when the national African American museum in Washington [National Museum of African American History and Culture, Washington, D.C.] was dedicated, there was a bell that the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] rang when he was there and that bell was from my church, First Baptist Church in Williamsburg, Virginia.  And that is the oldest church that was formed by, by freed blacks and slaves, and, and others many, many years ago.  So, it's got a very rich history and it was such a proud moment for us to see our bell there as part of that, that tremendous ceremony.  And, my mother was reminded when she as a little girl would ring that bell, so it was, it was great to see that.
Speaker 1: Now, the church is considered the oldest black church in the United States?
Speaker 2:  	That's my understanding, yes, that it was, it was founded by some slaves and so it carries that history.
Speaker 1: It's interesting so that, I know the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] is the oldest denomination but they did not necessarily have the oldest black church (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Church.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: So that's--okay.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, right there and it's still standing First Baptist Church right there on Scotland Street in Williamsburg.
Story_ID: 657964
Speaker 1: Any other history from that side of the family?  So what did the people do on that side for the most part?
Speaker 2:  	My grandfather [Stone's maternal grandfather, William Cumber, Sr.] was actually a caddy.  He would leave Williamsburg [Virginia] and he would go up to Pine Valley [Pine Valley Golf Club, Pine Valley, New Jersey] and, and spend time away from his family for months at a time during golf season, and would be there to caddy lot of the stars.  I remember him talking about working with Perry Como and others that would go and, and play at the fancy golf courses.  And he would be there to help them.  And then he'd come home and, and spend the off season with the family.  But it was, it was interesting to learn, you know, what our ancestors did to really provide for their families.
Speaker 1: Now that could be a fairly lucrative thing considering the stars have money that they tip with and could be, you know, considered a real plumb position to be in.
Speaker 2:  	Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, did he do okay financially?
Speaker 2:  	He did very well from what I gather, I mean, my, my mother [Sara Cumber Stone] was--she moved to the house that she grew up in and that still is where her siblings live in Williamsburg.  But she moved there on her first birthday, and, I mean, it's in an area very close to William and Mary [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia] that is a, a very highly sought after street.  That entire street actually was, was home to, to African Americans in Williamsburg and really was a wonderful location, is right around the corner from the church [First Baptist Church, Williamsburg, Virginia] we talked about.  But it was a very well, well--I don't know if I would call it well to do, but the individuals there did quite well and, and had a very nice living as a result.  And, now, I know that the Colonial Williamsburg [Williamsburg, Virginia] certainly has their eyes on all of that property because it's in a perfect location, and is well taken care of.  So, so I think he did very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (Simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 657965
Speaker 1: What did your mother [Sara Cumber Stone] say about growing up in Williamsburg [Virginia]?
Speaker 2:  	I think it was a, a childhood that was a very positive one.  I don't hear her talking about having to, to worry a lot about what they needed.  I think she and her siblings--she had two brothers [William Cumber, Jr. and Pernell Cumber] and two sisters [Ernestine Cumber and Juanita Cumber] and they all were very, very good people and they actually took care of their mother [Elizabeth Pierce Cumber] really, I mean, while grandpa [William Cumber, Sr.] was off working I think the kids all felt it was their role to take care of their mother and not have her have to worry about anything.  So, they would cook and clean and, and do all of the chores.  And, my mother actually went to school and became a seamstress.  I actually had heard one of her sisters mention that she'd actually put a portfolio together because she wanted to be a designer at the Fashion Institute [Fashion Institute of Technology] in New York [New York].  And, she did study design and, and seamstress.  And the other girls in the family went into education and, and actually was a, a really neat situation, we just happened to be talking to an individual who as it turned out had been in seventh grade, and my aunt had been her special ed- her physical education teacher.  And, this, this person was inspired to go into physical education as a result of my aunt.  So, so my aunt's love to do, do any kind of sports and arts and crafts and that sort of thing.  And they loved sharing that with their students--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and so.
Speaker 1: Did your mother--now did she go to college to be a seam- or how did she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) She went to a two year program at North Carolina A and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] for seamstress.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, North Carolina A and T, all right,
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 657966
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2:  	William Thomas Stone, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, T-H-O-M-A-S, S-T-O-N-E [William T. Stone, Sr.].
Speaker 1: And, what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2:  	He was born January the 8th, 1931 in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay, and once again, like, how far back can you trace his side and what were they doing?
Speaker 2:  	Well, my, my father's profession is law.  He, he's a retired attorney, judge, and actually is a funeral home director.  And, I, I think the funeral home business is one that has been in our family for, for years and as we have, have had family reunions, and had opportunities to kind of delve back into the family tree, there is a lot of, of morticians and funeral directors in the history (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, was your grandfather the founder of that funeral home or great-grandfather [William S. Cooke]?
Speaker 2:  	My, my father's father was not in the business but my father actually at some point ended up moving to--moving in with his, his aunt [Edna Cooke Whiting] and--we would call her Auntie Grandma because she had the role of grandmother and great aunt.  And, her husband was in the funeral home business, but there were other, other paths that also lead to, to funeral homes as well within the family structure.  So, that's what got my father most directly involved in, in the funeral home business.
Speaker 1: Now, what is the name of the funeral home?
Speaker 2:  	Whiting's Funeral Home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And it's located in Williamsburg [Virginia].  And, and even though he's eighty-five, he is still actively involved in, in running and operating the funeral home.
Speaker 1: So, Whiting's Funeral Home--funeral directors in black communities usually do well, I mean, they're some of the more, well heeled people in the community.  So, this is this uncle through by marriage I guess, right, who founded it?
Speaker 2:  	Right, right.
Speaker 1: And, do you know his name by any chance?
Speaker 2:  	His name is Mr. Whiting [McKinley T. Whiting], and I unfortunately don't recall his first name.
Speaker 1: All right, so, your father so he grew up in an environment where the funeral business was, was going strong and, I mean, he had resources.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, that was very much a part of his life.  But he was a, he was a, he was a hardworking person in every respect.  And, I think before he got fully involved in the funeral home he would just do whatever job he possibly could and was just very energetic.  So, I think he had convinced himself that he was going to go to law school.  And, he too had a friendship with William and Mary [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia], the dean at the law school at William and Mary [William and Mary Law School, Williamsburg, Virginia].  And I think he, he wanted to go to school there, but that, that wasn't, wasn't as available to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you couldn't do it really if you were black?
Speaker 2:  	That's right, that's right.  So, he went to American University [Washington, D.C.].  He went to Central State [Central State College; Central State University] in Wilberforce, Ohio.
Speaker 1: That's--near where I, I'm from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Exactly, and that's where he did his undergraduate work.  And then went to, to law school at American University, worked his way through.  He actually went during the--straight through, including summers, and also worked during the period that he was going to law school.  And started taking the bar just as early as he possibly could and was ready to, to jump into practice immediately after graduation.  He started his law firm and, and had it there in the same building as the funeral home in Williamsburg.  So, he had all of his activities all pretty much combined and--
Speaker 1: Okay so, so, he really did both at the same time? Okay.
Speaker 2:  	He sure did.
Speaker 1: He's in private practice and his office is in the funeral home?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  
Story_ID: 657967
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2:  	(Pause) I know that they were in school together.
Speaker 1: At--
Speaker 2: They were, they were both in Williamsburg [Virginia]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because my, my father [William T. Stone, Sr.] was born in Washington [D.C.] and I think at some point his, his mother died very early.  And, although he had a number of siblings, it's quite a good sized family.  But, my dad, as he was being raised by the Whitings [Edna Cooke Whiting and McKinley T. Whiting], that had him in Williamsburg so he ended up in school with my mother [Sara Cumber Stone].  And there's a, a graduation picture with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this was in high school [Bruton Heights School, Williamsburg, Virginia]?
Speaker 2:  	In high school, yes, yes.  So, she's on the front row and he's up in the back.  So, they, they met during the high school period.  And, and so, he went up to Ohio for college [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio], she went to North Carolina for college [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].  And, and unfortunately, I don't have all the details on where they got reconnected, but, but got married and had four children.  And I'm next to oldest.  But, but I do, do think of a funny story my mother told me while she was in North Carolina.  She was doing some, some seamstress work either at a, at a church or a laundromat or somewhere, but she had occasion to meet Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], who was there 'cause that was, that was definitely within his stomping grounds there.  So, they had a chance to, to be acquainted.  But, I think my mom came on back to Williamsburg after she completed her two years and, and then she and my dad got married.  That would have been in 1956 that they got married.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is--okay, all right, this is--around the time that Dr. King starts up the Montgomery bus boycotts, '55 [1955], '56 [1956].
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, it was a little before that they would have had a chance to meet.  And, and interestingly enough, when you go to my dad's office at the funeral home [Whiting's Funeral Home, Williamsburg, Virginia], there is a picture of Dr. King visiting Williamsburg and my dad is there in the picture.  I think he was helping host him during his visit to Williamsburg--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --so it's an interesting correlation.
Story_ID: 657968
Speaker 1: When you consider your parents' per- personalities, their, their dispositions their sense of humor, how they walked, how they talk, you know, what they were interested in, their talents, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2:  	That's funny, 'cause I, I see a lot of both of them in me.  My father [William T. Stone, Sr.] and I--to be honest when I was growing up, he was working hard, he was traveling, and he was just really, really doing what it took to take care of the family.  And I probably said to myself, I, I don't know if I, I don't know if I wanna be a lawyer 'cause I don't, I don't know if I wanna be all over the place working as hard as he is and, and just had that vision of him.  My mother [Sara Cumber Stone], she was there taking care of the household and, and really taking very good care of us.  And imparted a level of, of patience and perception and, and common sense.  And, when I look at how I have turned out, I'm a lawyer running around doing a lot of the same things that my dad was doing.  And, unbeknownst to me, I was, I was incorporating a whole lot of that in how I interact with people in my work environment, and, but at the same time I, I feel a lot of my mother's example in, in how I approach different situations.  And, so it's, it's an interesting mix from what I can, can feel.
Story_ID: 657969
Speaker 1: Now do you have siblings?
Speaker 2:  	I have three brothers, I'm the only girl.  I have one older brother [William T. Stone, Jr.] and then me and then a middle brother [Michael Stone] and a younger brother [Christopher Stone].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Can you tell us something about them?
Speaker 2:  	My oldest brother--we were all born in Williamsburg [Virginia] so we all grew up in, in that environment.  All of--I was the only one who stayed in Virginia for pretty much the entire time except for when I went away to law school.  But, my brothers have all done some, some of their time in Georgia, two of them are still living in Georgia.  My oldest brother, he was working at Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] in Williamsburg, was there for quite a while.  And when Anheuser-Busch announced that they were gonna open a new facility in Georgia, he was tapped to go down there and help open that and head up their quality control operations there.  So, he continues to work at Anheuser-Busch in Georgia.  My middle brother had lived in Georgia but actually is now back in Virginia, and he is a culinary expert.  And actually, part of my love for sweet potatoes is bolstered by him.  He is a masterful sweet potieta- potato pie maker.  So, he, he does a wonderful job.  And then my youngest brother is still in Georgia and he's a computer professional.  And actually is the one who is, is working very closely with my father [William T. Stone, Sr.] at the funeral home [Whiting's Funeral Home, Williamsburg, Virginia] and, and has that as part of his, his focus.  And is just--he's a tremendous asset--
Speaker 1: Oh (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) to the funeral home.
Story_ID: 657970
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2:  	(Pause) I, I have, I have very clear memories of growing up.  We talked about how my dad [William T. Stone, Sr.] had the office--the law office on top of the funeral home [Whiting's Funeral Home, Williamsburg, Virginia].  Well, we lived just on, on top of the garage on the funeral home so it was all like a little complex there.  So, we had an apartment up at the top of the garage.  And, I can picture vividly being up there, a couple of the, the clearest memories were when my brother [William T. Stone, Jr.] got to go to school.  He would walk out and catch the bus and I was not old enough to go to school yet, and I was very, very disappointed.  I wanted to go to school as well, so my mother [Sara Cumber Stone] had a little--I guess it was my little table that I ate off of, and she set it up and that was my school table.  And she would allow me to go to school there in the apartment in our living room.  And, and I would feel as though I'm getting all of what my brother was able to experience in school.  And, and, and it must, must have been something that, that left in my head because I enjoyed school to the point that when we'd have snow day or getting ready for summer or whatever, I was very disappointed.  Because I, I really enjoyed school enough that, that I didn't want it to end really.  So, so that was one of my vivid memories.  I also remember--and again, I'm not a fan of snow, but on one of those snow days I was all bundled up in my, my snow gear and there were some stairs to go from the apartment downstairs.  And I, I don't know if I felt I was ready to get on down but I found myself rolling down those stairs and out the door.  And so, (laughter) but, then yeah, unfortunately that's, that's vivid memories that you probably don't see me out skiing or doing a whole lot of snow related sports 'cause that's still in my head.  But, but those are some early memories.  I will mention that another memory, I went to a Catholic school.  I was very fortunate that our parents got us all started out in, in the private school.  Because in Williamsburg [Virginia] at that time, this was in the early '60s [1960s] there weren't a whole lot of different schools to, to go to so you either had the public school or the private school.  And we were, were able to go to the private school that was run by nuns (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I just wanna point out for anybody listening to this that a public school would have been underfunded in those days, severely underfunded and probably without a lot of resources.
Speaker 2:  	Precisely.
Speaker 1: So, if parents could afford to, do something different.
Speaker 2:  	And I, and there weren't a whole lot of kids of color there at all and so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At the Catholic school?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, at the Catholic school where we went, and I was able to go from kindergarten through twelfth grade.  And have the Bible to show that I was a thirteen year alum of Walsingham Academy [Williamsburg, Virginia].  But, but it made for an interesting dichotomy in how I grew up because I grew up around other kids of color on my street, but my school that I went to every day was not--it didn't look the same.
Speaker 1: I had a note in here that the school was a residential school, I mean a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) It wasn't a boarding school when I went.  It originally, it absolutely was a school where there could be female boarders there but they phased that out.  And when I started, there may have been some still there when I first started in kindergarten but that, that wasn't much longer through my time there.  And, and so it was all just a day school experience for me.
Speaker 1: Right there in Williamsburg [Virginia]?
Speaker 2:  	Right in Williamsburg.
Speaker 1: Within walking distance?
Speaker 2:  	It wasn't in walking distance, it was--I, I'm on the side of Williamsburg that's closest to Busch Gardens [Busch Gardens Williamsburg, Williamsburg, Virginia], which I'm sure a lot of folks are familiar with going that route, and then from my house you go through the restored area of Colonial Williamsburg [Williamsburg, Virginia] and then on the other side closer to William and Mary [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia] is where Walsingham is and continues to be (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where my grandparents [Stone's maternal grandparents, Elizabeth Pierce Cumber and William Cumber, Sr.] live over on that side.  But, but you couldn't walk to school from there.
Story_ID: 657971
Speaker 1: Now what was the demographic layout of Williamsburg [Virginia] in those days?  Was there, was there like a specific black community or did black folks live all around the city or?
Speaker 2:  	It was pretty clear the pockets of the black communities and, and, as I think about it, it was on pretty much one side of town where you had more of the, the black residents on the other side and in the areas that continued to grow as I was growing up, those were in the direction of William and Mary [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia].  And, again, that street that my grandparents [Stone's maternal grandparents, Elizabeth Pierce Cumber and William Cumber, Sr.] lived and my mom [Sara Cumber Stone] grew up on, and that was a pretty unique little segment there of Williamsburg.  But, but it, but it was, it was pretty segregated as I think back on it.  And actually, one of the memories that I really think about a lot is one of my, my best friends at school [Walsingham Academy, Williamsburg, Virginia] I came to find that we went to the same ballet teacher, but I didn't understand why I'd never seen her 'cause I would go to class at Fort Eustis [Joint Base Langley-Eustis, Virginia] which was right--not too far away.  And my friend said, "Oh, well, I, I go to the community center," which was literally just around the corner.  And I asked my mom, well, why, why, why do we go to different places?  And she said, "Well, little girls like you aren't, aren't allowed in the community center."  And, and that's where the pool was and where all the other kids went for their summer activities.  Fortunately, for me, where we grew up, the black pool was right there behind our house where we grew up.  So, that--I don't, I don't have really bitter memories about growing up in that type of environment because it really didn't, didn't hit me in a way that made me feel as though I was deprived of anything.  But, as I think about what I did, did experience just what I remember about the--just the, the distinctions that have, had been in place then, it, it really was a very, it was a divided environment but not to the point where it held me back.
Story_ID: 657972
Speaker 1: So, you're at the Walsingham Academy [Williamsburg, Virginia] and, and you enjoy school?
Speaker 2:  	Very much so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And--all right.  And did--did you have any--a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2:  	I enjoyed English, I enjoyed all the math subjects, I enjoyed physics.  And I think a lot of what went into what made me enjoy my classes was the teacher.  Now, I will mention English AP [advanced placement], it was taught by a woman who was, was very, very tough.  And, and we really set out not to like her very much but she was relentless, she would not let us get away with--without proofing and proofing and rewriting and rewriting, and, and I owe so much to her to this day.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2:  	Her name was Mrs. Allen [ph.].  And she happened to be the wife of our, our gym coach--the basketball coach and he taught us drivers ed [drivers education] and, and all that.  But, but Mrs. Allen was a--she was a stickler and she was--'cause a lot of our teachers were nuns, so it was, it was an interesting mix of the, the nuns who, I mean, you didn't understand a whole lot about, about nuns 'cause back then they had the full habit and, I mean, you didn't really know if they were people.  But, but the lay teachers were, were really, really very special people as well.
Speaker 1: Were there any black teachers in school?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, no, no.  The only black person who was in the school administration was another Mrs. Allen [ph.].  She was the secretary, the school secretary.  And her son was in my kindergarten class, and we were the two kids of color in kindergarten at Walsingham that year.  And then a couple of other students of color joined in, but it, it wasn't that many.
Speaker 1: It was never that many? Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Never, never more than three or four.
Speaker 1: So, you were in school 'til '76 [1976] (unclear).
Speaker 2:  	I graduated in '76 [1976].
Story_ID: 657973
Speaker 1: Had the black pop- population grown to any significant propor- you know, stage in that period of time?
Speaker 2:  	At the school or in the city (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah at the, at the--in the school, yeah.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, no, no.  It was--my graduating class [at Walsingham Academy, Williamsburg, Virginia], I had fifty-two in my graduating class and I'm picturing maybe three or four of us graduating in that, that class thereabouts, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, so was there a name for the part of town that you lived in?
Speaker 2:  	No, I don't think Williamsburg [Virginia] was big enough to have a lot of--I mean, Quarterpath Park [Williamsburg, Virginia] was what we referred to it because that, that pool where we were able to swim and have our summer activities that was Quarterpath Park and was right behind my street.  I lived on Pocahontas Street but I think Quarterpath Park is probably what people would refer to that area as.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, was there a Pow- Powhatan Street too and a Pocahontas, yeah (laughter) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) There was actually, there was a Powhatan Park--Drive [Powhatan Drive] and then Pocahontas Street, and, yep, we stick with the history in the area for sure.
Speaker 1: Did--I mean, growing up in such a historic place, I mean, in other towns you hear these names but you didn't see--you didn't have a sense that, that was as real 'cause it wasn't right up on you, but did you have a sense of history--a greater sense of history growing up in that area?
Speaker 2:  	I, I think I did.  And to have the restored area right there, you know, the historic Colonial Williamsburg [Williamsburg, Virginia] that we were just--I mean, we probably took it for granted to a large extent.  I will say that, when you go to the visitors center [Colonial Williamsburg Regional Visitor Center, Williamsburg, Virginia], there is a film called 'The Patriot' and growing up in the summer we didn't have air conditioning but the 'The Patriot' did because you--so we would--I can't tell you how many times we saw 'The Patriot' because we would sit in the air conditioning in the summer and enjoy 'The Patriot' many, many times.  I'm sure we could recite every line in it, but it was very comfortable in there.  But, like yeah, we really, really got to, to live that history and, frankly, didn't totally understand why there were so many tourists there keeping us from getting to school on time, but, but once I left Williamsburg and realized how very unique it was as a city to grow up in the midst of all of that history then I really, really had a greater appreciation for it.
Speaker 1: It's interesting and, I mean, I think it wasn't until like a few years ago, maybe fifteen years ago, that black people started, you know, taking roles in that colonial--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --drama--
Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in Williamsburg.
Speaker 2: It was as though there were no slaves because they didn't show the slave quarters or didn't really integrate the role of the slaves in that culture.  But, but, but one of my family friends was very instrumental in helping bring that out as part of a--the vital part of telling that entire story.
Speaker 1: While you were growing up, did they talk about it?
Speaker 2:  	It wasn't while I was growing up, it was, it was after I had grown up and left.  But it was in the probably late '80s [1980s], '90s [1990s], yeah.
Speaker 1: I think it's, you know, a certain stage in our history people tend to push history away, because they knew something was wrong but they couldn't--they hadn't necessarily decoded it enough to articulate it.  They knew something was really wrong with the picture they were seeing, but they couldn't, you know.  And it wasn't until recent years somebody actually put this in the right perspective (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) (unclear) Tell the rest of the story, exactly.
Story_ID: 657974
Speaker 1: Did you pay attention to your father's [William T. Stone, Sr.] law career when you were growing up?
Speaker 2:  	I did, and, and actually got a chance to spend some time in his office and helped out a couple of summers.  And, and it was during that period that I think I, I felt comfortable with that area as a possible career goal.  But, again, I, I probably still had in my head I'm not sure I wanna be a practicing attorney.  But, but it really gave me a really great base to, to work off of.  And then as I continued doing other things--I mean, when I was in college [at the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] I had the opportunity to be in Washington [D.C.] and was an intern with a company [Caterpillar Tractor Company; Caterpillar Inc.] that had a governmental affairs internship.  And, I, I loved that because growing up politics and, and the political process and government were all areas that, that I had an appreciation for.  And to be able to see that firsthand being in Washington and, you know, working in [U.S.] Congress, and interacting with the, the folks who were appointed by the president, it was really pretty exciting.  So, I was surrounded by people in the legislative and political process and many of whom had gone to law school.  So, I then said to myself, okay, well, I'll, I'll go ahead and, and consider studying law as an area that would give me the, you know, the ability to interact with them and, and talk that same language.  And still, went to law school [at Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] still not necessarily thinking I was gonna practice but, as life works out, it, it all ended up that I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay, so, so it was a combination of those things, those factors (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Precisely.
Speaker 1: --that pushed you towards law school?
Speaker 2:  	Precisely.
Story_ID: 657975
Speaker 1: Now back in, in high school, now you said you had a small graduating class?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: And, did, did you have any special opportunities in high school?
Speaker 2:  	I was, I was involved with the student government and was a cheerleader and, you know, was very involved in, in a lot of what the extracurricular activities would offer.  Just, I mean, it was, it was the type of environment that was very supportive and, again, even though there weren't a whole lot of us there it was--it had some really good resources and was the kind of place where you felt very comfortable being involved in as much as you possibly could.  So, that, that's the kind of life that I, I experienced during, during, you know, elementary all through high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when you were in high school did you--what had you projected as your career because you liked, you liked almost everything, English, physics even, you know, so did you ever consider becoming a scientist, you know?
Speaker 2:  	I was going to be a biomedical engineer.  I applied to Northwestern School of Engineering [Northwestern University School of Engineering; Robert R. McCormick School of Engineering and Applied Science, Evanston, Illinois] and was accepted into their biomedical engineering program.  And, and it was because I enjoyed all of those areas of study.  And I actually only applied to two schools; I applied to, to Northwestern and also University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] and was fortunate to get into both of them.  And--I recall talking to my mother [Sara Cumber Stone] about the, the two, I mean, Northwestern I saw the course of study and it was just all this technical study, which was all fine, but I said, well, where's the English and the other, other elements that I enjoyed.  And then, then thought about the fact that it's a lot colder there than it is in Virginia.  And, my mother ultimately said, "You know, I can see you doing any of that but, but to me the research and the, the work that's involved with being a biomedical engineer doesn't seem to me to involve as much of the interaction with people that I see you doing.  And so, I know you would do great at whatever but it just seems as though you might, might enjoy something else."  And, and I realized that she was absolutely on point, and I made the decision to go to University of Virginia.  And was able to be an Echols Scholar [Echols Scholars Program], which is a very unique program that they have available for students that, that come in at a level where you're, you're not required to take the usual freshman courses.  You can take higher level courses, you can kind of craft your own interdisciplinary degree.  And so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, were you in the National Honor Society and that sort of thing?  I would have guessed so.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.  I was, I was part of that at Walsingham [Walsingham Academy, Williamsburg, Virginia] and actually I must have been the president of it in my senior year because I recall being the, the emcee of our National Honor Society program where we had an outside speaker.  And actually went back to speak to my school at that same program about ten years after I graduated, so I was part of that.
Story_ID: 657976
Speaker 1: Now did you get a chance to travel any when you were growing up?  'Cause I know some of the students like you usually do like an American Friends Service [American Friends Service Committee], you know, where you go out of the country and that sort of thing.  Did you get a chance to do any of that?
Speaker 2:  	Not while I was in high school [Walsingham Academy, Williamsburg, Virginia] or college [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia].  I really didn't get to take advantage of an overseas studies type program until I was practicing law.  I was able to be a part of the American political leaders program with the American Council on Germany.  So, they would send folks from the United States over to Berlin [Germany] and Hamburg [Germany] and then on one year and then the next year the foreign students would come over here.  So, I did get a chance to be a part of, of that program in Germany.  But, but earlier in my growing up and academics, did not have a chance to do the overseas study.
Story_ID: 657977
Speaker 1: Here you are at the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia].  Well, the--this the oldest university in the United States, isn't it?
Speaker 2: Hm, for some reason I thought it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It may not be the oldest, but it was founded by [President] Thomas Jefferson I think.
Speaker 2:  	That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, no it's not the oldest but it's one of the oldest.
Speaker 2:  	No, but it's been around awhile.  Lot of history there too.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're an E- Echols Scholar [Echols Scholar Program] and so you hadn't cho- didn't choose a major right away.
Speaker 2:  	Not right away but, as it turns out, one of the graduate advisors said, "You know, why don't you just declare a major in something so that people will think you know a little bit about some area of a topic."  And so, I did decide to, to declare American government as my major.  And, at UVA you don't, at least then, you didn't declare a major until your second year.  So, I had a chance to, to really get some classes under my belt and, and really enjoyed American government and history and history, and decided to make American government my major.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, University of Virginia was in the process of--in the early stages of integrating I guess when you were in there, right?
Speaker 2:  	That's right, that's right.  Both women and students of color were not really there in, in many numbers I'd say about six years or so before I started.  In 1970 it seemed to be a bit of a breakthrough. There were women who were there in the school of education and perhaps nursing.  And, and I entered in '76 [1976], so it was still in the early stages of, of all of that kind of integration.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, you had to represent us and--I mean, black people and women (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well.
Speaker 1: So, so, I have a note here it was about 100 black students there in 1970?  Out of a population of how many?
Speaker 2:  	Gosh, yeah, that sounds about right.
Speaker 1: Four or five out of (unclear).
Speaker 2:  	Eight easily, yes, yes.  Yeah, yeah, maybe more.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now this is a--correct me if I'm wrong, I think this is the era where what--was [HistoryMaker] Ralph Sampson on campus?
Speaker 2:  	Well, Ralph and I overlapped one year.  I was there from '76 [1976] to '80 [1980] and he entered during my last year.  And, and I think it's another funny story that I was a cheerleader my second year and then the next several years I did different things, honor council and student government and that kind of thing.  But, but I worked my way through school, again, dad [William T. Stone, Sr.] coming through.  And I was waiting tables at a restaurant and on one Saturday afternoon the whole basketball team came in.  And I had seen Ralph out on the campus--we call it the grounds, and he would be walking by and I'd walk by him and I'd speak, but, but I didn't think he heard me or he didn't speak in return.  And so, when they came to the restaurant, he was actually sitting down and I came and spoke, and he said, "Oh, hi, I've never met you before, how are you?"  And, I'm going, you've walked right pass me but you're so tall, you never saw me.  I'm probably like an ant walking past you.  So, he couldn't even hear (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For those who are watching this and don't know, Ralph Sampson is how tall, was he?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, he was like 7' to me but, I mean
Speaker 1: Well, he was 7'4".
Speaker 2:  	Oh, thank you.
Speaker 1: 7'4".  So, he's taller, he's a good four inches taller than the average seven footer.
Speaker 2:  	Right.  And, that's more than two feet taller than I am, so, he really--so, I gave him all kinds of credit.  I said, okay, you really didn't know that I was down there speaking to you until you were sitting down.  But, very, very nice person, and really took us to new heights.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a college basketball prodigy and played professional basketball in Houston [Houston Rockets]--
Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) with Hakeem Olajuwon.
Speaker 2:  	That's right.
Speaker 1: Star for the Virginia Cavaliers so this is--
Speaker 2:  	Thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay and I, I just wo- wondered if he was there but--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, definitely.
Story_ID: 657978
Speaker 1: So what else is going on, on campus then in--when you were there from '76 [1976] to '80 [1980]?
Speaker 2:  	I think there were definitely efforts to, to increase the, the numbers of diverse students and those were kind of the early days of really talking about diversity in that kind of environment.  I mean, there were always efforts through the years to help with integration and dealing with, with the impact of segregation.  But, really the whole concept of, of diversity seemed as though that was gaining more momentum during those years.  And so, and there were--I, I think about some years just ahead of me at UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] where they were, you know, were sitting in at the president's house and, you know, having those types of, of efforts to really get some eyes to open to what people were trying to--
Speaker 1: Wa- was there a black student union on campus?
Speaker 2:  	There was a, there was a black student organization [Black Student Alliance] and then we, at some point during my being there, opened up the Luther P. Jackson House [Luther Porter Jackson Black Cultural Center, Charlottesville, Virginia], which was kind of the, the black student house that, that, that really took a lot--I mean, even at that point we didn't have a black studies major, but all of that was coming into the, the discussion at that point in time.
Speaker 1: Now, who was Luther P. Jackson?
Speaker 2:  	That was someone who--and unfortunately, I don't know the entire history, but that was someone who was an early black student I'm thinking or someone who, had, had left a real impact on the university.
Speaker 1: I'm just wondering if he could have been the first black student at the University of Virginia or something like that, but I don't know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Well, he's definitely part of the history.  And another one, Walter Ridley [Walter N. Ridley] is another individual who is very important to our history and there's actually a scholarship and an organization named in honor of Walter Ridley [Ridley Scholarship Fund], because he was one of the early students there at UVA, student of color.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the Luther P. Jackson House is sort of like a cultural center or--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --a place where you can go--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --to get support or advice or something?
Speaker 2:  	Precisely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 657979
Speaker 1: Yeah, and there, there was a, there was an individual in the admissions office who really--it was, it was a black gentleman who really made it his mission to try to get out there and recruit and scout as many of the African American students that he could find in high school to give an opportunity for the recruiting process and admissions process to hopefully end up with more, more students of color.
Speaker 2: What, what was his name?
Speaker 1:  	I, I, unfortunately, don't remember his name but he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When you went there, there wasn't such a person at the time?
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, he was.
Speaker 2: Did they have an Upward Bound program there to--
Speaker 1:  	I don't recall (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) to bring in high school students?
Speaker 1: There was, there was, there was definitely an, an opportunity for admitted students of color to come and spend--it was Spring Fling weekend [at the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia].  And you could come there and get to sit in on classes and get some, some interaction with other black students who were there on campus.  And it, it was very helpful in providing that comfort level that the high school students wanted to feel coming into an environment like that, a big school and--
Story_ID: 657980
Speaker 1: Yeah, a big--a school [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] with this kind of tradition that goes way, way back like that, was there a, was there any o- open manifestations of discontent with having black students on campus by the, by the white students in those days?
Speaker 2:  	I didn't, I didn't take note of that.  I will say that at that time it was still the fraternities and sororities were still very segregated.  I mean, and that's just how history had it and I don't think there were any, any black students who were really trying that hard to be a part of the white fraternities and sororities 'cause we had our own.  But there wasn't a--there wasn't a real concerted effort to try to, to do much blending there.  'Cause it seemed as though they had different focuses to some extent, I mean, one was more--it, it felt at least that the white fraternities and sororities had more of a social focus whereas the, the black fraternities and sororities, there were social elements to it but the service component of the organizations--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that was a big part of, of what the focus was at that point.
Speaker 1: Now, did you join?
Speaker 2:  	I did not.
Speaker 1: One--okay.
Speaker 2:  	I was doing other things there.  I, I felt, I felt as though I was busy enough in my involvements.  And really had friendships with people in all of those organizations, and so I, I really enjoyed being able to, to approach it that way.
Story_ID: 657981
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduation in 1980, now, you, you got a degree in American government, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, were there any particular instructors in American government or otherwise that, that you remember that were particularly helpful?
Speaker 2:  	One professor, James Ceaser [James W. Ceaser], was one who stuck in my mind, who was very involved.  Larry Sabato [Larry J. Sabato] is, is a very prominent professor now, he was, he was actually off doing his own studies Fulbright [Fulbright Scholarship] or Rhodes [Rhodes Scholarship] at the time but he was one who--he had been a student at UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] and was still very, very involved and one who I, I think very highly of.  And a lot of his contributions are part of what I, I really have appreciated about studying American government.  And, professor Graebner [Norman A. Graebner] was a history professor who was very, very helpful in my pursuit.  But, there was a professor who unfortunately I don't remember his name but he was the one who I, I was in one of the government classes with him and he just took me aside and he said, "You know, you really should do an internship.  You need to go and, and see what this is all about in Washington [D.C.]."  And I said, "Well, I, I'm doing all these things in Charlottesville [Virginia]."  I really enjoy what I'm getting to do too because I was a resident advisor, I was an honor council advisor, just doing a lot of different things.  And he said, "Well, I just--I think that'd be the best thing for you."  And, as it turns out, someone recommended me for an internship that I interviewed for kind of reluctantly thinking that, oh, gosh, I'll just do this but I, I still see myself staying in Charlottesville.  And, as it turns out, I was selected for that internship.  That was the internship with Caterpillar Tractor Company [Caterpillar Inc.].  And that had me in Washington for my second semester of my third year and I was able to be with the governmental affairs person for Caterpillar.  And, really, really learned so much during that experience, that, that had a lot to do with where I think I'd see my career having headed at this point (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was this internship basically with the Caterpillar lobbying effort?  Okay--
Speaker 2:  	Exactly, exactly, yes.
Speaker 1: All right. Okay.
Speaker 2: And I worked directly with the folks right there on K Street and got--
Speaker 1: That's where all the lawyers are.
Speaker 2:  	That's right, exactly.  But that really was the, the period that reinforced both my interest in legislative affairs, governmental affairs, lobbying, that kind of work as well as, as studying the law as a path to, to going down that, that approach.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, the period of time that you are in school from '76 [1976] to '80 [1980], that's the Carter administration years.
Speaker 2:  	That's right.
Speaker 1: And black people had more access to the White House than ever before.  Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] set a record appointing black people and even had [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young as UN ambassador [to the United Nations]--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --which was highly publicized.  Did you--were you, you know, aware of that, you know, when you were in school and, and did that access or any of the people from the Carter administration, you know, come to speak at school or, or?
Speaker 2:  	I don't recall having direct exposure to many of Carter's appointees, but that was definitely part of what I was learning about government and, and really understanding how the different presidents as they brought in their new administrations really took very different approaches.  When, when I then graduated from college, I worked on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] for two years before going to law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and that's right when Reagan came into office.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, I really had learned enough about what Carter had put into motion and how he went about his governing and compared that to Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan].  And it was really very, very instructive to, to see firsthand very different approaches and styles.  And both very effective in their own ways, but, but it was really quite interesting.
Story_ID: 657982
Speaker 1: Now you worked for a Republican representative, right? Or--
Speaker 2:  	I did. Bob Michel [Robert H. Michel].
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bob Michel.  And he was a--known as a person who, who could work from both sides of the aisle, right?
Speaker 2:  	Exactly.  Tip O'Neill was the speaker at the time and Mr. Michel was the, the minority leader but there was such a momentum that came in with the Reagan administration [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] on the Republican side that there was a lot of, of progress that was made in a collaborative sense that, that really made Mr. Michel's role very, very important.  And it was an outstanding place to work.  And, and, and Caterpillar [Caterpillar Tractor Company; Caterpillar Inc.] was really part of why I ended up with him, because that--he represents Peoria [Illinois] which is where Caterpillar is housed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, right, right, right.
Speaker 2: --and I got to meet him and be known by Mr. Michel's staff when I was an intern with Caterpillar.  So, it all just kind of came together really beautifully.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it says here that he was also a friend with Dan Rostenkowski, of Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) A huge friend, yes, very, very good buddies.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Peoria was a Caterpillar town that's true.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, indeed.
Speaker 1: So, what are some of the things you learned in Michel's office?
Speaker 2:  	Watching Mr. Michel operate in his leadership role, he was not such an ideologue that he was not willing to sit down and try to work through the, the various interests, you know, coming from all different directions.  And, and he really gave a, a enough of a focus on what the competing interests and views were that he figured out a way to, to work beyond that and, and make some things happen.  I mean, the worst situation is when you have some very, very talented intellectuals who are so solid in their point of view that they're unwilling to give at all for another point of view.  And, when you have a stalemate, you're just not making any progress.  But, I, I really learned from him that it didn't have to, to be solely based on partisan points of view.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, easy to understand.  Peoria is the home of Richard Pryor, you know, who grew up there.  Michel--now, this is after you were in his, you know, you left his, his service, but Michel was--it says here that Michel was criticized in 1988.  And I don't really remember this--for comments on how he missed minstrel shows in, in blackface and how he used to participate in them when he was younger.
Speaker 2: Hm. Well.
Speaker 1: So, this is, you know, this is something that you just wouldn't even--and he, he says the removal of racially offensive words and songs such as 'Old Man River' had something to do with the Soviet Union rewriting our history or something, which seems very bizarre.
Speaker 2:  	Interesting.
Speaker 1: But, did you see any of that kind of thing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Not at all.  And, one of the things I was gonna mention is that one of the other memories I have of Mr. Michel is he has a beautiful singing voice, so I'm not at all surprised to hear that he may have performed as a young person.  I don't know about the minstrel shows, but he would come down the hall and he would--his voice was this wonderful, booming, rich voice and you could hear him as he was approaching from far away.  But I hadn't--I'd never heard anything about the--
Speaker 1: I never heard this during the time period, but, but, gee just to think of the, the distance I guess between how people are raised and you just never know what they're thinking about.
Speaker 2:  	Exactly, you're absolutely right.  But, but I, I was treated with ultimate respect and support by him and others in his office and so.  But, you're right, people grow up in different environments and you just can't always totally get into their heads.
Story_ID: 657983
Speaker 1: You attended Harvard Law School in Cambridge, Massachusetts.  Now, this is not easy to do and so, I, I--we know you made good grades and everything and you had, you know, and you had this experience working as a legislative aide.  Now, how did you, I mean, did you just--did someone recommend you or did you just apply and get in, or how--and why did you choose Harvard above other schools?
Speaker 2:  	Well, I'll say that once I had determined that going to law school was a good next step and I was working on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.]--because when I came out of the internship [with Caterpillar Tractor Company; Caterpillar Inc.], I went back to UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia], graduated, and at that point in time I had taken the, the GMAT [Graduate Management Admissions Test], the LSAT, all of what I needed because I was still thinking, okay, do I go to law school, do I go to business school, what should I do?  And, since I wasn't able to just say to myself, this is the definitive path I wanted to take, I said, well, why don't I hopefully get a job that will help me--expose me to the real world, what's going out there, and see, see what really excited me.  And so, fortunately, got the position on Capitol Hill.  And during that period, I, I was surrounded by others who--actually, two others in particular who we were all the same age, we all kind of started about the same time, and one of them wanted to go to law school as well.  And so, she was, she was probably a bit more straightforward and staying on top of that application process.  And so, we were all kind of working on it together.  And I really had convinced myself that Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.] or somewhere right there in Washington [D.C.], go in an evening division kind of like my dad [William T. Stone, Sr.] had done [at American University, Washington, D.C.], continue working.  I thought that was gonna be the very best approach.  And, so I applied to all the D.C. area schools, but one of my friends who also worked in Mr. Michel's [Robert H. Michel] office, we had taken a trip to Boston [Massachusetts] and we were kind of in that area and we had picked up law school applications from Harvard.  And so, she had done hers so she said, "Well, you need to--have you done yours?  You need to do it."  And I'm going, "Ah, okay. Okay."  And so, I went ahead and applied and much to my amazement, the very first acceptance letter I received was from Harvard.  So, all those thoughts about, okay, I'm gonna stay in Washington and keep working and all that, all of that just went out the window.  And I said, okay, I am going to go to Cambridge and I'm gonna figure out how to make it all happen.
Story_ID: 657984
Speaker 1: So you're admitted to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], you get--that's the first letter that comes back, right?
Speaker 2:  	The first letter, and to be honest I was living with some other friends from UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] and they had seen the envelopes, when I get home from work they're all kind of standing around, and they say, "Oh, you have some mail."  And I see this envelope and it was thick, and I said to myself, okay, there's no way I got into Harvard so they must have sent me an application to a school I really could get into.  And so, I start opening it up, and they're all standing around.  I open it and I see dormitory pictures and I realize that they have sent me information on where I can live while I'm there in law school.  And I was absolutely ecstatic and that, that was my next, next stop after two years working on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay, so, you start at Harvard Law School in the fall of '82 [1982]?
Speaker 2:  	That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, now, you know, Harvard Law School is a prestigious law school.  They always have notoriously big classes, but then they warn you the first day that you may not be there, you know.  That's in the movie, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Look to your left, that's true.
Speaker 1: And did that really happen, did they really tell you--
Speaker 2:  	They do, they do tell you a little bit along those lines.  But I will say that people who go to that school really respect what their fellow classmates went through to be there.  So, once you're there, you really don't have that sense of competitive spirit, from a negative standpoint.  There's positive competition but, but you don't run into the--you don't feel as though you've got to knock your classmate out of contention so that you can be the number one or two in class, because you're gonna have the benefit of the, the tremendous reputation that the school has.
Speaker 1: Now, I've heard that expressed about the school in general.  If you get into Harvard, once you're there they don't want you to not finish.  They'll do everything they can to keep you in there to make sure you finish and get a degree and get of there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) That's true.
Speaker 1: So they wouldn't have chosen you in the first place if they thought that they were gonna punch you out, you know.  So, but the law school, there's a popular conception that it's, it's like swimming with sharks or something.  Everybody's like trying to keep the other--notes from the other person and trying--but that's not--okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I didn't experience it, I definitely did not.  And, and I hope that, that has not become the case.  And, you know, in law schools oftentimes in the general view, there is a bit of that, that happens but that was not at all what I felt I experienced at--when I was there at Harvard.
Story_ID: 657985
Speaker 1: I've heard that the first year is the toughest year.
Speaker 2:  	That's true, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this is true? Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  They, they definitely get you working at a pace and a capacity that is just unlike anything you've ever experienced.  It's just a lot to, to juggle and, and stay on top of.  But once you get past that first year, then, then second year it's a lot of juggling as well but you feel as though you have a sense of, of how to maneuver.  'Cause second year you've got to worry about interviews and moot court, and lots of different activities that are going on all at the same time.  And I will say that, when I was at law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], we didn't have the, the good fortune of having a period where all you do is interview and fly back to the law firms that you're interested in.  That has now become pretty much standard for law schools. They have a period where you do nothing but interview.  But, when I was in law school, you'd be running to class in your suit and then running out of class and maybe missing some of class to get to your interviews.  And, and it was a bit of a helter skelter situation, but it's a lot more, more efficient now.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, the dean when you were there was James Vorenberg, right?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and who else was there, I mean, was Derrick Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.] was there, right?
Speaker 2:  	He was, he definitely.  He was, he was one of the professors there who was really working hard to try to help increase the number of diverse faculty at the law school and was, was kind of the dean of the, the, the faculty of color, just a really wonderful person (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay. Who else was on the faculty that, you know, that stand out?
Speaker 2:  	Well, Professor Kennedy, [HistoryMaker] Randall Kennedy, came about probably right as I was going into my last year, so he was one of the newer professors.  And Professor Ogletree came after I graduated, but I was very fortunate to have come into contact with, with [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree when he was a public defender in Washington [D.C.].  And, one of the, the really sought after classes at the law school was introduction to trial advocacy, ITA.  And I took that one term and then I, I was very fortunate to be selected to work as one of the students along with the, the subsequent ITA workshops.  So, I was, was working along with the faculty and, as it turns out, Charles Ogletree was one of the faculty members who came to be a part of that, that next semester's program.  So, we were able to reconnect then.  And then, after I graduated, he came on board to be a professor at the law school and continues to serve in that capacity.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, was he one of the more inspirational figures there?
Speaker 2:  	Very much so, very, very much so continues to be that.
Speaker 1: And, Derrick Bell, did you have much--did you have classes with him?
Speaker 2:  	I didn't--I never had him for a class but, but he was very visible and very, very supportive and involved in, in a lot of what the student organizations were doing.  But he--but you knew that he was doing his very best to try to, to convince the, the powers that be that there needed to be more professors of color there at the school.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about Randall Kennedy?
Speaker 2:  	He, he was, he was, he was earlier in his tenure at the law school there, so I--so he was very, you know, instrumental in a lot of the folks that have come in since I was there.  But I didn't have him for class either, but, but saw him as someone who was really bringing a lot of really good teachings and, and writings there to the faculty.
Story_ID: 657986
Speaker 1: Who were some of the professors that you--I mean are--do any of them really stand out, I mean, and I always ask this question.  People feel like they're obligated to say something but, but sometimes there aren't any really that are any different from any others, you know, but were there any that really were, you know, personally helpful to you that you appreciated?
Speaker 2:  	Two do come to mind.  One, was my real estate professor and it was Professor Charles Haar [Charles M. Haar] who was a master of his, his area.  And, I don't think as many students were necessarily drawn to the property and real estate as an area of focus, but I was actually able to do my third year paper with him and really got to know him a lot better during that period.  Another professor, who I almost was gonna do my paper with and, and another professor of color, is Chris Edlow [sic.] who was there during the--Edley, I'm sorry.  Christopher Edley [Christopher Edley, Jr.] was there during that period and, and was very helpful and, and supportive.  But, another professor who actually is now the dean of the law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Martha Minow, she was my family law professor and was just--was kind of young and new in her role there but was really one who you could see a lot of, of promise.  And, for her to now be the dean and, and to have just brought so much real positive change there to the school it's really, really very heartening to see that.
Speaker 1: Probably not true but is she related to Newton Minow?
Speaker 2:  	I don't know.  She, she's from Chicago [Illinois]. Is that a Chicago person?
Speaker 1: Newton Minow is a head of FCC [Federal Communications Commission].  He's a lawyer too, you know, he's the one that said that TV was a vast wasteland.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, okay.  Very possible.  But, I know her mother [Josephine Baskin Minow] is an author of children's books.  But, that could very well be in the same family.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, was it real estate that you were drawn to?
Speaker 2:  	No, it was the, it was, it was Professor Haar--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that he was--and, and I think what was really compelling was the particular project.  He had identified a project with a community organization in Cambridge [Massachusetts] and it had to do with helping seniors learn about reverse mortgages.  And so, they needed someone to help pull together the research and, and, and set up documents that would allow for, for people to be a part of that program.  And so, that's what I chose to do as my third year paper.  And the fact that it could actually be put into use in, in real life to hopefully help people was a big part of what inspired me to want to do it.  So, it was more than just academic and theoretical in nature, it was something that was really available for the public to, to benefit from.
Story_ID: 657987
Speaker 1: Now you were involved in the Harvard Law Forum--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) student bar association [Harvard Law School Student Bar Association], and you were a Dunster House pre-law advisor?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell us about some of those activities.
Speaker 2:  	The Harvard Law School Forum was our speakers series, and we, we would--the students would come together and, and think about different individuals who could be invited to speak.  And, during that time, Judge Wapner [Joseph A. Wapner] was a big celebrity, it was one of the--I guess he was one of the very early judges on TV.  He came and spoke.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the first judge of 'The People's Court.'
Speaker 2:  	There you go, exactly.  He was very entertaining.  Shimon Peres was one of our speakers.  Lots of people from both the legal, judicial, as well as political arena, the one who really sticks out of my mind the most though was Stevie Wonder.  Because we had someone from Chicago [Illinois] who was very close to Stevie and he, he said, "Well, I wanna bring Stevie Wonder to speak."  And, we said, "Oh, can you really do that?"  He said, "Sure."  And, sure enough, he made arrangements for Stevie Wonder to be one of our speakers.  Well, the interesting thing was that when the students found out that Stevie Wonder was gonna be our next rich--speaker series, they said, well, what's he gonna talk about?  I mean, and he's just gonna come and do a concert and, I mean, that's fine but, but what could he really tell the students.  And we're going, okay.  Well, we didn't tell them that, yes, we were arranging for his keyboard to be there and all that.  And, you know, the tickets only cost three dollars so people definitely didn't miss those, those opportunities.  But he, he sang to the group, but, he really gave one of the most profound messages that I think the student body has ever heard.  And he, he talked about the fact that, you know, "Look around you.  You all are here at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] a place that, that has unlimited resources and it's giving you such a tremendous opportunity as you continue in your careers but don't lose sight of the people who helped get you here.  Don't forget about your family and about your community, and about other others who don't have the resources to, to do what you're doing.  And, give back to those people as you go off into the world and, and, and pursue your careers.  Don't ever forget to give back to those people who, who can least afford you."  And, it was a really, really compelling quote and comment that he shared with us.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, was he in the middle of a Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] birthday campaign in those days?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, 'cause I remember everybody singing 'Happy Birthday,' but that was still an issue.  It had not been, been finalized to have Martin Luther King Day [Martin Luther King Jr. Day] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think the mid-'80s [1980s] was when they finally did it (unclear).
Speaker 2:  	Yes, you're absolutely right.  Yeah, but it was really great to have him there.
Story_ID: 657988
Speaker 1: In Dunster House [Cambridge, Massachusetts], you, you--did you live in Dunster House?
Speaker 2:  	I did.  My first--the--I was selected to be a pre-law advisor at the end of my first year in law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], which was a real--I, I just got super lucky.  Because typically those positions are--it's usually the undergraduates who know about those positions and it usually goes to an undergraduate alum, but, but I was really fortunate to learn about the opportunity to be part of that, that resident advising group because I had done that at UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] as well.  And so, the first period I was a nonresident advisor but they would invite me to come and have dinner and lunches there, and speak with the students.  And then for my next two years, I was a resident advisor so I lived right there with the, the undergraduate students in Dunster House and I had a suite there, and they fed me three meals a day.  And when I couldn't make it back for lunch they'd give me a little bagged lunch to take to law school with me, and it was just a wonderful, wonderful opportunity.  And to think about a lot of the students that I had the, the great fortune to advise and, and talk to about law school, what's involved.  I would write their letters of recommendation, I mean, I, I really had a, a role in their development that, that really was gratifying to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so--let's see there was another question I had. I can't think (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Well, you also mentioned the student bar association [Harvard Law School Student Bar Association].
Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Right. Right.
Speaker 2: I was president of the student bar association during that period and that's actually what got me involved with the American Bar Association and attending those meetings as well as the National Bar Association, which I actually had, had the, the first taste of the National Bar Association going to those meeting with my dad [William T. Stone, Sr.].  But then, being a part of the student, student government at the law school I was more officially going to those meetings and it, and it just exposed me to so many people doing so many different things in the law that it was really eye opening.
Story_ID: 657989
Speaker 1: Who are some of the other people in law school with you?  Would we know any of them? You know, I was fortunate enough to interview some, someone the other day that went to school with Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] and Robert Reich, and Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] at Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut], you know, were there any future, I guess, notables in school with you?
Speaker 2:  	Well, I will admit that when I did have the opportunity to meet our current president, Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], he--I told him I was at the law school and he said, "Well, what year did you come out?"  And, I said, "'85 [1985]," and he said, "Well, well, I was just right behind you so we were practically there together."  So, so I think Michelle Obama started the year after I graduated.  So, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --graduated in '85 [1985] and I think she entered maybe that fall following that.  And then he came a little bit after that.  But, closer to my timeframe Loretta Lynch was the year ahead of me, Annette Gordon-Reed was in that class as well.
Speaker 1: She's--now, that's interesting.  She's one of my favorite historians (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I, I believe--
Speaker 1: She's the author of 'The Hemingses of Monticello,' ['The Hemingses of Monticello: An American Family'] an expert on the [President] Thomas Jefferson's extended family at Monticello [Charlottesville, Virginia], Sally Hemings and James Hemings, and the rest of the Hemings.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) She's done amazing work.
Speaker 1: --what was she like?  Was she, was she--did, did you get a chance to know her?
Speaker 2:  	She--I, I knew her a little bit, and she actually married someone who was in my actual class [Robert Reed].  She was a year ahead of me.  But she was just always a very studious, focused individual, and so I'm not at all surprised at the accomplishments that she has, has come to create.  It's just really tremendous.
Speaker 1: Miss- I read a lot of history and that's the most impressive, you know, that's one of the most impressive histories that I've ever read.
Speaker 2:  	She's quite amazing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I mean, she had to glean so much out of so little.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Because Sally Hemings never wrote, you know, she couldn't write.  So, she had to come up with the story surrounding them with information and stuff.  And that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --really, really something.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, and for someone who's grown up in Virginia who, you know, we learned pieces of our history but to really get underneath a whole lot of what we get, you know, the snippets of, it means a lot.  And to have, have gotten the benefit of the University of Virginia's perspective of Thomas Jefferson is just--we owe so much to people like Professor Gordon-Reed to have--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, to think that she's there, she's there in Boston [Massachusetts], she's in Cambridge [Massachusetts] with you in the school and so much of her work focuses on the area we're, we're in right here Charlottesville [Virginia]--
Speaker 2: Precisely.
Speaker 1: --in this area.  But, Loretta Lynch she's the current attorney general--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --so she was there.  Did you, did you--could you project that she was gonna do something like this?
Speaker 2:  	Well, she was another one who was very, very mature and balanced in her approach, and so I'm not at all surprised that she has, has achieved what she has and, and is showing a lot of leadership and good judgment.
Speaker 1: But it's not that, you know, most of the people that were in Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] probably went on to accomplish something great I would guess or, or make a lot of money or something if they didn't do something great.
Speaker 2:  	(Laughter) There're a lot of, lot of, lot of things--it's funny, one of them that I think about, one of our classmates he went straight to the Pacific Northwest and joined Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation].  And we're going, "Well, what the heck is that?  What are you doing?"  And this was, this was in the mid-'80s [1980s].  Well, now, we understand and just how wise that particular approach was, I mean, but that was, that was an unknown at that point in time.  But that certainly worked in the right direction.
Story_ID: 657990
Speaker 1: When you're on the--now, did you clerk for anybody when you were in law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I did not, I did not--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --do a judicial clerkship.  I, I guess, at that point, I figured I had spent two years before I went to law school kind of in my clerkship mode and learning about one of the areas of practice that I possibly would get involved in.  And I really didn't fashion myself as a litigator, which probably if I was most focused on litigation, I would, would want to consider a judicial clerkship.  I absolutely recommend it to any law student who is, is really wanting to, to add the, the most important components to their career. I'm a big, big supporter of judicial clerkships.  Not only because of what that exposes you to in learning more about the, the underpinnings of the judicial process, but the relationship that you develop with the judge and, and the training, and the mentoring that you get from that experience is just unequaled.  So, I'm a, a big fan of that.
Story_ID: 657991
Speaker 1: Almost immediately after law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you were hired by--as an associate at McGuireWoods [McGuireWoods LLP] here in Richmond [Virginia].  How did that take place, was this an interview or--
Speaker 2:  	Well, during my, my law school years the summers are very important so you immediately start applying for summer associate positions.  And I was able to work with a number of different law firms through the course of my summers.  And, at that point in time, I'd grown up in Virginia, worked in Washington [D.C.], felt very comfortable in both of those areas but really hadn't convinced myself where I wanted to be long term.  So, I, I, you know, went back and forth to Washington and Richmond during my summer positions.  And, as it turns out, I was a--I spent my last summer the second half of the summer with McGuireWoods in Richmond, and after that experience it was pretty clear that, that Richmond at McGuireWoods was where I felt the most comfortable and where I wanted to, to be, and where I could see myself.  And, and during that summer I, I had the chance to spend time with Governor Dalton, John Dalton [John N. Dalton], who had been governor of Virginia.  And, of course, in Virginia you can only be governor for, for one four year term and then you have to, to step out.  And so, when he finished his four year term, he came to McGuireWoods, so he sat me down during the summer and I think had a sense of what I had gotten involved in, and he said, "I know what it is you wanna do and you can do it right here with me and that's that."  So, I said, "That sounds wonderful."  So, I came to McGuireWoods immediately after law school and, and have been here ever since which is kind of a different statistic I think.  Because I do a lot of recruiting and when I talk to law students they'll ask me, "Well, how long have you been at McGuireWoods?"  And I say, "Well, ever since I came out of law school in '85 [1985]."  And once they get over realizing that they weren't even born then, they say, "Well, gosh, nobody does that.  How, how on earth could you be with the same law firm for your entire career?"  But, but it, it says a lot about McGuireWoods, it's been just a tremendous place to, to be and to grow and to learn.  And, and I'm surrounded by people who, who I really enjoy working with and who have been very supportive, and, and helpful to me.  So, it hasn't been hard and it doesn't seem like it's been long at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's gonna make this interview a lot easier I know that because we don't have to switch--
Speaker 2:  	That's right (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) positions.  But, McGuireWoods as a leading U.S. law firm with more than one thousand attorneys and twenty-three offices across the United States and Europe, right?  And, how many are here in Richmond?
Speaker 2:  	In the Richmond office, we are probably just a little under three hundred attorneys and then, and then, you know, a lot of staff many more than three hundred staff members.  So, we've got the largest number of attorneys here in the Richmond office but the next two offices in size are Chicago [Illinois] and Charlotte [North Carolina].  So, we've got couple hundred in each of those and then it kind of balances out the rest of those.  But, I, I think about when I started in 1985 and in the entire firm there were probably about 150 or definitely less than two hundred.  And I think we had maybe three or four offices, so I, I have watched the firm grow over the years and it's done it in a way that, that has really been very positive and--'cause you, you see a lot of firms that have been very highly regarded national firms and, when they grow too fast, it's not always possible to maintain that, that level of growth and, and some of those firms have ceased to exist.  But, but this firm has been tremendous.
Speaker 1: This one has been in existence since 1834--
Speaker 2:  	Exactly.
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: This is founded by Egbert Watson in 1834, still going strong.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, very much so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, what does McGuireWoods specialize in?
Speaker 2:  	We really cover a lot of territory.  I think we're, we're known for a number of areas of specialization.  Our national litigation practice is one that has our attorneys all over the globe representing major corporations on litigation matters, mat- tort matters.  We are also huge in the, the corporate arena and have a lot of energy clients.  We've got top notch tax and trust estates professionals, real estate.  I mean, it's really hard to envision an area of practice that we really don't handle.  I will say that domestic relations is not as much what we do unless it's very high profile, and I guess one example is Tiger Woods.  We represented his, his ex-wife [Elin Nordegren] in that matter and that, that's one that has been very publicly talked about.  But, but we really do have a lot of, lot of different areas of practice that we find ourselves in.
Speaker 1: And, Tiger Woods, does he live in this area?
Speaker 2:  	No, no, his, his, his former wife, her twin sister [Josefin Nordegren] is one of our colleagues in our London [England] office.  And so, we were asked to, to help her when that all came about.
Story_ID: 657992
Speaker 1: What do you concentrate on here?
Speaker 2:  	My areas of practice [at McGuireWoods LLP] include--we talked a lot about legislative things that I've done, so I, I do a lot of the legislative work for our clients here in Virginia.  I do regulatory work in the--primarily in the insurance arena and I do immigration work for a lot of our, our multinational clients when they are looking to bring either executives from overseas to the United States or looking to hire foreign nationals out of, out of higher ed [higher education] programs and, and other, other directions.  But a lot of that, lot of that activity is continuing to grow and particularly from the standpoint of making sure that, from a national security standpoint, everything is in place so the whole export control aspect of immigration law--I mean, it's gotten to be a lot more involved and complex.  So, that's, that's an area that I've, I've been involved with quite a bit.
Story_ID: 657993
Speaker 1: We were just talking about your areas of concentration [at McGuireWoods LLP].  So, you're, you're really into business law really (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And, and, you know, I guess you focus on immigration (unclear)--
Speaker 2:  	Right.  The immigration work I do is really representing employers from major corporations who are bringing in foreign nationals both for their particular expertise, or for their involvement with their companies in overseas operations.  So, it's a combination of, you know, what basis a foreign national can be hired at a, at a company, but we cover a lot of those different (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, there are regulations, you know, there are laws that regulate the, you know, how a foreign national can come here and be used by a corporation?
Speaker 2:  	Absolutely.  There's specific categories in which a foreign national can get their authorization to work in the United States.  So, those are--so, when we have to--when we are confronted with a client that says, "Okay, well, I've got So and So and we wanna bring them on our payroll and have them working in, in our company," we--they've gotta have--we've gotta put together the right set of supporting information and, based on their background, to, to fit them into a particular category.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, as you were saying earlier, they--that has national security implications?
Speaker 2:  	Right, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Especially these days.
Speaker 2:  	Exactly, exactly.  That's a component that's really grown in the immigration practice is export controls and, and that type of analysis.  So, that's a big part of what we do as well.
Story_ID: 657994
Speaker 1: Now, is there a local chapter of the National Bar Association here?
Speaker 2:  	There is, we have a state and local black bar, as we call it.  The Old Dominion Bar Association is our state organization.  And then the Hill Tucker Bar Association is the Richmond [Virginia] chapter of the Old Dominion Bar.
Speaker 1: And the Hill Tucker Bar is Richmond's, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Hill Tucker, yeah, named after Oliver Hill [HistoryMaker Oliver W. Hill] and Samuel Tucker [Samuel Wilbert Tucker].
Speaker 1: Yes.  Now, I thought so because we interviewed Oliver Hill here.  He's the only other Richmond trip that HistoryMakers has made, that I know of, is the one where we interviewed Oliver Hill.  And I have a copy of 'The Big Bang' ['The Big Bang, Brown vs. Board of Education and Beyond: The Autobiography of Oliver W. Hill, Sr.,' Oliver W. Hill] and all that he autographed for me (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Beautiful.  He, he made a--
Speaker 1: He was real sharp when we talked to him.
Speaker 2:  	I'm--and that could have been when he was a hundred years old.  He was
Speaker 1: Really, 'cause there wasn't a time when he wasn't sharp (laughter).
Speaker 2:  	Exactly.  But, he didn't forget anything and even when he couldn't see, you would tell him who you are and he would start talking as if he knew you for--I mean, and he--I, I--my dad [William T. Stone, Sr.] and I were both people that he knew quite well.  And, whenever he would hear my voice, he would ask how my dad is doing and just an amazing, amazing man.  And I--
Speaker 1: And now, do you wanna tell whoever is gonna watch this in the future who Oliver Hill is or you want me to do it.
Speaker 2:  	You're the historian, you--
Speaker 1: I can just say that Oliver Hill was a part of the famous team of lawyers that was trained by Charles Hamilton Houston at Howard University [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], which included Thurgood Marshall, Constance Baker [sic.], (unclear) Spottswood Robinson [Spottswood William Robinson III], Charles Duncan [sic.].  This is, this is the historic team that authored the Brown vs. the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and other such cases that broke down the segregation of schools in the United States.
Speaker 2:  	And, Richmond was the home to the law firm of Hill, Tucker and Marsh, which was founded by Oliver Hill and Samuel Tucker, and Henry Marsh [HistoryMaker Henry L. Marsh, III].  And, really have a continued legacy here.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  So, this is special.  He was a special member that night.  A few years ago, we were in I think Milwaukee [Wisconsin] for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] convention where they, they presented him with the Spingarn Medal and, you know, Oliver Hill.
Speaker 2:  	And he still has family here, so.
Speaker 1: He traveled the country to speak about those positions.  I know I found newspaper records of him coming to my hometown in Dayton [Ohio].
Speaker 2:  	I'm sure.
Speaker 1: You know, featured by the NAACP as the keynote speaker.
Speaker 2:  	I bet, amazing man.
Speaker 1: Yes. So, so, he's a family, family friend?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.  'Cause my dad, my dad when he started his practice, I mean, he and Doug Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder] and Henry Marsh were all contemporaries.  And, it wasn't a whole lot of them back then but they were all doing their own practices for the most part, because they--there weren't the larger law firms that would provide opportunities for them to practice.  So, they were there hanging their own shingles and going about it.  And, they, they really supported each other.  I mean, my dad was in Williamsburg [Virginia] but that's, that's less than an hour away from Richmond and, and they all really, really knew each other very well.
Story_ID: 657995
Speaker 1: Now, you're a member of the business law section of the American Bar Association too, right?
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: And, now, I don't kn--now, now when we conduct interviews with lawyers, I like to ask them about cases, but I don't know, some of them can't talk about (laughter)--
Speaker 2:  	That's true, that's true.
Speaker 1: So, I don't know how, how we approach it.  Maybe you can tell us about some cases anonymously or something, I don't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Sure, well, there is, there is a particular matter that I was very involved with that, that's very public so I'm happy to share that.  And it has to do with the legislative work that I do.  There was an occasion in 1993, I, I hadn't made partner [at McGuireWoods LLP] yet.  And, I remember getting a call from one of my law partners in our Tysons [Virginia] office and he said, well, "Jackie [HistoryMaker Jacquelyn E. Stone], I wanna, want to get you to help me with a particular client."  He said, "I can't tell you much about this client, but I can just tell you that they're a very client--it's a very clean industry.  You don't have to worry about any, any bad environmental issues or bad reputation or any of that.  But, I need you to help them with some, some meetings.  They need to interview some PR [public relations] firms, they need to ultimately have some help in the General Assembly of Virginia [Virginia General Assembly] and I, and I'm hoping you can help."  And, I'm going, okay, that's fine.  What are their names?  And he says, "Well, I can't really tell you their names either but let's just, let's call one of them Bob and the other one Dan."  And, I said, "Oh, okay, that's fine."  So, all this mystery is surrounding it.  So, Bob and Dan come to Richmond [Virginia] that next week and I have scheduled meeting with different PR firms.  And so, I'm, I'm ushering them to these firms and, and the PR firms, I mean, I tell them in advance, I said, "Well, I can't tell you exactly who you're meeting with but you just have to work with this."  And so, they're trying to figure out who is, what is this company and all that.  And, and the company people are asking questions and all.  And so, over time we come to find that I have been representing the Disney corporation [The Walt Disney Company] because they wanted to have a new theme park called Disney's America up in northern Virginia in the Manassas [Virginia] area, you know, 'cause there's a lot of battlefields, lot of history there.  And so, they said, well, this would be a perfect location for another theme park.  We can tap into all of the, you know, multinational visitors that come to Washington [D.C.].  We can help--hopefully, help with the traffic to get them from D.C. to northern Virginia, and help pay for widening the roads and all that.  And, and it was something that Michael Eisner who was the head of Disney at the time was very committed to.  He felt that Disney could tell America's history in a way that could be entertaining but, hopefully, accurate and help young people grow up with a better understanding of history.  Well, we, we did our job, we got the legislative approvals and the zoning approvals and all of what needed to happen.  Unfortunately, there was the sense among the people who lived in that area, many of whom are actors and actresses who live outside of the Washington area up in Middleburg [Virginia] area, they weren't as convinced that Disney was gonna be the best neighbor.
Story_ID: 657996
Speaker 1: What actors and actresses live--
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) can, can you name some of them?
Speaker 2:  	Well, Robert Duvall--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --is one who comes to mind, who was very involved in getting a group of others to oppose the Disney project [Disney's America].  And, I think they just were concerned about the amount of activity that would be brought to that area.  Because that had--has traditionally been a very quiet area, equestrian focus, and, you know, a lot of, lot of landed gentry, as we call them, with acres and acres of land.  And, I think that that was--that's where Elizabeth Taylor and John Warner had their home out (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, former governor of Virginia and Liz Taylor, right--
Speaker 2:  	And, U.S. senator, right.  And, when they were married, they were--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, senator, not governor--
Speaker 2: --they lived in Middleburg [Virginia].  And so, it's a lot--Pamela Harriman and a lot of that type of, again, landed gentry as we call it.  And so, the thought of Disney that would have a lot of people coming in and out, and, and just, just a lot of what they felt they couldn't control.
Speaker 1: 'Cause they're there for the secluded aspect of--
Speaker 2:  	Precisely, precisely.
Speaker 1: --of there.
Speaker 2: So, so, we were successful in our efforts but I think the public relations battle that was being waged by Robert Duvall and other historians and others who just raised some concerns about the project, I think Disney [The Walt Disney Company] was of a mindset that says, "You know, there's no telling how long this battle is gonna play out and it may go into litigation and just--," just more than they really felt comfortable delving into.  And so, they said, "Okay, well, we will shelve that project and go back to making lots of movies and doing some other--and start--," and, in fact, one of the, the people from Disney that I worked closely with, he left our project to go to start the Disney Cruise Line.  So, there was a--that was a point at which Disney was really looking at a lot of different ways to share the Disney experience.  And, it was a tremendous opportunity to see a, a major project underway and to, to see how Disney goes about their, their work.  It really was very eye opening.  And, the reason it had to be secret for so long is if a locality or landowner knew that Disney was interested in buying their land, just think about what the--right the (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The prices (unclear).
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: And Disney would not be able to acquire the land at a reasonable price--
Speaker 2:  	Exactly, precisely.  Well, and the funny coincidence is that in Williamsburg [Virginia] we've got Busch Gardens and Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies].  Well, my dad [William T. Stone, Sr.], in his legal practice had actually been brought in to help with some of the land acquisition for Anheuser-Busch when they were working on Busch Gardens and the, and the hospitality center [Anheuser-Busch Hospitality Center, Williamsburg, Virginia] and all.  So, it was funny that we both had a similar experience, but, but it, it makes for a really fun story when it's all over with, when you are allowed to talk about it.
Speaker 1: How long did that--those negotiations last?
Speaker 2:  	That was about a year that I was involved in it.  I wasn't part of the earlier land acquisition activities up in northern Virginia, so it could have been maybe total of a couple of years.  But, I was brought in when the, the legislative work was, was starting up.  And, it was funny 'cause I, I'd, I was then elected to the partnership at McGuireWoods [McGuireWoods LLP] right in the middle of all of, of the beginning of that, that project.  And, I had to kind of disappear and I couldn't really tell people where I was going when I was going out to, to Orlando [Florida] and California to participate in meetings with other Disney folks.  I had to just kind of sneak off, and so, they--people were looking for me.  Wait a minute, you're supposed to be in your office when we called to congratulate you for making partner.  But, I had to kind of--
Speaker 1: You were in Orlando.  What are you doing, you having fun or--there--or you're in California, what are you doing?
Speaker 2:  	And, it was actually fun I have to admit.  But, but it was, it was, it was a really, really neat opportunity.
Speaker 1: So, so did you make partner around this same time then?
Speaker 2: Yeah I was in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Around '93 [1993]?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, '93 [1993], and became effective in '94 [1994] that I, that I became partner.
Story_ID: 657997
Speaker 1: Now were you the first African American partner here?
Speaker 2:  	I was the first woman African American partner here in McGuireWoods [McGuireWoods LLP], and, and possibly in any law firm of this size in, in the area and maybe beyond.  And, it was, it was kind of interesting to think that, that would have been the case in '93 [1993], '94 [1994].  But, as I think about it, there really weren't a whole lot of others like us who were in the larger firms.  There was, I mean, there was a partner at Hunton and Williams [Hunton and Williams LLP] who was there, who had been--who had since been named to the Virginia supreme court [Supreme Court of Virginia], and actually a partner here of color, a gentleman who also was named to the Virginia supreme court shortly after I joined McGuireWoods and that was Leroy Hassell [Leroy R. Hassell, Sr.] who had actually gone to UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] ahead of me.  We overlapped a little bit at UVA and then he had gone straight to Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and then came to McGuireWoods right after he came out of Harvard.  And, he was here when I started as an attorney but then shortly thereafter was appointed to the Virginia supreme court and served there, and was the, the chief justice there until he passed away at an early age.  He died at age fifty-five and so did Governor Dalton [John N. Dalton], they both died at age fifty-five.  But, I have to say that in both of their instances I, I view them as people who had accomplished so, so much in their time here, that, that it--the one comforting element is that you feel as though they, they left such a legacy and had accomplished a lot of what they wanted to achieve even though fifty-five is, is awfully young to be taken away.  But, they've left us with a lot.
Story_ID: 657998
Speaker 1: One of the duties here at McGuireWoods [McGuireWoods LLP] is that, as a partner, you chaired the firm's diversity and inclusion committee.
Speaker 2:  	That's right, yeah.  Actually, I was the, the hiring partner for about twenty-five--more than twenty-five years before I took on the role of, of chairing the diversity and inclusion committee.  So, I served in that recruiting and hiring role for a long time and, and really enjoyed the opportunity to go around and meet students and, and help them in their quest, even if they didn't come to McGuireWoods ultimately, to really be part of their, their team of mentors to a large extent.  And, then when I, I stopped as the hiring partner I then took on as chairman of the diversity and inclusion committee which is what I continue to, to serve in at this point.  And I, and I continue to, to recruit on behalf of the firm as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you, you were--I don't know what year this is but you were on the firm's board of partners too?
Speaker 2:  	That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: That's the governing body for McGuireWoods?
Speaker 2:  	Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2:  	I can't remember exactly what years those were, but, but it was, it was an honor to be able to, to be in that capacity.
Speaker 1: So--have you been able to make strides in terms of diversity here at McGuireWoods, in terms and in what ways and with which groups especially?
Speaker 2:  	I would, I would say that not only in the numbers even though the numbers are not what we would like to see, and, and I don't know where you can go, what firm you can talk to and have them say, "Well, we've got all the diversity that we really want."  I think everyone is dealing with that same situation. Even law schools are dealing with the concerns about not having enough diversity in their applications, the applicant pool, as well as in the numbers of diverse students that graduate.  But, but, but I definitely have been able to collaborate with my colleagues here to make sure that we are very conscious in our efforts and very intentional in our, our strides to make this a more diverse law firm.  And--so, the numbers bear that out, but again, I wanna see them continue to grow.  But, I think even more important than the numbers is really the attitude and the mindset of our colleagues and, and in the profession overall.  That's probably a bigger hurdle, but we are really I think making some major headway in making people feel more comfortable in talking about diversity, seeking diversity, and helping diverse individuals succeed.  Because I think a lot of what we are constantly dealing with as, as diverse attorneys is we work with people who are not diverse and, and we rely on them in large part for opportunities with major clients for exposure to major cases and, and that's how we learn and grow.  But, if there is a discomfort on the part of the, the individual who has the relationship with the major clients and who can help, you know, figure out who gets to staff those cases, if those people aren't comfortable with what we as people of color have to offer and what our talents bring, then we're always gonna be, you know, behind the eight ball.  And so, getting the, the--those who are not of color who are in the leadership positions to feel that level of comfort in, in knowing that if they can be candid in helping us learn and grow then everyone's going to benefit ultimately.  So, so really working with leadership and our department chairs, and others at the firm to make sure that we're giving the attorneys of color all of the opportunities that everyone else is getting, that, that people are being acknowledged for what they bring to the firm, I mean, all of that is work that continues but I, I see a major, major positive growth in that regard.  And, and I really have to thank our clients in large part because we've got general counsel and, and, and not just diverse general counsel but general counsel of all sorts who are saying to the law firm leadership, "You've got to do better in terms of making sure that we've got diverse people who are doing our work, who are getting the credit and the benefit for doing the work, and, and that's what we've got to continue to see in the future."
Story_ID: 657999
Speaker 1: So, that's what I've been a part of and, and don't ever wanna give up.  But, I will say that as I think about when I started in 1985, again, there weren't a whole lot of women in, in partner positions at major firms and definitely not a lot of people of color.  And, to a large extent you really didn't talk about diversity and, I mean, that just was not a word that you used a lot, because you didn't wanna be viewed as someone who was charging in trying to bring this whole different--you wanted to be accepted.  You wanted to be viewed as capable as any of the others in doing the work and succeeding.  And you didn't want to have a lot of diversions to make them think, oh, well, I'm not sure this person, you know, is really a fit.  'Cause you hear that a whole lot in, in recruiting.  Not a fit.  So, you would see women, I mean, think about the women that you would observe in these positions years ago.  I mean, we'd be walking around with the bowties and all of that trying to, to look kind of like the rest of them.
Speaker 2: These are those days when black people would be at a conference, some would avoid each other, you know.
Speaker 1:  	Absolutely.
Speaker 2: And I've seen one--one man I interviewed who is a scientist out in Silicon Valley, he's the CEO of a firm and he tried to give his business card to other black people at a conference in Silicon Valley and the closer he got to them, the faster they would run.  Said, "I almost had to almost run people down to give 'em--."  He said, "Look, I'm the CEO of this company.  If you want, you know, and I have an opportunity for you if you, you know, call me."  And he had to chase people around in the conference room.  That was the craziest story I ever--
Speaker 1:  	I believe it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I totally believe it.
Speaker 2: There was a lot of pressure on the first blacks in a white environment.
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, it's not like we were--we had to assimilate, but we had to be respected for what we could do and it could be measured just like everybody else.  But, we also had that additional obligation and we had to figure out how to weave that in without losing our credibility and ability to make some change.  So, we've come a long way.
Speaker 2: This is not easy. Not necessarily easy, but it's something you have to feel compelled to do (simultaneous).
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) Absolutely.  Because I said to myself, I may be the one and only black woman here at the moment but I'm not going to let that be the case for any longer than I can.  And so, that was probably part of what excited me about being able to help with recruiting and ultimately being the hiring partner in addition to just enjoying every bit of that.  But I really did, and I--and, and in my role I couldn't just recruit and hire people of color.  I was responsible for everyone and I took that very seriously.  But, I also knew that it was incumbent upon me to make this extra efforts to make sure we were identifying as much diversity as possible.
Speaker 2: Are there many other associates or partners here at McGuireWoods [McGuireWoods LLP] now?
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, we definitely, we've definitely grown in numbers considerably to the point where every other year we have a, a attorney of color retreat.  And, we have about a hundred some odd attorneys who come from all over the world from our offices and we get together and really use that time to get to know each other, to figure out ways that we can help each other in our various practice areas.  And, and it really is a very positive opportunity.  And we make sure that the non-diverse leadership of the firm is part of our retreat as well so that they get to know who's out there and all of the diverse talent that's at the firm and, and ways that they can help as well.  So, it's, it's definitely a mutually beneficial approach.  But the numbers have absolutely increased and we're gonna continue to make that the case.
Story_ID: 658000
Speaker 1: Now, you also have served and as a faculty for the Virginia State Bar's mandatory course on professionalism.  So--you're viewed as someone who can teach professionalism on a, you know, I mean, you're seen as somebody that exemplifies it I guess if you're gonna teach it, right?
Speaker 2:  	That, that, that sounds like the case.  I, I'm honored to have had that opportunity.  And that's a course that is required of all incoming members of the bar, so once you've become a member of the Virginia bar at some point within that first year, you need to have taken the professionalism course.  And so, I, I taught along with judges and other professors and, and law partners.  It was--I was actually teaching before I was a partner, but it was a really wonderful opportunity to, to get to, to help indoctrinate the, the newest members of the bar to be of the, the right mindset to know the importance of the professionalism and integrity in what they're doing.
Speaker 1: Now, it's been said by a lot of the people I interview that they feel a need to be twice as good or be twice as diligent or twice as professional as everybody else in a setting like McGuireWoods [McGuireWoods LLP] and other settings where they're in the extreme minority.  Did you feel like that when you started or do you think, I mean, I see you teaching a course in professionalism as an exemplar of it, but did you feel that you had to, to really, just, I mean, not that every lawyer doesn't try to be professional but did you feel that really intensely (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yeah, I will say that I was always given the sense that I've needed to do my very best, but I never felt as though I had any extra obstacles placed in front of me as a part of proving what I could do.  And I also felt as though I was being respected and, and valued because I, frankly, brought a different perspective to the table and, and I, I had the ability to move around the community and be involved in different activities, and with different community leaders that perhaps others at the firm weren't as involved with.
Speaker 1: Or could not access--
Speaker 2:  	Right, so I definitely felt as though--
Speaker 1: Because the environment is cultural, right?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: And, and even, you know, being a woman puts you at some disadvantage in a firm established by white men (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --right, in terms of the things they do for recreation, you know, playing golf or whatever else they do.
Speaker 2:  	Exactly.  'Cause I do not play golf.  But, I do find that having gotten involved in community activities I, I get to maybe make up for the fact that I don't play golf and I'm not there out at the country club talking about business deals and all.  I can be involved in a community activity that a CEO of a company also shares that same interest in and I can develop the relationship that way.  And that has, has worked out.  But I will say that sports, it doesn't hurt to be a bit conversant in sports so I, I never shied away from being willing to go to basketball games or talking about the good recruiting season and, you know, knowing some of that lingo.  So, it, it definitely helps a woman to know how to, again, make the, the guys feel comfortable having them around because we, we know how to talk about things that, that's of mutual interest.  Like, you know, who's winning the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] or whatever.  So, I definitely found that to be a, a beneficial element as well.
Story_ID: 658001
Speaker 1: Yeah, we're talking about diversity in McGuireWoods [McGuireWoods LLP] and--okay.  Now tell us about the, the--the Institute for Women of Color Attorneys Incorporated?  The Leadership Institute for Women of Color Attorneys Incorporated [Leadership Institute for Women of Color Attorneys, Inc.].
Speaker 2:  	That's one of a number of organizations that has been established to really provide opportunities to expose diverse individuals, be they already in law school or in college or whatever level, to, to really see others who are in the profession.  And so, the, the leadership institute was an organization that we got involved with early on and created a McGuireWoods scholarship for a number of diverse women who were either in law school or seeking to, to pursue law.  And, we were very pleased to have the opportunity to, to provide funds to really support individuals.  There was an extensive application process that was involved, and, and we would, we would help at their, their presentation ceremonies to, to get the money and, and stay in touch with them to make sure that they were continuing on their path.
Story_ID: 658002
Speaker 1: And you were a part of something called the Millennium Diversity Initiative for the Virginia State Bar in 2001.
Speaker 2:  	That was, that was an opportunity to, to come up with something different.  The president at the time, he said, "Well, we're going into the new millennium, I wanna have some, some really cutting edge programs that, that are not just the same old things that have been done before."  And so, I was part of a group that came up with the idea to have a law camp for high school students who would have the opportunity to spend a week in the dormitory at the University of Richmond [Richmond, Virginia].  They would spend each day with other lawyers that would teach them what's involved in having--preparing for trial and they would work up to a mock trial and, and just really feel as though they were experiencing being in law school.  And that was actually called the Hill Tucker law camp [Oliver Hill/Samuel Tucker Pre-Law Institute].  And, and that continues and has grown in its impact and the number of students that it has touched.  But it was, it was something that was started as we went into the year 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And--y- you've been involved in the community, that's a, that's a lot of your job, right, is to be in touch with community on boards and business, yeah (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yeah, that's--I've made that my--a real important component of what I do.  And, I was, was encouraged to do that by a lot of the leadership here at the firm and they had set a wonderful example of being involved in the, the surrounding community and, and just taking their leadership not only in the legal profession, but also in helping the city with, with various projects.  The education system, just encouraging companies to come as economic development projects, but just a lot of different aspects of what makes a community special:  performing arts, I mean, lots of those areas are ones that, that I've gotten involved in and, and find that to be very personally satisfying (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now is--
Speaker 2: --as a component to--
Speaker 1: Yeah CenterStage [Richmond CenterStage Foundation; Richmond Performing Arts Alliance] is one like that, right?
Speaker 2:  	Right, right.  That's a project that we started working on a number of years ago.  In fact, our first board meeting was September 11th when the attacks came about.  Because we're sitting, we're just wrapping up the meeting and all of a sudden my phone is ringing and they're talking about planes flying into the tower [World Trade Center, New York, New York].  But that was the start of our effort to, to create a major performing arts venue in Richmond [Virginia].  And, as you can imagine, fundraising efforts were severely impacted at that point because there were much more critic--other competing concerns.  And, we worked through it and now have a, a tremendous venue that is sponsored by one of the, the wonderful companies here, Dominion, so we've got now got the Dominion Arts Center [Richmond, Virginia], which is what, what was started with that whole CenterStage effort.  But, it was, it was a wonderful opportunity to work with a lot of the business leaders here who were learning more about how important the performing arts and just arts in general can be to the quality of, of a community and the environment.  And, and it, and it is a lot, I mean, that's a lot of what people look at when they're evaluating a city to bring their company and their employees to, not only how good is the airport and how good is the school system but how good are the cultural outlets and the performing arts venues.  And so, we were able to, to bring about a wonderful collaboration.
Speaker 1: Do you often, you know, kind of fulfill a role of an ambassador I guess to--
Speaker 2:  	I think that's, that's exactly what--I mean, we don't, we don't have an official community relations title here at McGuireWoods [McGuireWoods LLP], but I think I've, I've kind of become a bit of a, an ambassador and, and have the good fortune to be, be encourage in being a part of different community activities here.  And it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and it adds to the, the fun of being here.
Speaker 1: You were active with the Y- with the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] too, right?
Speaker 2:  	Right.  I, I was involved with them and actually received an award in 2000, the outstanding women's awards.  Every year they identify women in various categories be it philanthropy, business, health, and in law I was able to be selected that year as the outstanding women's award recipient--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) for law.
Story_ID: 658003
Speaker 1: You're also involved in the Virginia Law Foundation, right, you were inducted into their class of fellows in 2010?
Speaker 2:  	That's correct.
Speaker 1: And, so what, what's the significance of the Virginia Law Foundation?
Speaker 2:  	That's an organization, I mean it--they look within the, the state bar membership and identify individuals who have contributed throughout the profession and, and they, they bring together a different, you know, a new set of fellows each year.  And, and they do that in concert with the ABA [American Bar Association] fellows as well.  So, it's a national, nationally recognized effort.  But, there are a lot of projects that the, the Virginia Law Foundation undertakes and, and this group really helps support those projects.  You know, different research or different philanthropic projects that we as a, a legal profession can, can help.  And a lot of pro bono activity as well, so, so those all factor into the, the focus and mission of the foundation.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And, now, do you teach as well?
Speaker 2:  	No, I, I, don't.  No, I don't officially teach but I, I like finding professors to help at different law schools and, and, you know, helping put those connections together.  So, I don't deem myself as, as, as the teacher but I, I know how to spot some good ones so I help put them in contact with law schools.  And, and also, help encourage law students who would--who kind of seem to be on that path as well.
Story_ID: 658004
Speaker 1: Are there any other stories like the Disney story [Disney's America] that in terms of the, you know, corporations try to, contemplating moving here or--
Speaker 2:  	Well, another example, I represented Churchill Downs [Churchill Downs, Inc.] in their application to, to open up a horse track, a horseracing track in Virginia.  And, I had actually worked on the legislation in the Virginia General Assembly that would allow for horseracing in Virginia.  I mean, lots of--the lottery and off track betting and those--all of those, those are very long and, and it takes a while to get those approved.  And, I had been involved in that effort, and Churchill Downs asked me to help them in their application.  So, our firm [McGuireWoods LLP] represented them in that process.  And, and there was, there was another organization that was selected for a different location 'cause it was really focused on where did the powers that be in Virginia want to have the new racetrack.  And, Churchill Downs was interested in Virginia Beach [Virginia] but the selected site was closer to the Richmond area in New Kent [New Kent County, Virginia] Charles City area [Charles City County, Virginia].  And so, so that, that's what ultimately happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so when a business decides to move into the area, you basically have to determine what all the regulations are that govern what they're gonna do or c- could impact what they're gonna do.
Speaker 2:  	Exactly.
Speaker 1: And the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.
Speaker 1: --what the potential is in terms of acquiring properties and permits and licenses.
Speaker 2:  	All of those, very intricate.  Exactly.  And, and also the incentives that the state or the locality might be able to provide to encourage a company to pick Virginia over another state.
Speaker 1: I know [HistoryMaker] Tim Reid's New Millennium Studios is right outside town in Petersburg [Virginia].  Did you have anything to do with (unclear)?
Speaker 2:  	No, no, but got to, got to spend time there and see some of the good work that went on there.  They've, they've actually moved on and, and are undertaking some other projects now.  And, they're, they're such a wonderful couple to have in the area, just very involved and doing lots of, lots of fun, fun things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I wondered 'cause, yeah, 'cause I wondered like why would they set up in Virginia, you know, not that there's anything wrong with Virginia but why Virginia instead of some other place, you know, that's more traditionally associated with filmmaking.
Speaker 2:  	That's a good point, yeah.  Well, well, they have roots, I mean, Tim went to school in Norfolk [Virginia]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and, as to why Petersburg--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --I think that was just an interesting--they were able to get a good location and some--nice piece of property.  And were able to, to create a really great venue.
Story_ID: 658005
Speaker 1: Now have you been able to represent any African American clients?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Over the years, a good number of--yeah, yeah. And they--I mean, at a larger firm like this [McGuireWoods LLP] a lot of what we do involves major Fortune 500 companies and all of that, so it, it really is wonderful to be able to bring clients of color into the fold as well.  So, we've got a good bit of that.
Speaker 1: Can you name any of them or?
Speaker 2:  	Well, well, one example is, and it actually correlates, this is not my client specifically but Sheila Johnson [HistoryMaker Sheila C. Johnson] in developing Salamander Resort [Salamander Resort and Spa] up in Middleburg [Virginia], she brought us on to help with a lot of the zoning work and, and other aspects of the work.  And, ironically, some of the same organizations that were very involved in opposing the Disney project [Disney's America] were the same individuals and groups that were against her project, because it's a lot of it right in that same general area of Middleburg and--
Speaker 1: So, so she was, she's the former wife of Robert Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] who founded BET [Black Entertainment Television], right?
Speaker 2:  	That's right.
Speaker 1: And, the project is a, is a resort (unclear) basically?
Speaker 2:  	It's a resort and spa, and she purchased the property that Pamela Harriman's estate was located on.  So, she got all of that land I think, for a number of years, had a dream to develop the project and, and over time worked very diligently and against some odds because it's still an area where people are very settled and, and like their peace and quiet.  And it's a beautiful, beautiful area and lot of equestrian influences.  And she was ready to, to put her resort there and fortunately we worked along with her to, to make it all a reality.  And, if you haven't been there, you have to go. It's absolutely gorgeous.  Really, really beautiful.  And I think the neighbors who initially had not been totally supportive, I think they're, they're very pleased at what she's done.  Because she's done it in a way that maintains a very high, high level of quality and sophistication.  And, and it fits beautifully within that environment.
Speaker 1: I hope I didn't misspeak when I mentioned her name, but she was a co-founder of BET along with--
Speaker 2: Precisely.
Speaker 1: --Robert Johnson.  Not just the wife of the founder (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: So, she has a lot of power in her own right.
Speaker 2:  	Very much so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And--yeah.
Speaker 2: She's doing some tremendous things and, and it's just, it's wonderful to be a part of, of what she's doing.
Story_ID: 658006
Speaker 1: Tell us about the Just the Beginning Foundation?
Speaker 2:  	Just the Beginning is an organization that was created by a number of federal judges, many of which who are judges of color and, and, you know, you talked about Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.].  I know he was touted as really opening the opportunities for more federal judges to be appointed.  And, over time it has still been a, an issue in terms of just the numbers of diverse judges that are being added to the bench.  And a group of judges, including Judge Ann Claire Williams [HistoryMaker Ann Claire Williams], Judge Gerald Bruce Lee, they said, well, the one way we can help getting more diversity on the bench is to get more diversity in the profession.  And so, you've got to encourage at the earliest stages of a young person's development just that interest in the law and exposure to people who are practicing law.  So, this organization has come up with a, a wonderful set of programs.  Some examples are:  Robes in Schools where the judges will go to the, the schools be it elementary, middle schools, and so on, and just sit there and, and spend time with the students.  There is a Summer Legal Institute that takes place in a number of cities where high school students are given the opportunity to spend a week focusing on--just like the law camp we talked about--learning what it is to prepare for trial and to go through an actual mock trial and, or a negotiation and just, just get a sense of what it involves.  Then for college students they've developed internships with judges.  And, and the same thing for law students there is a whole application process that helps law students get selected for judicial clerkships, which is, I mean, is a huge opportunity for students who, who are, are interested in pursuing the law to have a chance to clerk with a judge just propels them in wonderful ways.  And one of the, the particular projects that McGuireWoods [McGuireWoods LLP] has been helpful with is the U.S. Supreme Court day, which is an opportunity for high school students from the Washington [D.C.] and, and surrounding areas and even beyond, come in to, to view the Supreme Court, they get the full tour and then have lunch and have an audience with one of the members of the U.S. Supreme Court.  And then we have hosted a reception, a networking reception, after the Supreme Court visit where the students get to kind of pull it all into action.  They've been learning how to, how to network and how to introduce themselves to, to others.  And, it's just a tremendous opportunity for them to not only see someone that they've heard about, I mean, Justice Ginsburg [Ruth Bader Ginsburg] spoke with them this last time, Justice Kagan [Elena Kagan] spoke with them before, and just lots of, of tremendous people that they get to come into direct contact with.  And it's a really life changing opportunity.  But, that's just one example of an organization that, that I feel very committed to because of the good work that they've done and because of the commitment of the judges and others who have been involved in, in personally giving up their time and energy to, to assist with what's going on with that program.
Story_ID: 658007
Speaker 1: Now in 2014 you met--I don't know if you met him, but you married B. Keith Fulton [HistoryMaker B. K. Fulton], right?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: So, when did you all meet? And how did you--?
Speaker 2:  	We met a couple of years before that.  He had come into town after having served as the president of West Virginia Verizon [Verizon West Virginia, Inc.], and he had come to Virginia to take over the leadership role here in Virginia and moved to Richmond [Virginia].  And I had a chance to meet him.  The funny thing is that he grew up in the Hampton [Virginia], Denbigh [Virginia] area, I grew up in Williamsburg [Virginia], and our families knew each other.  His uncle actually cut my father's hair.  And so, they, they knew each other.  I used to go and, and hang in Hampton but we didn't meet until he came to Richmond.  And, it was, it was a wonderful, wonderful new dimension to my life to get to meet him and to ultimately get married on January 1st of 2014.  And, actually my father [William T. Stone, Sr.] conducted the wedding ceremony, and so it was very, very special.  It was interesting, we had the wedding at the Williamsburg Inn, which is really just around the corner from where I grew up, but, but talking about how the city was available to certain people in certain places, I had really never been in the Williamsburg Inn, had never attended anything at the inn (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, the Williamsburg Inn, is that part of the historical Williamsburg?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's an old inn?
Speaker 2:  	That's a very storied old institution there.  That's where Margaret Thatcher spent, spent time and the queen, Queen Elizabeth [Elizabeth II] was there and, you know, had people meeting her there, so it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How, how old is the Williamsburg Inn?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, gosh.
Speaker 1: What, what is--it going, goes back, it goes back at least to the 18th century, right? Seventeen something, if not further back.
Speaker 2:  	I would think, definitely.  Yes, yeah.  But it's beautiful and it was a really special to, to have that type of memory to begin because--
Speaker 1: So, did your father perform it as a justice of the peace?
Speaker 2:  	He--in Virginia you can make an application and be appointed as a celebrant.  You--get approved by a judge, and he submitted his paperwork.  Even though he's a retired judge, he did his paperwork so that he could be a celebrant for our wedding and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so you don't have to be--well, you know--
Speaker 2: You don't have to be--
Speaker 1: --of course you don't have to be married in the church.
Speaker 2: Right. Right.
Speaker 1: But, you don't have to be a justice of the peace to do it.
Speaker 2:  	Right, right, that's correct, yeah.  You can get authorized to.  You could do it if you wanted (laughter).  But, no, you don't have to be a judge or preacher or whatever.  A layperson can, can get the necessary authorization to, to conduct someone's wedding.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.
Speaker 2:  	So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So.
Speaker 2: --that, that added a very special element to, to it.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So, this, this happened on New Year's Day?
Speaker 2:  	Yes!
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, 2014 (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  And it was amazingly beautiful, it was fifty-two degrees, sunshine, absolutely gorgeous.
Story_ID: 658008
Speaker 1: And you two founded in 2016 the B. Keith Fulton and Jacquelyn E. Stone STEAM Endowed Scholarship at Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia].
Speaker 2:  	That's right.
Speaker 1: STEAM is a, is STEM with the arts added to it, right.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, arts and architecture, because B. K. [Stone's husband, HistoryMaker B. K. Fulton] who graduated from the architecture school, architecture and public policy school at Virginia Tech wanted to make sure to add that component to the, the focus of the scholarship as well.  And so, we're very pleased to, to have the opportunity to encourage students who may not otherwise be able to, to achieve that goal.
Speaker 1: Yeah, science, technology and--
Speaker 2: Engineering.
Speaker 1: --engineering, arts and architecture and--
Speaker 2: Mathematics.
Speaker 1: --mathematics.  Okay, all right. That's the STEAM.
Story_ID: 658009
Speaker 1: Now you're on the VCU [Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia] Board of Visitors as well (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes, yes.  I was initially appointed by our previous governor to serve a four year term and then Governor Terry McAuliffe our current governor reappointed me for a second four term.  And I just completed my year as vice rector of the board.  And, and it's, it's--I did not go to VCU, I'm not an alum, but I really appreciate the opportunity to be affiliated with an organization that has such an impact on the community and beyond.  I mean, the caliber of students that, that, that they're recruiting at VCU is just outstanding.  And the work that they're doing, and as they send them out it's just--it's really tremendous to, to see that in action.  And, I'm really pleased to be a part of that.  I also served on the VCU Health System board, and that's a teaching hospital here right in downtown Richmond [Virginia] that is really critical in, in not only ringing about some topnotch education for the students pursuing medicine but also taking care of the community in ways that a lot of hospitals can't.  Regardless of whether you have insurance, there is a mission that is satisfied and they'll take care of, of whoever comes there.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it's really, really great to see.
Story_ID: 658010
Speaker 1: You've been at McGuireWoods [McGuireWoods LLP] for how many years now? For--
Speaker 2:  	Well, I guess it's going on thirty-two years.  I--well, and if you count summer associate, I was here summer of '84 [1984], technically is when I--but I think fall of '85 [1985] is when I started, so I've, I've passed my thirty plus mark.  And, it doesn't feel like, like very long but I wouldn't do it any differently if I had the choice.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I know your husband [HistoryMaker B. K. Fulton] has retired from Verizon [Verizon West Virginia, Inc.] but, but--and, you know, retired at age fifty he's, he's--so are you thinking about considering retirement or are you gonna work as long as you can or what?
Speaker 2:  	Well, I definitely feel as though I've got a bit more in me to offer, so I'm not, not inclined to, to leave it behind quite yet.  And, and so, I think at least a couple more years I would, would absolutely hope that I could continue to, to hopefully add some value and also help with--the recruiting is still something.  Recruiting and, and helping the diversity efforts it's still very, very clear to me that, that's something that I want to continue helping with.  So, I don't wanna, wanna step away too quickly with, with that job, still one that, that needs some attention.  But, but my husband even though he will claim that he retired at the end of last year, he is as busy now as ever and is involved in a lot of very exciting projects.  So, to the extent that I can help in any way I can with those I, I definitely wanna be available.  But, but for now I'm still happy to, to be a part of McGuireWoods.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you alluded to the fact that you wouldn't do anything differently if you could, if you could go back to change it, right?
Speaker 2:  	That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 658011
Speaker 1: Do you have a--what would you consider to be your legal philosophy just as a lawyer?
Speaker 2:  	My legal philosophy.  Again, I think my experience has been one of trying to find consensus and really--I mean, you have to factor the law in no matter what or frankly in the legislative arena, you fix the law if it's not, not helping in the way that it should.  But, I, I think my philosophy is one of, of making sure that what we have as our written legal principles and the precedent with get from court decisions to make sure that those are appropriate given what our world is, is bringing to us and what, what new developments in business and technology and all of that.  I mean, there wasn't anything like Airbnb [Airbnb, Inc.] or Uber [Uber Technologies Inc.] or drones and all of that back when I first started as a person involved in the general assembly [Virginia General Assembly], and so, a lot of laws were written in a way they just didn't even contemplate a lot of these new developments.  So, I think my, my philosophy is making sure that, as we move forward, we make the necessary modifications or, or new legislative proposals to, to help us as our future unfolds.
Story_ID: 658012
Speaker 1: Now one of the questions we always ask is this one: considering everything that's going on in the country today, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I think one of the initial hopes is that we will get beyond the concern of where our politics have taken us.  We often express concerns about who gets elected in, in whatever position at any given point in time, or how we're being treated in a particular corporate environment or police environment, or so many different elements that, that give rise to concerns.  But, my hope is that we don't just focus on symbolic responses but rather really come up with meaningful solutions to address what the issues are.  And, I think a lot about those earlier days that we talked about where they didn't let us become a member of the Virginia State Bar when we, as people of color, were entering the legal profession.  So, we started our own organization that allowed us to advance our, our interests.  We didn't have the ability to be banking at a lot of the institutions, so rather than just deal with that we started our own banks.  We--in the--there are days in our history that I think about and can point to where we really just seized the opportunity despite all the obstacles and said, well, we're not gonna just let this happen to us, we're going to do something proactive that is going to allow us to, to achieve our goals and to, to continue to progress.  And, I just, I just hope that we will view our strengths and abilities in a way that allow us to continue to have our organizations and, and build our wealth.  Do whatever it is we have to do to inspire others to, to continue moving forward as opposed to just, just constantly saying, I don't like that person, I'm mad that, that they are the leader or whatever.  But give this--if somebody gets elected and they're in office, we've got to deal with it.  And for us to offer some workable suggestions to that person, then I think that's gonna ultimately help everyone.
Speaker 1: I, I know it doesn't really matter in the context of this interview but I personally agree with everything that you're saying.  But, the only problem is that when it comes to criminal justice issues I don't know, I mean, to express indignation or emote, you know, in a big demonstration, I mean, it may not really accomplish that.  I mean, it just shows your indignation basically.
Speaker 2: Precisely.
Speaker 1: But, then again, you know, how do you really change the criminal justice system or change a culture that has despised us from day one, from those days back in 1619--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --when we first hit these shores.  So, that's the, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's the--do you have any--
Speaker 2: Well, it's a lot to ask of people but we got to be in that system, we've got to be willing to, to be part of the criminal justice system.  And, a real sacrifice in a lot of respects but we've got to be a part of that from the inside in order to really make change I think.  And, I mean, it's hard.
Speaker 1: You're saying you got to get in it to change it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you gotta be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultnaeous) On (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --inside.  I think.  To be, be more police officers.
Speaker 1: So we need more black police officers, more black judges, more black--
Speaker 2: Prosecutors.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Prosecutors.
Speaker 2: All of that.  Every component of the, the justice system, we've got to be there and visible and, and give our perspective because that's the only way we're gonna be able to, to help influence the others who have been able to, to carry the--
Speaker 1: So, you're saying that despite whatever visceral feeling you have about, you know, those institutions today we better get in 'em or we'll never change 'em.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not gonna be easy but we've gotta do it.
Story_ID: 658013
Speaker 1: What today, as we sit here, would you consider to be your greatest accomplishment or your legacy to this, this point 'cause you're still young, so?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Thank you for that.  I have to think that when I think about my legacy I think about the individuals that I've been able to interact with through the course of my representing McGuireWoods [McGuireWoods LLP] or the legal profession or whatever in schools.  And, I think about people who have been law students or even earlier than law students who are now general counsels of major corporations, who are judges on supreme court benches and federal benches, people who are law professors, people who are running companies that--I, I feel that, that I was a little bit of a part of their development and, and that's very gratifying to me.  And I think in their growth and, and, and successes I see a bit of the legacy that, that I was hoping to leave.  And so, it's kind of a cumulative process and hopefully it will continue because I, I still hope that I am able to mentor and be a role model to, to others that are coming up.  And, and the ones that I am mentoring, I want them to be doing the same thing. And that's, that's part of how, how I hope that the legacy continues.
Story_ID: 658014
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask about fam--now, you don't have any biological children, do you?
Speaker 2: I do not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, I, I mentioned my middle brother [Michael Stone] who is the sweet potato pie maker, his son came to live with me when he was nine and he's, he's now grown and--but, I'm, I'm still part of his, his growth and development and he's in college now and hoping for the best.  But, but that's, that's the closest thing to my actual child.  And, and my husband [HistoryMaker B. K. Fulton] and I, we have twin boys that he, that he adopted as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now are your parents still with us?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, very much so.  My mother [Sara Cumber Stone] and father [William T. Stone, Sr.] still live in Williamsburg [Virginia] in the house that I grew up in.  And, they're, they're doing great and their, their parents are all gone but my mother really took care of her parents [Elizabeth Pierce Cumber and William Cumber, Sr.] as they were approaching 100 years old.  And so, you really wouldn't believe that they are the age that they are, but part of it's because of making sure that they could care for, for their, their parents.
Story_ID: 658015
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything that we have not mentioned or discussed that we should, or we'll be, we'll feel bad if we finish this interview and we didn't talk about it?  Is there anything like that, that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?  I know there's probably a million things, you know, but--
Speaker 2: No, I, I really think we've covered a lot of the territory that, that I was hoping for and maybe more but--
Speaker 1: All right, well, thank you for spending the time with us.  And the last question is similar to legacy when I asked you about that. It's a little different though.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I, I think the, the term that I often get shared with me is I'm a--I'm this--I'm called the supreme connector.  And, I, I do take a lot of pride and joy in helping people find others who can help them as they advance their interests or their lives or whatever.  And I, and I, I, I just find myself, you know, doing that kind of--and not necessarily matchmaking but often, you know, a business interest I enjoy being able to help them identify another entity that could help them as they are seeking certain goals.  And, and so, I, I, I--and I seem to have amassed a lot of friends and relationships along the way as I've, I've pursued my career and travels, and just being able to kind of connect those dots is something that, that I have enjoyed.  And so, I can--I don't have a problem with, with being called the connector since it seems to be a part of what I do pretty naturally.  And it's a lot of fun when it, when it happens.
Speaker 1: That's a great way to be remembered.  Thank you for spending the time with us.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 658016
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --Go ahead and tell us about these pictures.
Speaker 2: Well, here we have Henry Louis Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.], my hun- my husband, myself and Russell Wilson at the Richmond Forum program where Professor Gates interviewed Russell Wilson and conducted his ancestry.  And, Russell Wilson's father [Harrison Wilson III] was actually one of my colleagues here at McGuireWoods [McGuireWoods LLP], and unfortunately passed away before he could see his son achieve the greatness that he has on the football field.  But, but this, this was a program that was part of a series that Richmond [Virginia] does.  And I'm on that board as well, the Richmond Forum.
Speaker 1: Let me just interject here.  We interviewed [HistoryMaker] Harrison B. Wilson his grandfather, who was the president of Norfolk State [Norfolk State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia].  And he was telling us about him before he became like a big star.
Speaker 2: You--have you seen--oh, bet, yeah, I bet he was.  But have you seen this particular program that they taped here?  It was the first that they had ever taped outside of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I heard of it, I haven't seen it.
Speaker 2: You should try to see it, it's really very eye opening.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Anyway, we are recording.  I'd like to (unclear), so if you could just scroll down to the next picture.
Speaker 2: This is my husband and I, we are in--at The Ritz-Carlton in Laguna Niguel at Dana Point [sic. The Ritz-Carlton Laguna Niguel, Dana Point, California].  And we are being photographed, he is there as part of the black filmmakers foundation [Black Filmmaker Foundation] meeting that is held every year in California.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is Loretta Lynch our attorney general, my husband and myself and we are in Cambridge [Massachusetts] at Harvard Law School attending the 2016 celebration of black alumni.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the Just the Beginning students [Just the Beginning Foundation] at the U.S. Supreme Court day that was held a month or so ago.  And, Justice Ginsburg [Ruth Bader Ginsburg] is right there front and center with the group, but this is a group of, of the sponsors and some of the high school students that were there for the program.
Speaker 2: This is me, my nephew Sam [ph.], and my husband on our wedding day.  And, Sam is the nephew who came to live with me when he was nine and he was the one who walked me into the room at the Williamsburg Inn [Williamsburg, Virginia] since my dad [William T. Stone, Sr.] was, was in place as the celebrant.  Sam was the one who I guess gave me away.
Speaker 1: That is the cover of Style magazine which in 1994 did an article on me having just made partner and talking about the Disney project [Disney's America] that had taken place.
Speaker 2: And that's the rest of that article.
Speaker 1: That is Governor Terry McAuliffe and B. K. [Stone's husband, HistoryMaker B. K. Fulton] and the AO--Steve Case from AOL [America Online, Inc.; AOL, Inc.].  Steve had come to Richmond as part of his entrepreneurs tour and Governor McAuliffe was there to introduce him, and they had some entrepreneurs do pitches to get some funding.
Speaker 2: That is me in kindergarten in a dress that my mother [Sara Cumber Stone] made because she made all of my clothes when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: And that is President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] when he was in Richmond in the early stages of his wife's [Hillary Rodham Clinton] presidential campaign.  And that's me and B. K. there, we're at a friend's home where he was a tremendous speaker.
Speaker 2: That is me and B. K., we're in Washington [D.C.] at a chamber of commerce event.
Speaker 1: That is me and my husband at his--I'm not sure if it was a surprise party but it was his fiftieth, retirement party that was held on January 7th, which is my birthday, and that was the way that I figured I would surprise him because his birthday was January 10th and he actually surprised me on that birthday.
Speaker 2: That is our wedding picture at the Williamsburg Inn.
Speaker 1: That is me at Luray Caverns [Luray, Virginia] at age--that may be like age seven or I don't know, but my dad took me on a trip to Luray Caverns and that was my picture.
Speaker 2: That is me at age ten with my middle brother, Michael [Michael Stone], and we are standing in front of the funeral home [Whiting's Funeral Home, Williamsburg, Virginia] and our apartment where we lived is over to the side where we're waiting.  I'm in my school uniform either waiting for the school bus or coming back.
Speaker 1: That is me on my grandparents' porch, and that is a very early picture of me (laughter).
Speaker 2: That is my mother, my big brother [William T. Stone, Jr.] and me in another dress that my mother made.  She often made dresses and a matching dress for my doll baby.  And, we are on vacation visiting some folks in New England on that trip.
Speaker 1: And that is me and in my senior year [at Walsingham Academy, Williamsburg, Virginia] in 1976.
Speaker 2: I'm for the Afro (unclear).
Speaker 1: The, the nuns, they, they had to think about it a little bit (laughter).  It was so funny.
Speaker 2: That is my husband and I on our honeymoon, which was Mediterranean cruise.  We are in Palma de Majorca [Spain] in this picture and we took a cruise along with two other couples who joined us on our honeymoon.
Speaker 1: And this is a picture of us in Shanghai at a birthday party that we go to every year in some wonderful country.  This year we were in Berlin [Germany], last year we were in Shanghai.  And every birthday gathering has a theme and this year's theme was the 1930s there in Shanghai.  So, we dressed up in period attire and rode around in period automobiles.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Dr. Ron Crutcher [HistoryMaker Ronald A. Crutcher], Betty--Dr. Betty Crutcher [Betty Neal Crutcher].  Dr. Crutcher is the president of University of Richmond [Richmond, Virginia] and, and he and the first lady of University of Richmond who are just tremendous, and Congressman Bobby Scott and me and my husband B. K.  And we are at his annual Labor Day picnic and that was this year's gathering.
Speaker 1: That is B. K., me, and Justice Sotomayor [Sonia Sotomayor] at the annual conference of Just the Beginning in New York [New York].  And Justice Sotomayor is a major, major supporter of Just the Beginning.
Speaker 2: That is me in my cheerleading outfit at University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia].  That would have been in 1977.
Speaker 1: And that is Judge James Spencer [HistoryMaker James R. Spencer], me, and B. K. and that was a event in his court that I don't, I don't know if it was upon his retirement or taking senior status.  But that was there in his court.
Speaker 2: That is Dr. Betty Crutcher, me, B. K. and one of my law colleagues over to the side talking to one of the princes during our boule event in London [England] that, that my law partner in London and McGuireWoods were involved in hosting.  And we were there as the guests of the royal family.  And that is it.
