Story_ID: 595839
Speaker 1: All right, we're gonna get started with our HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview.  My name is Cheryl Butler; I'll be conducting the interview today.  We're also joined by Scott Stearn [sic. Scott Stearns] who's the videographer, and we're being observed today by Julieanna Richardson.  I'd like you to say your full name, and spell it.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Randolph Noel Stone, R-A-N-D-O-L-P-H, N-O-E-L, S-T-O-N-E.
Speaker 1: When were you born, and where?
Speaker 2: November 26th, 1946, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Excellent question.  February 5th, 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we conducting this interview today?
Speaker 2: In the law school--University of Chicago Law School, Mandel Legal Aid Clinic [Edwin F. Mandel Legal Aid Clinic], Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: And what is your profession?
Speaker 2: Clinical professor of law is my title; I'm a lawyer, law professor, teacher.
Story_ID: 595840
Speaker 1: Just a few questions--People magazine style questions.  What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Lamb.
Speaker 1: What about a favorite season?
Speaker 2: I'm a four seasons kind of person; I like all four seasons.
Speaker 1: What about a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I, I love Chicago [Illinois], I love Washington, D.C.; those are my two favorite places.
Speaker 1: So you don't mind the cold.
Speaker 2: No, I don't mind the cold at all; I, I enjoy the cold.  I like four seasons, so the cold makes me appreciate the summer.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite quote, or saying?
Speaker 2: Lately, my favorite quote has been, "The moral arc of the universe is long, but it curves towards justice," Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].
Story_ID: 595841
Speaker 1: Wanna find out a little about your family background.  Tell me about your mother.  What's her name, and when and where was she born?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Lee Bella Stone [Lee Terrell Stone]; she was born in Paducah, Kentucky in July 23rd, 1925.
Speaker 1: Can you spell her full name?
Speaker 2: L-E-E, B-E-L-L-A, S-T-O-N-E.  I guess her maiden name would have been Terrell, T-E-E-R-R-E-L-L [sic.], Terrell.
Speaker 1: And did she have siblings?
Speaker 2: She has a sister and a brother; she is the middle child--her oldest sister, younger brother.
Speaker 1: Okay; tell me their names.
Speaker 2: Older sister is Luvenia, L-U-V-E-N-I-A [sic.], Thompson [Luvenne Terrell Thompson]; younger brother is Richard Clinton Terrell, C-L-I-N-T-O-N, Terrell [sic. Henry Terrell].
Speaker 1: And then you mentioned your mother was born in 1925 in Paducah, Kentucky.  Did she tell you anything about her--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, my mother was born in 1925 in Paducah, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Her mother, I believe, was also born in Paducah, Kentucky.  Her mother's name was Earthel [Earthel Hale Terrell], E-A-R-T-H-E-L, and she had about five or six brothers and sisters, and they grew up in the Kentucky area and moved to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] probably in the--I wanna say '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: Do you know when Ethel was Ethel Terrell?
Speaker 2: Earthel.
Speaker 1: Earthel Terrell.  Do you know when she was born?
Speaker 2: Wow, yes; she was born in--I wanna say like 1898?  Something like that?
Speaker 1: And did your mother tell you any stories about your grandmother's upbringing in Paducah?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I mean they lived on a farm, and I think they were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was when your, your mother was a child or your grandmother was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When my mother was a child and also when my mother's mother was a child; they owned some property in the Kentucky area.  I think they were sharecroppers at first, and then eventually bought some land themselves, and a fairly large family and they did a lot of farming as well as canning of food and pickling of meat, and fairly self-sufficient.  And eventually, my grandmother's sister--one of my grandmother's sisters opened a restaurant and a store where they served food and sold food.  In addition to serving cooked food, also sold farm fresh food, and so I think--my mother describes it as a, a relatively rough upbringing in terms of they didn't have a lot but they made do with what they had; that's how she put it.  My grandmother, I spent a lot of time with her and my great-grandmother [Kansas Hale Beeks], as a matter of fact.  As a, as a child, when I grew up, we had a very large extended family, so--and we tended to be fairly clannish, so when I was growing up, my mother and her husband, my father [Raymond Stone, Sr.] and, and the kids, we lived in a two flat, and my mother's family lived on the first floor--on the second floor, and on the first floor was my grandmother, my great-grandmother, my uncle.
Story_ID: 595842
Speaker 1: So you mentioned your great-grandmother--your maternal great-grandmother.  What's her name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Kansas Hale [Kansas Hale Beeks], K-A-N-S-A-S, Hale, and she died when I was in my early twenties, so, you know, as coming up, I always had a lot of elderly influences, and each (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did she come from a farming, sharecropping family?
Speaker 2: She came from a farming, sharecropping family in Kentucky, and in fact, her parents were slaves; my great-grandmother's parents were slaves.  All of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did she share their names, by chance?
Speaker 2: She did, but I don't recall them, and she was very reluctant to talk about those days; her childhood, she would prefer not to talk about it and that's how she put it: "I'd prefer not to talk about it."
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did they pass--did she pass down any stories about slavery in Kentucky?
Speaker 2: No, no.  She did not like to talk about it.
Speaker 1: What about your maternal grandfather [Jacob Terrell]?  What's his name?
Speaker 2: He died fairly young, and I don't remember what his name was, to be honest.
Speaker 1: So your maternal grandmother [Earthel Hale Terrell] then raised the kids--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --as a single mom?
Speaker 2: My maternal--oh, my maternal grandmother [sic. great-grandmother], her husband's name was Jack--Jack Hale [Jacob Hale]--and he was in the [U.S.] Army in his--I, I think he served in World War I [WWI].  He moved to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] back--between Milwaukee, Cleveland [Ohio], Kentucky, in his early years, and they divorced and she married, so I had two grandfathers, Jack Hale, and then my other grandfather was Otis Beeks, who was a construction worker (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, this was on your father's [Raymond Stone, Sr.] side?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side--on my grandmoth- my grandmother was married twice--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --to Jack Hale first, and then later to Otis Beeks.
Speaker 1: Otis Speaks.
Speaker 2: Beeks, B-E-E-K-S.
Speaker 1: And what did Otis do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was a construction worker.  He was one of the first African Americans employed to work on major construction projects in Milwaukee, and he was quite successful, and worked on the big tunnel projects and the major public works projects in Milwaukee--supervised--he was one of the first African Americans to supervise white workers in the major construction municipal projects in Milwaukee.
Speaker 1: Was he involved in unions and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was involved in unions and the masons, and the--
Speaker 1: --and what, what year are we talking?
Speaker 2: We're talking about in the late '30s [1930s], '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: So he was really ahead of his time.
Speaker 2: He was way ahead of his time--very strong, physical person.
Story_ID: 595843
Speaker 1: So your mom [Lee Terrell Stone] really comes from a Midwest family--southern and Midwest.
Speaker 2: Southern and Midwest, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Paducah [Kentucky] is right on the, the border--southern Illinois--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Kentucky, Missouri.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Does she talk about the dynamic of--the coming together of those subcultures?
Speaker 2: A little.  I mean she considers herself more of a Midwest person; she came to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] when she was, you know, in her preteens, so she went to school all--in, in Milwaukee.  But she talks a little bit about the country living that she remembers when she was, was young--just the, the--how hard it was, and living from--basically from the land.  But she talks about it fondly, in terms of the family connections; that was the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Does she talk at all about race relations back then, and what they faced?
Speaker 2: Not really; I think they were pretty segregated, and her contact with the whites was very limited, so she doesn't really talk that much about it.
Story_ID: 595844
Speaker 1: And you mentioned the [U.S.] military where Jack Hale [Stone's maternal great-grandfather, Jacob Hale]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --was a veteran of World War I [WWI].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did he share stories about his time at, in the war--in the war?
Speaker 2: Very few; he was a very--a man of few words, so he was not a talker.  And he would not talk about--he would not talk about any bad times, and he did not talk about his military service at all.  I think he was conscript- conscripted in, and he did a lot of work on public works--construction type activity when he was in the service.  I don't think he left the United States.
Story_ID: 595845
Speaker 1: What about your father?  What's his name, and when and where was he born?
Speaker 2: My father, Raymond Fisher Stone [Raymond Stone, Sr.], born in Birmingham--Bessemer, Alabama, which is a suburb of Birmingham [Alabama].  Born (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen twenty-four [1924].  He died in 1980?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what has he told you about his childhood?
Speaker 2: He had a very hard childhood; he was, he was orphaned early, and his parents died early, so he was raised by an older sister.  Came to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] in his early teens, was drafted; also went into World War II [WWII]--served in World War II.  Had a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you mentioned his older sister raised him?  What's her name?
Speaker 2: Flora [ph.]--no, Flora's her daughter; what's her name?  I can't--no, I can't recall it right now.
Speaker 1: Did he have other siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes, he had a, an older brother; they called him--his, his nickname was Baby Ray 'cause he was the baby, and so he had several older siblings--an older brother who moved to Milwaukee before he did and he kind of followed him to Milwaukee.  Older brother was more of an entrepreneur type--owned a, owned a bar and (unclear) I think a couple other small businesses, and my father kind of followed the family to Milwaukee.
Speaker 1: What can you tell me about your paternal grandparents?  What's your grandfather's name on your dad's side?  You said they were--they died young--when he was young.
Speaker 2: Right, so I have no--little or no history about my father's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Did he tell you how they, how they died?  How did he become an orphan?
Speaker 2: I don't recall.
Speaker 1: But he was raised by an older sister (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was raised by an older sister, right.
Speaker 1: What stories has he told you about his childhood, growing up in that environment?
Speaker 2: Well, he didn't have much education, and he always regretted that--that he was never really--had the opportunity to go to school.  Hard scrabble coming up, very poor, and so coming north to Milwaukee was a major event for him and it allowed him to, you know, get employment and create opportunities for himself.  So he was very glad to escape the South.  He never really talked about the race relations in the South, but he always gave me the impression that it--that they were not pleasant, the relations that he had growing up as far (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, what decade did he make that move?
Speaker 2: He must have come to Milwaukee in the--either late '30s [1930s] or early '40s [1940s], right, and this--I think he was a teenager.
Speaker 1: Okay, so war time.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Was he involved in manufacturing related to the war?
Speaker 2: He went to--he went to Europe during World War II, he said his--what was--he was in a trucking unit involved in transport--transporting munitions and building roads where (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was he--he was in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: He was in the Army, right.
Speaker 1: In a black regiment.
Speaker 2: Right--segregated regiment, right.
Speaker 1: Did he share any stories about that experience?
Speaker 2: Not many; kind of kept it all to himself.  We would talk about it, and we had to pull, kind of like pulling teeth, and he was very negative about it but wouldn't really give us anecdotes or stories, or anything like that; he just let us know that it was unpleasant and not something that he wanted to share.
Story_ID: 595846
Speaker 1: What about your own childhood?  So you were born in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: I was born in Milwaukee.  I had a fantastic childhood.
Speaker 1: What's your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Wow, good question.  My earliest childhood memory.  I had a--I found a cat--a kitten and I brought the kitten home, and my mother [Lee Terrell Stone] got a saucer and filled it with milk and put it on the back porch.  I, I remember sitting on the back porch with this kitten, wondering whether my mother was gonna let me keep it or not; that's my earliest memory as a kid.  I was probably four, five, or something like that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Four years old?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 595847
Speaker 1: Describe your neighborhood.  What kind of neighborhood did you live in?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, my mother--my parents [Lee Terrell Stone and Raymond Stone, Sr.] were--Milwaukee's [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] a very segregated city; it's much like Chicago [Illinois] except on a smaller scale.  The black community was segregated in terms of boundaries, you know.  It was probably maybe a--I don't know, thirty square block area, I would say--maybe not quite that big.  And growing up, my mother was very determined that we were gonna be allowed to take advantage of educational opportunities.  My mother was a very--concerned about educating (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was she educated?
Speaker 2: High school education--graduated from pretty much an all-white high school; she was one of the few blacks who attended.  So when we--my--in about--when I was about, I wanna say five or six, she moved us in--we moved into this neighborhood that was all-white.
Speaker 1: So, before that, you were living in a black neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What was that neighborhood called?
Speaker 2: The--inner city Milwaukee--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --I don't know if it had a, had a specific name (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it--I mean did you live in public housing, or did you live in apartments, or--
Speaker 2: No, no, we lived in an apartment; in fact we lived in an apartment over a beauty shop--
Speaker 1: When you were very young.
Speaker 2: --when I was very young, right.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about that situation?
Speaker 2: I remember the smell of hair, that's all I remember, the smell of hair.
Speaker 1: So that's when pressing--
Speaker 2: Pressing and hot combs and, you know, I remember that.  But when we moved, we moved into a all-white neighborhood, and for a while it was, it was great; it was very mixed--diverse white neighborhood in the, in the sense that there was a, a German butcher on the corner, a Jewish pharmacy across the street, a Polish guy had a grocery store, there was a French couple that had a bakery on the next block up.  So it was very diverse in that sense, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where was this neighborhood compared to the other one?
Speaker 2: This was--it was probably a, a mile north.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the, the first neighborhood you lived in was in the inner city.  Do you remember around which streets?
Speaker 2: Yes, North Avenue; like 6th [Street] and North Avenue.  Then we moved about a mile north, and we were on 8th [Street] and Locust [Street] and, and we were one of the first black families to move on that block.
Story_ID: 595848
Speaker 1: Do you remember the day you moved?  How you were received?
Speaker 2: Well, there were so many of us by--as I said, my--we all moved together, so my mother [Lee Terrell Stone] and father [Raymond Stone, Sr.] and I and my--lived upstairs; there was just the three of us at that point.  And then downstairs, my grandmother [Earthel Hale Terrell], grandfather [Jacob Terrell], my uncle moved with us, and my great-grandmother [Kansas Hale Beeks] moved on the first floor.  So we were kind of a self-contained, self-sufficient unit.  I don't recall any problems as I--you know, in fact I--there was a lane behind our house called 7th Lane [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], I think it was, and there was a row of houses there, and there were a lot of Polish kids, and I--one of my best friends at that time was a little Polish kid who lived right, right behind us.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: I think his name was Jerry Sinkovic [ph.], and everything was fine until one day I recall going to, to get him, and getting ready to, to come in the house, and he came to the door and he said, "You can't come in," and I thought it was odd, but I didn't really--it didn't really register.  And then I went home and told my mom about it and then she gave me the 4-1-1, the--gave me this slick little lecture about race relations and how she was not gonna let him in our house and she didn't want me going to his house and--you know--so that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So prior to that, you had been playmates at least at school--
Speaker 2: Yeah, prior to that, he had been running in and outta my house, I had been running in and outta his house, but I think his parents, at some point, decided that they had to cut this short because the neighborhood was changing and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How was the neighborhood changing?
Speaker 2: There were more black families who were moving in that direction.
Speaker 1: And was that phenomenon of white flight in effect?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  By the time--within, I would say, six years, the neighborhood had completely changed from almost all-white to almost all-black.
Speaker 1: So this is what, the mid-'50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: This is mid-'50s [1950s]--mid to late '50s [1950s], right.  By 19--I would say '60 [1960], it was an all-black neighborhood.
Speaker 1: What else do you recall about those early days?  You mentioned that one playmate; were there other friendships that you recall?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we--I had a great childhood.  My--it was a very family friendly environment, family friendly neighborhood.  My aunt--I had an aunt [Luvenne Terrell Thompson] and uncle [Robert Thompson, Sr.] who lived like two blocks away; they moved up, and she had three boys, so we were like brothers--my mother's sister, and it was a very nurturing environment.
Story_ID: 595849
Speaker 1: What are some of the early sights, smells, and sounds of that neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a beautiful park, like a half a block from our house, called Borchert Field [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and it was a huge--well, huge by kids' standards; it was probably two blocks square of the park, and so there were tennis courts, and there were basketball courts, and there were base- there was a baseball field, and there was a football field, a, a little recreation house, so it was just a very--so the sounds--I remember balls, you know, being bounced, balls being hit, games being played, a lot of activity, a lot of--just fun and games as a kid is, is basically what I remember.
Speaker 1: And all these kids--I mean a diverse circle of kids playing together.
Speaker 2: Very diverse at, at first, and then slowly it began to be much more segregated, and the white kids began to either move out of the neighborhood or they wouldn't come out, and so within a matter of four or five years--it was still a, a lot of fun for me, but just the complexion of the people that I associated with began to be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did the sounds change as the population changed?
Speaker 2: Not at first.  At first it was very similar, just a different complexion, but yeah, then it did begin to change as the--you know, what I know now is the--you know, realest--people who own the real estate stopped taking care of the property to the extent that they had before, they started renting--cutting up some of the homes into smaller units so there were more people in the houses.
Speaker 1: So describe what you saw.
Speaker 2: Well, I saw just a deterioration of the neighborhood.  The business owners moved out--moved further out and, and, you know, rented the premises to people who had less capital, so the quality of the--you know--and my mother [Lee Terrell Stone], for example, who used to go to the German butcher on the corner to get fresh meat now had to go further out because the--she--he--the butcher sold the store and he sold it to somebody who just wasn't a butcher but was a--you know, just a regular little grocery store.
Speaker 1: So describe the sights so I can see the contrast.  The sights in the early days upon your move to this neighborhood, compared to the sights a few years later.  What did you see?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, when--like when we first moved there, I mean we thought it was Eden almost, you know.  I mean it was just a wonderful environment in terms of the facilities that were there, and products and---
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: Well, like I said, the French bakery; I remember the aroma of the French bakery going in there, the beautiful cakes and pies and desserts, the fresh meat at the butcher shop, you know, watching them cut up, you know, the meat and, and just the wide variety that--so the smells, I guess, is one thing that changed, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did the smells change?
Speaker 2: Well, they were just less fragrant, you know; I mean they were less vibrant and became--started getting stale.  The--and it, it was more crowded because of the way that the realtors were renting the properties, so there were more people--seemed to be packed into the same spaces.
Story_ID: 595850
Speaker 1: At the same time that all this was going on, I think some of the industries that were in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] began to move out or close down, so there were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What were some of those companies?
Speaker 1: Oh, there were--Milwaukee was a--is a--was in the '50s [1950s] a, a very big manufacturing town--lot of steel industry, meatpacking, manufacturing as it related to machinery, machine shops.  So the employ- unemployment was very low; if you had any sort of wherewithal, you could get a job in Milwaukee.  But as--around the same time as the minority African American population began to grow, the industrial base began to shrink, and around the same time, the white flight began to increase, so people were moving to the suburbs.  And then at--around the same time, the urban renewal started taking place, so you had the expressway system that came through the center city of Milwaukee and just virtually devastated our community.
Story_ID: 595851
Speaker 1: So, I wanted to find out about your siblings--how many kids in your family, and if you can, name them.
Speaker 2: I have three brothers and three sisters.  Sisters are Candace [Candace Stone McDowell], Carlotta [Carlotta Stone Bradley] and Cynthia [Cynthia Stone], and my brothers are Reginald [Reginald Stone], Raymond [Raymond Stone, Jr.] and Richard [Richard Stone]; they had the R-C thing going.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Where do you fall?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest, and after me is Candy, and then Raymond who's Butch, and then Rick--Reggie, and then Cindy and Carla.
Speaker 1: Was it tough or exciting growing up with seven kids in the family?
Speaker 2: It was hard, particularly for me being the oldest and--well, I don't know; they may say it was hard for them.  But, yeah, I mean I--my sister came when I was about six or seven, I think, and then the, the rest of 'em came pretty much after that, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you share bedrooms?  How many home--how many rooms in your house?
Speaker 2: Well, when we lived on 8th Street [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], we were on one floor, and there was a living room, dining room, kitchen, two small bedrooms, and then kind of a pantry like room in the back, so--when I was first there, I had my own little room in the back, but then as the kids came, we eventually wound up in two rooms; the boys were in one with bunk beds, so it was four boys in one room with bunk--two sets of bunk beds, and then the, the girls were in another room, and then my father's nephew--I had my own room; my father's nephew moved up from Birmingham [Alabama] and he got my room, so I got kicked out and had to go in the room with the other three boys, so it was tight; it was very tight (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were holidays--yeah--what were holidays like in your household?
Speaker 2: Holidays were great, you know; we always had a big tree and lots of gifts under the tree, and my mother [Lee Terrell Stone] and father [Raymond Stone, Sr.] eventually converted the living room into their bedroom and that became their bedroom, so basically we had a combination living room, dining room, and then a, a big--fairly big kitchen.  But growing up, it was some--it was, looking back on it, it was tight, it was crowded; we had one bathroom which is hard to imagine, to have a family with that many people with one bathroom, but that's--somehow we made it through.  I don't think--no, I guess we could do it today, too, but it's just hard to imagine, to have that many kids, two parents and one bathroom; I don't know how we did it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Because my father had this routine; he was a man of routine--he was a welder, so when he came home from work, he--if, if you came home from school and he was at home, you knew what time it was by what he was doing, you know.  If you smelled Noxzema, you knew he was in the bathroom shaving, you know, and he had his little set routine, so there was like certain periods of time where nobody could use the bathroom except him, you know, and 'cause it--you know, he'd be in there with his radio (laughter), shaving and doing whatever else he did.
Speaker 1: What did he listen to on the radio?
Speaker 2: He had it in the bathroom; he had a little transistor radio (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But did he have--were there certain songs that you recall?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, a baseball game usually, baseball game or news.
Story_ID: 595852
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was he a disciplinarian?
Speaker 2: No, he was a very mild mannered, soft spoken guy and, you know, we always dread--my mother [Lee Terrell Stone] was the disciplinarian and my mother was fierce.
Speaker 1: What do you recall about your mother and discipline?
Speaker 2: My mother--everybody feared my mother.  She was a very, you know--belts were her thing, or anything that she could grab that was near when you made her mad.
Speaker 1: Do you remember a time she used her belt (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I remember many times.  I was a very--I used to get in trouble quite a bit, and she was always up to the task.
Speaker 1: Can you share a story?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Well, I remember getting, getting in some trouble at school and the teacher called my mother to let her know that I had not been behaving appropriately; not--you know, talking in class or repeat- ignoring the teacher, something like that.  And I remember coming home and the teacher then told me that, "I called your mother, so we can deal with it when you get home."  And I remember trying to get home as late as possible because I knew if I got home and my father [Raymond Stone, Sr.] was there, it was always the chance that she might say to him, "You take care of it," because if she said that and he was in charge, I knew, you know, I could handle whatever he was gonna dish out.  So I got in, he was there, and she looked at him and said something like, "You should handle this, but I'm gonna take care of it."  And she took me in my room and wore me out, and it was a very--I was a very unhappy child (laughter), I'll put it that way, and my screams could be heard throughout the house.  And it was--I think it was kind of a way of getting the other kids in line, too, because she knew that they'd be listening, so--
Speaker 2: Taught by example.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 595853
Speaker 1: You mentioned school.  Tell me about your elementary schools.
Speaker 2: Well, school was, you know, interesting.  When we started first grade, Robert M. LaFollette [Robert M. LaFollette School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], or--yeah, R.M. LaFollette grade school is from first to eighth.  When I started first grade, there were probably two African American, maybe three, in class; I remember three.  But by the time I got to eighth grade, graduating, the class was probably at 50/50 [percent], or 60/40, black to white.  It was a typical neighborhood public school; we walked to school from probably, you know, four blocks from our house--four or five blocks.  Good teachers--
Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers?  Do you recall?
Speaker 2: Ozeen Labin [ph.], a French teacher; maybe that was probably high school [Rufus King High School; Rufus King International High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]--Ozeen Labin.  There was a good geometry teacher whose name escapes me.
Speaker 1: Were you a good student?
Speaker 2: I was an excellent student; I was--well, I was a hard working student, I'll put it that way.  I enjoyed school--I liked school, and my mother [Lee Terrell Stone] was a very--and my father [Raymond Stone, Sr.], too; they were both very adamant about school work, about grades, about report cards, about achievement so--and I, I bought into it, you know; I enjoyed it, I liked to do well.
Story_ID: 595854
Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite memories from early elementary school [Robert M. LaFollette School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: Well, my most interesting memory was probably fifth grade or something, and the teacher had this honor roll, and if you achieved a certain level of, you know, points and stars, you got to be--your name got on the board and you got to erase the board after she gave her lessons and it was a--kind of like a, a symbol of achievement.  And I remember thinking that someday I was gonna get this big prize, and when I finally did--it was probably fourth grade--when I finally did, she decided that she was gonna change the, the procedure and no longer give me (laughter) the opportunity that the other kids had.
Speaker 1: This is a white teacher?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I remember thinking--I couldn't quite grasp as to why the rules were changing, and I remember talking to my mother [Lee Terrell Stone] about it, and she went up to school the next day or--you know, and the teacher eventually apologized to me and gave me the award that I was supposed to get.  But it was a--I remember just being so disappointed that I had done what I was supposed to do but now I wasn't gonna get the little trinket that I was supposed to get, but it was a--more of an illustration for me and my mother and how she was just so into education and achievement, and making sure that we got our due, and a very strong person and a very serious person, and she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was your--oh, go on.
Speaker 2: No, go ahead.
Speaker 1: No, tell me about your mom.
Speaker 2: Well, she was just a--you know, even today, she's the type of woman that a lot of the neighbors or other parents didn't really like because the rumor was that she thought that her kids were better than everybody else's, and she probably did think that, you know?  But not in a negative way; she was just so focused on making sure that we achieved our potential, and she was not gonna accept second best or sloppy efforts.  We all had chores, we all had responsibilities.  One of my chores was washing down the front steps, you know, in the house, and--
Speaker 1: And this is something you had to do every day (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had to do every, every Saturday, you know; it was--the first thing I had to do Saturday morning was to get up, get a bucket of water, a scrub brush, and scrub down the front steps, and she would come and inspect the steps, you know, and the first few times I would do, you know, a halfway job, you know, had to do it over, and that was just the kind of person she was.  She wasn't--or is, I should say--I mean--and I'm grateful for it now; and I didn't like it then, but I'm grateful for it now.
Story_ID: 595855
Speaker 1: And at school, was the primary focus academics?  I mean, your parents [Lee Terrell Stone and Raymond Stone, Sr.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --stressed academics.  What about like music and gym, and sports?
Speaker 2: We all took music lessons; I took trumpet and piano, my sisters [Candace Stone McDowell, Carlotta Stone Bradley, and Cynthia Stone] mostly took piano.  Music was stressed, but academics was the primary responsibility.  Athletics--my father would kind of, you know, look forward to us being involved in athletics, but even he--you know, he always stressed that books were more--much more important.
Speaker 1: Were there certain activities that were preserved for the white kids at school, and certain activities for the black kids?
Speaker 2: Not when we were coming up, you know.  We were all eligible to participate in all the activities when I was coming up in grade school [Robert M. LaFollette School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and high school [Rufus King High School; Rufus King International High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]--they pretty much did.  I mean I think we were probably encouraged, or discouraged to some degree--like there were a lot of academic clubs that sometimes we didn't find out about until it was too late or, you know.
Story_ID: 595856
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And around what grade did you start noticing the population changing?
Speaker 2: Probably fifth, sixth.  As I said, when I started first grade [at Robert M. LaFollette School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], there were three of us; by the time I got to sixth grade, there were probably, you know, half and half--African American, white.
Speaker 1: Did, did things change in the classroom as the population changed?
Speaker 2: Not at first.  The--we had the same core teachers; our teachers didn't really change, so as we--as I got sixth, seventh and eighth, there was some emphasis more on what, what I call the behavior issues, you know, controlling the classroom, security and those kinds a things.
Speaker 1: And most of these kids, had they migrated from the South?
Speaker 2: Right.  Many of 'em had migrated from the South; some of them had been in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] for a while but just had been confined to their certain neighborhoods, and then they were moving to try to get better education.  You know, I think my mother [Lee Terrell Stone] figured out early that if you could put your kids in the schools where the white kids were, you were gonna get--at least in Milwaukee, you had a better opportunity to get more educational opportunities, and she was--I don't know if she was always right about that, but that was her perspective, and she followed through.
Story_ID: 595857
Speaker 1: Where did you go after you left LaFollette [Robert M. LaFollette School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: LaFollette?  After I left LaFollette, I went to Rufus King High School [Rufus King International High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  Once again, when we started off in Rufus King, it was probably 80/20 [percent], white to black; by the time I graduated four years later, it was probably 60/40, black to white.  And my sister [Candace Stone McDowell] followed me a few years later, and I think by the time she graduated, it was almost all-black.
Speaker 1: What year did you enter?
Speaker 2: I entered in '60 [1960] and graduated in '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: So, tell me about your high school experience.  Was this a good high school?  Was it known for its academics?
Speaker 2: No, it was just a regular neighborhood high school.
Speaker 1: Were you on any teams, or any clubs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I played a little football 'til I broke my leg; I broke my leg one year and the next year I broke my ankle, so my football career was abbreviated.  And then the third year my mother [Lee Terrell Stone] wouldn't let me go out, and she was probably right about that.
Speaker 1: Are there stories around those--
Speaker 2: No, not really just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) dangerous--
Speaker 2: Being in the wrong place at the wrong time--brittle bones, maybe; I don't know.
Speaker 1: So (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) High school was fairly uneventful, and--
Speaker 1: You were in clubs as well?
Speaker 2: I think I was in--ma- might have been in the chess club.  What did I do in high school?  It's all a big blur.
Story_ID: 595858
Speaker 1: Do you remember the political climate at the time?  You said you entered in 1960.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I remember toward the end of my high school career [at Rufus King High School; Rufus King International High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]; there was a priest in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], a Father Groppi [James Groppi], who started doing some open housing marches and demonstrations, and I remember Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to Milwaukee at some point, and gave a talk at one of the local churches that I attended.
Speaker 1: So tell me about Father Grappy.
Speaker 2: Father Groppi.
Speaker 1: Was he white, black--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was white.  He was a priest, Catholic priest, and he was very instrumental in kind of the Civil Rights Movement in Milwaukee and he partnered with a number of other folks, but he was kind of the symbol because he led a lot of marches through areas in which blacks were not allowed to move or live.
Speaker 1: What were some of those areas?
Speaker 2: Well, South Side of Milwaukee was notorious for its refusal to sell or rent housing to African Americans, and he led several marches in that area.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the details from the marches?  Was there any violence or--
Speaker 2: There was a lot of catcalling and, and, and that kind of thing but no, no, I don't recall any fights or anything like that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you ever venture into the South Side of Milwaukee?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What do you recall?
Speaker 2: Just, you know, trying to get back to the North Side as quickly as possible 'cause (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why?  What happened there?
Speaker 2: Well, it was very hostile, and if you were--in that--in those days, you know, you could go over there during the day because some people had jobs over there, but you just had to make sure you were back across--there was a viaduct; make sure you're back across the viaduct or the bridge by the time nightfall--night came, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were there stories about people who didn't make it back before nightfall?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, there were people being chased back, beat up.  The police chief at the time also lived on the South Side and the, the police department in Milwaukee was notorious for police brutality during the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Do you remember the police chief?
Speaker 2: Breier [Harold A. Breier], B-R-E-I-E-R, something like that.
Speaker 1: So this is still in the early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: It's early '60s [1960s], mid-'60s [1960s]; probably up until the late '60s [1960s], yeah.
Speaker 1: And you mentioned Father Groppi (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Father Groppi, yeah.
Speaker 1: --would partner with some other folks in town.  Who were some of his partners?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--well, [HistoryMaker] Vel Phillips was one; she was a, a lawyer in Milwaukee.  There was another--Barbee, Lloyd Barbee--great civil rights lawyer in Milwaukee.  Several ministers, black ministers who were involved as well.  And they kind of--
Speaker 1: What organizations like the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) NAACP, the Urban League [National Urban League], yeah; some of the Baptist, Baptist Youth Fellowship programs were involved, I was involved in the Baptist Youth Fellowship program at the Calvary Baptist Church in Milwaukee.
Speaker 1: Was this an interracial protest?
Speaker 2: A lot of it was interracial, yes, 'cause Father Groppi involved some of the Catholic churches and--yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: Were you--was your family active at all in any of the marches?
Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandmother [Earthel Hale Terrell]--in the marches no, but my grandmother was a very big supporter of the NAACP, and she says that--me and my cousin Bobby [Robert Thompson, Jr.] were around the same age; we were probably thirteen, fourteen, fifteen during that period of time, and she, she says that we--she made us both lifetime members.  I never followed up on that to find out about that, but she was very supportive financially and psychologically.  I don't think my pare- my parents--my father [Raymond Stone, Sr.] was supportive as well.  My mother [Lee Terrell Stone] tended to be more of a spectator, and was a little nervous about us getting involved in any kind of protest activity for security reasons.  She was always concerned about our safety and, and things that might happen (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 595859
Speaker 1: So did Father Groppi [James Groppi] and his group invite Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] to Milwaukee [Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that event; where was it held and when?
Speaker 2: It was held at--I wanna say one of the churches in Milwaukee; I think it was St. Matthew's [sic. Milwaukee Auditorium; Miller High Life Theatre, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], but I could be wrong about that.  But he came and gave a great--just a talk; it was a--I guess it was a sermon--about civil rights, about participating.  It was more for young people, a lot of young people in attendance; I was one of the, you know, hundreds.
Speaker 1: How many people were at this event (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was packed.  I--you know, the church was packed; it was standing room only, people were trying to get in, couldn't get in.
Speaker 1: And do you have an idea what year this was?
Speaker 2: Man, I wanna say '64 [1964]?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, after the March on Washington.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I wanna say '64 [1964]--'63 [1963], '64 [1964], something like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: And after JFK's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassination?
Speaker 2: JFK was assassinated in what, November of '63 [1963], or something like that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 2: Maybe it was that summer before the assassination; yeah, that--that's probably when it was, that summer--summer of '63 [sic.].
Story_ID: 595860
Speaker 1: And you mentioned that Milwaukee [Wisconsin] was--at least in the early years--was segregated, that there was this--
Speaker 2: Very segregated town, very--boundaries, you know, were--you knew where you could go pretty much, and people--the black community was pretty self-contained.  Even--I remember when the Milwaukee Braves [Atlanta Braves] first hired a few black ball players--Henry Aaron [HistoryMaker Hank Aaron] was one.  A, a lot of them used to live in the black community and I, I remember when Henry Aaron first bought a house out in the suburbs, and there was a huge thing, you know, and--just for him to, you know, kind of make that stand that he could live wherever he wanted to, and that was probably in the early '60s [1960s], too.
Speaker 1: So, what were the white neighborhoods and what were the black neighborhoods?
Speaker 2: Well, the black neighborhood tended to be in the central city of Milwaukee up north, and it just expanded north and west and, you know, when I was at--at some point, I remember my parents [Lee Terrell Stone and Raymond Stone, Sr.] telling me, you know, North Avenue was the boundary, and then it became Center Street, and then Burleigh [Street] and then Capitol.  By the time--as I was growing up in--coming up in high school [Rufus King High School; Rufus King International High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], pretty much Capitol Drive was one of the boundaries, and then it ex- slowly, it's expanded.  And now, when I go back now, of course, black people live all over the city in places that I could never even imagine black folks living when I was a kid.
Speaker 1: And this was also a very industrial town, the unions were active.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was there a coming together of the folks--the members of the unions and folks who were active during the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I left Milwaukee in '64 [1964], to go to college [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], and then, then I went into the [U.S.] military.  So, after '64 [1964], I never--I didn't really spend a lot of time in Milwaukee, so I don't know what was going on other than reports that I would hear, and things like that.  I kind of--pretty much lost touch--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --I would say.
Story_ID: 595861
Speaker 1: So you were in high school [Rufus King High School; Rufus King International High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] during these years when the protests were going on, the marches (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --were you still focused primarily upon academics and--
Speaker 2: Pretty much, you know.  I got a scholarship to go to Lincoln University in Pennsylvania [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]; it's a historically black college [HBCU], and I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Had you applied to other schools?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I got accepted to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]--Northwestern in their engineering program, and that's where I wanted to go.  We couldn't afford it, and so some question about what I was gonna do, and then this guy from Lincoln University showed up and offered me a scholarship, an academic scholarship, so there wasn't much discussion after that--that's where I was going.
Speaker 1: Did someone--did you have a mentor in high school who put the bug in your ear prior to Northwestern?
Speaker 2: No, I think I just--I knew they had a good engineering program. I wanted to be an engineer--
Speaker 1: Who?  Was there a model in the engineering world?  How did you know engineering?
Speaker 2: I, I, I like math, I thought I would like the mechanical engineering field; I don't know how I--I kind of talked myself into it.  No, I didn't have a mentor, I didn't know an engineer and, you know, I didn't really know what an engineer--you know, what a--the daily work of an engineer would be, but I had done some reading at the library and I just convinced myself that that's what I wanted to be, and I applied to Northwestern, among other places; I got accepted, and--
Speaker 1: But no scholarships at this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No scholarship, and then we realized the, the economics of it, and this guy from Lincoln University showed up, just like a godsend, and offered me an academic scholarship, and that was it.
Story_ID: 595862
Speaker 1: You had mentioned Julie Ellis [ph.].  Did she go all the way from elementary through high school with you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Julie?  Yeah, from like first grade [at Robert M. LaFollette School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] through high school [Rufus King High School; Rufus King International High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], right.
Speaker 1: Was there a cohort, like a group of black kids who knew they were going to college?
Speaker 2: I think there was a small group of us whose parents expected them to go to college, but for me, you know, it was just what was expected.  I was the first person in my extended family to go to college, so I didn't really have family members to bounce ideas off of about college applications or anything like that.
Speaker 1: Was there a counsellor at school who helped?
Speaker 2: There was a counsellor at school who was of marginal help, yeah; not great help, but marginal help, yeah.
Speaker 1: But you weren't steered into the vocational field.
Speaker 2: No, no.  Oh well my, my mother [Lee Terrell Stone] was pretty adamant that I was going to college, so.
Story_ID: 595863
Speaker 1: I wanna get a sense of the kind of child you were.  If you had to put yourself in a category, how would you describe yourself?
Speaker 2: I was quiet, I was pretty studious, I was not--I kind of had a--you know, like most kids, I had a split personality.  I mean I think I was probably--if you asked people who knew me at the time, they would probably describe me as nerdy, quiet, shy, bookish, you know; I had a--kind of a wild side, but it was, you know--relatively speaking.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your wild side.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I was adventurous, you know.  I liked to do, you know, somewhat scary things.
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me an example of--
Speaker 2: I'll tell you--
Speaker 1: -an adventure?
Speaker 2: --an adventure.  There was--there is, you know, a park called Estabrook Park, which is way on the--kind of on the North Side of Milwaukee [Wisconsin], and they had a train trestle that kind of went over a, a large valley in the park, and I remember my brother--my cousin and I, you know, riding across this trestle.  It was pretty dangerous, you know, but we--so I--things like that, you know.  I mean--but I guess they'd be considered pretty mild today, but that, that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 595864
Speaker 1: And you mentioned reading.  What kinds of books were you reading?
Speaker 2: I was reading everything.  I read a lot of--I remember my--one of my favorite books at the time was 'For Whom the Bell Tolls' [Ernest Hemingway].  I just thought this was such a fascinating book; I don't know (laughter), you know, I--
Speaker 1: What was it about that book?
Speaker 2: Man, I don't know; it's just, it's just the panoramic view of a life from beginning to end, I guess; the possibilities inherent in living, opportunities, roads not taken and the consequences.  So I read a lot of--I'd read some mysteries, I, I read--I tried to read, you know, whatever was available.  I didn't try to pin myself down to any specific style or type; I read poetry.
Speaker 1: What kind of poetry?  Were you reading the literary canon, or were you reading [HistoryMaker] Sonia Sanchez?
Speaker 2: Yeah, more the latter.  A lot of Don Lee [Don L. Lee] and [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti, or Don Lee who became Haki Madhubuti--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --a lot of, lot of the revolutionary poetry at, at the time, during that period.  And high school [Rufus King High School; Rufus King International High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]--what was I reading in high school?  I read a lot of comic books; I collected comic books, I collected cards--baseball cards.
Speaker 1: What kind of comic books did you read?
Speaker 2: I read 'em all, you know--the super heroes, the science fiction.  I guess I was a nerd (laughter), now that I think about it.  I did a lot of the card collecting--baseball cards and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Did you guys trade cards?
Speaker 2: Trade cards, yeah, you know.  I did a lot of math on the back of the cards; I think I--that's how I got fascinated with math, trying to figure out the batting averages and on base percentages and all that stuff, you know, so--
Speaker 1: Who taught you how to do that?
Speaker 2: Oh, friends, taught myself.
Speaker 1: Would you have competitions, or--
Speaker 2: No, it was more of a solitary kind of thing.
Speaker 1: And what did you gain from figuring out batting averages, et cetera (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Aww, man, just the challenge of it, you know?  To try to figure out how they, how they got the math that they came up with, you know, so it was fascinating to a young mind, I guess.
Story_ID: 595865
Speaker 1: And you mentioned you were quiet.
Speaker 2: I was very quiet.
Speaker 1: What did you think about, or what did you do during your quiet time?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess I was trying to figure out, you know, what was next.  I was always thinking about what was next, you know, how--where I, where I was, and where I was gonna be, you know; how, how to, you know--and looking at my friends and family, you could see how people wound up where they were, how they got to the places they, they were, and I was always trying to figure out how does one--is--are there things that one can do to help you get to where you want to be?  Or is it more a matter of fate or is it more a matter of self-motivation, a combination of both?  How does it happen that some people wind up, you know, in one spot and others wind up in another?
Speaker 1: So, who were you studying?  Whose lives did you meditate upon?
Speaker 2: Friends, really.  I--my--I noticed a lot of my friends, particularly in high school [Rufus King High School; Rufus King International High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]--later years of high school, kind of falling through the cracks.  I remember--the major event for me was going to--my father [Raymond Stone, Sr.] took myself and my sister [Candace Stone McDowell] to a basketball game; it was a big game, and my father liked high school basketball.  So we get to the game, and I'm probably a junior, maybe, in high school.  And about five of my friends show up at the game and so after the game, my father--I asked my father, I said, "Pops, I'm gonna go--is it okay if I go hang out with--," and he was reluctant at first, but he said, "Okay, make sure you're at home by X amount of time."  So I'm leaving the game with these five friends, and on our way to--they're walking to a car, and they said, "We got a car."  I said, "Where'd you guys get a car," you know, and one of the guys says, "Well, don't ask any questions," you know.  So, just as we get to the car, the police burst from around the--around the car and try to put us all under arrest, and they arrested about four or five of us, I'm one, take us to the county jail--to the police station, and it turns out that these guys had robbed a store and stolen a car--my friends.  And me, being at the game and leaving with them, I'm, you know, caught up in this dragnet, and my father had to come and get me out.  And when he came to get me, he was so, you know, traumatized by the process, and I was, too, you know.  The police had slapped me around a bit just for GP [general principle], I guess, 'cause they thought I had been involved in this robbery that the other guys had committed.  But that was an--just an example.  And then, you know, obviously we kind of went apart after that incident, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What happened at home after this incident?  So you father picks you up--
Speaker 2: Well, fortunately, you know, I had been with him all day at the game, so they knew--my dad and my parents knew I, I was not involved, and they were able to convince the police of, of the same, so it was more--you know, I got a lecture about choosing your friends, you know, and was not a lecture that I had heard before, but obviously it had more import as a result of this incident, so--I mean my parents were very emotional about it because they knew that it could have gone a different way, you know.  I could have gotten hurt, I could have gotten shot, I could have gotten caught up in the criminal justice system, and then in watching what happened to my friends, you know--they got criminal records and one of 'em, you know, was--eventually wound up doing a lot of time in prison, and so I--those kind of things--and there were a few other incidents similar to that (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 595866
Speaker 1: Can you share another one?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I had a very good friend who--actually, he was kind of well off for, for our standards; his parents owned a grocery store in the community.  But for some reason, he got, he got involved in a different sort of set and committed a, a, an armed robbery and was sentenced to prison when we were sixteen.  I had another friend who bought a, brought a gun to school; this was--and then he had gotten in a fight, went home, got the gun from his father's collection, and came back to school and, you know, was apprehended before he could do anything.  But, you know--so incidents like that, kind of, I don't know, for me, forced me to think about the future and how minor things can affect that future in a big way.
Speaker 1: So this is a James Baldwin moment.
Speaker 2: I guess.
Speaker 1: In 'The Fire Next Time' [James Baldwin], he saw his friends going down the wrong path (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I guess so.  Now, I can't say I learned my lesson then, but it's--those, those kinds of things stayed with me 'cause I didn't really learn; I had a--had to have a few knocks upside my own head later, to really kind of get myself together, but--
Speaker 1: Did you get in trouble?  And--you mentioned one time being on the receiving end of a pretty bad spanking.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had, I had my share of issues, but they were minor.  I never did anything, you know, major through high school [Rufus King High School; Rufus King International High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]; I got out of high school pretty much unscathed, and then went to college [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: What was the one incident?  What inspired that spanking by your mother [Lee Terrell Stone] that day?
Speaker 2: It was a, a--just being unruly, not following the rules at school and the teacher called home; it was nothing that I considered significant--sassing off, mouthing off, and the teacher called my mother.
Story_ID: 595867
Speaker 1: And you were a musician as well.
Speaker 2: Now, I wouldn't say I was a musician.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I, I took (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Talk about your--
Speaker 2: --I took trumpet lessons for a, a number of years.
Speaker 1: Private lessons?
Speaker 2: Private lessons.  And, and then later I took a few pi-, piano lessons.
Speaker 1: Were you playing jazz or--
Speaker 2: I was doing jazz and a little classical and--you know, I, I, I wouldn't consider myself a musician by any stretch of the imagination; I liked music--I love music, I still do love music but I, I didn't have much talent.
Story_ID: 595868
Speaker 1: Was your family associated with the church in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My grandmother's church was Calvary Baptist Church [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and so we were--probably from the time I was--up until I was like seventeen, I was in church every Sunday.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about the church service experience?
Speaker 2: Well, I joined the church when I was, I think twelve.  I was in Sun- we used to go to Sunday school, we used to--I was in Sunday school, I was in Baptist Youth Fellowship, I was in the youth choir, I was on the usher board.  So, for a period of time there, I was in church two or three times a week.  I hated it, but my grandmother [Earthel Hale Terrell] was the type of person that--she was into it and she was determined that we were gonna be into it and my mother [Lee Stone Terrell] kind of went along with the program, so once--you know, you know, it was just something that I had to do and I did it until I, I could say I didn't have to do it anymore, which is when I went off to college [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania].  Looking back on it, you know, I'm glad that they took the time to involve me in it because while I'm not a religious person today, I'm--I consider myself a spiritual person, and I appreciate the, the time that I spent in that environment because I learned a lot about how to conduct one's self as an adult. I got to see people who had, or who aspired to have high morals, values, which I think was important, and I learned some social skills as well, from being in those, in those groups.  I learned a lot about the Bible that--some of which I still retain.  So, I'm very grateful to my grandmother, even though I can recall times sitting next to her on--in the pew and her grabbing my thigh and pinching me with, with so much pressure I thought I was gonna pass out, you know.  But, you know, I appreciate her for it, and sometimes I regret that I haven't been the same sort of disciplinarian with my children about church because I think they miss a lot from not, you know, being involved to that degree.
Speaker 1: So you were active in the church all the way up until at least seventeen (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Until I went to college. Yeah, when I went to college, it was all over.
Story_ID: 595869
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So let's talk about that period--the transition from high school [Rufus King High School; Rufus King International High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] to college.  You got this scholarship to go to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I got the scholarship to go to Lincoln, and the story there is my parents [Lee Terrell Stone and Raymond Stone, Sr.] put me on the train in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] to go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: And this is what year?
Speaker 2: This is 1964--September, 1964.  And it was my first train ride, and I--it's so funny because it's such a big contrast to me sending my kids to college, you know.  When I sent--I've sent three so far, and it's always been a big production, you know; I've gone with them, they're in the car, you know.  And I remember on the train ride to Philadelphia, I'm by my--I'm seventeen years old, and I'm--the reason they didn't go with me was 'cause they couldn't afford it; it was quite--just that simple.  And, you know, they had to work, they had things to do, and they--you know, they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember that day when they brought you to the train station?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I re- that was very vividly; I mean I remember--you know, I had--I remember what I had on and--
Speaker 1: What were you wearing?
Speaker 2: I was overdressed; I had on an Italian knit sweater and it was September; it was, it was hot--it was still hot, and I had on a, a corduroy kind of like a, a kangaroo hat, trying to look cool and hard, and I remember arriving at the train--the, the train ride was pretty uneventful.  There was a trumpet player, a musician, on the train and he was--back then you could stand between the trains, and he was standing between the trains playing his--between the cars on the train--playing his trumpet, and I remember hanging out with him for a bit and playing his trumpet for a bit, and winding up in Philadelphia, and then trying to figure out how to get from Philadelphia to Lincoln because Lincoln is kind of, you know, in a small town, probably, I don't know, ten miles outside of Philadelphia--fifteen miles outside of Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: On that train ride were, were the train cars segregated?
Speaker 2: No, no.  This was '64 [1964].  No, I walked (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A lot of times traveling from South to North they would be, but--
Speaker 2: Right.  This was from Milwaukee to Philadelphia--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --so no, it wasn't segregated at all.  It was a lonely ride, I was scared, you know, and then getting from Philadelphia to Lincoln was an issue 'cause I--there was a bus (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you--first of all you arrive--did you arrive at 30th Street Station in Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: I think so, I think--it was either 30th Street or Broad Street.  Isn't there a Broad Street Station [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't remember which one.
Story_ID: 595870
Speaker 1: Did you have any impressions of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?  Did you see Philly?
Speaker 2: A little bit.  I remember stepping outside and try--and this guy was trying to con me, you know; he realized I was from out of town, and he came up with some scam about he had just found a wallet and he wanted me to go with him to, to return the wallet to its rightful owner, and, and he was sure we were gonna get a reward.  And it was so--he was, he was very persuasive, but I remember when he came up to me I said, "I know this is a scam," you know (laughter), and--but I let him go through his whole little spiel and then I told him, you know, "No," I had to, I had to catch a bus, so he, he could keep all the money, you know.  And then I caught a bus from Philadelphia to Oxford, or to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], which was right outside of Oxford, Pennsylvania.
Story_ID: 595871
Speaker 1: At that time, Lincoln was an all-male school, and I think they had just admitted their first female--first females the year before, so it was changing from an all-male school to a co-ed school.
Speaker 2: What were your first impressions of Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 1: I was intimidated.  I was the only person there from Milwaukee [Wisconsin], and after the first few days, I realized that everybody had more or less segregated themselves into what city they were from, so the Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] guys and the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] guys and the New York [New York] people.  And I ran into one guy who was from Chicago [Illinois], so we kind of hooked.
Speaker 2: Who was that?
Speaker 1: What was his name?  Tony Adams was his name--Anthony Adams.
Speaker 2: And at this time, Lincoln was known as a prestigious black school [HBCU].
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I didn't know that, but after I got there, you know, I realized, you know, Langston Hughes and Thurgood Marshall, and Kwame Nkrumah, and--they had a long list of distinguished people who had attended or graduated--Gil Scott-Heron, you know.  So, yeah, and the--after a few days, the faculty--you know, you realized how seriously they took their mission, and it was a pretty integrated faculty; I would say probably half and half, African American and, and Caucasian.  And it was a great experience, although I didn't--I have to admit I didn't take it seriously; I was into the partying, so I was on the road every weekend.  I got to--was in New York, I was in Philadelphia, I was in Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 2: Where you go--you guys were road tripping.
Speaker 1: Road tripping every weekend, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And where were you going?  To clubs in these cities?
Speaker 1: --parties, clubs--you know.
Speaker 2: So you, you got rid of your nerd hat in high sc- in college.
Speaker 1: I tried to, you know; I tried to hang out, and I, I hung out pretty successfully (laughter), I have to admit.
Speaker 2: Did they have an indoctrination period the first couple of weeks (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they--they did, orienta- freshman orientation; you had to wear a beanie, they had little green beanies with an orange thing on the top, and the freshman hazing; it was interesting.  It was mild, you know, it was more humiliation and ridicule, no--nothing physical, so--
Speaker 2: And you mentioned the university was going through a transition from--
Speaker 1: From all-male to admitting some women, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How many women?
Speaker 1: Very few.  I think there might have been three or four in my class, or half a dozen at the most, and a half a dozen in the year before.
Speaker 2: Out of how many students in your class?
Speaker 1: That's a good question.  I, I wanna say a couple hundred.
Story_ID: 595872
Speaker 1: So tell me about some of your teachers.
Speaker 2: My favorite teacher at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] was Charles Hamilton [Charles V. Hamilton].  Charles Hamilton wrote a book called, 'Black Power' ['Black Power: The Politics of Liberation in America'] with Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], and he was my political science teacher, and he made me--he was the first African American teacher that I had who was an intellectual in the, in the purest sense; I mean he lived for ideas and communicating ideas, and so he, he just really changed the way I thought about books and ideas, and the, the intellectual passion.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of his classes?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I, I--he was a great teacher, a very passionate teacher.
Speaker 1: Share--can you give me an example?
Speaker 2: Well, he--you know, if you weren't prepared, he was extremely disap- he would give you a look of just sheer disappointment, and a look of, you know, disbelief that you would come into his classroom not being prepared to contribute.  And he was a very sarcastic--he could be very sarcastic and, you know, he could belittle people, and humiliate people and, and he did it, but he usually--I know he did it with me a couple times; he just, just, just expressed his disappointment in me that I would come to his class not having read the material, or being prepared to contribute to the discussion.  But, you know, I'd go see him later and he would tell me what he told me.  He said, "I'm disappointed with you because you have potential and I expect better from you, and if you're not gonna give me better, then you shouldn't--you should drop the class."
Speaker 1: Now, were his black power philosophies coming out even at this--
Speaker 2: Even at that point, he was beginning to develop the--his theories.
Speaker 1: So what kinds of things was he telling you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he was more about political power, you know--the, the need for people to coalesce around issues and ideas, as opposed to around party.
Speaker 1: What were some of the issues and ideas he brought up in class?
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean did he talk about racial injustice?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot, yeah; his--the course that I took was basic political science 101, and so he talked about, you know, voting, the importance of voting, the history of racial--of--the history of excluding blacks from the process, the importance of participating in the process now that we have the legal ability to do so, community organizing--he talked a lot about that, building coalitions from the bottom up as opposed to from the top down, connecting with other communities--white--poor, white people, other minorities, et cetera.  He was a great teacher.
Story_ID: 595873
Speaker 1: Then I had another course, an economics course.  In fact, I--after I took the economics course, I decided then to major in economics.  I don't remember the professor's name, but he was just so infused with economics as the solution to all problems, you know.  Economic theory could solve all problems was, was one of his catchphrases, which I later learned not to be true, but at the time, he was very convincing and very persuasive.
Speaker 2: So, what was so appealing to you about economics and economic theory?
Speaker 1: Well, I think the math, you know; the, the ability to use the numbers to create a theory of behavior--the ability to translate numbers and statistics into a theory of behavior, it just was fascinating to me.  And to analyze behavior based on a mathematical equations would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What kind of behaviors were you translating?
Speaker 1: Well, it was basic--
Speaker 2: Crime rate, and things like that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, crime rate--basic economics, you know; crime rate, he would--you--he would--we would do the market theory, you know--theory of the marketplace, some Adam Smith stuff and--it was just--I don't know, it just opened my eyes to, you know, I guess issues that I had not focused on, so--
Speaker 2: Did you excel in economics?
Speaker 1: No.  I didn't ec- I--my two years at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] was very, a mediocre academic performance; I didn't take it seriously.
Story_ID: 595874
Speaker 1: Like I said, I was on the road every weekend.  I really got a good grounding in the geography of the East Coast (laughter) and, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So tell me about some of the social situations.
Speaker 1: Well, we'd go to--we'd go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], we'd go to Morgan State [Morgan College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Okay, so you went to Howard in the mid-1960s.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: What do you recall?  What was the social scene like there--political, social?
Speaker 1: Well, we were--for us it was all about the party, so we would, you know, go to Howard to find the party--where the party was; how we did, you know, little, little, little getting out into D.C. [Washington, D.C.], but mostly it was--you know, we're there for the weekend; we get in, we drive up Friday night and then we try to get back in time for classes on Monday morning, you know--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Cough).
Speaker 1: --so I'm probably being too honest.
Story_ID: 595875
Speaker 1: You were talking about your party instinct during your days at Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm, I'm not that proud of it, but during those two years, that's pretty much what I did was explore the East Coast and--
Speaker 1: Did you belong to a fraternity?
Speaker 2: I started Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], but I didn't complete it.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: That's a long story (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Private story?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah; you don't wanna hear about it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: So tell me about--what was the--you were interested, initially, in Omega Psi Phi.
Speaker 1: Yeah; I think the people that I was more associated with were in, in that fraternity, and there were a group of us, maybe four or five of us, that decided to pledge together and we did, and at that, time my sensibilities were not such that I was ready to be subjected (laughter) to a, a serious hazing so we, we decided to, to try it maybe later, and then I never did.
Speaker 2: What were the various fraternities known for on campus?
Speaker 1: There was Omega Psi Phi (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they were known for what, partying?
Speaker 1: I think they were more regular, social, but they had a serious side.  The, the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], and Sigmas [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity], I think, were the four fraternities that--
Speaker 2: And what were--so the frater- the Kappas were known as--
Speaker 1: Oh, you know, you'd, you'd have to ask somebody who's in 'em to, to describe (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, 'cause I know some campuses have said Kappas are the pretty boys, the Alphas are the smart ones (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 2: --but there was not that division at Lincoln?
Speaker 1: I'm sure there was but, but I--it's been so long ago (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 595876
Speaker 1: Did you belong to any clubs on campus [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I was in the choir.  We had a--kind of a world class choir that used to go around the country and give concerts.  We used to do a lot of the Langston Hughes--song, poetry--you know, 'Field of Rivers' [sic. 'The Negro Speaks of Rivers,' Langston Hughes]; it was a great choir, and several of the members went on to, you know, become fairly famous.  The (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who?
Speaker 2: The Delfonics, who were on campus at the time.
Speaker 1: Were they called The Delfonics (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They weren't The Delfonics then, but--
Speaker 1: What were they called back then?
Speaker 2: I don't know--even know if they had a name, you know; they were, they were in the--Lincoln's choir, and they went on to form The Delfonics, you know, later.
Speaker 1: Were these students who were known for their singing ability?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were good; they were very--they were very good. And what else was I in? I was in the choir (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you tra- where did you travel with the choir?
Speaker 2: Oh, we went mostly on the East Coast, Jersey [New Jersey], New York [New York], Baltimore [Maryland], D.C. [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Were you performing before black crowds?
Speaker 2: Pretty much, yeah, black crowds.  We did a couple concerts at churches, auditoriums.  The choir director [O. Anderson Fuller], whose name escapes me now, was, you know, a fairly well recognized figure in the music--academic music world; I mean he--I think he had a Ph.D., and he took himself very seriously and he took the choir very seriously, and he was excellent--he was very good, and he kind of booked the choir.  That--I think that was my major extra- extracurricular activity on campus.  I did a little intramural basketball, played a lot of pool in the poolroom.
Story_ID: 595877
Speaker 1: And you were on academic scholarship for engineering?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't have an engineering program, so it was just a general academic scholarship.
Speaker 1: And you chose economics as your major (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I chose economics as my major my second year, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how did you progress?  You left after two years?
Speaker 2: I left after two years (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year did you leave?
Speaker 2: Well, I did my freshman and sophomore year, and then I didn't come back for my junior year, so that would be '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Was that by choice?
Speaker 2: That was by choice.  The summer of '66 [1966]--summer of '65 [1965], I got a job with a major manufacturing company in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], and it was Allen Bradley Company [Rockwell Automation, Inc.] was the name of the company, and the job paid very well.  And then I convinced my parents [Lee Terrell Stone and Raymond Stone, Sr.] to let me keep the job and I would go to school at night; that was my bargain 'cause--and they said, "Fine," so I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why did you decide to do that since you were having so much fun at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Money--you know, just the idea--you know; I was getting paid, you know, what I thought was a great salary.  The--I figured I could go to school at, at night, get the salary, you know, and I was--had convinced myself that I was a clothes horse, so I was, you know--needed to dress appropriately.
Story_ID: 595878
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So even before you decided to leave Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], once again the height of civil rights--Brown v. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], all that kind of stuff--were you learning about these cases?  And did Thurgood Marshall, himself a graduate of Lincoln, come back to speak?
Speaker 2: No, he--not--I don't recall him ever coming back to speak.  There was some activity, some civil rights activities, in the school.  In fact, there was a rumor that there was a group called RAM, the Revolutionary Action Movement, had a cell at Lincoln, and I was never involved in it but, you know, there was percolation and activity about being more proactive and participating in the--in political movements and process.  I think I was a little naive at, at that point; I hadn't really progressed.  Although my interest was, was up, I hadn't made the next leap.
Speaker 1: Was Hamilton [Charles V. Hamilton] at all involved in RAM leadership?
Speaker 2: You know, they say, "Those who know don't tell, and those who tell don't know." It was that, it was that kind of activity--because later, some of 'em got indicted for some of their activities.  I, I--you know, I think Hamilton may have been involved as an advisor or as a, a mentor, but it was a student--more of a student run organization.
Story_ID: 595879
Speaker 1: So, I came back to Milwaukee [Wisconsin], worked full-time, and went to school part-time [at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and then I got drafted in '67 [1967]--July of '67 [1967], and the question at that time was, you know, should I go or not?  And I think Ali had just decided that he wasn't going, so that was the big topic around that time, and--
Speaker 2: So what do you remember thinking when you saw that move taken by Muhammad Ali?
Speaker 1: I remember thinking how courageous, you know--how outstanding, how, you know, brave, what guts it must have taken.  And a lot of--I had a--remember having a lot of conversations with my peers about it, and then when I got my notice, you know, the question was, "Well, what are you gonna do?"  You know.  And I remember talking to my parents [Lee Terrell Stone and Raymond Stone, Sr.] about it, and ultimately I went.
Speaker 2: What were your options?
Speaker 1: Well, that was the question, you know.  It appeared the options were to go to jail or to go to the [U.S. military] service; those were the only two options (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But not go to Canada.
Speaker 1: I didn't know about that; I found out about that later.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: In fact--yeah--so I got drafted and went to Fort Campbell, Kentucky for basic training, and then to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What do you--
Speaker 1: --Fort Polk, Louisiana for advanced infantry training, which they called jungle school.
Speaker 2: What do you remember about those early days of training?
Speaker 1: Well, the shocking--the, the eye opener to me was I realized that, you know, I was a little bit older and more mature than most of the people that I was in basic training and jungle school with, and I realized that the--even some of the drill sergeants were relatively uneducated.  So, that, that's kind of what I remember about that.  And then, you know, when I went to jungle school, I probably got in the best shape of my life physically.  Mentally, I was probably still lacking--sorely lacking, but then they gave us our orders at the end of infantry training, and everybody was wondering where they were gonna go, you know, where--and some people were sent to Germany--a few people--and some people were sent other places and--but most of us got the orders to go to Vietnam.  And I remember being somewhat--I guess chagrined, that's probably a good word, because I thought that given the fact that I had two years of college or more, you know, that they should have taken that into consideration (laughter), from the fool that I was.  And I just kind of remembered being--is--I thought, isn't it odd that I'm in infantry--I'm an infantry person?  I got two years of college, you know?  Shouldn't they put me in the clerical division or something?
Speaker 2: Or officer training school [Officer Candidate School] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Officer training--well, they did offer me to go into officer training, but that would have meant I had to stay in an extra year or two, and I was pretty determined to get in and get out.
Story_ID: 595880
Speaker 1: So, we got the orders to go to Vietnam and--story--the funny story there was, we get the orders to go to Vietnam from Louisiana, but we're gonna get about a month off to go home for the holidays because this is December of '67 [1967], and we're supposed to report to Seattle [Washington] in January of '8 [1968], so we got three full weeks off.  So, those of us who were coming back to the Midwest--there were about eight or nine of us, and we took a bus from Fort Polk, Louisiana, and we were gonna catch a plane out of Houston [Texas] and I think we went to maybe--some small town in Louisiana to wait for a transport to take us to Houston.  So we're, we're dropped off; there're six or seven of us, all of us going to Chicago [Illinois] to catch flights to other places.  And so we're standing on the ground, and we look up and there's a bar, you know, within walking distance--big sign, beer sign out in front.  So somebody says, "Well, let's go and have a couple beers while we're waiting on our transport to the Houston airport."  So we all walk in this bar, and we're all in our uniforms, fatigues, with our, you know, duffle bags and whatnot, and it's kind of like a country western bar, and there's a huge table--a round table--and we all sit around this table; there's six or seven of us, and it was just like right out of a Western movie, you know; we walk in, and everything gets quiet, you know; I mean you could almost hear a pin drop.  And we sit around this, this table, and the waitress walks up and she says to one of the other guys--I'm the only black guy there; there's six or seven guys.  She says to the white guy, she says, "We can't serve you guys."  And the white guys look at her like, what, are you crazy, you know.  "We just finished advanced infantry training, we're on our way to Vietnam; what do you mean you can't serve us?"  And she says, "Well, as long as you--as long as he's here, we can't serve you."  And so the white guys, you know, they all look at me like--they can't believe it, you know, 'cause they're from Chicago, the Midwest, or whatever.  And so they wanna get violent and turn the place out and so, you know, I'm saying, "No, we're, we're not gonna do that," (laughter), "because I'll be the one who winds up going to jail, you know."  So we walk out of the club--the bar--complete silence, and nobody says another word until the transport comes.  So, we're on the plane or--the transport comes, takes us to Hou- to the Houston airport, we get on the plane; one of the--we're all going to Chicago, and then a couple of us are going to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and, and other places.  One of the white guys on the plane comes and sits with me in my seat on the airplane, and he says, "Look, I'm not going to Vietnam, I'm going to Canada and then I'm going to Paris [France].  If you wanna go, call this number."  And he gives me this number to call, and then he goes back to his seat.  So, when I get home to Milwaukee, you know, after decompressing for a couple days, I tell my parents, you know, what happened in this bar, and I tell 'em about this number that I have to call, and I give it to my parents and, you know--so we--I remember sitting at the kitchen table, and my father [Raymond Stone, Sr.], he has worked himself up into such an emotion that he's almost, he wants to cry, you know.  And my mother [Lee Terrell Stone], she's just in a complete consternation; she doesn't know what--so I said, "Well, here's the thing, you know; I can go to Canada and maybe France, or I can go to Vietnam.  What should I do?"  You know.  And, you know, it was just so difficult for them to discuss it, you know; they were just like dumbfounded.  And they never did tell me what they thought I should do, you know; they kind of talked about the pros and the cons and, you know, "You may not make it to Canada, you might not make it to France, you could get locked up.  If you go to Vietnam you could get killed or maimed or hurt."  It's a, you know, tough decision.  And--well, ultimately I dec- I--you know, I went to Vietnam, but it was--I still think about that a lot.
Story_ID: 595881
Speaker 1: What were your first impressions of Vietnam?  Where were you?
Speaker 2: Let's see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year was this?
Speaker 2: This was January 5th of 1968 to January 4th or 5th of 1969.  My first impression getting off the plane was just the heat in January; it was really, really hot and, you know, it was all downhill from there.  It was, it was--worst experience of my life but, you know, what I got out of it was that, you know, if I could survive that, I could survive anything, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, and I know that it's tough to go back--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to Vietnam, but is there an incident that would--that could document the difficulty?
Speaker 2: Well, when I got there, my goal was to--I was assigned to infantry, and my goal was not to be in infantry, so the first thing I did when I got my bearings was to try to figure out how I could get out of being in, in the infantry, and I went to a--one of the clerical payroll processing units, talked to one of the officers there, and told him I had two and a half years of college, you know--I could type--find me something.  And he did, he found me a little--a payroll clerk job that I had for about two or three weeks.  And then his--for some reason, he said I had to go back to my regular unit.  So, as I was going back to my regular unit, I passed a helicopter unit, and I went in there and talked to one of the officers there, and I said, "Look, I am fantastic with a machine gun.  I--you know, I got all these awards during basic training about my ability to handle a machine gun, you know.  I know you need machine gunners on the helicopters, you know.  I'm not afraid of flying, give me a shot."  And he did, so I became a machine gunner on a helicopter from, you know, that point on, for about six months and, you know, I flew the gunships which are the ships that have the big rocket launchers on the side, and a big machine gun in the nose, and then you have your two machine gunners who are hanging out the doors on the side, so they fire the rockets and they shoot hand grenades and, you know, this--that's why they're called gunships.  So I did that for a few months, and then I was on the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you did that for a few months, so you would--what was that experience like?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: We'd go out on missions, we'd go out on missions usually escorting other helicopters who were gonna try to pick people up or bring 'em back, or we'd go out looking for the VC [Vietcong] units, and then bomb and shoot.
Story_ID: 595882
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was that difficult for you emotionally, or did you have to detach?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was very--it was hard for me, and over time, you learn how to detach yourself from it.
Speaker 1: What was the difficulty?  What was so hard for you?
Speaker 2: I think--well, for me it was fear; just the fear of getting shot down out of the air, you know, because, you know, once--when you start flying, people shoot at you, and you can--sometimes you can see the bullets coming because they're tracers; every fourth bullet is a tracer, and the--and--which is a bullet that creates a visual image.  And the reason they use tracers when they're shooting in the air is so they can calibrate the, the firing, so you can see the, the bullets coming.  And a helicopter is a fairly delicate, dainty aircraft (background noise) in the sense that if it--you know, one of the blades is struck or something, it can cause the, the pilot to lose control.
Speaker 1: Any, any close calls for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a number of close calls; I had a couple people who were shot down and whose planes were shot down and died.
Speaker 1: Friends of yours?
Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't say friends--colleagues--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --co-workers.  And then I also flew on the scout ships which are the little small bubble helicopters; they used to have one pilot and one machine gunner, and they fly like down the rivers, and they really kind of looking for--it's a scouting mission, and then you radio back to the gunships and the others.  And then I did the alert missions, which are like your long range patrols where you send a helicopter out to pick people up who are out in the jungle, and bring 'em back in.
Speaker 1: Was your regiment pretty diverse?
Speaker 2: All the pilots were white; I don't think I ever saw a black helicopter pilot in Vietnam--maybe I saw one.  Most of the crew members were white.  In my unit there were two black crew members, myself and Anderson Murf [ph.], a guy from Indianapolis [Indiana] who I still keep in touch with.  Most of those guys were, were white as well.  The--you know, most of the black troops in Vietnam were in the infantry.
Speaker 1: And why did you resist the infantry?
Speaker 2: Because, you know, I knew if they--that's where they were putting most of the black people; that was the most dangerous units, and I didn't wanna be in it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were there for--
Speaker 2: I was there for a year, but I probably only flew for like six months.  So after about six months, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, I think, that year; there were a lot of riots that summer.  We'd get the news kind of late.
Speaker 1: How did you get the news about Martin Luther King's assassination?
Speaker 2: I think somebody wrote me a letter, sent me a newspaper clipping.
Speaker 1: What was your reaction?
Speaker 2: Sadness and anger.  There were some protests on the base.  Eventually, I just decided to stop flying and, you know, really, I got reprimanded and censured, and whatever.
Speaker 1: Why did you stop flying?
Speaker 2: I just didn't feel--there, there were a number of reasons.  One was the, the fear factor, I have to admit.  Two, it was the, the political situation.  I mean I'm reading about all this stuff that's going on in the states, and it just felt relatively incongruous to--for me to be this good soldier that I--and I had been a--I had been a very good soldier for like six months, and I just stopped.
Speaker 1: That was your act of rebellion?
Speaker 2: I guess so.
Story_ID: 595883
Speaker 1: So you came home from Vietnam in--
Speaker 2: January of '09 [sic. 1969].
Speaker 1: What'd you do next?
Speaker 2: They (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wait, so how are you received when you came home in '69 [1969]?
Speaker 2: You know, I think--not very well.  I mean, you know, there were, there were no parades or (laughter) welcome home parties, or anything like that; I mean my parents [Lee Terrell Stone and Raymond Stone, Sr.] were glad to see me, obviously.  My peers--you, you know, you just kind of came back and tried to pick up the pieces.  I didn't encounter any real negativity.  Some of my more revolutionary friends kind of were disappointed that I had gone, and wanted to see what I was gonna do now that I was back, so--
Speaker 1: And so what did you do next?
Speaker 2: Well, for six months, I went to Fort Hood [Texas], and I was in a tank unit; after that, I got out, I got back in school, I got a job as a janitor working third shift at a--University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and then I got back in school, so I would--I was a janitor at night and then I was a student during the day, which was kind of interesting.
Speaker 1: Did you get a discount on your tuition?
Speaker 2: No, there was a, there was a work study position so--or a temporary position, so I just got paid.  I majored in political science, and I got involved in--a little bit in the--there was a group called the Topographical Research Center [Black People's Topographical Research Center] which--I got involved with them in terms of presenting demographic, geographic info and data to the public about--I guess what we call the racial dynamic of the United States of America, so that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the, what was the climate like at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee in the late '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: It was like most college campuses, very political--a lot of political activity.
Speaker 1: A lot of anti-war [Vietnam War] protests?
Speaker 2: A lot of anti-war protests and a lot of Afrocentric activity among the African American students.  There was one particular professor, Rocky Taylor, Tejumola Ologboni, who was a poet, taught creative writing, and I got, took several of his classes and he was very helpful.
Story_ID: 595884
Speaker 1: You mentioned the anti-Vietnam War protests on campus [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  Describe what you saw, and how were you feeling as of then?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, when I got out of the [U.S. military] service, it took me a while to get my bearings because 1968 was such a--a lot happened in that year in the states, and so part of coming back was to--was trying to catch up to everybody else.  Part of it--so that was one, one--you know, tension, I guess.
Speaker 1: So, in what--in what ways were you catching up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, just trying to figure out where people were because people were in a lot--psychologically, politically, they were in a lot--they were in a different space in, in July of '69 [1969] than they were in January of '68 [1968].  They were in a--you know, a lot had happened in terms of assassinations, in terms of riots, in terms of the discourse.
Speaker 1: In Milwaukee [Wisconsin], had there been any riots associated with--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, there, there was a riot in Milwaukee in that summer, July of '68 [1968], while I was in Vietnam, and people sent me stories about that as well.  The Black Panther Party was on the upswing in Milwaukee when I came back.  The Black Muslim movement was on the upswing when I came back.  There were a lot of others--Black People's Topographical Research Center was another sort of sect that was trying to involve itself in the--in, in the politics.
Speaker 1: Was Milwaukee divided politically at this point, racially and politically?
Speaker 2: It was still a very segregated city, and the black population was trying to assert itself, so yeah, it was a very controversial period.  And then, you know, I'm coming back really with a lot of psychological issues myself, as a result of being in Vietnam for a year.  So, it took me quite a while, really, to get back to where I thought I was normal.
Story_ID: 595885
Speaker 1: Describe your, your psychological state.
Speaker 2: Well, it, it's kind of like being out of tune with your body, you know?  I mean it's kind of like an out of body experience; you see yourself going through the routines of daily life, but you're not really all there.  I--you know.  So it, it took me a while; it took me quite a while.
Speaker 1: Were there certain events in Vietnam that you could point to that helped create that kind of fragmentation?
Speaker 2: I don't know if there was specific events as much as it was the process.  Being there for that year, you know; the Tet Offensive in, in '68 [1968] was a very big event and I had been in the country maybe two months when--or a month and a half when the Tet Offensive hit.
Speaker 1: But the process of watching death, you know, watching colleagues lose their lives--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that, too.  But I think for me it was more, it was more the whole thing; I can't point to a specific event and say that was, that was it; it was more the whole, you know, seeing--you know, I got close to a lot of Vietnamese people, you know I really--to the extent that I could, got into the culture a bit.  I kind of liked Vietnamese people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind of friendships?
Speaker 2: Oh, just, you know, I used to go into, into the local--some of the local towns.  I was in the central highlands, which is in--Pleiku [Vietnam] was the big city and I--you know, after I stopped flying, I would go into the town, eat, you know, meet people; there were some bars that kind of catered to African Americans, you know, and yeah, I kind of--and actually I kind of appreciated the people and their culture, and what they were going through.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your Vietnamese friends?
Speaker 2: I don't remember names but just, you know--and I would--I don't know if I'd call 'em friends, but relationships, acquaintances, people that I knew.  So, coming back, it just, you know, it's just like--I don't know--a broken mirror or something when I came back, is a good way to describe it.  I mean I recognized myself and other people, but it was different.
Story_ID: 595886
Speaker 1: And so for me, you know, I, I got a job as soon as I could, and I had several, but the, the--eventually I got the, the janitorial job, and then I got it--back in school.
Speaker 2: Now, were your parents [Lee Terrell Stone and Raymond Stone, Sr.] excited that you were back in school?  And were they upset that you had left Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] and decided to go to the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, they were very upset when I, when I didn't go back to Lincoln.  They, they thought that, you know, the part-time school and job thing was not gonna work, that a--and, and they were right, you know; I should have stayed at Lincoln.  If I'd stayed at Lincoln, I might not have never--I might have never gone to Vietnam, I don't know.
Speaker 2: How did your parents express their disappointment (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, they, they just told me I--you know, was making a mistake, and they didn't think it was the right thing to do.
Speaker 2: Were you active at the University of Wisconsin in clubs and organizations?
Speaker 1: Not really.  I pretty much did my school work, I had my job, and then I had my political activities on the side, so I wasn't really active in college life at all (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Describe your--
Story_ID: 595887
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Describe your political activities.
Speaker 2: Well, the main thing was this Black People's Topographical Research Center; that was my major focus from probably a few months after I got back [from Vietnam] for about a year, until--
Speaker 1: And that was a political group (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was a very political group involved in educating the community about the geography, urban renewal, voter rights and education, economics of capitalism in the--as it related to the black community, the educa- school educational system, et cetera.
Story_ID: 595888
Speaker 1: Do you remember the leadership at the time, the University of Wisconsin administrators?
Speaker 2: There was one African American guy who was, who was very generous with me, and his name was, I think, James Bates [ph.], and he was in the dean--he was like an assistant dean, or assistant vice president, and when I came back to UWM [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], I met with him and he, you know, expressed a desire for me to come back, assuming that I was more serious about my studies than I had been while--before I left, and I promised him that I would be, and he kind of encouraged me and followed me through, and in fact I was much more focused academically than, than I had been before I left, and we kept in touch over the years, even after I left.  He was a very important person for me.
Speaker 1: Were there other professors?
Speaker 2: Well, I mentioned Rocky Taylor [Tejumola Ologboni], the creative writing poet; he was very encouraging about my writing.  I was doing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind of writing were you doing?
Speaker 2: I was doing a lot of short stories, some about Vietnam related issues, that he encouraged me to do.
Speaker 1: Were you writing short stories about Vietnam?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What, what kind of stories?
Speaker 2: Oh, stories about what I saw in terms of the segregation, the drug--drugs, drug use.
Speaker 1: What kind of segregation did you see?
Speaker 2: Well, it was--you know, as I said, you know, most of the black troops were concentrated in infantry positions and infantry divisions, and you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then the drug use.
Speaker 2: Well, that was pretty rampant across the board, you know.  Vietnam was--drug use was very prolific in terms of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind of drugs are we talking?
Speaker 2: Oh, we're talking marijuana, we're talking opium--all the opiates.  And then they had their own brand of psycho- I guess drugs that people would get from pharmacists, or pharmacies, and use hallucinogenics and stuff (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, are officers just looking the other way when this is going on, or are they participating?
Speaker 2: Pretty much.  They were looking the other way, and some were participating.  It was, it was rampant.
Story_ID: 595889
Speaker 1: And you graduated with what major from the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: Political science, January of '72 [1972].  January of '72 [1972] I graduated B.A. in political science, and then I got a job as an economist for the City of Milwaukee [Wisconsin], and I started grad school in their urban affairs department at, at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee.  I started grad school in the urban affairs department, I got married in April of '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Who did you marry?
Speaker 2: I married Anquinette Gathing, G-A-T-H-I-N-G [Anquinette Gathing Stone (ph.)].
Speaker 1: And where did you two meet?
Speaker 2: We met before I went to Vietnam--before I went in the, in the [U.S.] Army at a social club--a dance, and she stuck with me while I was in the service.  We corresponded a lot, and when I came home, we got married in April of '72 [1972].
Story_ID: 595890
Speaker 1: Somebody sent me an announcement about law school.  The University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] was announcing a legal education opportunity program, as many schools were at that time--post-riots--and they were trying to recruit people from minority communities to apply to law school, and so I applied to--I only applied to one school, University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin Law School, Madison, Wisconsin], and I took the Law School Admission Test [LSAT], got accepted, and started law school in September of '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: So your grades must have been pretty good.
Speaker 1: My grades were excellent post-Vietnam; they were excellent.  One thing Vietnam did to me was impress upon me the importance of education and--or re-impressed upon me, I guess.  So, yeah, my grades were good.
Speaker 2: So, what classes did you take in law school?
Speaker 1: Well, I started law school in September '72 [1972]; the first year con law [constitutional law], criminal law, torts, contracts.  I had my first child in October of '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: And the name of that child?
Speaker 1: The name of that child is Sokoni.
Speaker 2: Spell it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) S-O-K-O-N-I, Malika, M-A-L-I-K-A, Stone [Sokoni Stone]--daughter.  And then I had my second child my third year of law school; that's Rahman, R-A-H-M-A-N, Nkosi, N-K-O-S-I, Stone [Rahman Stone].
Speaker 2: So these are Afrocentric names.
Speaker 1: Yes, they are (laughter) and, you know, the reflection of the times, I guess.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But law school was great.  I, I loved law school.  It was an intellectual feast, you know.  I got a--I was working during law school, I got several jobs.  I had a job as--working in the law, law library, and then my second and third year, I had a job teaching legal writing to first year law students so, you know, law school was a great time for me; I had my two kids during that period.
Speaker 2: Now, a lot of people describe their first year of law school as difficult and traumatic (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --especially because of the Socratic Method.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Was that jarring to you?
Speaker 1: No.  But, you know, I'm coming from Vietnam so, you know, it's all a matter of perspective and context.  I thought it was great; it was a lot of fun, it was three of the best years of my life, was being in law school.
Story_ID: 595891
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was your favorite course?
Speaker 2: My favorite course was evidence; it's probably--I got my--one of my lowest grades in the course, but it was my favorite course.
Speaker 1: Who taught that course?
Speaker 2: This guy name Tuerkheimer--Francis Tuerkheimer, Turkenheimer [sic. Frank Tuerkheimer], who was a former U.S. attorney, and taught evidence for many years at Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin Law School, Madison, Wisconsin].
Speaker 1: So, what was it about that class that really spoke to you?
Speaker 2: I guess the idea of, you know, how do you prove something?  What are the rules of proof?  You know.  I kind of--had kind of figured out by that point that I wanted to be a trial lawyer, so I know I, I needed to know how--how do you prove something in court?  You know; what are the rules?  You know.  What are the theories of--behind the rules?
Speaker 1: What do you remember from, from his course in particular?
Speaker 2: I remember at--you know, at one point in his course, you had to stand up in his course, and ask questions of a witness, and have somebody object to the questions that you were asked--asking, based on the rules of evidence.  And I remember how afraid most of the people in the class were when called upon and they had to perform this activity, and I remember how calm I was when I had to do it, and so it kind of let me know, well this is probably what you can do, probably what you should do (laughter) since, you know, it doesn't seem to strike as much fear in you as everybody else; maybe this is a--and so that's what I really remember about that class.  He taught it in a Socratic--used a Socratic Method but he also allowed for simulation, and I thought it was--kind of let me know that there was something I could do and that's something that I might wanna do.
Story_ID: 595892
Speaker 1: Was BALSA [Black American Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)] getting started at the time?
Speaker 2: BALSA was, was getting started at the time; I was the--I became the president of BALSA my second year, and during my second year, there's this big picture.  We had a press conference outside the dean off- dean's office demanding more black law professors, more black students, and--I'll find this picture--but it--there were about twenty of us get--reading our press statement and answering questions and, and it was a very high profile event but it was--later, we realized--or I realized--that the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin Law School, Madison, Wisconsin] probably had one of the most--the best policies as it related to admitting African American students and hiring African American faculty in the whole country.  Well, I didn't know that then (laughter), and there were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How many?
Speaker 2: --there were only one or two on the faculty at Wisconsin, but back in 1972, you know, two black faculty was a lot for any law school in the country.  But, you know, we were naive and ignorant and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What about black students?  How many in your class?
Speaker 2: Black students?  We probably had, you know, thirty or forty, you know; I would say close to 10 percent of the student population, which was very good for law schools at that time.  But we were young and, you know, trying to be active and political, and trying to do our thing, so--yeah, BALSA was very important to me during law school as well.  We went to the national conventions, we tried to do some community education and work with some of the local community organizations and groups in, in Madison--the local NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] chapter, for example.  So we were pretty--we were a pretty active group.
Speaker 1: Did you offer any legal counsel to residents, the poor residents of Milwaukee [Wisconsin] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we started a--we did a--we were--most of us were involved in, in the political program at the law school that provided legal services and assistance to people who couldn't afford to hire private lawyers.
Speaker 1: So, what do you recall about that experience?
Speaker 2: It was fantastic.  I remember representing a young white guy who was charged with disorderly conduct. Now, I remember first meeting him and I remember the expression on his face was like, "Should I let this black guy represent me?"  I remember--I could see his brain (laughter), you know.  And, you know, we got to know each other and we talked it through, and I think he was satisfied.
Speaker 1: What was his case?
Speaker 2: It was a disorderly conduct case.  He had--the police arrested him for--you know, he was in the middle of the street after a, an athletic event, and arrested him and charged him with disorderly conduct.  But we won the case because we argued to the judge that, you know, the laws of disorderly conduct has to be--in some states, there has to be two or three or more people who are disturbed and, and the, the, the officer couldn't prove that anybody was disturbed but it--so we won the case.  But it was interesting in, in being able to put together the elements of an offense and put together a defense, and it was under the supervision of a law professor [Steve Herzberg] at the time, which is pretty much related to what I'm currently doing.
Story_ID: 595893
Speaker 1: Who was the professor?
Speaker 2: Steve Herzberg, who is now a professor in the California--or in the California system somewhere.
Speaker 1: And was he a mentor in this kind of law (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was; he was a, he was a good mentor to me in terms of helping me to understand how to apply theory in practice.  Probably the biggest mentor to me in law school was James Jones [James E. Jones, Jr.].  James Jones is--was a professor at the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin Law School, Madison, Wisconsin] for twenty years, twenty-five years, thirty years.  He was a former labor lawyer, civil rights lawyer, and he took it upon himself to mentor many of the young African American students; he was a African American law professor and he was--I never took any course from him, but I was in his office a lot and--talking about getting through law school, and he was very helpful to me in finding employment after law school.  He's invited me back to the law school on a number of occasions to talk to students there now.  He's a--he was a very instrumental--and just letting us know that we could make it 'cause we--you know, I didn't really know any lawyers.  I--there was one lawyer in my church [Calvary Baptist Church, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] who--there may have been more than one, but there--this one guy who everybody knew as a lawyer, and he was so distant and aloof from us that we never really got to know him, so I never--so James Jones was like the guy for me, to tell me what being a lawyer was all about--at least his theory, and convincing us that we could make it and we could do it.
Story_ID: 595894
Speaker 1: Did you do any internships?
Speaker 2: I worked for a summer at the Milwaukee Legal Services program [Milwaukee Legal Services, Inc.; Legal Action of Wisconsin, Inc.] in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] while in law school, basically being a summer law clerk representing poor people, and--
Speaker 1: Was that always your passion?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think when I got to law school, I was pretty much committed to representing people who were locked out, locked up, disadvantaged.
Speaker 1: So there was nothing alluring about the money involved in corporate law for you?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I, I mean--during law school, you do get--there's a lot of peer pressure during law school, and a lot of--I know a lot of people who came to law school with public service or public interests in mind, get distracted, detoured because it's a lot of money to be made.  Fortunately, for me I was at Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin Law School, Madison, Wisconsin], which is a very public service spirited institution, so we were encouraged to pursue our, our dreams.  My wife [Anquinette Gathing Stone (ph.)] was--at the time, was very supportive, she didn't put--you know--and I noticed a lot of people who had family pressure to go into the corporate environment.
Speaker 1: But you were handling the balance okay--family and law school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at the time, at the time I was; unfortunately, it didn't last, but at the time I was doing quite well.
Story_ID: 595895
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate [from the University of Wisconsin Law School, Madison, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 1: And what was your first career move upon graduation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My first job I took a fellowship--the Reginald Heber Smith Community Law Fellowship [Reginald Heber Smith Community Lawyer Fellowship Program], which was this fellowship program, and they'd hire lawyers; they'd give you a one or two year stipend, and then they'd assign you to a, a legal services program.  My dream job was working for the Public Defender Service in D.C. [Public Defender Service for the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] and I couldn't--I didn't get that job so I took the fellowship, and they assigned me to the Neighborhood Legal Services Program in Washington, D.C., so I figured if I couldn't get the D.C. public defender's job, I'd get to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and then I'd get it; that was my thinking at the time.  So I took this fellowship job, it was eleven thousand dollars a year, with my family of four--my wife [Stone's first wife, Anquinette Gathing Stone (ph.)] and two kids [Sokoni Stone and Rahman Stone] and I.  We got a U-Haul truck, loaded up our stuff, and a, a friend and I drove out there, and then my wife and kids flew out a little later.  And that was my first full-time legal job, which was a great job, inspiring job, very depressing at the same time, because at that time, D.C. was going through a lot of gentrification; I don't--they didn't call it that then, I think they called urban renewal or something.  And I worked right on the--in the middle of D.C. like, I think it was like 6th [Street] and F [Street], or something like that--a little townhouse.  And every day I'd get to work, there would--somebody's belongings would be on the street, either in my block or the next block, or a block over, so I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Evictions?
Speaker 2: Evictions.  I mean--and they were doing it routinely and with conviction.  They were just putting people out on the street (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, at this time, 6th and F was a black neighborhood?
Speaker 2: 6th and F was--yeah, yeah, it was mostly all-black, yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Now--if you go back now, it's, it's a lot different.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, I know.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 595896
Speaker 1: Describe the political situation in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] in 1975.
Speaker 2: You know, I wasn't much involved in the political situation in 1975.  I was really trying to learn how to be a lawyer and represent my clients [at the Neighborhood Legal Services Program, Washington, D.C.], so I was pretty much involved in the day to day; I was doing landlord-tenant work and consumer work.
Speaker 1: So, [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry--did you ever cross paths with Marion Barry?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I saw him in the papers, that's about it (laughter).  You know, there were a lot of loan companies and furniture companies in D.C. who were preying upon the poor, so that was kind of my, my work involvement at that time.
Speaker 1: What were some of the, the cases you got involved with?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we had a case where a woman had purchased a living room set for, you know--the price was like two hundred dollars for a living room set, but the fine print in the contract meant that she was gonna wind up paying like seven or eight hundred dollars for this really bad living room set because of the interest rate that was buried in the contract, the late fees, et cetera, and it, it was, it was just a rip off, but it was a way to--you know, for poor people to, to get something, you know; she only had to put twenty, thirty dollars down, but then by the time she paid it off, it was, it was just usurious.  So we did a lot of work in, in--contract work because the contracts were in violation of the Uniform Commercial Code.  But, of course, nobody but a lawyer would know that, and there weren't lawyers representing people who were being preyed upon at that time.
Speaker 1: Did you win the case for her?
Speaker 2: We won that case.  I did a lot of eviction work just trying to get people back into their places, or trying to get people new housing so they wouldn't be on the street.
Story_ID: 595897
Speaker 1: We are gonna get started with the second half of our HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview.  Again, I'm Cheryl Butler; I'll be conducting this interview joined by Scott Stearns who's the videographer, and again I'll have you say your full name, and spell it.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Randolph Noel Stone, R-A-N-D-O-L-P-H, N-O-E-L, S-T-O-N-E.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth, and where you were born?
Speaker 2: Eleven, twenty-six, forty-six [November 26, 1946], Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: February 8th, 2008.
Speaker 1: Where are we holding this interview today?
Speaker 2: In the Mandel Legal Aid Clinic [Edwin F. Mandel Legal Aid Clinic], University of Chicago Law School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: What is your profession?
Speaker 2: Clinical professor of law.
Story_ID: 595898
Speaker 1: We are going to start with the work you were doing in Washington, D.C. around 1975.  You were working with the Neighborhood Legal Services?
Speaker 2: Right.  It was called the Neighborhood Legal Services Program in Washington, D.C., and I was assigned to that program; I was what's called the Reginald Heber Community Lawyer Fellow--it's called the Reggie [Reginald Heber Smith Community Lawyer Fellowship Program].  And in--during the '70s [1970s], you'd apply for a Reggie; it was usually a one or a two year fellowship right out of law school, and they would send you to different legal services programs across the country, so there were probably about 100 or so of us each year.  We'd meet in D.C. for a training program for a couple weeks, and then we'd be assigned to programs, and I was assigned to the program in D.C.  The reason I picked D.C., first I wanted to--my dream job out of law school [University of Wisconsin Law School, Madison, Wisconsin] was working with the Public Defender Service of the District of Columbia [Public Defender Service for the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.]; that was--for some reason my head was just fixed on this job because it--the D.C. defender's office had a reputation of being the best defender's office in the country, and I had convinced myself that I wanted to be a criminal defense lawyer, civil rights lawyer, human rights lawyer, and I thought that was the best place to start.  It turned out I didn't get the job, so I thought the next best thing would be to go to D.C., and that's what--the Reggie program came through, so I went to Neighborhood Legal Services thinking I'd work there for a year or two and then work for the Public Defender Service--didn't happen that way but, in any event, I--the beautiful thing about working for NLSP was we had--I was at a small neighborhood office, and their--the director was Willie Cook [Willie E. Cook, Jr.], and the deputy director was William Martin--Billy Martin we called him--two black men who ran this fairly large legal services program.  What was inspirational about it for me, it let me know that as a black man, I could work for poor people because you get all this pressure in law school about going into the corporate arena and making money, and so it was reinforcing to see these two black men of very distinguished, long history, long career, of devoting their entire legal career to working for the public interest.  So, it meant a lot that they were my bosses, and it kind of gave me the--a path to follow.  In terms of the work, the work was a, was a little daunting.  I did consumer--representing people with consumer issues, loan, loan problems and consumer fraud, and I did landlord-tenant work.  And as a young lawyer, a new lawyer, it was--you get kind of thrown in and with not a lot of hand-holding, so--and I just felt that the issues--you know, people being evicted from their homes, coming to work and seeing people's belongings on the street, it was quite a daunting experience; I enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 595899
Speaker 1: And I think my first case involved a, a woman who had--a first case in court, I should say-that, where I actually went to court and made an argument, involved a woman who had purchased a living room set, an arrangement, and had fallen behind on her payments--installment payments, and then the local company was trying to repossess her furniture.  And what we discovered was that the contract was basically--involved a lot of overreaching, exorbitant interest, and clauses in which, you know, if the consumer fell behind, then it gave the, the merchant a right to come in and, and, and repossess the furniture.  But we were successful in pointing out that the contract violated a number of provisions in the Uniform Commercial Code, and really was, was able to allow her to keep her furniture and work out much better terms of the agreement.  And it turns out, I think Ted Newman [HistoryMakers Theodore Newman, Jr.], who was a judge in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] at the time, later became the chief judge of the appellate court [D.C. Court of Appeals], was the judge on my very first case in D.C.  So--
Speaker 2: How did that case make you feel, since one of your main objectives was to help people, particularly poor people?
Speaker 1: I, I felt great, you know; I really felt like my legal education was being--was, was being used in the manner in which I had thought that a legal education should be used, you know.  I felt like I was serving someone.  I always looked at the law as a service profession, you know, and I know people look at it in different ways, but for me the legal profession is a service profession; it's, it's a helping profession, so to be able to use some of the theories that you learned in law school on behalf of people who need them the most, you know, was the best of all worlds.
Speaker 2: What specifically did you do for that woman?
Speaker 1: Well, we allowed her to keep her furniture.
Speaker 2: Do you remember some of the, the initial steps?  What did that require?
Speaker 1: Oh, I see what you mean.  Well, we, we filed the complaint in the local court in D.C., and the complaint outlined the ways in which the contract that she had signed violated the Uniform Commercial Code, so we filed a complaint asking that the court find that the contract was void, and--as violation of the code, and therefore, that allowed us in terms of settlement, to work out a much more legitimate agreement between the consumer--the woman with the furniture, and the merchant.
Speaker 2: Did you have to develop a relationship with her?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, we, we developed a very good relationship, a working relationship, and in fact, she continued to call me after that issue was resolved about other issues, and referred other neighbors.  And eventually, we talked about creating some policy initiatives to deal with a lot of the similar merchants in that community who were, you know--had these usurious contractual relationships with people in the community.
Story_ID: 595900
Speaker 1: What are other cases, either like that one, or other cases that were rewarding to you in some way, that you can recall from that stage of your life?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a couple cases involving landlord-tenant issues where I was able to--one, keep somebody from being evicted and, and allow them to, to stay in their apartment and create better terms for their lease.
Speaker 1: Do you remember one of those cases?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, there was a, a young family, a married couple, with two or three small children.  The father had been laid off, they'd fallen behind in their rent payments, and the landlord wanted them out of the apartment, but it turned out that the condition of the apartment was just--the landlord had a--I guess it was more like a three flat building that he had converted into smaller apartments, and as the community was, I don't know, gentrifying, I suppose is the word, he was allowing the conditions in the building to just deteriorate, hoping people would move out, and then he was gonna, you know, sell it, convert it.  And so this particular couple, because of his work situation and because of the really terrible conditions of the apartment, they had fallen behind on their rent so they were trying to put 'em out, and I was able to, over a period of time, allow them to, to stay in the apartment until they could find a, a better place, and allow them to escape the debt that the landlord claimed that they owed, and in fact, created a little pool of money so they could use for moving expenses to move to a better place.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was this a part of clinical law?
Speaker 2: Not really, this was just legal services work [at the Neighborhood Legal Services Program, Washington, D.C.]--typical legal services for the poor.
Story_ID: 595901
Speaker 1: There was a case, and I'm not sure when it happened exactly, but you represented a client who was accused of robbing a store, a liquor store?
Speaker 2: Oh, right.
Speaker 1: Do you remember that case?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was later when I, when I came back to the D.C. public defender service [Public Defender Service for the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, after--I worked in the--for NLSP [Neighborhood Legal Services Program, Washington, D.C.] for about a year, and then I reapplied to the D.C. public defender's office the second time after I had passed the D.C. bar, and--'cause I thought maybe the reason they didn't hire me the first time was because I wasn't a member of the D.C. bar, and the D.C. bar had a somewhat notorious pass rate.  But I, I passed the bar and then I reapplied, and I still didn't get hired.  So, at that point, I got a call from a friend in Chicago [Illinois] who was telling me about this new, experimental public defender's office in Chicago; it was called the Criminal Defense Consortium of Cook County [Chicago, Illinois], and my fellowship was running out at NLSP, and so the question was should I renew it for another year, or take this job in Chicago?  So I flew out to Chicago, had an interview, and they offered me a job, so I left D.C. [Washington, D.C.] with my family and we came back to Chicago, and it was a beautiful job.  It was set up as an alternative to the Cook County P.D.'s office [Law Office of the Cook County Public Defender].  At that time, the Cook County P.D.'s office had somewhat of a negative reputation in terms of--their caseloads were very high, their reputation in the community was not as vigorous advocates, but in, in some places in the community more of a political patronage type of situation, when you have to know somebody to get a job to work in the P.D.'s office; that's the reputation it had back in the mid-'70s [1970s]--mid to late '70s [1970s].  So, this Criminal Defense Consortium was set up to be an alternative to the P.D.'s office, and they were gonna try new techniques for the delivery of legal services to the poor in the criminal defense context.  So, they had six neighborhood offices: Lakeview, West Town, Uptown [Chicago, Illinois], Evanston [Illinois], Harvey [Illinois], and Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois], with four lawyers, an investigator, a social worker, and two secretaries, in each little neighborhood office, and my first office was in Evanston.  And the beautiful thing about it, you know, you had the four lawyers, you had your investigator, you had your social worker and your secretary, so we were all like a little unit, and there was a couple senior lawyers and a couple junior lawyers.
Speaker 1: Do you remember who those lawyers were?
Speaker 2: Yes.  In Evanston, it was--Bill Parks [William Parks] was the office director, Rob Roy, Greg Thompson [ph.], and myself, were the other three lawyers.  Investigator was Alton Belcher [ph.], social worker--I don't remember what her name was--Malcolm who's a he--Malcolm: Malcolm Young, Malcolm Rich--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Malcolm Sharp [ph.] and two secretaries, Pat Barber [ph.], and I think Judy Myatek [ph.].  So, the beautiful thing about it you had small caseloads.  We had good training, and there was no political interference, and you just practiced law; you didn't have to worry about budgets, you didn't have to worry about salaries, you know; you just--pure practicing law, so it was great.  I worked in the Evanston office for a year, and then they switched me to the Woodlawn office, and that's when I started a, a little connection with the University of Chicago Law School [Chicago, Illinois] because the Woodlawn office was partially supported by the University of Chicago Law School.  Each office was supposed to develop a relationship with a law school.
Story_ID: 595902
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of the cases you took on during that time period [at the Criminal Defense Consortium of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I tried my very first murder case I tried during that period, and I tried it in front of [HistoryMaker] R. Eugene Pincham, famous judge here in Chicago [Illinois]; he was on the bench at that time in the trial court at 26th [Street] and California [Avenue].  It was an eye wit- one eye witness murder case where the--my client was accused of a first degree murder on the West Side of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Well, do you remember the client's name?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You can't reveal that?
Speaker 2: I can't--I couldn't tell you that.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And--well, I guess I could, but I, I won't.  Anyway, he was accused of a, a, a killing in an apartment on the West Side of Chicago, and we tried the case in--a bench trial; we took a bench trial.  It was--nobody actually saw the murder, but somebody claimed they saw him leave the apartment where the death had occurred at or about the time of the incident.
Speaker 1: Who was the victim?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't recall (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A man, a woman?
Speaker 2: It was a woman, it was a woman.
Speaker 1: And did they have a relationship?
Speaker 2: There was some allegation that they had been intimate during--for a certain period, and that they had broken up.  And the case was tried in--at 26th and California; it was not a jury trial, it was a bench trial, and the--he was acquitted.  The judge found that the state hadn't proved its case beyond a reasonable doubt, and it was fairly traumatic because the family of the person who was killed was in the courtroom at the time that the judge rendered his ruling, and they got pretty emotional about it and had to be calmed down, and we had to be kind of escorted out.  And it was the first--as I said, it was my first murder case, so it was pretty emotional for me as well, and of course for the client.
Speaker 1: So, describe what you were going through emotionally during this case, and at what stage?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, you know, when you're trying a murder case, you know, somebody has died, so even though you may represent a client who was not involved or was not--didn't do it, there's still a, you know, a body of emotion involved--deep emotion, particularly when the family members of the victim are in the courtroom and looking at you with hostility, hate, and then you look at your client and your client is facing what could be a very long time in prison.  So it--it's a very emotional experience, and you have to keep that emotion under control because you have to be effective in court in terms of cross examining witnesses during your opening statements, closing arguments, et cetera--arguments to the court, legal research, and all the things that you need to do to perfect your craft.  You have to figure out how to use that emotion in an effective way.  You can't just ignore it; you've got to actually use it.
Story_ID: 595903
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At what moments were you feeling, I guess the emotion that--obviously, in the courtroom, but was it in your private moments when you were reviewing the details of the case?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, sure. All through--the private moments, pretrial, when you're looking at pictures of someone who's been, you know, hurt, and when you're preparing your argument away from the courtroom, you know, in the quiet moments of your home, when you visit your client in the jail; I've always found that, not always but oftentimes, a very spiritual experience to be in the bowels of the jail or a prison with someone who is facing very desperate circumstances.  It can be a very spiritual experience at times.
Speaker 1: Describe that.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean it's--you're in the bowels of a jail or a prison, you're trying to communicate with someone who is facing a lot of time or liberty--lost liberty; in some cases, death, and you're trying to explain in lay language, a very complicated legal process, or what can be a complicated legal process.  And, you know, people, people cry, people act out, you know, in anger sometimes--fear, so I think you have to be--you learn to be very--almost like a--you know, part of being a lawyer is being a counsellor, and you're dealing not only--what I try to tell my students, the legal issues are extremely important, but you got to go beyond the legal issues to really be an effective lawyer, I think.
Speaker 1: So, in this case, with this, this man who was accused of murder--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --do you recall going to his jail cell and, and experiencing that, that spiritual moment (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yes.  I--In fact, I, I really do; I recall him breaking down and crying, and this is a grown man; he was older than I was at the time.  But just the tension and the pressure.  I--you know, when we were getting--we were almost ready to go to trial, and I was putting him through his sort of rehearsal for his testimony, and there were a couple times where he just, you know, broke down and--had to, you know, leave him and come back and build him back up and--but--yeah, so those were two very good years working for the Criminal Defense Consortium of Cook County [Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was that client facing, potentially?
Speaker 2: He was facing sixty years, was the max.
Story_ID: 595904
Speaker 1: And at times like that, do you draw on your spiritual background--your religious background?
Speaker 2: To some degree, I guess.  I also draw on being in Vietnam and, you know, many of the--you know, as bad as Vietnam was, what it taught me was that no matter how bad things are, you can get through it, and so, you know, I use that often when I'm in a very  precarious, desperate situation with clients, or in my own personal life.
Speaker 1: So, if you're--in that case when you were with that client accused of murder--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you felt that sense of desperation, that spiritual calm, what types of Vietnam experiences do you draw on?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess it was more, you know, being in situations where I thought I might not make it out--being in very unpleasant and depressing situations.  I mean when you're in, in a, in a war situation, you are often--sometimes the tension and the unpleasantness of the situation that you're in can be almost overwhelming, and it may not be the fact that you're shooting at somebody or somebody is shooting at you, it may just be the idea surfacing in you that you want to be home and you're not home, and you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember--oh, go ahead.
Speaker 2: --and you're just looking out at the situation that you're in, wishing and hoping that this--that you weren't there, you know.  So--and then, you know, of course it can be compounded by, you know, the actual physical exertion that you're going through--the weather, you know.  I remember being in the monsoon situation in Vietnam where it would just like rain very, very hard for three or four days; I mean just hard rain, and you're just soaked from your core--you're just wet, and you just feel soggy (laughter), you know, and you just wanna be out but you can't, so you have to figure out.  So, those kind of situations (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did--are there--
Speaker 2: --you can draw on those to help you get through others.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  But I find that, that, that's really fascinating, I mean the fact that you're drawing on Vietnam to help somebody else.  Often, you think of lawyers as being detached and taking an intellectual approach, so I'm wondering--you mentioned the monsoon; are there other--is there another type of Vietnam moment that gives you the strength you need to get through a difficult trial situation?  Like what--
Speaker 2: Well, it's not--I mean I, I don't wanna mischaracterize it; I mean I don't want--I mean, you know, I was in Vietnam thirty years ago, forty years ago, so.
Speaker 1: But at that time, you had been back a short time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, at that time, it was probably twenty years or ten years; yeah, you're right.
Speaker 1: So, I just--you know, 'cause there a lot of people who, who wonder about Vietnam and, and you see the vets who come back and, and the emotional scarring that, that happened, and so to fully understand--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't think I can explain it any better than I have, you know; it's probably intuitive, you know.  I probably need to--you know--we could do some deep therapy and, and work it out (laughter), but you know, I, I don't--I don't think I ever really have--it's just kind of--something that you go through and then you draw on as needed.
Speaker 1: But life there was--but life or death situations like that offer that same kind of spiritual--
Speaker 2: Yeah, for me, for me it does, yeah.  But I think everybody's different.
Story_ID: 595905
Speaker 1: Describe the transition when you were working for the Criminal Defense Consortium of Cook County when you moved from the Evanston [Illinois] office to the Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] office.
Speaker 2: Well, when we moved to--when I moved to the Woodlawn office, the Woodlawn office was connected to the University of Chicago [University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois], so in addition to our caseload responsibilities, we started developing some teaching responsibilities, and we worked with the clinical faculty here in teaching trial practice workshops and trial practice advocacy--trial advocacy courses, which I really enjoyed, and it kind of opened my eye to the idea that I might wanna engage in, in this more, more on a full-time basis, so every week we would teach a portion of trial practice, you know, either opening statement or developing theories and themes, direct examination, cross examination techniques, closing argument, you know, putting together a pretrial motion or a motion hearing--different phases of trial work, and we, we worked in conjunction with the clinical faculty for about, about I would say, probably a year.
Story_ID: 595906
Speaker 1: And then the consortium [Criminal Defense Consortium of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] ran out of federal money, and that's when the university hired me to come here full-time, and I started doing employment discrimination cases and criminal defense cases in connection with my job here.  At the time, I think I was called a clinical fellow, and I worked here from '77 [1977] to '80 [1980], handling employment discrimination cases, criminal defense cases, and doing the--supervising students, trying to connect students, get them to connect the theory they learned in the classroom with practical cases--practical legal theory and practice.  Kind of what doctors do--have been doing for many, many years, you know, when they put their med students into residency and internships so that they can practice medicine under the supervision of doctors, and learn how to be a doctor.  Well, legal education has always been a little slow in that regard in terms of theory and practice, and so the clinical legal education movement, although it's been, you know, you know, going on for a number of years, really in the '70s [1970s] was when it started to explode, and really started to develop a foothold in legal education.
Speaker 2: Why do you think that is?  Why the '70s [1970s]?  Was there something about the political climate at the time?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was the political climate at the time, the idea that lawyers were beginning to be recognized as agents of change and involved in the movements, the civil rights and human rights lawyers were coming to the fore, you know.  Thurgood Marshall and all of his great work, you know, was beginning to see some--have some resonance, so, you know--although--I wanna emphasize it--many people had been talking about it; I think the confluence of the social justice movements as well as there was federal funding now that was becoming available to law schools to do clinical work, and I think that had a, a major impact.
Speaker 2: Was that sort of the beginning of the institutionalization of that at the University of Chicago [University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois]?  Had they done it before, and now they were just amplifying the program?
Speaker 1: They had done it before on a smaller scale.  I think our clinic [Edwin F. Mandel Legal Aid Clinic, Chicago, Illinois] probably--well, we're getting ready to celebrate our fiftieth year anniversary, so '57 [1957], '58 [1958] was when the clinic began but yeah, in the mid-'70s [1970s], or early to mid-'70s [1970s], with the federal funding that was available, it allowed the clinic to expand.  It--we still weren't accepted as a full player in the legal education process, but it was beginning to, to grow and expand.  And, you know, when I was at Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin Law School, Madison, Wisconsin] in '75 [1975], we had a small clinical program as well, and now, today, 2008, almost every law school in the country has some form of clinical program.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. And back then, in the '70s [1970s], when you were appointed this fellow--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --were you one of few blacks, or the only black--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --at University of Chicago Law School?
Speaker 1: Let me, let me think.  Actually, there were two of us; there was--actually, Alan Brothers [Alan W. Brothers] was here, I think in--before me; Stanley Hill [Stanley L. Hill], Buddy Clark [William S. Clark, Jr.] and, and I were here at around the same time, but there were no--yeah, there were, there were not a lot of African Americans involved in clinical legal education anywhere in the country--there were a handful.
Story_ID: 595907
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of the early cases in which you helped train students?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, the big case was--there was a double murder case on the North Side of Chicago [Illinois].  Two businessmen were killed, and somehow--I don't remember how we got the case, but somehow, one of the defendants in the case--either his parent, or somebody, called me and asked me to get involved in the case.  So it was the first big death penalty case that I got involved in; it was a death penalty case because it was a double murder; armed robbery, double murder.  Two businessmen were found one morning tied up in a bathroom of a restaurant on the North Side of Chicago, bound and, and shot to death and, you know, there was some debate about whether this would be a good case for the clinic [Edwin F. Mandel Legal Aid Clinic, Chicago, Illinois], whether we should take it or not, and I decided to take it, and it's one of those cases that just had a life of its own, that lasted for a number year--of years.
Speaker 1: Who was accused in that case?  I mean what--you know, give me the profile.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, one of the, the--our, our client was a long time North Side resident of Chicago, he had a, a record, and somebody had told the police that he might be--have, have some information about this murder.  The police raided his apartment; he lived in one of those--what do you call it--resident occupant hotels?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And they broke down his door, arrested him, and discovered that there was a watch that had been worn by one of the victims--was found in his apartment, and it was a very unique watch, and so that was the basis for, for his arrest.  And then the second person arrested was also a long time resident of the North Side of Chicago.  And I, I--according to what we found out later they, they knew each other but not in any--I mean it wasn't like they were fast friends or anything, but they, they were acquaintances.  So, we went to trial, jury trial, at 26th [Street] and California [Avenue], and they were--it was a hung jury; the jury deliberated for several days.  There was one African American.  Well, there might have been--the, the first trial there might have been three or four African Americans on the jury, and--hung jury, and the sec- they decided to try the case again.  They tried it again, this time there was one African American on the jury and he held out and refused to convict, so it was another hung jury (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was--
Story_ID: 595908
Speaker 1: Were there holes in the evidence?
Speaker 2: Well, there were no confessions and the so called--there was one witness who claimed that she had driven these two guys [Perry Cobb and Darby Tillis] to the restaurant, that they went in and they--that they came out, and when they came out, they were very agitated, and that she drove them away.  And then there was another witness who claimed that he was across the street from the restaurant, and he could see the people going in from across the street, and he could see 'em coming out but he didn't see any shooting, and he identified the people that he saw as our two clients.  But his testimony changed from the first trial to the second.  The first trial, he wasn't sure, the second trial he became a lot more certain, but the jury hung again the second time, and we thought that they would dismiss the case since they had two hung juries.  They decided to try the case again, a third time.  This time, we filed a mandamus in the Illinois Supreme Court and asked the Supreme Court to prohibit a third trial as being, you know, double jeopardy.  The Supreme Court denied our, our mandamus motion.  We went to trial a third time and it--this time they had excused all the African Americans from the jury, so we had an all-white jury, we had a terrible judge, and they were convicted and sentenced to death--they were both sentenced to death, and so this was probably--we're probably up to like '79 [1979], or something like that.
Speaker 1: So, describe--you know, you--before, we were talking about the emotional toll this is taking on you.  Describe the emotional toll this trial, actually three trials, are taking on you, and also there are students working on this as well?
Speaker 2: There were students working on the first two trials.  Yeah, the students--I have to admit, I'm still in contact with some of the students who worked on that case.
Speaker 1: How many students worked on that case?
Speaker 2: Altogether, there might have been a half a dozen over the years.  And I think they were very--I mean it's an experience they'll never forget; I think they learned a lot about how the criminal justice system works.  It took a lot of toll, emotionally, on me; I mean I was crushed when the third jury came back and convicted them and sentenced them to death 'cause, you know, you've in- so much time and energy invested into the case, and you develop relationships with the client.
Story_ID: 595909
Speaker 1: What was your reaction when the verdict was announced?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I was--I was not surprised because of the way the jury selection went; I mean once they eliminated all the African Americans from the jury pool, and the judge, in his rulings on evidentiary issues, was so adverse to the defense and so pro- prosecution, I can't say we were--my client wasn't surprised either, nor was I, but we were very disappointed and very exhausted.  The funny thing about it, after he was convicted, then the judge set the case down for a hearing on whether or not he should get the death penalty, and in preparing for that hearing, you know, I remember sitting in jail talking to him about it and telling him that, you know, I needed to call his mother--I--that I wanted to call his mother as a witness in the mitigations hearing so that she could testify about her relationship to him and, and he refused; he said he didn't want his--any of his family members involved, and I told him, I said, "Well, you know, if you don't present any evidence, then the likelihood of you being sentenced to death is way high."  And his response was that he didn't care.  He didn't--he knew he was innocent, and that he knew if he got the death penalty, the case would go directly to the Illinois Supreme Court and they would, you know, review it with a lot more urgency, whereas if he didn't get the death penalty, he said, you know, they may not look at it that closely, so he was prepared, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you--go ahead.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.  In fact, he was right.  I mean he was sentenced to death; we didn't present much of any evidence at the mitigation hearing, and the Illinois Supreme Court, when it finally got up there, reversed his conviction because of the errors that the trial court had made during the trial.  By this time, I had moved back to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], but I got a, a good friend of mine appointed to his case who tried (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who was that?
Speaker 2: Akim Gursel, private lawyer here in Chicago [Illinois].  And they tried the case again a fourth time, and it came back another hung jury, and then the state tried it again for a fifth time, and this time it was not a jury trial, it was a bench trial and the judge finally acquitted them both.  But they, they were on death row for a number of years.
Story_ID: 595910
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's the length of time from beginning to the final verdict?
Speaker 2: From the final acquittal?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know, I--it had to be about eight or nine years of--and then, I think they were on death row for about six years--five or six years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you give us the, the last names of the--of the defendants, just for research purposes?
Speaker 2: Sure, Perry Cobb and Darby Tillis.
Speaker 1: You said that was Perry-
Speaker 2: Cobb, C-O-B-B, and Darby Tillis.  And the murder--the, the papers called them the--I think they called them the Hot Dog Stand Murders because it was a hot dog stand type restaurant right on the North Side of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And so, again, I'm gonna take you--internally--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that must have been a roller coaster ride for you, emotionally.
Speaker 2: It was, it was a very--and it stayed with me for a long time.  By, by then, you know, I was a little more mature, and I understood--I think I was better able to handle my emotions.  I mean I, I, I've never been a--the type of lawyer who works hard to distance themselves from their clients, but by the same token I, I can separate myself when necessary.  So it was hard during the moment, you know, particularly that moment when the jury comes back and says, "Guilty."  I mean that's a very devastating moment 'cause you just feel so rejected.
Speaker 1: And, and what kinds of things go through your mind (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you start thinking about all the things you could have done that you didn't do, mistakes you made, how you--what you should have, you know, argued that you didn't, you know; points that you failed to make or make as persuasively as you would have liked to, questions about the type of jurors that you selected, you know; questions about what witnesses you called or didn't call and, you know, you tend to go back through all of the errors and mistakes that you made, and you--you know, in any trial you're gonna make errors and mistakes, so--
Speaker 1: Was there a sense of relief and satisfaction when, when they were acquitted finally (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah--yes, definitely.  And then I, I brought him in, as a matter of fact, and I hooked him up with a civil lawyer, and they were able to get some money for him for the time that they--that he served.  And we're still in touch and he, he--I think he moved to Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Which one is that?
Speaker 2: Perry Cobb; he moved to Memphis.  Darby Tillis is still here in Chicago and he's active in the anti-death penalty movement; and I see him often.  He's a minister and he's really--I'm very proud of the evolution that he's made, so.
Story_ID: 595911
Speaker 1: I'd like to understand this clinical process.  I know part of the idea behind clinical law is to merge, you know, the psychological and the sociological and the legal kind of counsel you provide.  How did you integrate all those things and, and teach students how to go through the proper steps?
Speaker 2: Good question.  I mean it's a learning process and, you know, we have certain--it's an inefficient process as well.  I mean, you know, what I tell clients that we're gonna represent them, I let them know that students are gonna be doing a lot of the work, so it may not be as efficient as if you just had a, a lawyer because I'm not gonna do--you know, it would be easier for me to just write a brief myself than it would be to allow students to write the brief and then have a constant critique, feedback, but that's how they learn.  So it's a fusion of, you know, trying to provide quality legal representation to clients at the same time as trying to provide pedagogical opportunities for students, and so it, it can be very inefficient.  But because we take--we have small caseloads and, you know, our students are very dedicated, and one thing, the students who work in the clinic [Edwin F. Mandel Legal Aid Clinic, Chicago, Illinois] are very dedicated to the work, they're very smart, they're willing to work hard, they're willing to go the extra mile.  So I think we're, we're, you know, in the--at the end of the day, we're able to provide a fairly high quality product; it just may take us longer to get there.
Speaker 1: In the Cobb [Perry Cobb], Tillis [Darby Tillis] case, do you remember some of the processes you went through with the students?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, the students did a lot of legal research on evidentiary issues that came up during, during pretrial and during the trial.  They didn't have as much contact with the client as I normally would have liked, and I think because the client was much more mature and, and he and I developed a rapport, so to that extent, it was--and, you know, other cases, the students may have a better relationship to the client than I do and they--it all depends, and sometimes it's a matter of personality, and I think with younger clients, the students tend to relate better; I guess that the age, you know, when our, our juvenile clients, for example; I think the students are much able--much better able to develop good relationships with.  But the clinical legal education process it's, it's theory and practice, you know; it's taking that theory that they learn in the classroom, you know, these big const- lofty constitutional principles like the Fourth Amendment and the Fifth Amendment and the Sixth Amendment, and then seeing how they really apply in the context of a case--a practical legal situation.  And, you know--so it opens their eyes that the law professor's view about the Fourth Amendment may be a lot different than the judge's view about the Fourth Amendment who is processing cases through his courtroom and may not be as attuned to the, you know, theoretical ramifications of the application in the Fourth Amendment.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So, I think it's a really good mixture of reality and practice and theory.
Story_ID: 595912
Speaker 1: So the type of legal aid you provide your clients under clinical law, is it more encompassing when you bring in like the psychological (unclear) (background noise) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it is.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold it, hold it. Let the siren pass--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):--before you answer.
Speaker 1: For example, in the Cobb [Perry Cobb], Tillis [Darby Tillis] case, was there a specific type of counsel you were able to provide given their social predicament?
Speaker 2: Well, Cobb, Tillis case was more of an example of a, an analysis of the legal ramifications of, you know, evidentiary rulings; there wasn't a lot of social history, social service involved in that case.  There should have been, but the client pretty much rejected that approach; he did not want his family dynamics dragged into public--into a public courtroom, and sometimes you have to respect the client's decisions.  That was a hard one to respect, but sometimes you have to--you know, and had his case not been reversed, you know, who knows that--you know, I probably would still be criticized for not forcing him to bring his family dynamics into court.  I think most death penalty lawyers would--looking at that, if they had to read that record, they would probably be very critical of my decision not to present mitigating evidence at his death penalty trial because it's, it's, it's something that you're supposed to do.  But sometimes I think you have to respect the dignity of the client, and in his view, he did not want his family subjected to that process, so--and he was willing to accept the consequences.  Now, if he had been sentenced to death and executed, you know, you probably wouldn't be here talking to me because I'd probably be disbarred or something but, you know, fortunately it worked out.
Story_ID: 595913
Speaker 1: Were there other cases that come to mind when you were at the University of Chicago [University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois] the first time around--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --as a clinical fellow [at the Edwin F. Mandel Legal Aid Clinic, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah; we tried a, a--we tried an armed robbery case with two, two brothers who had been--it was an eye witness identification case and, supposedly, they had gone into a--I think it was a convenience store and robbed the store.  It was a fun case in the sense that, you know, they had an alibi and we put the alibi on and, you know, we were convinced that it was a misidentification case.  There are a lot of misidentification cases that we run into in, in the course of practicing criminal law.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the kind of work students--you had students doing?
Speaker 2: Yes, students did--they did the pretrial motions, prepared a motion to suppress the identification--the lineup identification because it appeared that the lineup was--once we got the pictures of the lineup, we could see that our clients kind of stood out because of their young age.  Everybody else in the lineup looked like they were thirty or forty years old; our clients were seventeen and eighteen.  So they did a lot of work on researching the law on lineup identification procedures and presenting the motion.  They also did a lot of work in that case in working with the social work branch in, you know, helping the kids get into GED [General Educational Development] programs 'cause they had been kicked out of school--helping them to get in GED programs, and thinking about career counselling and, and, and those kind of issues.
Story_ID: 595914
Speaker 1: Do you feel those years--those early years at University of Chicago [University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois] as a clinical fellow  were successful?  Did you sort of revolutionize, revolutionize the program here?
Speaker 2: They were very successful.  I don't think we revolutionized the program but we pushed the envelope a little further along the path, and they were very good years and prepared me--I--well, at least I thought they prepared me for private practice 'cause I left here in January of '80 [1980], and we opened up our own office, Stone and Clark [Chicago, Illinois], and Clark was a, a guy I went to law school [University of Wisconsin Law School, Madison, Wisconsin] with--Buddy Clark [William S. Clark, Jr.]--and he also had taught here as a clinical fellow for a short period of time, and he left and went to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] to work in the P.D.'s office [Wisconsin State Public Defender's Office, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and I stayed here in the clinic [Edwin F. Mandel Legal Aid Clinic, Chicago, Illinois] for another two or three years, and then in January of '80 [1980], we decided to open up our own practice.
Story_ID: 595915
Speaker 1: So in 1980, you opened a private practice.
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980], Stone and Clark [Chicago, Illinois].  We decided to pursue a private practice and we were gonna do criminal defense and civil rights work, and then eventually we talked about doing--it was a litigation firm, and eventually we thought we might do some civil litigation as well.  But, you know, what happened was I got appointed to this death penalty case; it was called the Pontiac 17, and at that time it was the largest death penalty case in the history of the United States.  They had charged seventeen individuals with the murders of three prison guards, and the attempted murder and aggravated battery of a number of others and, you know, millions of dollars' worth a damage as a result of a rebellion--riot at Pontiac prison [Pontiac Correctional Center, Pontiac, Illinois], one of the maximum security prisons in Illinois.  So, as a result of this rebellion and, and the deaths that occurred, and the damage that occurred, they indicted seventeen people for those triple--for the triple murder, and that made it a death penalty case and the largest death penalty case--mass death penalty case at that time.  So you had seventeen people charged with triple murder, and it was a death case.  Ultimately, I don't remember how, one of the seventeen wrote me a letter and asked me if I would represent him [Albert Jackson].  I went down, met the person, and agreed to represent him, and ultimately the, the case was set downstate, but because of--there were so many people, they realized that they were gonna have a hard time trying the case in a small town, and because all seventeen of the individuals were African American who were indicted, the three correctional officers who were killed were Caucasian, there was some thought that they needed to be tried in a larger county, away from the prison, so that they could get a fair trial.  So ultimately, the Supreme Court [Illinois Supreme Court] decided to move the case to Chicago [Illinois] and appointed--the Supreme Court appointed lawyers for all of the individuals, and the case was moved to Cook County [Illinois], 26th [Street] and California [Avenue] in the criminal courts building.  They constructed a special courtroom, or refitted a, a courtroom to accommodate the, the size of the trial.  So, when I got appointed to the case, you know, Clark [William S. Clark, Jr.] and I had been talking about private practice, and I kind of thought that maybe this case was not suitable for the clinic [Edwin F. Mandel Legal Aid Clinic, Chicago, Illinois] because it would last so long, I probably wouldn't have the same amount of ability to teach courses and try the case, and involve students at the level that I wanted to 'cause (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were still involved with the University of Chicago [University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois] and the clinic?
Speaker 2: At--up until January of '80 [1980], right, and I think I got appointed to the case probably in November of '79 [1979] or sometime in the late summer of '79 [1979].  So I thought, well, this might be a good time to try private practice, so we started our practice in the Fisher Building in downtown Chicago, and opened up and our--you know, my major case was the, the Pontiac case, and Clark was appointed on a number of other cases related to the riot but he wasn't on the, on the death case.  So, the idea was, you know, to see how private practice would work, and it was a lot of fun; we were in private practice for three years or so--three and a half years maybe.
Story_ID: 595916
Speaker 1: What happened with the--this, this Pontiac [Pontiac 17] case?
Speaker 2: The Pontiac case--well, the Pontiac case was a nightmare of--an, an administrative nightmare. Seventeen defendants, each defendant had one or two lawyers appointed, so just--you know, as you can imagine, trying to manage that schedule was just an administrative nightmare, and the judge who was appointed was a judge from downstate, Ben Miller [Benjamin K. Miller], and he had worked out some kind of schedule for payment; we were supposed to be getting paid every couple weeks and we'd submit our vouchers for payment.  And then they appointed three prosecutors, special prosecutors, to try the case.  Well, sometime during the, the pretrial proceedings, we discovered that the prosecutors were being paid a lot more than the defense lawyers.  The prosecutors were all white, most of the defense lawyers were African American, which was another unique thing about this case, in that there were so many African American lawyers involved, you know--Skip Gant, Roosevelt Thomas, Lou Myers [ph.], Chokwe Lumumba from Detroit [Michigan]; he came in, tried--was part of the case--Stan Hill [Stanley L. Hill]--and I'm leaving out a lot of people, but there were a lot of very good--Leo Holt [HistoryMaker Leo Ellwood Holt] was the--probably the dean, and I think he's one of your HistoryMakers.  Marianne Jackson, who's now a judge in juvenile court, was one of the trial lawyers on the case; Jeff Haas [ph.], Flint Taylor [G. Flint Taylor] from the People's Law Office [Chicago, Illinois], they were involved in the case.  David Thomas, Paul Brayman--just a, a, a, a really good group of trial lawyers--Marc Kadish, and many of them African American.  So, thousands of motions were filed, pretrial proceedings lasted about a year, jury selection took about three or four months of jury selection; it was a very painstaking, onerous process.  And I'm in private practice at the time, so I'm trying to balance my practice with this Pontiac case, which was extremely difficult, and--but anyway--so we picked a jury, three or four months of jury selection, and then the trial lasted another two, two and a half months.  And, and then, just before the trial started, the judge divided the case into the ten--ten and seven; one group of ten, one group of seven, and then he decided that he would go to try the ten first, hence the Pontiac 10.  One of the seven defendants decided to turn state's evidence and testify against the ten, which created all kinds of havoc and--but--so two and a half months at trial, and then closing arguments took three or four days, and jury goes out on Mother's Day, I think, or the day before Mother's Day in 1981, and they're out like three or four hours, and they come back and they find everybody not guilty, and it was just a pandemonium, you know; I mean sheer ecstasy for us, but--and for the--you know, the clients, obviously.  And my client (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who was your client?
Speaker 2: My client was Albert Jackson, who was serving time on another--every--well, obviously, everybody in, in the case was serving time on another case, that's why they were in prison [Pontiac Correctional Center, Pontiac, Illinois].  But ultimately, I got him out on his other case and we--we're still in very close touch. We, I talk to him at least once a month, or twice a month.
Story_ID: 595917
Speaker 1: What was it about, about the case?  Was it because there were so many inmates involved in the quote, unquote, rebellion, that it was difficult to identify who was responsible for the killings?
Speaker 2: That was part of it, and then the investigation after the rebellion, was handled very poorly in terms of the evidence that was collected; it was mislabeled, not analyzed soon after the incident, but then they locked the prison [Pontiac Correctional Center, Pontiac, Illinois] down after the incident and they did intensive interrogations of people, and then they offered some people early release if they testified against others.  So there was a lot of severe credibility problems about the witnesses who testified, and the--ultimately, the state was just unable to prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt.  I think part of it was they over--they indicted too many people, and so you had some people who were alleged to have done very little at the same trial with some people who were alleged to have done, you know, almost everything.  So when the jury, I think went back to deliberate, it was, you know, "Should we just convict everybody, even though some people obviously did very little, or should we acquit everybody because it's just--it, it just seems like they just throw--threw this case together?"  So I--that was part of it.  I think the lawyers in the case--Leo Holt [HistoryMaker Leo Ellwood Holt] was this so called quarterback of the defense team, and he did a masterful job of keeping everybody under control and organizing the presentation of evidence, and we really collaborated well; we had a--several retreats before the trial to kind of orchestrate who was gonna talk and--so that it wouldn't be a free for all, and assigned roles to people and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--did your--because the Pontiac 10 were acquitted, you didn't have to try your case?  What had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, I--no, I did try that case.
Speaker 1: Oh, you did?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I was one of the ten.
Speaker 1: Oh, you were, okay.
Speaker 2: I was one of the ten.
Speaker 1: So, what, what kind of evidence did you present?
Speaker 2: I--well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Defense--what was the defense?
Speaker 2: The defense was essentially that the--because of the sloppy investigation, and the deals that were offered to witnesses, that we would never know what really happened on the day of the riot--that was the defense.
Story_ID: 595918
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember any, any of the difficulties you faced?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, there were a lot.  Well, you know, my father [Raymond Stone, Sr.] died months before the trial was to begin--right in the middle of pretrial motions.
Speaker 1: An illness?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had cancer and had been sick for a while--pancreatic cancer, and by the time it was discovered, it was too late, so--
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And so, you know--and so he nev- actually never got to see me in court; I always kind of regretted that, but my mother [Lee Terrell Stone] and my grandmother [Earthel Hale Terrell] came down because we did--in, in deciding who would do opening statements, for example, we, we agreed that we'd only have three people do opening statements as opposed to all ten of us 'cause it would just be overkill.  So I was one of the lawyers selected to do the opening statement, so I did get my mom and my grandmom to come down and they, you know, were in court and watched me do that, so that was--it was, it was important--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --you know, and I felt good about that.
Speaker 1: But during the trial, you were going through the grief over your dad's death?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was--I was, and I'd find myself distracted at times, which is not a good thing.  But then, just the managing, the, the process--when you have so many lawyers, so many defendants, and then you're trying to, to handle your private practice on the side, deal with your personal family issues.  So, when the case was finally over, I was completely exhausted, just completely worn out, and I think my--our practice [Stone and Clark, Chicago, Illinois] never really recovered from that intensity of that situation.
Speaker 1: You said there was pandemonium at the end of the case.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, the families of the people who were charged were, were in the courtroom, and they were just delirious, you know, and erupted in the gallery, and the judge [Benjamin K. Miller] had to call in the sheriffs to, to quiet them down, and a lot of tears, lot of crying--very moving experience.
Speaker 1: Were the families of the prison guards in the courtroom?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, I don't think so.  And, you know, that was one issue with transferring the case from the local town near Pontiac [Pontiac Correctional Center, Pontiac, Illinois] to Chicago [Illinois]; I don't think the families were able to--whereas (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's such a long time commute.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a very big commute, and for such a long period of time, too--months and months and months.
Speaker 1: So that was a huge case.
Speaker 2: That was a huge case, we got a--publicity all over the country, we got letters and telegrams, and congratulations from people that I had never heard of or knew of, and it was major--major headlines in the Chicago Tribune the next day, lots of photos and stuff and, you know, you kind of had your little fifteen minutes of celebrity lawyering.
Story_ID: 595919
Speaker 1: So it was good (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You also mentioned another case--
Speaker 1: Yeah, one of my favorite cases, during the time I was in private practice [Stone and Clark, Chicago, Illinois], was Delores Bailey [ph.], you know, mid- probably early forties, a woman who was charged with first degree murder for killing her husband, and it was--my--I picked up a series of these cases during private practice, but I think she was the first one who sort of--a domestic violence, a battered woman syndrome; a very fascinating phenomenon.  Anyway, so the first time I interview her, she calls some--think her cousin called me from the--and asked me to go see, see her, and she was in custody at the time.  And in the, the battered women's syndrome cases, a lot of the women who have killed their spouses have this real overwhelming sense of guilt; it's really amazing.  I mean they've suffered all this brutality, and when they finally respond to it, many of the responses is guilt, you know: "I shouldn't have done it," you know.  "I'm sorry I did it."  So I spent a lot of time with her explaining to her that while she may be morally guilty and she may have the right to feel that way, my job was to deal with the legal guilt, and that in my opinion, her actions were justified as far as the law was concerned.  Once we got into the history, what happened that particular night, et cetera, et cetera (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And there was a long history of abuse?
Speaker 1: Yeah, this--her husband apparently--you know, when he drank, he lost control of his inhibitions and got violent and, you know, apparently it had been happening for a long period of time, and it had started to escalate.  So, this particular evening, he came home from work, and they were both home, and he had started to drink; she went to the bedroom and sat there for a while, and she could hear him getting louder and, you know, more vociferous and, you know, he started hollering for her to come out and she wouldn't, and she--so she knew what was coming next, and when he came in the bedroom, she reached in the drawer, pulled out a, a gun and shot him and killed him.  And so our first thing was to get her out on bond; we, we managed to do that, and then we got her into some counselling, and then we tried the case.  It was a bench trial, and she was acquitted, but the--for me, you know, that was good; I, I, it was a right result.
Story_ID: 595920
Speaker 1: And then we tried to get the insurance because he was insured, and that was rather novel because can you get insurance after you've killed the, the insured?  And we had--so, to me, you know, going after the insurance company--at first they denied liability, you know, the, the--but then the more we, we researched the case, we developed some angles in which, you know, it wasn't an intentional killing; it was self-defense--almost under duress.  And it wasn't a huge policy, but it was a policy that had been in effect for a number of years, so there was no question that she had--you know; it was a policy he had through his job, as a matter of fact.  So we were successful in getting her [Delores Bailey (ph.)] the award for that insurance policy and just--I remember seeing her face when we told her that she was gonna get this policy.  I mean it was like a--you know, surprise, elation, you know.  And she was able to get her life together, she--her and her daughter moved out of Chicago [Illinois] to another city, and occasionally I get a card or a note from her.
Story_ID: 595921
Speaker 1: But then after that, you know, I had a series of those cases and they're very depressing cases because you're dealing with so much guilt, and it's just amazing how guilty people can feel under those circumstances, you know.  You would think people would be almost happy.  "I've finally gotten rid of this person who's been tormenting me, beating me," but they're rarely, rarely that way; it's much more--it's much deeper than that for most people.
Speaker 2: So why did this--all of these cases are emotionally draining in some way--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --they are also getting some gratification.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: What, what were you getting from trying these cases over the years?
Speaker 1: I think a lot for me was the art and the craft of actually putting together a case, doing the legal research, crafting the argument; so, I think, for me, a lot of it is the craft and the art of the process--the lawyering process.  I got a, I got a lot out of that; I still get a lot out of that.  Secondly, I guess, is the personal relationships and the satisfaction of helping someone, you know, in a crises situation; I get a lot out of that.  And I, I guess those are the two major things.
Speaker 2: And helping--particularly it sounds like people who historically have been victims of society.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Working for people who are, you know, marginalized, the locked up, the locked out--get a lot of satisfaction out of that.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It's a really--keeps me going, you know.  It's, it's why I went to law school in the first place, and I've managed to continue to do it and to be successful, so it's best of all worlds (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is that--and after--
Story_ID: 595922
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And after three years you decided to leave the private practice [Stone and Clark, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: After three years, we closed down the practice, I moved back to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], and finally got my dream job on my third application (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Sense of satisfaction?
Speaker 2: Sense of satisfaction--got to work with the Public Defender Service in the District of Columbia [Public Defender Service for the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.].  Frank Carter, by this time, was the director, [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree was--I think Charles was either chief of the--trial chief or the deputy director, one of the two.  And one of--you know, I, I didn't know this at the time, but prior to this, the office had apparently had a lot of criticism about its failure to be diverse and to hire minority lawyers, but Frank in--particularly, had made it a--an objective to diversify the office, so the third time was a charm for me. I got hired.
Speaker 1: What was it like working with, under (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Frank?  It was great, you know, and, and--great.  The beautiful thing about the D.C. public defender office at the time was, the quality of lawyering was very, very high, you know; Charles Ogletree was from--had been there four or five years and developed a great reputation as a great lawyer, great mentor, great teacher; he's now a professor at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Michelle Roberts [Michelle A. Roberts], who is--was--became the trial chief, is now partner at a major firm in, in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. Kim Taylor-Thompson is a professor at NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York]; she was on the staff at the P.D.'s office, Angela Davis [Angela J. Davis], a professor at American University [American University Washington College of Law, Washington, D.C.], former director; she's doing her thing at, at American.  Frank Carter's, I think, one of the better lawyers in the D.C. area.  A lot of great lawyers who came outta that office and were in that office at that time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was it like working with Charles Ogletree?
Speaker 2: It was great.  He was a--we became very good friends, still are good friends, during that period.  Excellent lawyer, hard working lawyer, really dedicated to his clients.  And he always had a--you know, the big picture view, so you could--you knew that he was going to do a lot with his career, and he has--a very impressive guy.
Story_ID: 595923
Speaker 1: Was there a major case that you can recall during this time around in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: During this time around?  My favorite case--well, I had a lot of great cases.  Probably my case that I usually talk about is a case of a young kid who was charged with possession of a weapon--unlawful use of a weapon, I think, was the particular charge.  And this was a guy who'd been arrested in a convenience store.  He was walking up to the counter and he had the gun in his hand; police--and the owner freaked out, called the police, had him arrested, and I got the case.  You know, I'd been in the P.D.'s office [Public Defender Service for the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] for a year or so; I was doing appellate work, and then when I transferred into the trial division, this case was transferred to me by a lawyer who was leaving the office.  And I'm reading the file, and apparently they had offered the guy a plea for a short period of time and probation and felony conviction, and he had declined the plea.
Story_ID: 595924
Speaker 1: You were describing a case in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] involving a young man accused of robbing a liquor store?
Speaker 2: Right.  And the--
Speaker 1: Or, at least having a weapon.
Speaker 2: Having a weapon in the store, right.  And I guess the big issue in the case was why he wouldn't accept a plea, and so as I got to know him, you know, he just felt that he was innocent and he was not gonna plead guilty to something that he didn't do.  The problem was in D.C., if you're in possession of a gun, it's pretty much a--and you don't have a license for it, it's pretty much a done deal, so to speak; I mean there's not a lot of legal defenses about it.  But as I got to know him--and it kind of illustrates the importance of getting to know the clients that you represent and not just focusing on the books; the books are important, but you gotta go beyond the books.  So he would take me out to his area; he lived in far Southeast D.C., and I noticed when he would come into the office [Public Defender Service for the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], he would always be very non-verbal, very difficult for him to talk, and so finally I said, "Well, let's take a ride and you can kind of show me around your, your neighborhood."  So, as we crossed the, the river going into Southeast, you know, he, he perked up, he was much more talkative and, you know, he was just like a different person and--which is not that surprising given that people are more comfortable in their own environments and, you know, he looked at me and he, he was like, "I notice you're, you're a little quiet.  Are you nervous?"  'Cause we were riding through some fairly high crime areas.  But I think that helped us develop a better relationship and, you know--his story was he had been in a fight, grabbed the gun from the guy who he was in the fight with, ran into the store, was gonna turn it in, but of course there were no witnesses to the fight, and we couldn't find this person that he had been in, in the fight with, so it was basically his word.
Speaker 1: Was the gun registered to anyone?
Speaker 2: No, it was like an unregistered kind of gun.
Story_ID: 595925
Speaker 1: Anyway, we went to trial on the case; we, we did a jury trial, and the funny thing about it, the judge who was a judge who I had nothing but respect for, but he was very irritated that we were taking up his time trying what he thought was a very simple case in this jury context, you know; he just thought, you know, we should have worked this case out.  Why are we wasting his time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you were taking this case very seriously.
Speaker 1: Very seriously, and he thought I was taking it way too seriously; he let me know that a couple times.  But the--I--the moral of the story, you know, there are no small cases; every case is a big case, particularly to the client, or to the person that you're representing and, you know, there are small lawyers, but there are no small cases, and that case I think--I always go back to that case because of the time that I spent, the work that I put in on what looked like a small case but was a very important case for that particular person and we, we won the case and, you know, when the jury came back, you know, the client was crying, his mother was crying, you know, you know.  I, I'm 'bout--probably had a couple tears in my eyes, and I think even the grumpy judge might've had a tear in his eye, you know, so, it was all worth it and it kind of illustrated for me the importance of the work that public defenders do.  We don't get a lot of credit for it, you know; nobody is proud of the fact that you're a public defender, and I have a lot of students who often wanna do public defender work, and part of the problem is convincing their parents, you know, that, that--they paid all this money (laughter) for this law school education, and now they wanna do something that is not gonna reward them financially, so it's--it can be difficult.
Story_ID: 595926
Speaker 1: But the period of time in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] with the Public Defender Service [Public Defender Service for the District of Columbia] was great, you know; we had a few issues that arose during that time about the directors of the office.  Eventually, I became the deputy director there, and just about the time at--by '88 [1988], the director was getting ready to go on the bench, and so the issue for me then was should I apply to be the director of the office since I was the deputy, or should I come back to Chicago [Illinois], because the public defender's office [Law Office of the Cook County Public Defender] here in Chicago had a vacancy and people had encouraged me to apply, and in fact, I did apply to the Chicago office instead of the D.C. office, and people have always wondered why.  Why would you not stay in D.C. at the best public defender office in the world, as opposed to coming to Chicago where the office's always had a mediocre reputation, or at times it's had a mediocre reputation.  And for me it was--it wasn't that close of a thing; I mean once I applied and was going through the process, and they kept winnowing the number of applications down, once I was finally offered the job, I thought it was a good fit in the sense I was the first African American ever to be appointed to the job, and it was a huge office, you know: five hundred lawyers and another two or three hundred support staff, $30 million budget, and a lot of problems.  The office had been under--several studies had been produced about the office, about their poor management style, huge caseloads, lack of training opportunities, you know; low percentage of minorities in positions of authority in the office (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And what did you hope to bring to the office?
Speaker 1: Well, I think I, I had experience in the sense of, you know, having worked in other types of public defender offices--I had that experience.  I had some administrative experience as being deputy director.  What I really wanted to do was to create an environment where the public looked at the office a little differently, and where the people inside the office looked at themselves a little differently, where we had a commitment to providing high quality representation to our clients, and hopefully where our clients began to recognize that that was our mission, that was our goal, that was our purpose.  So, over the course of the--I guess five or so years that--well, I, I became the director in ninety--'88 [1988], right, and I, I almost tripled the number of African American lawyers in the office--
Speaker 2: To what number?
Speaker 1: --during that period. I think we got up to about 100 just before I left.
Story_ID: 595927
Speaker 1: We created a training program [at the Law Office of the Cook County Public Defender] that required that all new lawyers go through this training program before they were assigned to cases and clients.  Part of the training program involved community relations.  One of the things I did was had new lawyers bused to the--some of the housing projects around this city [Chicago, Illinois] so that they could see how our clients lived and what kind of communities they came from, and it destroyed some stereotypes 'cause people have this--a lot of people have stereotypes about people in public housing that's not always true, so I think they needed to know that there were people in public housing who had jobs, who had nice apartments, who maintained certain standards of living, that everybody in public housing were, were not drug dealers or drug users.
Speaker 2: Was this around the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I got a lot of criticism about that, too because people thought it was like going to the zoo, you know, that I was exploiting people in public housing, so--I, I just thought it was important that our new lawyers got a chance to hear from the client population.  Big thing we did--one day we had a public defender day at Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] where about a couple hundred of our employees showed up at Operation PUSH.  We did a series of workshops and they just got a chance to--the lawyers got a chance to see people in our community in a different setting, and the people in the community got to see that our lawyers were human beings and committed to providing representation, so--
Speaker 2: So were you employing some of the principles of clinical law?
Speaker 1: I was using some of the clinic--some principles I learned from clinical legal education, some of the things I learned from working at the Criminal Defense Consortium of Cook County [Chicago, Illinois], and a lot of the techniques and training that I learned from the Public Defender Service in D.C. [Public Defender Service for the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 595928
Speaker 1: What were the pivotal moments?
Speaker 2: Pivotal moments.  I think the--one of the significant accomplishments was to change the way the public defender was appointed.  Prior to my arrival, the public defender was appointed by the chief judge of Cook County [Illinois], and that creates an inherent conflict when you have the judge deciding who the public defender is, because it makes the public defender seem under the knuckle of the judge.  So we passed legislation in Springfield [Illinois] that removed the judge from the appointing authority, put it in the authority of the county board [Cook County Board of Commissioners], which has its problems as well, but at least it divorces it--it makes the office more independent.  I think that was one of our major accomplishments.  Another was, as I said, the minority hiring--increasing that; we established a public affairs division so that our lawyers would go out on speaking engagements in the community--public education about the criminal justice system.  I wrote a column in the Chicago Defender called Ask the Public Defender [ph.], where people could write in and ask questions about the criminal justice system and the public defender's office [Law Office of the Cook County Public Defender, Chicago, Illinois], et cetera.
Story_ID: 595929
Speaker 1: You mentioned Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois].  Were you working with people like Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]?
Speaker 2: Jesse--Operation PUSH and the Cook County Bar Association, and a number of other community groups were instrumental in ensuring that an African American candidate for that job got serious attention, so I worked with a lot of different groups and organizations after I got in to make sure that, you know, community education was a priority.
Speaker 1: Was this the beginning of the, the trend--the gentrification trend in Chicago [Illinois]--the reevaluation of the housing projects?
Speaker 2: Actually, that came a little later.  I--probably the beginning of it--I think the plans were involved, but it really started probably in the mid--early to mid-'90s [1990s], yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Did that affect your work at all in Cook County [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Not--no, I can't say it did--not significantly, although it did inc- you know, I suppose it did increase the percentage of poverty and lack of housing in that community, which probably did have a concomitant effect on criminal activity and things--but no direct relationship.
Story_ID: 595930
Speaker 1: Were there some pivotal cases that were tried under your watch?
Speaker 2: Too numerous to mention.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I mean we handle about two hundred thousand cases or clients a year, so we had a lot of high profile cases.  It's a tremendous office, and we did appeals as well as criminal; we did juvenile, we represented parents in abuse and neglect cases, we represented children in delinquency cases, we represented--we had a paternity division where we represented people in that process.  In fact, William Martin, who was the person in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] at the Neighborhood Legal Services [Neighborhood Legal Services Program], I brought him out to run the civil division of the Cook County Public Defender's office [Law Office of the Cook County Public Defender], which included paternity as well as some abuse and neglect for parents.
Story_ID: 595931
Speaker 1: Any specific problems with the D.A.'s office [Cook County State's Attorney's Office] or--
Speaker 2: We had, we had a fair amount of issues with the D.A.'s office, particularly as it related to jury selection and the exclusion of minorities from jury service; we had some discussions with them about that and, you know, around that time, it was a series of articles that came out in the Chicago Tribune about prosecutorial misconduct, withholding of exculpatory material, discovery violations, et cetera.  And one of the other big accomplishments, I think, was with creating a public affairs unit in the office [Law Office of the Cook County Public Defender] for the first time.  So, we had some people dedicated to the idea of getting our message out about what we were about, and dealing with negative images and messages, and also teaching our lawyers how to be more advocates for the community in--outside of the courtroom as well as inside the courtroom (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 595932
Speaker 1: How long did you remain director?
Speaker 2: I left in '92 [1992], I guess?  I was offered a job as the director of the Mandel Legal Aid Clinic [Edwin F. Mandel Legal Aid Clinic] here at the law school [University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois]; dean called me up and asked me if I'd be interested in coming back as a director, and gave it some serious thought, and one of the things I missed about being the director of the public defender's office [Law Office of the Cook County Public Defender] was I never got a chance to get into court because I'm so focused on administrative and management issues, so I thought this would be a good, a good mix to come back and do a little bit a of trial work, a little bit of teaching, you know, best of all worlds.  I--and, you know, around that same time I got appointed to the--chair the American Bar Association's Criminal Justice Section, which in--it's an organization of like five thousand lawyers, judges, prosecutors, defense lawyers, law professors, et cetera; we work on policy related issues, so coming back to the clinic and to the law school at the same time I was the chair of the ABA section, it kind of--was a good fit, you know--gave me a chance to get some of my students involved in some of the policy questions as well.
Story_ID: 595933
Speaker 1: Tell me about the Criminal and Juvenile Justice Project.
Speaker 2: We started that in ninety--well, when I came back in '91 [1991], what we saw during that--those first few years was this increasing trend of moving children out of juvenile court into adult court.  There were a lot of social scientists who came up with this idea of the super predator, and it was supposedly this cohort of kids between the ages of five and twelve, who were gonna turn into these raging super predators; they call--were called godless, hopeless, fatherless and jobless, and they were just gonna wreak havoc on American society.  And as a result of some of that research--faulty, that we know now--a lot of states around the country passed laws that increased the ways in which children could be moved out of juvenile court into adult court, so they lowered the ages and they expanded the categories.  When I first started practicing law, typically the only kid that you'd find in adult court was a kid who was sixteen or seventeen charged with first degree murder.  Now, you've got kids as young as thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, and they can be charged with a variety of offenses; a lot of 'em are drug cases.  And so, when we saw that developing, that's when we decided to create the Criminal and Juvenile Justice Project.
Speaker 1: Affiliated with the University of Chicago [University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Part of the Mandel Legal Aid Clinic [Edwin F. Mandel Legal Aid Clinic, Chicago, Illinois] here at the law school--to try to slow down this process, to examine this process, to see if it made sense and to figure out what we could do about it.  And as a result, we started picking up a lot of cases of kids who were being automatically transferred to adult court.  So, for a while, during the mid-'90s [1990s], we had a lot of first degree mur- we were representing a lot of kids charged with first degree murder, charged with drug offenses, charged with other offenses where they had been transferred to adult court.  Part of our goal was to get 'em back to juvenile court, or to provide them high quality representation in the adult system, to make sure they got social service, their social service needs were addressed, as well as their legal needs, and we still do that today to--in the same degree.  We still have--the Criminal and Juvenile Justice Project is still the project under which we work.  I've got a partner, Herschella Conyers [Herschella G. Conyers], my colleague who is--works with me in the project, and a social worker, Michelle Geller, works very closely; she has social work students, so we collaborate with her social work students, our law students; try to develop a holistic representational scheme that deals with the family's needs, the client's needs, the legal needs, the social service needs, and that could be jobs, job training, education, GED [General Educational Development], you know--college, work if, if possible, counselling, therapy--try to hook it all together and make sure the client and their family are better off after they've come into contact with us than they were before.
Story_ID: 595934
Speaker 1: Again, is there a specific case that comes to mind that demonstrates the usefulness?
Speaker 2: Well, there's a--one of the major cases that we worked on for a number of years is--involves--is juvenile life without parole question.  In addition to our individual representation, we always try to develop a policy initiative, so about, I don't know, six or seven years ago we, we picked up a case of a kid charged with first degree murder, sixteen--fifteen years old.  He was accused of being a lookout in a double homicide; two people were killed.  He was supposed to be one of the lookouts, looking out for the police.  But because he was fifteen, because two people were killed, he was automatically transferred to adult court and never got to juvenile court.  Because two people were killed, the only sentence that he could get was mandatory life without parole, even though he didn't shoot anybody, but that's the only sentence available; it's either you're acquitted, or you go to jail for the rest a of your life.  And because of the law on accountability in Illinois, he was just as responsible for the deaths as the person who pulled the trigger.  In Illinois, if you're accountable for a crime, meaning you aided, abetted, participated in, helped out--you can be just as guilty as the actual perpetrator and receive the same sentence.  So it was a kind of triple whammy.  And as we started getting into the case, we realized that we were gonna have to challenge the constitutionality of the statute if our client was convicted.  But, fortunately for us, we went to trial and our client was acquitted; he was found not guilty, and released.  One of the other codefendants was convicted, and the judge called the clinic [Edwin F. Mandel Legal Aid Clinic, Chicago, Illinois] and asked the clinic--asked me and our project [Criminal and Juvenile Justice Project] if we would get involved on the sentencing question 'cause we had raised the issue with him on our case, and told him that in the event of a conviction, we were gonna be challenging the statute.  So, he called us up and said, "Well, you know, your guy got acquitted but the codefendant is convicted.  How would you like to get involved on this question?"  So we got involved on the question.  Our students [at the University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois] did a fantastic job of writing an amicus brief on the question of sentencing, and we bought it--brought in the merging issues about brain, neuroscience as it relates to children, that children's brains are still forming up until their early twenties, and therefore, questions about judgment, peer pressure, accountability for their actions--they're still maturing.  And, you know, most of the neuroscience now says that the brain is not fully formed until their early twenties, particularly around some of the issues that I mentioned.  And the science really mirrors what most parents already know about teenagers, you know; teenagers are impulsive, teenagers are subject to peer pressure, teenagers don't think about consequences, I mean--that's why they're teenagers.  But anyway, the science is now backing up what most conscious adults already know, so does it make sense for the adult criminal justice system to impose its strictures on this category of children?  We say, "No."  We say, "Our children should get a second chance."  We say, "Children may do bad things, and often they do very bad things, but that doesn't mean they're bad people for the rest of their lives."  So--and we--so we, we tie in the, the, the, the neuroscience, and then we tie in the international law of human rights.
Story_ID: 595935
Speaker 1: There's the, you know, Convention on the Rights of the Child, the United States Convention--United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, there's the UN civil and political covenants, all of which prohibit the sentencing of life without parole for people who commit crimes under the age of eighteen.  And we tried to get the courts in the United States to accept the international law as well as the neuroscience, and we were successful in this case.  The judge bought, bought our argument, declared the statute unconstitutional as it applied to this particular case, and refused to sentence the kid to life without parole.  The state appealed to the Illinois Supreme Court, we asked the Illinois Supreme Court to appoint us his amicus curiae in that case; the court did, and we wrote another brief and they essentially agreed with our position at the Illinois Supreme Court level.  So that's kind of a major example of theory and practice, policy connected to individual cases, and the students did the majority of the work, a great majority of the work, under our supervision, but they really, you know, invested into this situation.  And now, as I said, we're connecting up with other groups around the country and around the world who are attacking this life without parole situation for kids.
Story_ID: 595936
Speaker 1: You know, I went to South Africa in '92 [1992], right after I came to the clinic [Edwin F. Mandel Legal Aid Clinic, Chicago, Illinois], to do--Johannesburg [South Africa] to do a program about indigent defense, a public defense.  Johannesb- South Africa had just started a little--a public defender's office for the first time, so in South Africa, prior to that, if you were poor and you were charged with a crime, you had--didn't have a right to a lawyer.  You got a right to hire a lawyer, but you didn't have a right to have a lawyer appointed for you if you couldn't afford one, so a lot of poor people were left to, to represent themselves.  So they just started the idea of creating a public defender service, so I went with a group of folks. [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree was one, Nancy Gist--a few other people who, who went to South Africa as part of a foundation program to talk about indigent defense issues.  And of course, one of the major issues always is the representation of children and how you have to really think about the kind of systems that you wanna create to provide effective representation for children.  Now, you know, as I said, I went in '92 [1992], and that was before the elections in South Africa so, you know, one of the crazy things about it, they had set up this public defender office, and we went to visit, and they were wondering why the indigenous folks who were charged with crimes didn't trust the public defenders in the office and they were--viewed the public defenders as being part of the system.
Story_ID: 595937
Speaker 1: So you're talking about your experiences in South Africa.
Speaker 2: Right.  I, I--the first trip was in '92 [1992], and it was in Johannesburg [South Africa] and we did a--went there for four or five days, focusing on trying to help folks design and implement, and think about issues related to public defense--how do you defend people who are charged with crimes who can't afford private lawyers?  It was an interesting experience and as I, I mentioned earlier, one of the odd things about it was the, the people who were running the program.  It was an experimental program and they had great in- good intentions, but I think they kind of lost--or, or--lost sight of the context so, you know, part of the reason that the population distrusted them was, I think, partly a result of the fact that the office did not reflect the ethnicity of the population that they were trying to serve, and it's one of the things I try to go--you know, I was in New Orleans [Louisiana] after Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], looking at the public defender system there, and the problems in the system; a lot of it was related to, to--the system was, was bad before Katrina, and then Katrina just exacerbated the issue--the issue being you have to have some independence, the office has to reflect, to some degree, the client population, you have to have a diverse staff, you can't have all the clients black and all the lawyers white because it kind of perpetuates the, you know, appearance of oppression, even though the lawyers may be committed, you know; you have to pay attention to context.  So, that was a great trip.  And then, you know, I went back to South Africa a few years ago for the United Nations Conference against Racism--World Conference against Racism [World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance], which was a fascinating experience; this was in Durban [South Africa].  And just the energy there--I was more an observer for The Sentencing Project, a group that does a lot of policy work in Washington, D.C. on, on sentencing issues; I'm on--I've been on their board of directors for--since they started--twenty years.  But they sent me over to South Africa to kind of--for the world conference, and my goal was really to just absorb it and look at what other criminal justice not-for-profits NGOs [non-governmental organization] were doing around the world about these issues of sentencing, incarceration, policy work.
Story_ID: 595938
Speaker 1: You know, it's been a great ride, I'm still enjoying it, I have--working here in the clinic [Edwin F. Mandel Legal Aid Clinic, Chicago, Illinois] is the best of all worlds for me.  I get to try a few cases, I get to teach, the students are energetic, they keep me young and keep me on my toes, and I'm enjoying it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How did your--how does your experience at the University of Chicago [University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois] compare with your experience at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?  You were there in the late '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I--well, I was merely a lecturer at Harvard in their intensive trial practice workshop [Trial Advocacy Workshop], so I would go up for a couple weeks every year, probably for five or six years, working with [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree who taught--who was the director of their intensive trial practice workshop--excellent experience, and I brought back that experience to our clinic and created an intensive trial practice workshop here, kind of modeled on the--Harvard's program.  And what it does is--all my clinic students come back to law school a couple weeks before the fall quarter, and are engaged in a very intensive advocacy workshop, and they work from like noon to five or six at night, sometimes eight or nine at night, for two weeks, focusing on all the aspects of developing a case for trial.  And the reason I do it in an intensive manner with the clinic, I think it creates collaboration--forces them to collaborate and work with each other, and the clinic students get to know each other from the different projects that are in the clinic.  We have about eight or nine projects here in the clinic, and sometime--well, six or seven, and sometimes the students don't get to know each other, so the workshop kind of forces them to, to deal with that.
Story_ID: 595939
Speaker 1: At this point in your career, as you look back at all of the hurdles and all of the incredible accomplishments, what stands out in your mind?  I know in Chicago [Illinois] you were also involved in the commander--police commander Burge [Jon Burge] case; you were involved in the Corethian Bell case.  Are there certain accomplishments that really stand out in your mind?
Speaker 2: You know, every case, to me, is very important, so I wouldn't single out one case above the other.  All my cases are very important; some just get a lot more publicity than others, but in terms of importance to me and importance to the client, you know, it's kind of like asking me which of my four kids [Sokoni Stone, Rahman Stone, Marisa Stone, and Lee Sukari Stone] do I love the best; I love all four of my kids equally, and I'm very proud of all of their accomplishments.  My cases I, I look at the same way, you know.  All of them have taught me something, hopefully I've contributed a little bit to, to them with the students, or with all of us working together.  You know, coming back to the university [University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois], and when I came back in '91 [1991], I was very mixed about coming back in the sense that I liked the job that I had being the public defender of Cook County [Illinois], and I wasn't looking for a job.  I came back partly--you know, the history idea.  You know, when I was appointed, they, they noted that I was the first African American appointed to the law school in so many years, so I thought that was important. Bob Ming [William Robert Ming], I think, was the last full-time faculty member here at the university, and that was twenty or thirty years before I was appointed, so I began to try to, to learn a bit more about him and his contributions.  I mean he was a black law professor at a time when there were very, very few, particularly at a, a, a white law school, or an establishment--elite law school, so that had a lot of resonance for me.  The clinic [Edwin F. Mandel Legal Aid Clinic, Chicago, Illinois] has always been a place where people are committed to social justice--that was a big draw; and then, you know, it's, it's been, it's been a--I've had a very surprisingly good career.
Story_ID: 595940
Speaker 1: What would you like your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Oh, good husband, good father, good lawyer.  I'd be happy, I'd be happy with those (laughter); I'd be very happy with that.
Story_ID: 595941
Speaker 1: And you mentioned your children.
Speaker 2: I have four children.  My daughter Sokoni [Sokoni Stone] is--well, she was a public school teacher up until--just recently she left.  She has three sons--her and her husband have three sons, so I'm a grandfather three times over.  They're doing a fantastic job raising their family.  My son is a computer person with the Illinois Department of Public Health.  I think he does some work with the Center for Disease Control [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia] and--in terms of updating the hardware and software systems on issues of public health.
Speaker 1: His name again?
Speaker 2: Rahman [Rahman Stone], R-A-H-M-A-N.  I have a daughter Marisa [Marisa Stone], who's a Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] graduate like yourself, who's now in New York [New York] working for Macy's [Macy's, Inc.] in their corporate department, and my youngest is Lee Sukari [Lee Sukari Stone], L-E-E, S-U-K-A-R-I, who is eleven; she'll be twelve next month, sixth grade, honor roll, straight A student.  So, I'm proud of all my kids; they're, they're doing well, taking care of business, and keeping the old man on his toes.
Speaker 1: And your wife?
Speaker 2: My wife Cheryl is a--she does a--she's a law school graduate, graduated from Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.], and she does a lot of consulting work or--around issues related to strategic planning, consult- diversity workshops, so it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And her full name?
Speaker 2: Cheryl Bradley Stone.
Story_ID: 595942
Speaker 1: What's the next step for you?
Speaker 2: That's an excellent question.  I'm trying to figure that out--what the next step should be, whether I should just go out to pasture or whether I should try to do one more big thing, and I don't know the answer to that.  I'm gonna try to do some writing.
Speaker 1: Some more writing.
Speaker 2: That's what I'm gonna really try to do, is develop my writing beyond the legal sphere into essays and maybe some fiction.
Speaker 1: Very good.  Well, Professor Randolph Stone [HistoryMaker Randolph Noel Stone], it has been an extreme pleasure to share this time with you, and to learn about your amazing life.  Thank you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, thank--well thank you.  I've, I've really enjoyed it, you've been very thorough, and I appreciate your work.
