Story_ID: 668911
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is Shaeideh Prince.  Sir, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Okay it's William Richard Stevenson [HistoryMaker Mickey Stevenson], but I'm known as William "Mickey" Stevenson.  Okay and that's W-I-L-L-I-A-M, and Stevenson, S-T-E-V-E-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And where did the nickname Mickey come from?
Speaker 2: My mother [Kitty Stevenson] gave it to me (laughter), that's all I can say.  I hear, remember her calling, "Mickey, Lonnie [Alonzo Stevenson] get in here." That was it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay all right and sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is the 1/4/37 [January 4, 1937]. And placement, Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: All right and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: A and R director [artists and repertoire].  I was the A and R director of Motown [Motown Records] and now I'm producing plays, shows, films.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 17th and--
Speaker 1: Of November, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) November, 2016.
Speaker 1: Yes sir, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Los Angeles [California] downtown at the 300 building [300 South Grand Avenue] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay that's good enough, that's good enough.
Story_ID: 668912
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth we ask five questions as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer. First one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite food is Jamaican fish and goat.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color, gray.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year would be spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Destination, favorite vacation destination would be Hawaii I think.
Speaker 1: And do, do, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, learn all you can, can all you learn (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 668913
Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Kitty Stevenson, K-I-T-T-Y, and S-T-E-V-E-N-S-O-N.  Now she was also known as Kitty "Brown Gal" Stevenson.  My mother was an entertainer.
Speaker 1: Okay, right and a successful one in those days too, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: That I can't tell you.
Speaker 1: Okay, now we have a date here and I don't know if it, if it, if it matches up with what you know, but we have the date of 1925 for her birth.  Is that?
Speaker 2: Well that sounds right.
Speaker 1: Is it about right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay and she passed at fifty-three, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and was she from Detroit [Michigan] originally or?
Speaker 2: She was from I think Alabama originally.
Speaker 1: There's a lot of people from Detroit are from Alabama, so.  It's like Mississippi is to Chicago [Illinois] same kind of thing, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so did she talk about growing up and about her people and her ancestors?
Speaker 2: No she did not.  She was really into teaching us.  That was, you know about, in, in music and how to conduct ourselves.  She was into that, not, she, her mother, which was my grandmother was, was present and very different.  My mother never drank or smoked.  That's, and I wouldn't say she was really religious, but she stayed, kept her time with the Lord for church et cetera.
Speaker 1: That's remarkable in the fact that she, she was a performer and performed in clubs.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: But she did not drink or smoke?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  It was amazing.
Speaker 1: Okay, now she never talked about Alabama or, or how she grew up or your grandmother never talked about it either?
Speaker 2: Nope.  My grandmother would talk about when we had like some dinners together.  My grandmother would talk about her husband who was an Indian [Native American], and his, his way of doing things and, but my mother all she would deal with us on is performing, singing, how to conduct ourselves, go after what you want, don't, if you want something, you believe in it, deal with it, other than that you'll never know if you could accomplish it.  She was in that kind of a mode all the time.
Speaker 1: So, were you ever curious about, about your family history at all?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I, with my sisters and brothers [Alonzo Stevenson and Martin Stevenson] around, it was four of us, but we had enough to do and survive.  It was not in a curious thing.  It was never there.
Speaker 1: I know in some households it is really, is discouraged, that kind of discussion is discouraged, you know, I mean in the North, people don't want to talk about what happened down south.  Did it ever, did they ever want to visit or go back to where they came from?
Speaker 2: My grandmother would say to me, "Stay out of the South."  She says, "The kind of kid you are, you will not come back, you will get hurt."  You have a--what were they saying? I had an attitude or a way of dealing with things that could get me in a lot of trouble.  And they made it a point to keep me out of the South.  I only went, I went back once because one of my uncles was, had a problem with the court and all that and, which was my grandmother's brother, so I had to go back with her to make sure that she would be okay and, and even then she kept me, I could only go so far, walk with her, don't, you know 'cause I would, I would say things normally like you know, "What is that? Who are you?" That sort of thing and I had a curiosity that was, she said was not good for that area the way I would approach you know.
Speaker 1: You know what you are saying this is serious business because during your, I guess adolescence, Emmett Kill--Till [Emmett Till] was killed--
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: --in--
Speaker 2: Oh boy.
Speaker 1: --in Money, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, it was in '55 [1955] or '56 [1956], I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But, you know this is, this is, this is serious.
Story_ID: 668914
Speaker 1: Where did you go, go in Alabama when you went down, do you remember (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well we went, I, I remember going by a graveyard (laughter) and we stayed in a, in a house over the graveyard.  We could look and see.  And--
Speaker 1: They didn't name the town or anything or you didn't remember what, what town it was?
Speaker 2: No I don't, because I didn't even want to go, but, so it was like some strange southern town name.  And she, she was very nervous for me, but, and I was you know I was pretty bold.  I was a bold kid and I was very curious and I would just ask questions and she would say to me--I know we were going to a restaurant once to eat and she say, "Now just don't say anything, just, just order what you want, get you a hamburger or whatever."  And I'm saying, "Why, I mean I wanna see the menu.  I wanna see what's going on," you know.  She said, "Don't do it, don't it."  It was ve- it was very uncomfortable for me and, and I got out as soon as, as soon as we got out of there I got back.  I remember taking a train to, to some little spot, and that was it, that was it for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And was through with it.
Story_ID: 668915
Speaker 1: All right now, now, now did you mother grow up in Detroit [Michigan] or did she grow up in Alabama, then move to Detroit?
Speaker 2: She grew up in Alabama and moved to Detroit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and she was singing and playing congas and writing songs and, and teaching us.
Speaker 1: Okay now this is, she was quite a tea- a teacher.  Now she, so did she always, did she always want to perform, is that, is that what you got--?
Speaker 2: I think so because it, but she never sang in church.  I never remember seeing her sing in church, only I remember her standing in, in the living room with the congas playing, writing, and she performed in Detroit, of course, a lot, different clubs in Detroit.  And she was, pardon me, she was one of the main acts at the club we called the Flame Show Bar [Detroit, Michigan].  It was like, like the main in that, in that ti- at that time artists like Dinah Washington and Duke Ellington and people like that would come to the Flame Show Bar.  And a guy named Maurice King, I remember him, he was there.  He was like the conductor, and he was so unique.  The guy wore his white suit and his white tails and his hat and his hair was white and he had the whole thing going on, and he was very, very good.  And I would say that because I could come in and get on the floor and look up and see the, some of the productions and show going on.  At any rate, my mom was there and she, they did, they did a story on her where as Dinah Washington came to do her, her bit at, at the club and my mom was the opening act and when the show was over Dinah Washington told the manager, "Look from now on when you bring me I don't wanna see any dog acts, any tambourines and twirling things."  She say, "And I don't wanna see any Kitty 'Brown Gal' Stevenson [Kitty Stevenson]," (laughter). And, and so after that the, the two of them got to be friends you know.  She would come to the house sometime and all that and, but it was really amazing because my mother was very, very good.
Speaker 1: Okay and I know Dinah Washington was known for like really speaking her mind too.
Speaker 2: I mean straight up all the time, never stopped, and I, I, I was, even in the house when we were, my mother would cook and they would talk and, yeah she was, she'd be right on it.  She didn't waste any time, get right to the point (laughter).
Story_ID: 668916
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name was William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, William Stevenson, and he was a tap dancer and he was, he worked in a major store, the store that sold furniture and clothes and that was his other job so he could keep taking care of his responsibilities.  The tap dancing thing wasn't paying off, so he had that job.
Speaker 1: Was this one of the stores on Hastings Street?
Speaker 2: This store was on, on, this store was on Woodward [Avenue]--
Speaker 1: Woodward.
Speaker 2: --on the main street.
Speaker 1: Oh okay now that wasn't Hudson's [J.L. Hudson Company, Detroit, Michigan]--
Speaker 2: It was not Hudson's, but it was close.
Speaker 1: Something close to there, okay.
Speaker 2: One of those kind of, kind of department stores.  And what was amazing about him was he, he asked me what instrument did I want to play and I said, "I'd like to play the bass."  And there was a bass in the window of the store, and he said, "Now if I buy this bass for you, you gotta stick with this 'cause this is gonna cost me a lot of money." And at, in those days that was a lot of money for him.  It was a lot of money for us as blacks anyway, you know it was just really tight.  And I said, "Okay I'll, stay with it," and he bought it for me and I remember he would be stretched out on his, in his chair and I would have the bass and I would be leaning up against the refi- in those days we had iceboxes (laughter), and I could lean against it because the bass was bigger than me, right, and I was holding it--
Speaker 1: This is an upright bass?
Speaker 2: Upright, straight up, upright.  In those days, that was, that was it.  And I had a li- I, I, I would, I had my notes and I would play the notes, read the notes and find my hand thing and it was not, I couldn't go to someone to get the, a teaching process for the bass because we didn't have the money and I wanted to play the bass and so I would get the book and I would learn to play the notes with the book and my dad would say, "That one was flat, raise up, go up, go up," (laughter).  He would never get up, now he'd be stretched out on like on a chair with his feet up and lean back and all that.  And I would, I would do this to the point I would actually fall asleep with the bass leaning on the, on the box, and he would take it, take it from me to lie down and all that.  I never forget that.  He would insist that I stay with it, and that was a wonderful time.  And my family at that time was a separation between my mom [Kitty Stevenson] and my dad, but my dad would always, and, and they lived like a block from each other, so of course I would go to, to him and when I, on the weekend I would just never leave because that's where my bass was, you know what I mean (laughter).
Speaker 1: So now where was your father, what was his date of birth and where was he from?
Speaker 2: I gotta tell you I do not remember, and I was also taught by my mom that days and dates were not important as a young kid, it's what you do and what you, what you're after and what you learn, that's important.  And so I never really focused on whose birthday is this, what day is that, never, never focused on that.  To this very day, even with my sons and daughters, I can't tell you all their birthdays.  So, it's been like in here, but I can tell you songs, who wrote them, what place, what city that I can tell you (laughter).  At any rate, I can't tell you my--
Speaker 1: Would you have the sense that he was from Detroit [Michigan] or was he from someplace else or did he ever talk about it?
Speaker 2: He, they met in Detroit, so obviously where he came before that is, is, I don't know, but they met in Detroit and that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a young man, they, they, they got together in Detroit.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did he, did he have a special name he performed under or was it just William Stevenson?
Speaker 2: Nope, he was just William Stevenson.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And he was very handsome, very handsome guy.  So, he was--they would have him come and do things just to have him there, I mean you know in the clubs and all that.  But, his job that kept him with money was working in that department store.  Almost had it, almost came to me.  Okay it might slide in (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, all right.
Speaker 2: But okay so now was he a World War II [WWII] vet?  Did he have to fight in the war?
Speaker 1: No, no fight at all.  He didn't, he didn't go in.
Speaker 2: Okay and all right so, so did you get a sense that he was raised in Chicago [Illinois] too, I mean in--
Speaker 1: In Detroit.
Speaker 2: --in Detroit too?
Speaker 1: Yes, I had the feeling he was raised in Detroit.  I'm sure in those days that most blacks came from some place other than Detroit, so I'm, I'm sure he came from another, from someplace in the South as, as a young, as a young kid.
Speaker 2: Okay, but he was around during the whole time you were growing up then?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: They, they just lived in separate places.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.
Story_ID: 668917
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now when you think about their talents, their personalities, their dispositions, what they look like, how they walk, talk, their opinions, who do you think that you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I would say my mom [Kitty Stevenson] because of, she was, the things that she would say and mean was very important to me because watching my sisters, my brother and her really handling everything.  She was a strong force, and to be, not, to not drink or smoke and all that and still be a--a strong force was like unusual because around me in those days everybody was either drinking or going crazy, trying to survive of course, and that, that was a way to, of relieving themselves, and she was just, she was just standing strong, you know.  So, I, I mean my, my mother would eat--when it came time for cooking she could actually sing a song, working on her, on her music, and then go out and get a chicken out from, off the porch, we had chickens, kill the chicken personally, pick the stuff while we're, be singing, and then turn around and cook it and be talking to us all at the same time.  That was just amazing to me.
Story_ID: 668918
Speaker 1: When all the kids in my neighborhood--we stayed in a neighborhood where we could--it was like an apartment, a lot of apartments and there were like maybe one, about six of them that turn the corner, but in the, in the yard you could see all the, all the, the apartments and the backdoors and stairs and you could see them and you could holler across the yard to another person and, and so it was like, it was like a big family place for all of us, right.  And for my mom [Kitty Stevenson] to go out on the, on the back porch and kill the chicken, be plucking, dipping it in the hot water and talking and singing and preparing herself, she gotta go to work that night.  It was amazing.  And people hollering back and forth across it was like, I think it gave me the feeling of being in a neighborhood and like being say in Africa.  In other words, the, the family was, everybody was for everybody from my learning about Africa, never, never going from there as a kid but just for whatever I knew about it I felt I was like, we were all one family and everybody took care of each other.  In other words, every, every mother or father see one of us kids doing something wrong we could get punished or straightened out by that person, you know what I mean.  All the back doors were always open.  It was like a whole other ballgame.  Of course, as I grew up that was, that was out of the question you lock your door, you put bars up, but in those days it wasn't like that.
Speaker 2: Now did you live in what they call the Black Bottom neighborhood of Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 1: Kind of yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What was your street or address?
Speaker 1: Hastings [Street] and Henry, Henry Street.
Speaker 2: Hastings and Henry.
Speaker 1: And you know we had the alley, and we could play ball, and all the families would sit on the porches and look at and they covered, they, they looked after all of us.  Everybody was, was, was a family member, even though they were across the yard, you know what I mean?   And it was a good comfortable feeling.
Speaker 2: All right so now, now how many siblings do you have, and can you give us the birth order of everybody and where you fit in too?
Speaker 1: My sister was the oldest, Elaine [Elaine Stevenson], and then I was next, and then my brother Lonnie [Alonzo Stevenson] was after me and one year away, and then my brother Martin [Martin Stevenson], who was three, four years away.  So, we're in that order.
Story_ID: 668919
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes, but my earlier memories were (pause) being a Boy Scout.
Speaker 1: Now I'm talking about the earliest, what's the earliest memory (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Early, early?
Speaker 1: I mean the first thing you remember you remember.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Let's see the first thing I remember.  You going back a lot of years here brother (laughter).  First thing I remember, remember.
Speaker 1: Was there a first story about you as a baby or something or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Let me see, that's a tough one I, well first--
Speaker 1: Well you might not be able to think of one, but this--I always ask.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Wow that's, that's deep.  The first thing as a kid, baby, wow that's, that's tough, that's tough.
Speaker 1: Some people think--have them--but, well at any rate what was it like, you've already shared some of what it was like growing up, but that was, I know that's a time in Detroit [Michigan] that's gone now, I mean Black Bottom is gone--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --Paradise Valley [Detroit, Michigan]--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --where your mother [Kitty Stevenson] performed is gone--
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.
Speaker 1: --big Ford stadium [Ford Field, Detroit, Michigan] is sitting there where it used to be.  What were some of the sights and sounds or smells of growing up in Detroit in those days?
Speaker 2: I, I, I remember my mother was working for one of the, one of the factories that made tanks; that I remember.  And because all the guys were, men were at war [World War II, WWII] or whatever, the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--
Speaker 2: --the women did a lot of work, you know, in factories and stuff, and my mother had one of those jobs.  And they had a day that the families could come to the factory, and I remember going with her and my brothers [Alonzo Stevenson and Martin Stevenson] and I and watched the tanks and I had an opportunity to climb in one and when that happened it was a claustrophobia thing that hit me that was amazing and they had to get me out.  And from that day on I never wanted to be in that kind of position even as from, I was a kid then, but it never left my head.  It was, and how they did that, how they built those things and why it was just.  And the women had these bandanas they tie around their heads and, and, and had tools in their hands and they were like working like men, you know, with the tanks and that was, that was a frightening feeling for me.  And to see my mom do that was frightening too.  That I couldn't forget.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah that's--any other sights, sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: Well, the worse thing was when my mom passed, I remember oatmeal cookies, and I never wanted to eat those again or touch them, and it just stayed in my head.  She was, she had a cancer thing and what happened was in those days when you had cancer it was just over.  I mean she had, they amputated one breast, then they amputated the other one and it was not like, you know, thank God they found solutions to, for women to, to live a lot longer, but in those days forget it.  And being black it was even worse.  They never, you know didn't, didn't, automatically counted you out.  I remember being under the bed and she couldn't handle things and I would--she would, my mom was like my friend as well as my mom.  I mean we was like you know like that (gesture) and that was, that was heavy for me.
Story_ID: 668920
Speaker 1: I wanna go back to some of the things your mom [Kitty Stevenson] taught you and now she, she formed you and, and your two brothers [Alonzo Stevenson and Martin Stevenson] into a trio right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.
Speaker 2: We were The Stevenson Trio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she had us rehearsing and we, we, we, we rehearsed, I mean constantly.  And she said, "In order to be good you gotta, you have to be able to perform without thinking about it, and if you had to think about it, then you better rehearse more because it should come natural to you."  And so therefore if you made any mistakes, the only one knew about it was you because you could go past that moment.  She had a real thing about that.  And we were singing, we were singing tunes like, by The Mills Brothers, goes back a ways, and so we weren't singing rock and roll or R and B or say blues at the time.  We were singing like Mills Brothers stuff and kind of pop kind of stuff, right.  And I never understood why she gave us that, but as I grew up I recognized that the R and B, blues would come naturally.  It's the other part you wanna learn so you can put it altogether.  So, that was a blessing.  You know I didn't know it at the time, but it came out to be a blessing.
Story_ID: 668921
Speaker 1: Well was this a factor too, I know and it took me a long time to figure this out that the blues, at least the original blues, some of the lyrics were not, you couldn't sing them in public.  I mean you know--
Speaker 2: Oh no (laughter).
Speaker 1: --I mean they, they, they weren't, ready for the radio or something or public consumption of broad--because of the sexual innuendos--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and things in some of these songs--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --so, so guys like The Mills Brothers, you know, had more of an act that was more consumable and Nat King Cole or The Mills Brothers and people like that.
Speaker 2: Right, right and, and I think, and you're absolutely right and what happened was for me it was to take an artist to another level, for a black talent at the time, you either had to be blues, blues, you know what I mean, or you had to find a way to lift yourself up to another level and, and the, and the blues was never missing, they never, I mean The Mills Brothers could sing some blues too now.  They can sing church songs, all that, but the point was let's go this way so people, others can come into another level, you know what I mean, and that's the way my mom [Kitty Stevenson] was because she would play, she would sing blues, but her records were always in a pop format, big band sounding stuff.  Where blues to me was like guitar, soulful, you know (singing), "Oh baby why don't you come--," you know that kind of thing, right, which was good because it all come from spiritual, spiritual content, context.  So, it was out, but yeah that was--she kept us in a, in a certain place.  So, she taught us these songs like The Mills Brothers songs and, and songs like Nat Cole would do remember--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, in that order.
Story_ID: 668922
Speaker 1: And she had us go to the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] to perform.  She was working with the Sweethearts of Rhythm.
Speaker 2: Oh, right, now we interviewed Cathy Hughes' mother [HistoryMaker Helen Jones Woods] who was performing in the International Sweethearts of Rhythm during the war [World War II, WWII]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --and they did perform at the Apollo, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so my mom [Kitty Stevenson] was, she said to, she had an opportunity to have us come on and do the amateur show ['Amateur Night at the Apollo'], 'cause she was hooked up with the people in there, and, and it was that time that when we went in, my brothers [Alonzo Stevenson and Martin Stevenson] and I, we were doing a song called (singing), "Bee I bumble, be a, I like honey and awful lot, you're as sweet as honeydew, that's the reason I love you," that was a Mills Brothers [The Mills Brothers] song, right, so we, we had got this tune down and my little brother, the youngest brother, he would, at the right point he would fall on the floor on his knees and sing his line.  So, we had to time that just right.  So, at the Apollo going in it was a mad house, everything going up and down the stairs, people all over the place, it was like frightening going in there.  But, once we got in and got to the backstage for our turn to go on we watched the other artists and, and the guy with, with the hook--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: --they had the guy would snatch you off the stage (laughter).  Anyway he was standing there.  The guy looked like a giant.  He had on all this clown outfit, and he had this, this rainbow like a hook in his hand.  It was like, you know with the tall stick with the turn top on it, you know what I mean and he--
Speaker 2: Was he called the Sandman [Sandman Sims] or something?
Speaker 1: Sandman, ah, ah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He was there and he be standing, we were, he was like right in front of us.  Now we're backstage watching the other, the act that's on stage, and he would stand there.  And when the act was terrible, he'd step out with this hook, put it around your waist or your neck, and he would be Sandman sanding or dancing as he's pulling you off the stage.  Well, that was frightening for me and my brothers.  We said, "Oh man we, we gone get caught by the Sandman," and my mother said, "Don't worry about the Sandman you guys have this, you got this, that's why you rehearse, relax."  And that was nice to hear, but it didn't (laughter), didn't, didn't help what I was looking at being, watching the first man snatched off the stage.  So, we was the, we were the next act.  We walk out there, and we doing, we singing our song bee I bumble, we're doing the whole nine yards, a little nervous and everything.  My little brother was scared to death and right in the middle of, at the moment when he's supposed to fall on his knees and do this, say his little line, he dropped to both knees, put his hands together like he was praying, and he say (singing), "And that's the reason I love you."  When he said that, the audience went insane (laughter), and he was crying 'cause he was still scared, right, and we won the contest.  We won the contest, and from that point on we were known as the Stevenson brothers [The Stevenson Trio] and all that.  And when we came off, when, I remember walking off the stage and the smile on my mother's face.  She say, "See, I told you, that's what rehearsing and practicing is all about, from when you react, even when you can't you will act, you will break, it will come out."  And I never forgot that.  So, when I got to Motown [Motown Records] I used that theory.
Story_ID: 668923
Speaker 1: Okay now as I was reading the material and after what you just said it seems to me that your mother [Kitty Stevenson] in addition to being a, a top notch performer was the A R person for your family (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's good.
Speaker 1: She's a, she was the, yeah the artists and repertoire (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, yep (laughter).
Speaker 1: --development per- person for your family.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: She, she taught you all the ropes of show business how to rehearse, how to present yourselves, what to do, and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know so you're like, almost like as they say born in a trunk, you know.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah that's right, that's good.  You're right she was, she was the A and R for the family, right.  You know my, my brother was, he was not interested in being a--when my mother passed, my brother--
Speaker 1: Now which one is this the, the youngest one?
Speaker 2: The one, no the one, Lonnie [Alonzo Stevenson], the one under me.  He was one year younger than I am.  He was not interested in being in the entertainment business anymore.  That kind of took him in a whole other level.  And he went into college to do, he wanted to be an architect or something like that.  He was, he went for that.  And then my younger brother, Martin [Martin Stevenson], he could out sing all of us, the one that fell on his knees and did his hands together, had a great voice.  He wanted to become a singer.  And me I was kind of out of it too.  I was upset, my mom was, when she left, that was it for me.  I didn't--we sang together for a while around, around the city, and we just stopped doing it.  And then when, how did I go back into it?  Well later on I decided to get back into the business.
Speaker 1: Well we'll catch up with it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We have yet to talk about school and all that too.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: But, I mean you know, so when you got back to Detroit [Michigan] from the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] you all didn't try to, did you try to you know use that--
Speaker 2: Well we were big time then.  We got back from the Apollo we was known as, you know, the Stevenson brothers [The Stevenson Trio] was it, right, so we were called in different places to perform and we were just wearing it out.  And I mean we, we got to be able to do the Michael Jackson spin.  It wasn't Michael Jackson in those days, but there was, it was like guys would, other artists and you know we would copy that and do our routine and, and we didn't have to ask to practice, we would automatically get to it because we wanted to be great, you know, and that was going on.  And then between that and her passing we stopped.  You know what I mean, we just, just fell apart.  But--
Speaker 1: She, she passed when you were like, you were what, how old?
Speaker 2: About fourteen something like that around thirteen, fourteen, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  But, but you know, so as a little kid, I mean--
Speaker 2: Oh, we was hot, we were hot.
Speaker 1: --elementary school kids you were like actually--did you ever record any, any music with the Stevenson brothers?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no we had, no, no, no recording, we was just, we was just proud to be--after the Apollo our heads were huge (laughter).  Yeah, no recordings.
Speaker 1: Did you get any publicity in the local papers, or?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember seeing it, but everybody knew who we were.  Everybody knew we had won 'cause I guess my mom was like, she was so proud of us and I remember singing all the different, in the apartments and then around places.  We were just, and everybody would call us to come and do a, do a song and all that so, that was it on that side.
Story_ID: 668924
Speaker 1: Let me ask you now you, it just occurred to me that you were maybe six years old when the Detroit [Michigan] race riot of 1943 took place.  Do you have any remem- any, memory of that?
Speaker 2: I remember, I remember--
Speaker 1: 'Cause it took place on the west side too at Belle Isle [Belle Isle Park, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah it was in, right, it was in my area too because I remember the cars would go by a street called Brush, Brush Street.  They would be going from Brush Street going downtown Detroit in city and, and they were mostly, this is where the, the, the white people would come from their area going out Brush and John R. [Street], which was another street, heading downtown.  And I remember seeing guys take rocks and stuff and throwing it at the cars and that was really, really frightening.  I remember seeing that happen.  Breaking the windows and the cars would be trying to drive and trying to get out the way.  That was a frightening moment, frightening moment for me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so is this something that happened during the riot or?
Speaker 2: During the riot.
Speaker 1: Okay, right.  This was one of the biggest race riots in U.S. history.
Speaker 2: Unbelievable.
Speaker 1: Belle Isle, I think it, there, there was a rumor that a black baby was thrown off the Belle Isle Bridge or a white baby was thrown off the Belle--we, it's, there's all these different rumors about what happened that set it off.  It was on like Labor Day or Memorial Day, one of those.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was, it was, it was incredible that, that it spread from Belle Isle and it just went each block by block things were happening.  It got, got really, really crazy.
Speaker 1: Right, right and then I guess you would have been, it was much later when the east side really was just, you know, devastated in the riots of '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we, we ended up with two, two riots in our city.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: The second one was I was well aware of, but the first one I was a kid and didn't know what was happening.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It was crazy.  I remember my uncle and them, as, as, in the first one my uncles and they were, you know big guys, you know and they could turn cars over and all that kind of stuff.  You know they were huge, big guys.  It was, it was weird.  It was weird.  It was crazy you know.
Speaker 1: But no, nobody in your family got hurt or anything?
Speaker 2: Nobody in my family got hurt, but they were involved no question about it and, but they nev- they didn't, nobody got hurt.  And I, I remember seeing them, the guys, all the men getting together to stop things.  We had trains, streetcars in those days that were, they stopped all that.  I mean it was, it was really weird.  'Cause we could come out our back door, go through the yard, and go right out to the, like to the left and we'd be right on Beaubien [Street] was the street, I remember, and the streetcars ran down Beaubien and they would stop them.  And the people on there, you know, a lot of innocent folk were hurt because they were caught in the middle of this madness.  I remember, I can remember that.
Story_ID: 668925
Speaker 1: Well it wasn't rumored it was in the paper, Detroit Free Press or The News [The Detroit News]. That the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] actually was involved and the story was that white people from the South were recruited by General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] just as the black folks were.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: They come to Detroit [Michigan] too.
Speaker 2: Well, you know the, the, the worse part of it is, is, is as time went on and watching and listening to my uncles and them talk that you know the blacks were paid so little doing the same work as everybody else, so they had a thing about that and we were all living in our neighborhood packed in because we had to be, everybody in the family had to be there to be, in order to pay the rent and eat and they would go to work every morning and see other, the whites make more money and live much better and doing the same job and they couldn't--there's no such thing as getting raises and all that, you know you must, you just stayed a level.  And, so it was a lot of anger, you know what I mean.  So when, when the riot broke out a lot of the, the guys like my uncles and them they could vent this anger out.  They could bring it out and, and, and I could see that happening with a whole neighborhood of people from my area, so I imagine what was happening in all the other areas.  There were certain places in Detroit out by the river [Detroit River] where there was no stairs.  You were living in places where you had to put sheets up to keep the cold air from coming in and living like nothing.  There was, you might as well be in, may be in a tent, you know what I mean with the whole families and working in the factories.  So that, that showed you what kind of money they were making.  They were being used, you know.  I made up my mind as a kid that I would never work in a factory.  I would never do that.  Whatever it took, I would never do that kind of work.  There was no appreciation and none of that.  You got nothing back.  And I saw my uncles and them come in tired and worn out.  I seen them age rapidly in their skin and faces, and I said forget it, not gonna happen.  Whatever it took, I'd go to jail before I'd go that way.
Story_ID: 668926
Speaker 1: Now how many people lived in your household in your--?
Speaker 2: In my house, in that apartment we were in there was my mother [Kitty Stevenson], my uncle, four of us, my [maternal] grandmother.  We were all in one--we used to have to sit with what we call a stove that you put the coal in to stay warm and cook on it at the same time.  It was a, you know what I mean, and sometimes we had to sit around it to stay warm and put, and you couldn't get the coals, so we'd have to go out and find or either steal it or take it to put in there to stay warm you know, god.
Speaker 1: Yeah, sounds like really pretty tight (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And working in the factory, all right.
Speaker 1: How many rooms did you have in that apartment?
Speaker 2: One, one big room where the stove and the refrigerator was and then bathrooms were down the hall and all the families had to use the same bathroom.  You can imagine what that was like.  It only got better when we moved into 426, I never forgot this, 426 Henry Street in Detroit [Michigan].  When we moved to that place, it was better.  There we had two bedrooms, no one bedroom, and we turned one dining room into a bedroom and a kitchen, and we, there we had my brothers [Alonzo Stevenson and Martin Stevenson] and sisters, my grandmother, and my mom and we took on a cousin because he couldn't, the family, somebody died in the family and the kid was by himself and my mom just brought him in.  His name was Charles [ph.], I can't never forget that, brought him to stay with us.  It was a very good thing 'cause Charles was a real rough kid, and whenever we had a problem all us boys we'd get Charles and he stopped the problem 'cause he would out there and knock your head off, you know, he didn't care.  And when--I loved that guy 'cause he was, he could, we learned from him how to fight and survive.  And she just took him on and my mom was amazing, yeah.
Story_ID: 668927
Speaker 1: Now where did you start school?  What, what was your first school?
Speaker 2: Balch, Balch, I think it was called Balch.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that B--
Speaker 2: I think it was B--
Speaker 1: B-O-S-C-H like.
Speaker 2: Balch, B-O-S-C-H [sic.], yeah Balch [George W. Balch School; Golightly Education Center, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Just like the guy that invented the Volkswagen, Bosch [sic. Ferdinand Porsche], yeah old school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Bosch.
Speaker 1: All right, all right so you started off there and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember that school going and I remember it because when I'd go to school the teachers would have come in and she would actually put spit on her thumb and rub our hands to see if, how dirty we were and then tell us to go take a shower before we could get into the classroom.
Speaker 1: Where would you take the shower at, at the school?
Speaker 2: They had, they had, they had a swimming pool in the school and they had showers, and that would be so de- just degrading, you know, to, to come in, "Show me your hands."  Right in here she would actually rub it to see if the dirt rolled up, you know.  It was terrible; couldn't wait to get out of there.
Speaker 1: Now is the school all black in terms of the--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, it was all black.
Speaker 1: Were the teachers black?
Speaker 2: All, all white, all white teachers.
Speaker 1: All white teachers, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, all white teachers.  I had, we had one guy who was, he taught science.  He was white, but he was, he had compassion, and I remember he would give us potato chips in the room, and he would talk.  He was teaching science, but he was, you could tell he cared, you know, yeah.  I never forgot him because without him I would, I thought the teachers, I mean they would, I mean we, in those days they would actually take a ruler or something and whack you on the hands and on the back and nothing you could do about it.  You go back and tell your parents, either you got out of school or you know you could take the, take the, take the hits you know.
Speaker 1: Corporal punishment was a big thing and paddling.
Speaker 2: Paddling the whole nine yards.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they were crazy.
Speaker 1: So, so did you like school?  Was--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't like school.  And I was known as a bad boy because I didn't like school and, and I would do whatever I could do to get out of it.  Of course my mom [Kitty Stevenson] and my [maternal] grandmother would make sure that I went back and you know, and when, later on I would, so I'd end up going to different schools because I, I, I couldn't, couldn't.
Speaker 1: What was it about school that you didn't like 'cause you, you seem to be, I mean well this is true I mean you're a person who reads and keeps up with things, I mean you, you, you're an intelligent man and I don't think there's any question about that.  So, like, and you probably were that way as a child too, but, so what was it about school that you didn't like?
Speaker 2: What I didn't like about it was the way we were treated as, as kids and as black kids.  I didn't--the word black kids wasn't really the point, it was the point that we were treated differently and the teachers would, would look at us like we didn't exist, I mean we were, you know.  If you said something, you were told to shut up without finishing your thought and all that.  I didn't like none of that stuff.  I didn't like the way they do, to see kids get whacked upside the head or hit on the butt real hard and pushed out of the room and go out, go in the office and sit down and I didn't like none of that stuff.  I guess that's why my mother and them told me, "Don't go south 'cause you can't," (laughter), you wouldn't come out of there.  And I would speak up, you know.  I would say whatever I thought, you know.  "What you doing hitting that kid like that?  Who you think you are?"  I'd go into that kind of stuff like--of course that didn't work and they put me out.  I ended up getting put out of school.
Speaker 1: So you went to, you went to Balch and where else did you go?
Speaker 2: Miller High [Sidney D. Miller Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan] that was the--
Speaker 1: Miller, yeah.
Speaker 2: --all boys kind of place, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's a place that's almost like a sacred place in Detroit [Michigan].  I mean people they were talking about knocking it down and people showed up and surrounded the school.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, you know, they had a reunion.  A friend of mine actually filmed where people were crying and remembering the days of Miller High.
Speaker 2: It was terr- like, like, like a little jail.
Speaker 1: It was (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know what I'm saying.  And I didn't care, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It wasn't a, it wasn't a nostalgic place for everybody then, I guess you know--
Speaker 2: But see a lot of kids were not bad, it was just that when whatever you did they didn't like that's where they'd send you, you know forget it, you know, you know.  I, I, me personally I was considered a bad kid, so any way I took my punishment, you know what I mean.  I was in and out of the juveniles and all that kind of stuff, you know, you know.  I was considered a bad kid.
Story_ID: 668928
Speaker 1: Now did you go to Northwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan] too, or is that (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Northern High [sic. Northeastern High School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Northern High School, Northern.  Now is Northern the one that, where a lot of the Motown [Motown Records] musicians went to school too? All right Northern High School, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: All right, Northern was (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Northern was, yes that where we, we kind of got together.  I had a group then, a little, four of us sing, singing group in there and that was good.  We were very good.  Smokey [HistoryMaker Smokey Robinson] had a group too, and I had a group and it was like battling who had the best group.  You know we'd make all the parties and stuff.
Speaker 1: So Smokey was at Northern with you?
Speaker 2: I don't know if he went to Northern--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but we would meet in different places.  His group was out and my group was out.  And I don't remember him being at Northern because Smokey being light complected (laughter) he was, know we, know we, he had a little problem with everybody over there you know, so he was, I don't remember him because if it was, if he was in one of my schools he'd a got beaten up (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now this is real, this was going on then, right--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --if you were a certain complexion you, if you were too light in the wrong place--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah you had a problem.  You had to be black, black you know what I mean, you know.  And you know Smokey was, you know, light with green eyes, oh then forget it, you know he had a problem in my school, you know (laughter).  So, so as we, we, we had, we, his, his group was good and my group was great, you know what I mean that's my ego talking of course (laughter).
Speaker 1: What was the name of your group?
Speaker 2: We were the, what did we call ourselves, oh gosh.  Meadowlarks.
Speaker 1: Meadowlarks okay.
Speaker 2: The Meadowlarks.
Speaker 1: Yeah and I think his was The Matadors, is that right?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Something like that, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: And we'd be battling out there on song wise, you know.
Story_ID: 668929
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna go back a little bit now when your mother [Kitty Stevenson] passed you were about thirteen or fourteen, you're getting ready to start high school, you'd already had a history of not liking school right--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --up to that point even though you know you, you respect your mother's teachings and all her, and her tutelage and she would send you to A and R [artists and repertoire] school--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --as you were developing, but now when your mother passed did you, I mean, do you think that had something to do with your, 'cause you got in trouble, really big trouble--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in high school, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did that, did that have something to do with it do you think?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Losing your mother so early?
Speaker 2: No, I, I, it might have had and I didn't know about it, but you know in my head, but I didn't see why, I, I was more, my attitude was a little worse because even in the high schools I didn't think we were treated right, so I had more to complain about personally and they put me out of Northern High [Northeastern High School, Detroit, Michigan], of course, and I ended up going to a school called Chadsey High School [Detroit, Michigan].  There I went to, to, I decided I'd be a cook. I could take up cooking and baking and that sort of thing in that school. And it was basically a white school I might add, and that's where I went. I went there, and I told my mom, I mean I told my [maternal] grandmother that I'd rather go over there than to be, you know 'cause as I said I was in fights and that was, you know, crazy the other way.
Speaker 1: Was there gang activity in the--?
Speaker 2: Not, not in Chadsey, but at Northern--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I meant.
Speaker 2: --High yeah, yeah gang, oh yeah, oh yeah it was gangs, and I was, I was taking up boxing and stuff, so I was really going into boxing to learn how to protect myself, you know.  And so I was, I was not the best kind of kid, you know what I mean (laughter).  And when I went to Chadsey High I was, I decided, why did I do that, I think, at any rate I wanted to cook and there it was a better feeling for me, you know, cooking and baking and I was very good.  And that's what I was gonna be, I thought I'd be a chef, you know.  And I remember that.  Did I get put out of that school?  Let me see, I think I, yeah, no, no I was good.
Story_ID: 668930
Speaker 1: In high school at some point you, you, you're like, you get arrested, right?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now this is, this is, I mean there are several times, right, and then--?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah that was for, what was it for, I wasn't, I wasn't, I got arrested for, I was robbing buildings that were burned and stuff like that.  We'd go in there and take things out, and I got arrested for, that's what I got arrested for.  I remember--
Speaker 1: For robbing burned, burned down buildings.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  And I thought it was okay, but then I, it was, wasn't okay, but you know stuff was in there and it wasn't nobody around so me and boys would go right in and, and take the stuff home that we could use, you know what I mean.
Speaker 1: Now were there a lot of fires, I know, I know that Detroit [Michigan]--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --at one time, even in the '70s [1970s] was famous for, and the '80s [1980s], famous for the east side part of it would burn up every year around Halloween.
Speaker 2: I felt they were burning, helping, making these fires 'cause they wanted blacks out of the area, and so that's what we had, we had in, in our minds, the guys that I was running around with.  That was our reason for going in there and getting whatever we could.  It wasn't right as I put it altogether, but it gave us a reason, you know what I mean to sur- to survive.  You know 'cause we didn't have no furniture and all that kind of stuff, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, yeah so the east side of downtown was burning up and there around Black Bottom [Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, we'd go in there and you know take stuff.  I remember getting arrested for that.  And when we got caught, I was on the second floor, I don't know how I got up there without falling through the, the burnt stuff, and I had picked up a Bible and in the Bible was a twenty dollar bill or something like and I had it in my hand when the guy said, "All right come on down," and he had a long gun pointed at me.  And, of course I came down.  I don't know how I got down from that, from that danger zone.  And he told me I could have fell through and died.  And why, why I remember it so well was he had me, they called the police to come and get me, of course, and he had me in his house, in his apartment and they were eating breakfast him and his family.  And the sausage and the eggs, of course we weren't eating like that, smelled incredibly great, and I could sit there and he asked me did I want some and I told him yes and he fed me.  And then the police came and got me and they took me to, to, to jail.  And I remember that scene, you know what I mean.  And I remember this long gun he had in his hand and--
Speaker 1: At first I thought you were talking about the police, but this is just a guy--
Speaker 2: Who was in, he was, he caught me in the building and he had the gun and told me to come down.
Speaker 1: So, he was like a super in the building?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --like that, one of those kind of guys.  And so I came down, you know, but I had the Bible in my hand and I guess that's why he got a little, was a little nice about talking to me and all that and had me sit down while, while the police came to pick me up.  And he was--the smell of that breakfast, never forgot that.  And 'cause eating sausage and eggs and the stuff at my time you, you get it every now and then, you know what I mean as a kid.  It was great and--
Speaker 1: Did you keep the Bible?  Were you able to keep it?
Speaker 2: No, he took the Bible.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He took the Bible, and I went to jail, went to, yeah I remember.  I had been there before, so it wasn't no big thing to go in there.
Speaker 1: This was like juvenile charge.
Speaker 2: That's exactly what it was yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you went to some kind of juvenile detention or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah--he had it--and saw some of my friends.  When I walked in, they, they knew me, you know the, the, the guys in charge at the juvenile.  Say, "Okay you know what to do, you know go, get, get your clothes--," and you know.  So, that was it.  I found that I might get a lot of time as I got older doing things that I shouldn't do.  I (unclear) because I, I was determined like I said earlier that I didn't wanna work in a factory and be like that.  I didn't wanna do that, so I, survival was either stealing or robbing or drugs or whatever, you know like everybody else was doing to stay out of the, that, that prison.  What I call factories were like prisons to me 'cause I saw men looked terrible, go in, come out of there they were tired, they were beat.  I said nah.
Story_ID: 668931
Speaker 1: Now this is kind of a paradox 'cause I, I know, you know I grew up in the same kind of town, everybody, people from the South were constantly coming up trying to get these factory jobs--
Speaker 2: Yeah thought it was great.
Speaker 1: --which were plentiful, I mean and they thought that was heaven, they, they had arrived.  But, you're like looking at it as a jail, you know and you said this is--
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you didn't want that.
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: I mean it's, it's understandable that you wouldn't want to do that, but--
Speaker 2: I didn't--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --see anybody progress in it.  I didn't see nobody come out and say this is great, you know, you know life is okay, I'm making good.  Nobody said those things.  They all would come out with sad stories, how uncomfortable it was and how they were treated and some guys were hurt if they complained.  They were, you know, beat up and all that, you know, now that's terrible man.
Speaker 1: Got what they used to call fundamental alienation in the workplace, yeah so.
Speaker 2: And watching that go, go you know and seeing your own uncles and, and people come back you know I just said unh-uh you had to, nah, nah, not for me.
Story_ID: 668932
Speaker 1: Okay there are some loose ends before we move you on to the [U.S.] Air Force.  We're gonna tie up some loose ends here.  Now you had a stepfather just before your mother passed right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Who was a, he was a cabdriver right who--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's good, that's good (laughter).
Speaker 1: How was your relationship with him?
Speaker 2: It was great.  He was much younger than my mom.  And what happened with him was as a cab driver he would take her to work at the Flame Show Bar [Detroit, Michigan] and when he would drive her there he would not allow any other driver to take her home.  And he fell in love with my mom.  My mom was very pretty, and, and he would sit there, he'd do--when he'd drop her off at the club, he'd go do his ca- his cab driving bit, and then he would be back to pick her up to bring her home and that went on and on and on and one day my mom was saying to us how she, she liked this guy and she thought he was crazy 'cause she was older than he, but he was so attentive and all that and they got together, eventually he would be the only one that would, would deal with her.  And all the other drivers knew not, 'cause he was a big guy, he was like a gladiator you know, I mean he was huge.  And they didn't want to mess with him, so they say don't take, his name was Ted Moore, they said, "Ted is gonna pick up Kitty 'Brown Gal' Stevenson [Kitty Stevenson] so don't, don't fool around, you know he don't play."  You know he was one of those kind of guys, and he really loved her.  And they got married and, and he treated us really, really good.  He was like, to me he was like a big kid, you know.  And when my mother passed, it just broke his heart.  When they got married, he was like a kid in a candy store.  I mean he was just the happiest guy in the world, and then when she passed he just went a complete other way.  There's no one way he could have taken care of the four of us, not financially.  His mind was not there.  And I could see that then, and I felt sorry for him.  Can you imagine me feeling sorry for him, you know what I mean, but I felt sorry for him.  And, 'cause he didn't know what to do.  He started drinking.  He was always crying (pause), yeah.  And then he, he just left.  He told me couldn't--my, fortunately my [maternal] grandmother stayed with us, with the rest of us.
Speaker 1: Now you still had a relationship with your biological father [William Stevenson], right when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now when, when you got in trouble did he play any role in trying to get you out of trouble that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: My father was, he had problems later on.  He could not, he could not survive.  My father was drinking very heavy, very heavy.  As a matter of fact, he was, he was a working alcoholic.  He could work and on the weekends he would drink, and it finally killed him of course.  And I remember that.  And Ted, I loved that guy.  He was really a second father.  And I remember when he, he went to Las Vegas [Nevada] to live and I remember going in there and seeing him.  He was a guard for one of the casinos, and it was a joy to see him.  Yeah, he was, he was, he still had the love in his heart, but he had to pull himself together; that was a good feeling for me.
Speaker 1: And this, this is much later on then right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 668933
Speaker 1: Now you had mentioned you were a Boy Scout too (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well I got in the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] when I was younger from a Cub Scout to a Boy Scout.  That was the only place I felt pretty--I liked the idea of being in charge, you know.  Yeah, always did and as a Boy Scout, the Cub Scout I was in charge.  They put me in charge.  As a Boy Scout I was in charge and I had the guys you know doing things and all that.  I felt good about that.  That was a good feeling for me, yeah.  Of course I got out of it, but after I recognized it wasn't going nowhere, but during the time it was a good feeling.
Speaker 1: Now I didn't ask you anything about church that much, but you mentioned that your family went to church, but your mother [Kitty Stevenson] never sang in church.
Speaker 2: Went to church every Sunday.  We had to go to church every Sunday.
Speaker 1: Which one was it?
Speaker 2: It was A.M.E. Zion [African Methodist Episcopal Zion], something like that church off of, I remember on Palmer Street [Detroit, Michigan] and it was--I remember si- sitting up in the balcony.  I had to go to Sunday school, the whole nine yards, couldn't wait to get out of there.
Story_ID: 668934
Speaker 1: So this was like 1956 you're, is when you join the [U.S.] Air Force right? Is that right, thereabout?
Speaker 2: Yeah somewhere in that area. Yeah, I can't, you know, going back, but I remember going in.  I went in because I either had to go to jail or the service, so I figured I better go to service and save myself a lot of trouble.  I had my [maternal] grandmother sign me in and say how old I was.  I wasn't old enough, but she covered it for me.
Speaker 1: Okay now, now what, you were in trouble one, I guess it's from, this is from the book is that you, you stole a cop's car and that was like a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well we were stealing cars in those days, you know then and I took the wrong one (laughter).
Speaker 1: This was not a squad car, but it was a car that belonged to a cop.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep and he had, but he had his guns and stuff in there, you know what I mean.  And we would you know take the cars and the boys would drive them to Chicago [Illinois] and then turn 'em into people who could refix 'em and change the license plates and pay you a little money.  Thought you was getting real money, but it wasn't, wasn't what it was really worth.  Yep, yep and that got crazy.  It was a whole, a whole little gang, but it was like a racket, you know.  We were being used, didn't know that of course, but it was a survival.  And I know when I was arrested I was to go to court I was arrested, put in the care of mom--my grandmother, you know they say, you know she was responsible for me, and my point was there's no way I was gonna get out of that deal, but to have a big problem and so I decided I'd join, join the Air Force and I had her help me sign say I was older than I should have been, you know, and I got into the Air Force.  And I said, "Okay now they gotta find me."
Story_ID: 668935
Speaker 1: This is interesting 'cause the [U.S.] Air Force is--has a certain amount of selectivity, I guess I mean it does now.  Did, was the Air Force like that then?  I mean if you gonna get in the [U.S.] Navy or the Air Force they, they kind of select who they want.  It's not like joining the [U.S.] Army.  The Army will take almost anybody, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Air, well the Air Force, one of my uncles knew the guy that you go in and you know you can walk in off the street they had a sign to come in and join the service blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, and, and he told me where to go and that's where I went.  And they asked me a bunch of questions and all that I remember and then I signed up to, to join 'cause I was under age, 'cause you weren't supposed to let me in right.  And, but he took me and, and I signed in, well my [maternal] grandmother vouched for me that I was old enough to be there and all that, and I just went right on in, you know, and I enjoyed it for a while that's for sure because I figured nobody could find me (laughter).  And I was in the service, I was, I got into dealing, I was doing shows, producing shows and stuff like that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now how did you get involved in that?
Speaker 2: Well, you know there was some kind of entertainment going on you know just for the soldiers and the, the, the officer in charge of my unit I, I started singing and, and since I was from my mother's [Kitty Stevenson] teaching I could produce a little show and stuff like that, and I would have this singer dance or this guy dance and this guy sing and I would, you know we'd put on little shows at the USO [United Service Organizations].
Speaker 1: Okay 'cause you, you had a group in high school [Northeastern High School, Detroit, Michigan].  I just wanna remind anybody looking at this that you had a group in high school, The Meadowlarks right?
Speaker 2: Meadowlarks, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay so--
Speaker 2: Yes.  So I learned how to you know, so doing that was good for me and, and I produced shows at the USO and come into the city and do my thing.  And as a matter of fact it was from that point, yeah that got me back into the entertainment business, and, and I did it because I didn't have to work like all the other soldiers, you know what I mean, because the captain would make that I was, 'cause it made him look good that my stuff was going on, productions was happening, and I, that, I was handling that and I was handling the, the warehouse where they had all the blankets, sheets, and stuff like that where other soldiers would come and get their order and take it back to their barracks.  And I was handling it for my, for the captain there and, which was great because between that and entertaining I did not have a big problem being in the Army [sic.].  As a matter of fact, I decided I would stay in the Army.  I said yeah I'm a make this a career and--
Speaker 1: There was a possibility, I mean I read that you were offered you know--
Speaker 2: Officers--
Speaker 1: --officers training [Officer Training School].
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I said I was gonna make a career out of the Army because it was good for me.  I felt I had a home.  I had a home that's what it boiled down to.  I was, and I was in charge of my, my area.  And I always liked doing, being in that position.  And 'cause my, my room I had like a little, a separate room from, in the barracks.  You know what I mean that you could walk through the barracks and then I had a room of my own kind of.  And I remember when we're called for breakfast, you know, I was in Cheyenne, Wyoming area and the snow was all up there and stuff in the wintertime.  I didn't have to go down to any of the cold weather, I had a little refrigerator and I had my own breakfast, so it was like, it was like at home for me, yeah.
Speaker 1: So did you ever, were you ever stationed overseas?
Speaker 2: No, no I was just--
Speaker 1: Just, okay.
Speaker 2: --in that, I that--I had choices.  They wanted me to go and then, and then the, the, the captain was working for--he kept me, he took care of me 'cause I took care of him.  And by that I mean he would be gone sometime and I would be running the warehouse, and in fact he told me, "You got any problem, you just call this number and tell me."  If anybody give me trouble, I would threaten them.  I'd say, "You don't want no problem by my captain, you better--," you know they bring--a lot of guys would come and wanna take stuff that they shouldn't take or whatever, and I would say, "You don't want a problem." And they were, they had more stripes than me, but they knew that I was covered by him, you know what I mean.  And, and I liked that position.
Speaker 1: What were you a sergeant or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got, I mean, he was, I got stripes quick in those days. It was like they weren't, they weren't specialists.  You got either sergeant or, I mean you had extra stripes you know.  They, they changed the title of that since then.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And in the Air Force I wasn't in the, in the area where you flew the planes.  I was in the area where we kept these things working.  You know I wasn't a pilot, you know what I mean.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you were in the maintenance (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, ground crew.
Speaker 2: Yeah whole 'nother, whole 'nother ball game.  I thought about in the Air Force I would go in and be a pilot, but that was not the case (laughter). Nope you were servants.
Story_ID: 668936
Speaker 1: Something happened when you were, you were on furlough in the [U.S. military] service when you came across the Four Aims--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --right and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I came home on a fur- I was really on my way to re- reenlist, they wanted me to reenlist and become, you know for officers training [Officer Training School] and all that kind of thing, and I was told that you'd make a great, good officer for your people.  Every time they say those kind of words that bothered me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so--
Speaker 2: Really bothered me.  Anyway I come home for a furlough and when I got in I went to the Warfield Theater and there--
Speaker 1: It was in Detroit [Michigan], right, yeah.
Speaker 2: In Detroit and we had, that was, that was our Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York], and that's when I saw the Four Aims who was really the Four Tops later, became the Four Tops, and they were singing and they were doing this tune and I remember (singing), "Rock roll rock everybody, rock roll, do, do, do, do, da, do da, da," and I said, "Wow these guys are great." And I said, "You know I think I'm gonna get into show business."  I didn't know, I, I had no idea which way I was gonna go, but I wanted to get into show business.  I think that whole thing from my training with my mom [Kitty Stevenson], it all came back you know, and that was it for me I didn't go back.
Speaker 1: In the book it talks about how, about they were dressed.  They had mohair suits.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah they had the Billy, Billy Eckstine shirts.  You know he had a shirt out at the time with a large collar to it, you know what I mean, and they had on--
Speaker 1: It's called Mr. B.
Speaker 2: Mr. B yeah, yeah.  And they had on these mohair suits and the shoes was great, everything, but they looked like Billy.  And when the light hits the, hit the, the spotlight hit 'em they looked like stars, you know.  And they would sing, oh god could they sing.  That Levi Stubbs was incredible.
Speaker 1: Levi Stubbs is really something, I mean he--
Speaker 2: We got to be friends later, really, really tight.  But that Levi was, he was a combination of Billy Eckstine and Nat Cole [Nat King Cole] all wrapped up into one voice, you know what I mean.  He could phrase and, and then come off strong and, ah man and Duke Fakir [Abdul Fakir] who was the, the tenor in the group his voice was incredible.  And they hit that sound and I said man, I said, "Man these guys are gonna be stars."  They, and I, I decided this was it I'm going into show business.  No idea what I was gonna do, but I'm going into show business.  And when I, when, I started working with the musicians, and I started, I was working with musicians, I was singing with a guy named Clarence Paul as a duet, R and B Sam and Dave kind of thing and I was handling people, guys who wanted to write songs or produce something on them.  I was a, a producer.  I would take your song and make it happen with voices and record it for you and (laughter).  I was doing all kind of stuff in show business.
Story_ID: 668937
Speaker 1: So this is an era in R and B I guess where this is what, I remember as a kid was the beginning of rock and roll, not defined the way it is now with the long haired guys playing the guitar but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Rock and roll was Chuck Berry and--
Speaker 2: Right, that was rock and roll.
Speaker 1: --Bo Diddley--
Speaker 2: Bo Diddley.
Speaker 1: --like Elvis [Elvis Presley] later.  But, you know that was the kind of rock and roll, right?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: People were [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Price and--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah Lloyd Price, rock and roll, rhythm and blues.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm that was it.  And I was in the middle of it, you know, but in my, in my area I was producing for that kind of thing.  And I had, I remember working with, what is that guy's name, he married, he married Mary Wells.  What was his name?  My first production was on him, and he was a singer-writer, but he, he had a postman as his manager who was paying for everything, and they paid me a lot of money to produce.  What was his name?  I can't think of it.  And I remember the song I produced on him was (singing), "Riding along in my hot rod car."  He was a black guy, but he was singing rock and roll, rock and roll, right, and he was dancing and he was you know.  I did, produced a record for him, and the postman who would come by with his bag and sit down to watch me work with the, almost had his name, and it was funny.  It was funny, 'cause I was, I was playing piano and I really couldn't play, but I used it to, you know get my music together, my songs.
Speaker 1: I guess you didn't continue playing the bass.
Speaker 2: No, I stopped playing the bass.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I stopped playing the bass because they came out with the Fender [Fender Musical Instruments Corporation] here and I was learning up on the upright and I couldn't get enough sound out of the bass for me to write a song, 'cause you know I could only get one note at a time.  But, so I went to the piano.  But fortunately in reading the notes, learning how to play the bass I learned how to form my chords and stuff on the piano, so I could write songs and that's when I first started writing songs was with the piano.  So, in writing my songs I could write and help other people with their songs.  I almost had that guy's name again.
Speaker 1: That's maddening isn't it when you--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --it happened to me--
Speaker 2: 'Cause I end up dealing with him later in life, you know what I mean, that's why I was trying to thinking of his, his name. Yeah, at Motown [Motown Records] I ended up dealing with him and Mary Wells--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I can't think of his name.
Story_ID: 668938
Speaker 1: And you got married right too around this period of time I guess right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah yep.
Speaker 1: You married yeah Betty Ann Wright [Betty Ann Wright Stevenson].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: While I was in the Army [sic. U.S. Air Force].
Speaker 1: Okay, while you were in the Army not--
Speaker 2: Well, I married her before, yeah I married her before I went in.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, so she was from Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you have any children?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I had, I had a son with her from, I had two sons with her, but I had a son when I was, when I was in the Army and then I brought her with me while I was here because my captain let me do whatever I wanted.  So, they gave me a trailer on the base, 'cause I was really looking out for him, I mean he could, he could go anywhere and knew that I would cover his back, so when I wanted something he gave it to me.  I had a trailer and I had Betty come and live with my son in the trailer.
Speaker 1: This is out in Wyoming?
Speaker 2: I don't know where it was, was Wyoming, yeah I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But, I had him and so I had my trailer and--yeah Cheyenne, Wyoming, right, right, right.  And I had my trailer and I was living in the trailer on the base.  You know it was other, other soldiers had the same thing, but it was great 'cause it was like that's what made me want, made me want to stay in the Army 'cause everything was so convenient for me.  And I had my little shows going and you know I was, I was kind of, I was, I was, I was happy.
Story_ID: 668939
Speaker 1: At some point you got with Lionel Hampton's band, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when, when, when, when I got out of the [U.S. military] service and that was one of the things my, my idea of being in the entertainment business didn't work out quite like I wanted it to work out.  And with the family taking care of them was tough because I really wanted the, I thought I would just jump into show business and make it happen.  It didn't work like that, of course.  And the boys came, I remember three of the guys that I worked with when was with my first group the Ham- The Meadowlarks they went on to become with their group to, as the, The Hamptones to work for Lionel Hampton, and they lost their lead singer, who was incredible, and they came to me and asked me would I be one of them, one of the, one of the group because they had a job that if they didn't have the four guys they would lose the job.  And at that time, I could use the money and I had said, "Okay I'll go, I'll be the lead singer for the group." And I became a Hamptone.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: They--
Speaker 1: --so not only a Hamptone but the lead singer for the Hamp--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the leader.  But, I wasn't really a great lead singer; I thought I was of course, so I became the singer for the group and, and then in charge, I always liked being in charge, I, I, I helped them with the routines and, and all that sort of thing, you know what I mean.  And that worked out great.  I went to some of the best places in the world, in, in, in America.
Speaker 1: Lionel Hampton was big.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: This is, this is the big band area--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --still going on during the '50s [1950s], even though young people were turning to rhythm and blues more.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Big band is still big.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then, and then me doing tunes like Mills Brothers [The Mills Brothers] stuff and all that, and Lionel was another level of that, it worked out great you know because I could, I could work with the boys and tell 'em you know what to do and what songs to sing 'cause when we had our moments--
Speaker 1: Is that the kind of repertoire that you had--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --like Mills Brothers type.
Speaker 2: Yep.  And we went into, into jazz from Mills Brothers stuff to doing jazz.  And, and I, we had a great jazz group.  I mean we could sing--they had The Four Freshmen at that time and people like that, you know. Lambert, Hendricks, Ross and Bavan [Lambert, Hendricks and Ross; Lambert, Hendricks and Bavan] and we were singing in that sound.  And we were dangerous, 'cause we practiced all the time, all the time.  We'd lie over in the room, we'd get over the bathtub and then put our heads down so we could hear the harmony and the blending and, and it was great.
Speaker 1: How much of that did you get from your mother [Kitty Stevenson] like--?
Speaker 2: All of that (laughter) and I would bring it with the group you know and you know you didn't have, we didn't have echo chambers then, I mean you had to have a lot of money to get an echo, so our echo was the bathtub, you know, and we'd all get around the tub, put our heads down, and let the sound bounce against the tub and we could hear the blend and the harmony and knew who was off and who was on and, and sang the whole song, spent hours doing it, you know.  First they thought it was crazy you know when they, when they start hearing themselves they said, "Oh this is great."  So, we hit the microphone on stage, that we remember the sound and, yep that was, that was it.
Story_ID: 668940
Speaker 1: I have a note here that you learned a lot from Lionel Hampton's wife, Gladys Hampton [Gladys Riddle Hampton].
Speaker 2: Not about singing, but about control. (Pause) She was like a sergeant and I, and I watched how well she could handle the musicians and get them to do what she wanted them to do, and that was great.  And he, he was player, he was a player.  He was, I mean on his instrument.  He was not--
Speaker 1: He was a vibraharp player.
Speaker 2: Yeah vibe player.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, but she was in control of the whole operation, and I was studying her.  I don't know why I was studying her, but I was amazed that she could do these things.  And, and I remember her saying to me, "You know, you know you always watching me," you know (laughter).  You know I said you know, and I was, I, I, I watched her work and have guys do--men--for a woman to have men do things and out of respect was a whole 'nother world from where I came from, so that was, that was something to watch.  And it stayed with me, you know.  I learned how to get my guys to do what I wanted them to do, and, and as a matter of fact I became the, not only the lead singer, but I, I became in charge of the group to the point that when he left Lionel and went into, I didn't wanna go home, they didn't wanna go home, and so we stayed in California and, and I went out and got jobs as a, as a trio.  We went down to a trio at that point, and I got jobs recording background singers for other artists, but on, on the microphone and stuff like that and, and I would then--what happened was Leon Rene, I remember that name, had his son [Googie Rene] had a record called (singing), "Weekend, such a beautiful weekend" ['Beautiful Weekend'] that was the, the title of a song and it was an instrumental thing, and we did the background for that and he had a singer with him called Bobby Day and asked us to be the background singers for Bobby Day.  And we became The Satellites.  We went from The Hamptones to The Satellites, and I found myself handling bands and stuff like that on a tour, you know with him.  He had 'Little Bitty Pretty One,' 'Rockin' Robin' were the songs.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's Bobby, that's him?
Speaker 2: Yeah Bobby Day.
Speaker 1: (Singing), "Little bitty pretty one, come on talk to me," (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Singing), "Come on talk to me, lovey dovey lovey one," yep.
Speaker 1: And 'Rockin' Robin' too.
Speaker 2: 'Rockin' Robin,' yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And we were The Satellites singing those backgrounds on that--Leon Rene was--
Speaker 1: So you were singing like, "Tweet tweet tweedle dee," (laughter).
Speaker 2: "Tweedle dee," ah yeah, yeah (laughter) very good.
Speaker 1: Okay well we're gonna pause here a second, my singing career is over (laughter).
Story_ID: 668941
Speaker 1: So you're making records, you're, you're recording now with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but now we--well I was doing background singing, you know what I mean, and me and my boys and we were background singing.  And Leon Rene heard us, I mean when he saw that happening and the 'Rockin' Robin' was a hit, 'Little Bitty Pretty One' was first.  He asked us to go on the road with Bobby Day, and since coming off as a Hamptones I knew about the road feeling it wasn't as--now you know with, with, with The Hamptones we had, we played great rooms, great, first class stuff you know, the Sinatra [Frank Sinatra] people and all that.  All this, they were all one kind of thing.  And Lionel, which is amazing again, the treatment wasn't fair, you know what I mean it was, and I never got out of that.  It was either from the, from my, as a kid all the way through the way we were treated as a people even though we were doing as good, if not better, in our performances and, and, and, and, and, in the, in the arts it didn't matter.
Speaker 1: Yeah sure, I mean Lionel Hampton was a big name.  I mean when you look back there was Count Basie, Duke Ellington and Lionel Hampton was up there with those guys.
Speaker 2: Right, but it didn't matter you still had to walk in the back doors of clubs and you couldn't stay in the rooms and you couldn't, you know it was, the prejudice thing was still dynamite, upfront first.  No matter what you did you were in the background, and that bothered me, never stopped, never stopped.  And so when I got with Rene and Bobby Day and we were out I had the opportunity--every place we went there was a new band.  In other words, we were going through the South on a tour.
Story_ID: 668942
Speaker 1: That was a real Chitlin' Circuit we used to say.  As I got with Motown [Motown Records], the Chitlin' Circuit was Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] and--
Speaker 2: Regal [Regal Theater, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: --Regal and all that.  But, the real Chitlin' Circuit was in the South in those rooms where the saw dust was on the floor and forget it man.  And, and you had a new band every, every time we went into a place, the band was completely different.  I had to work with them to get the sound, but fortunately the song was a hit, so they kind of knew that song.  But, we had to do more than one song, so now I, I found myself doing Gladys' [Gladys Riddle Hampton] treatment with the new musicians getting to do and make the sound that we needed for our show.  And the process was good, and we never got booed or nothing, none of that.  And Bobby Day was, he was such a talented guy.  He was so talented and, but he was a drinker.  And he could fill up a glass of Old Grand-Dad I think they called it, whiskey.  He could drink that down straight and go out and perform, I mean sing like he could, like I mean sing his butt off.  But, by the time he was into the third song, he was kind of drunk, you know what I mean.  So, now we had to hold him up.  We had our routine, do our routine, hold him and do the routine and sing and all that.  It was madness.  So when the tour was over and Reon- Leon Rene wanted us to go back, I said, "Nah that's it," (laughter), yeah we, we going home.
Story_ID: 668943
Speaker 1: Now how did your wife [Betty Ann Wright Stevenson], you know--
Speaker 2: I was sending money back--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so I had a--her mother was a pain for me, but my point was I wanted to take care of my, my sons you know, so I would send money back constantly, I mean.  And she, she was, she was like her mother very kind of har- she got harder, you know, harder to deal with
Speaker 1: You know there was a song out then called 'Mother in Law' remember that--
Speaker 2: Oh, god (laughter).
Speaker 1: --sent from down below, you know.  That was a famous song right around that same period of time, but this is actually the situation.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (singing), "Mother in law, mother in law." Oh yeah, yeah.  Well, she got like that.  I mean she was very uncomfortable, it got uncomfortable.  When I came home from that tour, and I brought, brought some nice money back with me and I remember they were living in like the Brewster projects [Brewster-Douglass Housing Projects; Frederick Douglass Homes, Detroit, Michigan] and--
Speaker 1: Now were they, were the Brewster projects then, you know were they, I mean all projects are stigmatized now as being like you know worst places to go, but, but in those days what was the feeling about the (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: Well, the Brewster projects was, there would be like maybe ten floors and one or two bedroom apartments on every floor and it had to be at least eight or nine on a floor, you know like that and so drugs was heavy in the area, not as bad as it got later.  Drugs and alcohol and everybody was on some kind of a welfare kind of set up, not everybody but you had to have, your income was low enough that you could be in that place.  If you had a little bit more, then you couldn't stay in those buildings.  And--
Speaker 1: Didn't The Supremes live in the Brewsters too and some--?
Speaker 2: I think most of the Motown [Motown Records] artists lived in, in that kind of a setup, either Brewster or something like it, and that's why I, I said before and I say in my book ['Motown's First A and R Man Presents The A and R Man,' William Mickey Stevenson] that the whole concept of music in Detroit [Michigan] happening at Motown was all done for a reason, spiritual reason because nobody had anything.  All the teaching for music in schools and all that, they didn't get that.  They, they, got theirs singing on the street, and seeing somebody who wanted to be like that was not an educational development; it wasn't that.  And, so the projects were for, I think we all came from some kind of a project living, but the Brewster is where we came from.
Story_ID: 668944
Speaker 1: And when I went back home and to have my mother in law telling me that I need to go in a factory to work, 'cause this in the music business and, "What are you doing, you know take care of your family."  And I'm sending money home, more money than they was making in a factory, but it was short lived, you know.  And I said, "Wait a minute," you know, then my, my wife [Betty Ann Wright Stevenson] was talking like her mother.  I'm looking at both of them saying the same thing, and I said, "That's not gone work for me, goodbye," (laughter), "I'm out of here," you know.  Not, not to avoid my sons, that, that I was determined to take care of it, 'cause when I grew up I said to myself, "I'm not gonna let my, if I have kids, I'm responsible, it's a man's responsibility, so whatever it takes."  And that's what had got me into different things that I shouldn't do because I couldn't make the money, so whatever it took I did to take care of my sons.
Story_ID: 668945
Speaker 1: This is like an immediate crisis at that point when you, when you left (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you had to deal, you had to, and you said you did things that you probably shouldn't have done or, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Like, like what?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was dealing with so, with musicians that when, when they couldn't get paid their proper money for working in the clubs, mostly white clubs, I would say all white clubs, they would come to me to borrow money and I would say, "You know but you just got, you just left, you were in such a, such a club you got paid what's your problem?"  And they said, "Well you know they took out for the drinks, and they took out for the food and, and this is all I got left and I need fifty dollars, I'll give it back to you, I'll give you fifty five back."  And all that, so.  You know I had my, my game shall we say, and, and I would say, "Okay how about if I get your money for you and I take 10 percent." And they said, "Okay."  You know, so I'd go to the club with my friends and I'd say, "Look man the guy worked, he worked every day, you know he did his job, you owe him his money, pay him," you know like that.  And I was kind of threatening, shall we say, and so the manager or owner or whoever ran that club recognized he was really cheating the guy and he said, "Okay," you know they would pay the difference and then I would make a deal with them, "I'll tell you what, I'll make sure the guy is here on time, his band is on, on the case, they be doing what they should be doing, you pay 'em and you give me 10 percent and, and I'll make sure that everything happens, you have no more responsibility, I'll be responsible.  If anything goes wrong, I'll bring in another musician like that."  So, the club owner would say, "Okay," so he relieves the responsibility, so he make the deal.  And then I'd tell the band or the musician, "Now you pay me 10 percent for making sure that," you know, you get paid and all that.  So, that was my, my hustle shall we say.
Speaker 1: So were you being paid by both the owner and the musician?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah, and, but what happens is--
Speaker 1: This is interesting 'cause I mean you know I, I was reading outline, the material said this guy must be a tough guy or something, but you don't seem like a tough guy type.
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't--
Speaker 1: You know how to, how to--
Speaker 2: I was a talker, and I was--Smokey [HistoryMaker Smokey Robinson] said, "Mickey [HistoryMaker Mickey Stevenson] could talk you into doing anything." That, that was his line.  But, I also had my backup now, you know I--
Speaker 1: So you had some tough guys?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah because you know you dealing with these white guys and in those days they, they, they, they stepped up to the table.  You know they fighting you, but I bring my, my own group too, so now you--
Speaker 1: Detroit [Michigan] is, is like Chicago [Illinois] and some of the other places--
Speaker 2: You know, oh yeah, oh Detroit, Detroit mafia was a whole 'nother world, you know what I mean.  And so I had my friends that they got paid from me, right.  So, take that and I would have other musicians come say, "Hey man would you handle my stuff?  Man I hear you, we can get paid--," and like that.  So, I ended up with some of the best players in the city.  Now here's the problem, these guys were great and they weren't great readers, but they were great musicians.  But, they wasn't getting paid any money, nowhere near the white musicians doing the same job.  And I made sure that they got--so this problem I had, this prejudice problem I had as a kid never left me, you know what I'm saying.  So, in that process I would see that they got paid no matter what it took.  So, if I'm talking to you as a manager I don't wanna hear your crap.  You're robbing this guy, you're cheating him, pay him.  You know you pay him or you pay me, you know what I mean.  So, so I wasn't really a nice love guy, but they guys, my boys they thought I was great, I was great, you know what I mean.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have to make an example out of somebody?  (Pause) I'm sure the statute of limitations is over (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah, some, some examples were made, you know, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now I was pretty sure the answer had to be yes 'cause--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --people don't, I mean word has to get around that you were serious.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I made some examples.
Speaker 1: This, it has to get around that this is serious--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --or they wouldn't even pay you to do it.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I, I've made some examples and I didn't have to make too many, but enough to know, people know not to fool around with me, you know, and, and the people that I had behind me they were really crazy.  You know they, they loved to help make an example, you know what I mean.  I've said--
Speaker 1: So did, so are these guys you knew grewing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Growing up rather, rather than grewing up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah that was--the, the best example saved me later on too, I might add, I might add.
Story_ID: 668946
Speaker 1: But that's the way it was and so as a matter of fact when I got later on with Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] I used, the guys, I was known to my word was my bond.  If I make a deal with you, 'cause that's all we had really, you know you had nothing else.  I make a deal with you I stuck by my deal, but you gone stick by your deal too, that was the point.  You know you break the, you break the rules you, you, you got a problem, you know what I mean.  Not with me, you got a problem with these two guys (laughter), and that was the deal.  So, I didn't have too much trouble.
Speaker 2: Now there is a movie called 'The Five Heartbeats,' I know when I was reading this I thought about a character named Red in 'The Five Heartbeats' who was, hung cats out the window by their ankles--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, well that was a true, it was really a guy.  His name wasn't Red though, but he was really true.  He worked with Morris Levy.
Speaker 2: This was the Jewish guy he worked for--
Speaker 1: In New York [New York] who we called him the godfather, and he had a couple of guys with him that they didn't play around.  They would hang you out the window and let you go if you didn't pay up, you know what I mean.  But they, what will happen if we would, goes past the story, but they wouldn't do that unless you were a deejay and you took the money to play the records, but you didn't play the records, so then they'd pay you a visit.  All you had to do was play the records or don't take the money, you follow what I'm saying?  Almost had his name too, it will come to me.  Nate McTalla, McCalla [Nathan McCalla] was his name and, huge guy man, huge guy.  And he was the kind of guy that he worked with Morris Levy and he would say, you know he'd come to visit you.  All you do is don't, don't, don't, don't make the deal and then you, everything's okay.  How you gonna take somebody's money and then act like you're not gonna play the product and all that crap.  You're asking for a problem, and with Morris you got a problem.
Speaker 2: I imagine somebody going to the door and seeing (laughter), coming up the walk--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 668947
Speaker 1: You start this business you know, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And it worked for a while for me, it was good you know.  It was not a, not a great living, but it was making a living, you know.  I wasn't going in the factory, you know what I mean (laughter).  And I was producing songs and working with the boys in the bands and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: In those days I guess to be, from what I, this is being, now, now we're like late '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is, I mean a working man, guy working in a factory then, my dad did it he worked for General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], he had two jobs actually and we were still poor.
Speaker 2: Had to have two jobs 'cause that one wasn't gone hold up.
Speaker 1: That was supposed to be a good job, good check (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wasn't a good job.
Speaker 1: And he'd get about a hundred dollars a week or a hundred and ten--
Speaker 2: Or less.  I was close.  I could, in my head I, I'm looking at seventy-five, seventy-six.  I never heard the word hundred.
Speaker 1: That, that probably was true in, in the late '50s [1950s].  I'm thinking about a later time in the '60s [1960s] where he probably made hundred dollars.
Speaker 2: Oh well '60s [1960s] I was in another--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --another world, but I, I'm being hearing--
Speaker 1: That's, yeah but that's, that's the kind of money (unclear).
Speaker 2: Can you imagine that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --taking care of a family.
Speaker 1: And that was considered a good job.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the quotes around a good job, you know with benefits and like you know.
Speaker 2: Rent was like twenty-six, twenty-seven, thirty dollars a month, you know what I mean.  I mean and these things stayed in my head.  You take that away, now you gotta eat, take care of your family and all that, while the, the, the white guys was making like hundred and thirty, hundred and forty, terrible, terrible.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: I wasn't gonna do that.  I mean that was it for me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So was this--
Story_ID: 668948
Speaker 1: Was the entertainment district still like Paradise Valley area of Detroit [Michigan], what they call it you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah Paradise Valley and, and we was around, around John R. [Street] and, and, and in that area there was kind of all the places were worth, the upscale places were like in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The other scale places were on Hastings [Street] and Brewster [Brewster-Douglass Housing Projects] and all that.  Now there you can get killed over there or cut up quick.  And I didn't have fear of going, and they were all owned by whites, I'm talking either way.  And I had no fear of taking my guys going in any club and, and talking to any manager about paying the musicians and being, being fair, so.
Speaker 1: Now, now were these mostly Jewish owners of these clubs?
Speaker 2: I would say so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought so just from people today say, "Well you don't wanna say that," but, but that's the way it was up there, that's the landscape--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yep.
Speaker 1: --in my hometown and other places.  The, in the black community a lot of businesses were run by a Jewish--
Speaker 2: All your liquor stores--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and all the clubs.  Anything that could give you, take you out of the suffering that blacks lived through alcohol, entertainment was a relief.
Speaker 1: And the clothing stores or haberdasheries where, where black men dressed radically different than anybody else.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so that made 'em feel they had something to live for, shall we say.  And to me it's a terrible sight.  I remember standing on the streets looking up and seeing the airplanes go by and wonder how do those people get in those planes and where are they going when the world that I lived in was right here; that was it.  That was, that was not a frightening feeling, but that was like a hopeless place, state of mind, and I wanted out of it.  I wanted to be in those planes going where they're going.  I mean the world for most of us was maybe twenty blocks, that was the world, and that wasn't for me.  So, whatever it took was out.
Story_ID: 668949
Speaker 1: You met [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy around 1958 or '9 [1959] I guess--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in Mullins barbershop, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Benny Mullins.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We called him Muldoon (laughter).  I don't know why.  We called him Muldoon.
Speaker 1: And he did processes.  That was his specialty.
Speaker 2: Yeah everybody had it.  Oh yeah he was a great processor.  I mean when he finished with your head man it was waves.  You could float a boat on 'em, you know what I mean.  He was, but the stuff in those days was burning.  I mean it was like lye in the, in the, in the, in stuff, you know.  And so you had to have--make sure you get the right guy 'cause you had burn your hair out and all that, so, so Muldoon was the best in Detroit [Michigan] as far as I was concerned and a lot of us.  And that's where we went to get our--
Speaker 1: Did you ever process it?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, everybody had to have the process now you can't, you can't be in the business.  You know when you watched The Midnighters and The Orioles and all the boys they, all their hair was waved and you had your, had your B, Mr. B shirt and the wave hair and everything fit, you know what I mean.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That was the look.
Speaker 1: Nat King Cole had a process.
Speaker 2: Yep, every--
Speaker 1: Every entertainer.
Speaker 2: --every, every black entertainer and that was their way of hopefully getting into another world of, made no sense when you really thought about it, but at the time if you had your, your hair straight and your outfit, just, just your Mr. B collar and you weren't a ghetto person, you were somebody as an entertainer and whatever, so it was a state of mind, you know what I mean.  And it was before the black naturals took over, which brought us back to reality (laughter).
Speaker 1: And so, so you're in the barbershop and tell us how you first met Berry Gordy?
Speaker 2: Well, Muldoon, Benny Mullins was his name.  He only had two chairs in the shop so, and since he had the best processing shop in the city, he had tons of customers.  Now his, his idea to keep you in the shop, 'cause he had two chairs, so he wouldn't lose no money, he made everybody communicate with each other.  In other words, he had say checker games over here, he had two or three phones for you to talk.  He had people, so everybody could stay in the shop while he did one or two heads at a time.  And in that process he introduced Berry to me and me to Berry and my, my, as a producer writer at the time Jackie Wilson was my idol as an artist and Berry produced Jackie Wilson and so when he introduced us he said to Berry, "Man this is the guy I was telling you about, Mickey [HistoryMaker Mickey Stevenson].  He handles all the musicians in the city worthwhile dealing with."  And he told Berry and he told me man that's, "Berry Gordy, that's the guy that, that song you like by Jackie Wilson, he produced that song."  So that, that brought us together like really tight, you know.  And while he was doing it, he played, he'd go over to his little box, he had a jukebox at the time, put the nickel in and play the Jackie Wilson record.  Oh, he was very clever.  Benny Mullins was very clever.  And so Berry and I started talking, and Berry said, "I heard you're a writer and you handle the musicians and all that kind of stuff, you got some, you know you got a good reputation, we gotta talk when I come back."  I said, "Come back?" He said, "Yeah I'm going into Chicago [Illinois] to do, finish an album on Jackie Wilson."  And I said, "Ah Jack Wilson."  I said, "I mean I got some songs for you, you know and all that," and he said, "Well we'll talk about it," you know.  And we got to talking so much, 'til we went under the dryer, Benny only had two dryers, and you better get under it quick because other than that somebody, now you gotta wait another hour and a half, you know what I mean.  And we talked until I fell asleep.  You know dryers would put me to sleep.  And, and we got to be hooked up, set up the meeting for when he came back.  And when he came back, it was like months later, he called me.  He said, "Come over we gotta talk," and that's--we started the Motown [Motown Records] setup he and I.
Story_ID: 668950
Speaker 1: From what I read here, you were thinking that you were gonna get an entertainment contract.  You were gonna become an entertainer with Motown [Motown Records] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was gonna be the next Jackie Wilson, yeah.  I, when he [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] called me for the meeting I said, "Okay." I gathered up all my songs in my little briefcase and went over and he said, "Okay let me hear some of your songs."  I opened and I started singing them and, of course, he, he didn't have a piano or nothing in his house.  As a matter of fact, he was what we call the ghetto fabulous apartment building you know where you had to push the button and grab the door before it closed and all that, you know what I mean (laughter).  So, but when I, when I started singing my songs I, I, of course I was looking for a piano so I can play my songs and sing, but he didn't have none of that in his place, terrible apartment.  And I was saying to myself, man this guy sure is cheap, you know.  You know what, where's all this Jackie Wilson money coming from; it wasn't there.  And so anyway I did my song and I did one and I did two and maybe around six or seven songs he said, "You got some good stuff man, you got some good songs," and so I said, "Okay let me put, let me play--." I said, "That's my general stuff, now let me play the record I think we ought to go with."  I'm trying to tell him now how, who, what he gonna produce on me as a singer, and that's when he told me he said, "Hold it man I'm, I'm not talking about you being a singer or artist," you know.  I said, "What?"  He said, "Yeah man your music is great, but your voice, your voice is for shit, that ain't--," you know what I mean.  I said, "What?" You know I'm, I'm now mad, I'm ready to go.  I grabbed all my stuff.  I'm ready to walk out the door, put my songs back in my briefcase and I'm heading out the door.  He said, "Where you going?"  I said, "Man I didn't come here to, I come here to be an artist."  He said, "No, so," you know he said, "you gotta be honest if you gonna be the A and R man for my company, you gotta, you gotta be, be, be honest."  I said, "A and R man, what is that?"  He said--
Speaker 1: This is the first you ever heard that huh?
Speaker 2: Never heard, I didn't have no idea what an A and R man was.  He said, he said that's you know run the music, you know you handle the artists and the musicians and all that.
Speaker 1: So A and R actually stand for artists and repertoire.
Speaker 2: Artists and repertoire, right.
Speaker 1: It has come to mean more than that right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  In, in my case I took it to another level.  I took it to another level 'cause I didn't know what A and R meant in the first place so (laughter) I just, I just took it for what I thought it, what it's supposed to mean to me.  And he, he said to me that that's what he wanted me to do, and I'm saying, "I don't, that's not what I came here for and, and I'm mad."  He done told me my voice was terrible, and I thought my voice was great, you know what I mean.  I'm walking out the building, and he said, "Where are you going?"  I said, "Man I'm, this, unh-uh."  And on my way out and walking down the hall going back to the door and he's standing in his door, I could see him you know when I turn around he's still standing there, I'm leaving going to the, getting out the building and I thought about my mom [Kitty Stevenson] and about how she said, "Whatever you do you gotta go after it, if you believe in it you gotta go after it 'cause if you don't, you don't know if you could have made it happen or not and if you don't try nothing happens."  And I said, so I stopped and turned around and walked back I said, "Now what's this A and R thing man, what is this, what is this?"  He said, "Well you handle the musicians and everything and the singers."  I said, "I'm in charge?" Which I've always loved to be, and he said, "You're in charge."  I said, "Well who do I report to?"  He said, "You talk to me."  I said, "Just you?"  He said, "Just me."
Story_ID: 668951
Speaker 1: All right so you start as A R [artists and repertoire] man with [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy, and then it was like Tamla Records was it, what was it?
Speaker 2: Well, we had, I think Tamla was a Gordy label.  I think Gordy or Tamla.  I don't know which one came first.
Speaker 1: I think Tamla came first, then second Gordy (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sure you're right.
Speaker 1: But, but. Okay. I think so, but I'm not completely sure, but all right so this is, this is 1959.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah and when I was talking with Berry when I, when I, when I took the deal, when he said to me, told me was in charge I asked him I said, "Can I--?" He said, he asked me, oh he said to me, "You're in charge and you record anybody you think could make hit records for us."  And I said, "Anybody?"  He said, "Anybody."  I said, "Can I record me," (laughter)?  He said, "Yeah, but you gotta be honest.  If it don't work, if it ain't happening, it don't work."  I said, "Okay." And, and Smokey, [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson came in and while we're, Berry and I were talking Smokey came down and, of course we knew each other from high school and all that, and he said, "[HistoryMaker] Mickey Stevenson," he said, he told Berry, "you got Mickey here what's, what's happening?"  Berry said, "Well he's gonna be the A and R man for the company [Motown Records]."  He said, Smokey said, "Oh man that's great."  He said, "Man this guy knows all the musicians."  He say, "We need, I, I gotta session coming up and I, make, make sure I get some good musicians."  I said, "I got this, don't worry about this."  That was my line.  I got that from Gladys [Gladys Riddle Hampton] (laughter).  I said, "I got this don't worry about it I'll take care of it."  And Berry was talking and I said, as I was walking out the door he said, "Where you going?"  I said, "I gotta get some musicians for this session," and I was gone.  I was, I was into it at that point.  We did, we had a handshake and that was the beginning of our relationship.
Story_ID: 668952
Speaker 1: All right so, so now you assembled The Funk Brothers, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: So now tell us that process.  You, you, you knew a lot of the musicians in Detroit [Michigan].  Detroit has a, is a rich town for musicians.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah it was great, it was great, it was great--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and, and you know what was, was good for me this was my opportunity to, it's amazing.  This was my opportunity to help these guys get what they deserved as talented musicians.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you said these guys, these are guys that are being exploited (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Remember I, I could (unclear).
Speaker 1: --in these clubs and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was a chance, not everybody, but this was my chance to set a standard, you know what I mean.  So, and I went after the guys I remember and I knew that were good and they were, some of these guys were great jazz musicians you know playing in crazy places, getting nothing, and as I, as I met with them and talked with them they knew me and they knew that if, whatever I said was gonna happen, that's the way it was gonna happen.  And I told them, I said, "Look man you know come with us and do these sessions R and B."  You know they said, "Well R and B man--." I said, "Look this is music.  You make music and we, we gonna do songs and you know come with me and I will, we ain't got a lot of money, but eventually it's gonna happen and as we grow you'll grow and you got my word on it and I'll make the dates around your time.  In other words, I know you gotta make more money so you can still keep your gig, but you'll do sessions with me."  So, I made deals with them, you know.  And as a matter of fact when I took my job with Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] my pay was five dollars a day, and all the chili I could eat.
Story_ID: 668953
Speaker 1: All the chili now where was the chili being served?
Speaker 2: In, in the--in the, in the building where we were working from, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay now had, had he acquired that building?
Speaker 2: No, no, no he had--
Speaker 1: Hitsville buil- [Hitsville U.S.A., Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: --it was like he was getting the building, but we were, we were working there and, and we had his, his wife [Raynoma Gordy Singleton] was cooking the chili and that was our lunch and stuff like that, you know.
Speaker 1: So you were working at his house in the beginning or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --his apartment?
Speaker 2: Yep, we working there.  We went from there to a, he took a building, he took a building that was really an apartment, wait a minute now, it was like a house, and he turned it into a studio.
Speaker 1: This was at another location other than, it's not the Hitsville building, it's the--?
Speaker 2: This was the Hitsville building.  It went from his apartment--
Speaker 1: To the--
Speaker 2: --to the Hitsville building--
Speaker 1: Which is now the Motown Museum [Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: --which was, right, but, exactly, but it was like, it was a house that we, that he lived in while we worked in, you know what I mean.
Speaker 1: So he lived upstairs and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was great.  It was, and I took, I eventually took upstairs as, as my office you know when, as we start growing.  But--
Speaker 1: And from what I understand from having a little tour the, the garage was the studio, right?
Speaker 2: The garage was where you parked your car, and we turned that into the studio.  And then it, it dawned on me as he was making that happen that he was not really interested in making a great apartment for himself and having a great car and all that.  To me, Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] was fixed in his head to make this operation work and it was more important than the fancy things that men bought to show progress.  That's why his place, his apartment was terrible looking 'cause he was saving his money and his, for his dream.  And, when I saw, when he got the building it dawned, I said oh that's, that's why he didn't have that, he used that money to change that garage into a studio and buy this equipment and whatever he got doing the Jackie Wilson records, then whatever that income he took that money to build this operation.
Story_ID: 668954
Speaker 1: I think it, now I'm not sure of what date this was a hit, but the song 'Money' ['Money (That's What I Want)'] was one of his first big, big, big hits (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah 'Money,' yeah 'Money,' yeah it was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's been recorded a million times, I think the residuals on that must be out of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --sight and I know that his, we interviewed his secretary [HistoryMaker Janie Bradford] here in Beverly Hills [California], and she's living off the residuals of 'Money' because she was a co-writer of the song, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What is it that everybody needs? Money.
Speaker 2: "That's what I want."
Speaker 1: "Yeah, that's what I want."
Speaker 2: "Give me some money, that's what I want," (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right so this, so he's, I mean so this is in the beginning stages and, now, well I was talking about--was first was, was assembling The Funk Brothers the first thing that you did really?
Speaker 2: Well it wasn't the first thing 'cause there were some musicians around--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I was, I had to get 'em, to me get the kind that I thought should be there.  So, they had other bass players and stuff 'til I got the ones that I wanted to be in the, 'cause I was singing background.  And I remember Raynoma [Raynoma Gordy Singleton], that was Berry's wife at the time, she was singing background and so I had to, you know--from where I come from, from The Hamptones I seen and heard great singers and great sounds and all that, so I wanted to see that happen.  And, and he gave me the, the authority to do it without no, I mean I never got, "Why did you do this and what was that about?"  And one of those questions.  It was like I would bring in somebody and say, "This is gonna be the bass player, this is gonna be--." He said, "Okay." He let it go, you know.  I, I, I, I think, I believed that Berry's gift, in, in my opinion, all of us has gifts from God and one of his gifts were to pick the right people to do the right things at the right time.  And, which is a whole 'nother ball game.  And he never give me any problem about anything that I thought could make Motown [Motown Records] happen, never a question.
Speaker 1: So [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy is a young man then, you're twenty-two years old from my calculations in, in '59 [1959], so--
Speaker 2: Never, never, never quess and that was amazing, you know what I mean.  And he had that kind of faith, you know what I mean with me.  And, and Smokey [HistoryMaker Smokey Robinson] did too, I might add.  And so I, I, I ra- I, I ran as the, as they say, as the women in the Motown would say, "[HistoryMaker] Mickey Stevenson has gone rampant.  He's gone crazy," you know what I mean, but they knew it wasn't crazy, it was what was needed.  But, everybody had an idea how things should go and I had mine, you know what I mean, and he agreed with me and my concept.  And when I brought in musicians and artists and, and writers and never a question.
Story_ID: 668955
Speaker 1: Now I hear that the first musician of The Funk Brothers that you brought in was James Jamerson, is that true (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, oh yeah he was, he was, he, I, I used to watch him play before Motown [Motown Records], and I would see him hum the notes, when he was playing upright [upright bass] at the time, and they could see him, he would sing the notes before, the dub, a dub, bom, bom.  He would be singing what he's playing and that, I said, "Man that's incredible.  That guy is so locked into his instrument that he can hum the note." So he was a singer in his own voice and, but that would be the notes that he would playing on the bass.  And when the music, the other musicians were not working for me, I was listening to him and it, everything seems to be feeling right, sounding right, you know, and I said, 'cause, in other words, as a bass player he was to me the leader of the sound.  In other words, it should be, normally this is the piano or the saxophone, but in this case wherever James was he was the lead, you know what I mean in my, to my ears.
Speaker 1: It's interesting that, like he's become like kind of a folk hero now, I mean to a lot of musicians.  We didn't even know who he was and we heard the music, but his name was never on any of the liner notes.
Speaker 2: I know and that was, that was, I felt very guilty about that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what a talent.
Speaker 2: Later I felt, I felt guilty, 'cause I never thought about it, you know.  I just thought about the sound and the music and the Motown band and The Funk Brothers.  I had no, no, I, I, it was not my job to, that's unfair, I wasn't in charge of what went on the album covers.  That was not my area shall we say.  My area was the music.  How the covers came out and what went on them was not my responsibility, but as I, as time went on and as I look back I should have made sure that these things happened, you know what I'm saying.  But, I didn't know to do that.  I was involved in what I was doing.
Story_ID: 668956
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Making sounds, making records (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You, you think the decisions not to list the--well, I'm--well, let's talk about the rest of them first of all they--so, he came on first and then Ben- Benny Benjamin was the drummer, right?
Speaker 2: Ah Benny Benjamin, great drummer, great drummer.  Benny was the, Benny was, he was an addict, but he was a functioning addict.  I mean he was better high than normal (laughter).  He was great.  I mean if you set him on, get him to the drums, if you can get him to the drums and put the sticks in his hand you can forget it.
Speaker 1: So, he's like a Lester Young of drummers.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: This is a phenomenon people talk about it, I mean this is really part of music lore that some people are like that.  How they do incredible things.
Speaker 2: He was unbelievable.
Speaker 1: He, as a drummer he couldn't miss a lick, right?  He is not supposed to--
Speaker 2: He was, he was like a metronome. Once he started he was right there.  I mean foot was on it, hands was working, and now, now you gotta make sure you get him there now.  That was my job.  I mean after a while when I found out how, what a genius he was at his, at his craft, the thing was to get him to the drums because sometimes I had to find him, you know, in the, in a drug house or someplace, wherever.  And he'd find all kind of excuses to try to get out of the studio.  I mean he was good at that.  He could lie like, like, I mean he would come up with stories that you wouldn't believe.  And when he's talking to you say--one day he told me he said, "Look man," he said, "my, my dogs man I haven't, I haven't been home.  They haven't eaten nothing.  I gotta get back to feed, feed the dogs. Give me fifty dollars and I'll be back."  I said, "Benny you don't even have a dog, who you talking to," (laughter).  You know what I mean, "Get back in there on them drums."
Speaker 1: Now this is important 'cause if, if it weren't for you knowing him and having a relationship with him, you know the whole foundation of the band could have fallen down, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we would have--I had to go, I'd get somebody else and all that kind of stuff.  But, he would come up with stories you would not believe.  Oh man my sister is sick.  You know Wemar [ph.], you know he called me Il Duce.  He said, "Il Duce, listen man my sister is sick. I, can you drop me off at the house?"  And I said, "Benny if I take you some place to drop you off, you won't come even back to the car, so you can forget all your stories.  I'll let you go when you finish playing the session."  And he would stomp his foot, walk away, but he'd get back to the drums and man we may, he may be in there for another two hours, three hours, then he'd disappear.
Story_ID: 668957
Speaker 1: Marvin Gaye was a drummer too at some point. I mean, did, did he start off at the be- he wasn't at, with you at the beginning or was he, or was he (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well no he, Marvin came to us from, Berry's sister [Anna Gordy Gaye] had a label called Anna Records I think, and when Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] at a certain point he absorbed that operation and brought it into, all in, under one, one company.  And in that process he, Marvin came with, Marvin and Harvey Fuqua, The Moonglows, pardon me.  They--Harvey was a very talented guy, very--he did Etta James and people like that you know as a producer and writer.  And he had, at Moonglows they had great records.  I think the era without of that sound of records, you know, doo-wop as we call it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And Harvey decided that he make another move and get into the production label side, and he came to Detroit [Michigan] with Marvin 'cause Marvin was one of the members of his group.
Speaker 1: Okay and Marvin came from Washington D- it was Washington [D.C.], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah somewhere in that area with Harvey.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay and they came to Detroit to be with Anna Records, they were gonna help develop that company.  Well, and it would have been all right, but I think they had bad luck, 'cause some of the songs they did were good, but I think they just had bad luck.  And so Berry we had, we had good luck, and he absorbed that, his sister's company and make it all one operation.  In the process, he brought Marvin to me and he said, "Look I wants some hits on this guy."  And I'm saying, 'cause I knew who Marvin was, I'm saying 'cause I knew Harvey and all that, I said, "He's the jazz singer B.G. What I'm gonna do with--we don't do jazz."  He said, "I didn't ask you to do jazz, I asked you--I wanna hit, can you, can you get me a hit on him?  You the, you the man, you're the A and R [artists and repertoire] director here [Motown Records] right?"  Well he, Berry always knew how to challenge me, you know what I mean (laughter), and I'm saying to myself you think I can't get a hit on him, you know.  I said, "Okay I'll, I'll get a record on Marvin Gaye, leave him here with me."  He said, "Okay." And that was our, that's our first meeting, that's how we got involved he and I.
Speaker 1: So, he was known as a singer when he came over?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he was a jazz singer on Anna Records.  He had a couple of albums out doing jazz.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I didn't know if he was just known as a drummer or he was a singer, okay so he was both.
Speaker 2: Yeah and he was--
Speaker 1: So, so many, there are so many artists that start off as drummers and end up as singers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we he, he was--
Speaker 1: Jeffrey Osborne was one.
Speaker 2: Yep Jeff, good too.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean there's, yeah those are some others too.  Phil Collins in Britain was a drummer for Genesis.
Speaker 2: Oh, you know your stuff brother, you know your stuff (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know because there's a whole you know, yeah I know a thing about drummers you know becoming singers, I, you know.  So, he's, he's, okay so he comes over, about what year does he sixty, sixty--
Speaker 2: Early '60s [1960s], early '60s [1960s] yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah 'cause I think he has a hit by '61 [1961], so it must be '59 [1959], '60 [1960] in this era.
Speaker 2: We worked awhile as a, my, my idea to get Marvin to sing R and B, which was a trip for me 'cause I tried a few things and it didn't work.  And, but I remember he, he had some, as a songwriter I liked his approach to songwriting, so I got him to write songs with me and we, we, we would stay, you know I had my, my A and R business from say nine o'clock till around five and after that I'd go into my personal writing, song writing and producing job.
Story_ID: 668958
Speaker 1: Marvin [Marvin Gaye] would stay with me.  We worked around the clock.  And a matter of fact we'd be working in the studio from say six till about nine o'clock at night, then I'd, he and I would go to my house, we'd eat and I had a piano there and we'd write something there and then we'd go back to the studio, and it was like that, you know.  And, and in the process, pardon me, in doing that I had, in the building, in the Hitsville building [Hitsville U.S.A., Detroit, Michigan], we had rooms with pianos and tape recorders so that the producers if they had an idea they could tape it so they wouldn't lose the concept and then play a tape back and keep writing and every, every room we had that going on.  And Marvin and I would, you know, go right back into the same thing and then, and creating songs for other artists.  I would record everything.  I'd record my verses, record his verses, you know, and within--Marvin was a reasonable piano player as well, and I'm chording, but he was much better than I was, so we kept something going so we could find the moment of the song.  And what I did was I taped everything that we recorded and when I was ready and I thought I had enough going on I eliminated my voice, edited and closed the tapes up and had only his voice running and I had him at the right time.  I said, "Come here I want you to hear something," and I played the tape, and he heard himself singing these R and B songs that we were giving to someone else that we were writing.  'Stubborn Kind of Fellow' was the first one and that was the one I had recorded.  And he heard himself and I said, I said, "That's what you should be singing," and he said, "Yeah man that, that, that sound pretty good."  And I said, "If you will do me a favor instead of this why don't you, you record this song and you'll take me off the hook with Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy], 'cause we got a hit, he'll be satisfied, and then we'll go in and do some jazz."  So Marvin said, "You'll do a jazz album with me?"  Now he knew I was with The Hamptones and we sung jazz 'cause I was, at the time I was showing [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson and The Miracles some jazz songs for their show, so I had a separate gig with them.  So Smokey will say, "Why you wanna sing jazz man you're doing great."  I said, "Man well you just wanna be able to sing other kind of songs," and he said, "You know come on Mick [HistoryMaker Mickey Stevenson], why won't you show us?"  So, I said, "Okay." And then said, "Well we'll pay you.  We gonna give you fifty dollars a song," you know.  I said, "You don't have to pay me."  I said, "Okay I'll teach you how to sing a couple of songs, but I think you're really wasting your time because you're doing great what you're doing."  But, they had this idea in their head they wanted to be more than just you know R and B singers and so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That seemed to be a pervasive idea at Motown [Motown Records].
Story_ID: 668959
Speaker 1: When I was a teenager I guess when I saw the first flirtation with Broadway, you know (laughter), talking about doing Broadway.  So, what country and western, you know Supremes [The Supremes] and country and west- said, "Why are they doing this?" You know but you know there, there's, you know it's a bigger, you know, having art serve a bigger world--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, lift it up, step, a step up 'cause that, R and B you got, learn something else and if, and, and they were right about it for me and I put the two together you got something going on, you know, you know.  You know blues had its, had its limits, you know what I mean.  Think for, we, we went from gospel to opera you know with artists, black artists, from gospel all the way to the top, which was, it's almost like saying dancing the boogie and now doing ballet, why not?  You know, you know we got the ability.  It's about lifting yourself.  You'll never forget the beginning.  Whether you're gonna stay there or you're gonna grow, you know, so that was, it's the same thing with the Motown sound [Motown Records] to me.  If you, if you think about it, you never really heard blues, blues with us.  We, our music had another level to it, you know.  It was a combination of jazz and R and B and all locked in.  Right down to the strings and you know it was all, take it to another place.  Now we can always go way--I had, had some, maybe taking you off the subject, but I had blues singers that I like, little Sammy, Singin' Sammy Ward, I mean nobody could out sing him with the blues, but there was a limit to the buyers of that, you know what I'm saying where music there's no limit you know.  There's no, no box, you're out of the box when you do music.  If you do blues, you're in the blues box, so that was a thing for me, you know in my head and I think it was all ordained personally the whole nine yards.
Story_ID: 668960
Speaker 1: At any rate with Marvin when I finished that song with him the 'Stubborn Kind of Fellow' we did another one and had, had to follow up now 'cause the sales department said, "You got a hit, what's next?"  So, I said, "Okay Marvin you gotta do another one."  He said, "Wait a minute what about jazz?"  I said, "We'd get to that, but this, we gotta, we gotta cover, you know we gotta keep moving and so"--
Speaker 2: So what kind of jazz did he like?  What was, what was he singing in terms of jazz, was he like--
Speaker 1: He wanted to do Nat King Cole.  He wanted to do Andy Williams.  You know he had a whole, saw himself with the tuxedo and the bow tie and, and I'm saying, "Brother, you out to church," you know (laughter), you know what I mean.  What's his name, what was the jazz singer, I mean the gospel singer that went over, out of California, died in some crazy problem.  Church singer--
Speaker 2: A male singer?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah and--
Speaker 2: See I don't know--
Speaker 1: Wait a minute, Marvin Gaye, Marvin changed his name like the guy did.  Marvin Gaye, his name was, what was his name?
Speaker 2: You got me on this one, I'm thinking but I can't come up with it.
Speaker 1: It will come to me.  And he was the black to do television and all that and sang--
Speaker 2: He sung gospel?
Speaker 1: He started gospel and that was his first, from gospel to pop.  He went right--
Speaker 2: You're not talking about Sam Cooke?
Speaker 1: That's who I'm talking about.
Speaker 2: Oh that--okay, all right.
Speaker 1: He, and Sam Cooke had that, that look of jazz and pop.  He, he was one of the first that made that move.
Story_ID: 668961
Speaker 1: Benny Benjamin, drum player, we talked about him.  We talked about Marvin [Marvin Gaye] and how his career got, got started.  He also played drums in his sessions (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he, he played all his sessions, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And we talked about James Jamerson and there's a fellow named Richard "Popcorn" Wylie, right that played piano, is that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but he wasn't a Funk Brother.
Speaker 1: He wasn't, okay.
Speaker 2: He was a good writer, producer kind of guy.  He did some songs with us that was, he wanted to be an ar- he was an artist himself, but he was better to me, a better producer with other artists, so.
Speaker 1: Okay and who, who was, who was the, the piano player for The Funk Brothers who was?
Speaker 2: Earl Van Dyke, but we had one--
Speaker 1: Earl Van--okay.
Speaker 2: --before him which was Joe, his name was Joe [Joe Hunter]--I can't think of his last name.  He was first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Joe was playing, and, but Joe wasn't really a jazz player.  He was a rock and roll kind of player, so to me he had a, a limit to how, how much colors he could give us.  And so I had to bring in extra, we had a couple of guitar players.  We had absolute jazz player.
Speaker 1: It was a fella named White, right--
Speaker 2: Robert White was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Robert White could play all of it, but we had another guitar player that I got, white boy who was--
Speaker 1: Oh, right, right, right.
Speaker 2: --who was really colorful and we kept him on the straight feeling temple and Robert White would do the colors and so that gave our music a lift.  I can't think of his name, the past just so terrible.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's, it's in here.  I'm looking for you, right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Joe Messina.
Speaker 2: Joe Messina.
Speaker 1: So you got Joe, Joe Messina, you got Eddie "Chank" Willis [Eddie Willis]--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --Robert White.
Speaker 2: That was three guitar players.
Speaker 1: Yeah and then sometimes [HistoryMaker] Cornelius Grant if he had, was on the song.
Speaker 2: Yeah, with, with the Temps [The Temptations], 'cause--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Cor- Cornelius was a writer too, so he could, he could, he, when he wrote one of his songs he, we, nobody gonna play it better than him you know his own, had his own colors.  But, Joe Messina, who was strictly jazz, jazz, so he would make very unique movements in the R and B music.  And Robert White could play anything, and so that kept us balanced, you know what I mean.
Story_ID: 668962
Speaker 1: Who played the keyboards on 'Heat Wave'?  Somebody, whoever was playing the keyboard on 'Heat Wave' was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous 'Heat Wave'--(singing) "Heat Wave."
Speaker 1: --cooking.
Speaker 2: (Singing) "Heat"--that was--
Speaker 1: That was driven by that keyboard.
Speaker 2: Well, our piano player was, you got names there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Earl Van Dyke.
Speaker 1: Earl Van Dyke okay, all right that's Earl Van Dyke.
Speaker 2: Earl Van Dyke was, Benny [Benny Benjamin], James Jamerson brought Earl Van Dyke in to me.  He brought him in 'cause he knew I was keep moving the piano players around because each producer had a different feeling, so the, the guy that we had was good, but he, he was limited, you know, so I would bring in other, other piano players.  When Earl Van, when James Jamerson brought Earl Van Dyke, Earl Van Dyke was playing with some band that was, had a, was in the city [Detroit, Michigan] and something happened with the date, it got cancelled and he didn't get paid and all that kind of stuff and Jamerson, he and Jamerson were friends and Jamerson said, "Man you gotta meet [HistoryMaker] Mickey Stevenson and I think I can get him to have you be, play with us, with us in the studio make you--get you some money so you can get back home."  And, and he brought him in, we had a session going on and Jamerson said, "Man I want you, I want you to meet Earl Van Dyke. He's a great player man and you can use him."  And I'm saying, "Come on man I got enough musicians in here now, you know."  He said, "Man but you, you ought to try him out."  Well Jamerson was such a convincer and he and I were so close and I didn't want to disappoint him and he was, he kind of promised the guy that he would help him out and all that, and so I'm, we're heading to the studio and by the time we got downstairs and the guy, Jamerson is constantly talking to me while I'm trying to get my, my business on and Earl is following him and by the time I got in I took the music and I told him, I told Earl I said, "Okay here, here's the music get on the vi- on the, on the, on the organ."  And so he took it and put it on the, on the stand and we started, and then the count off and we got into it and he started playing and I said, "Wow look at this guy."  He gave colors that I was looking for right, and now I got a problem.  I gotta figure out how do I get him to play more and get Joe [Joe Hunter] to play less on the piano right and so I said, "Jesus this ain't gonna work 'cause the guy gonna hate me."  And Joe came in the following day or in that week and he said to me he had another gig he wanted to go to and I had to get a replacement for him.  And I said, "Oh what a break," (laughter). And that's how Earl Van Dyke got a permanent position.  And when Joe came back, Earl was playing and he said you know, it was a little jealousy going on, but for me unfortunately I wanted the best so I took the, the verbal beating from Joe about, why do I have this other guy playing and all that 'cause I was not gonna let him go you know what I mean.
Speaker 1: This is the hardest part of this job is when, is what I've read that you said--
Speaker 2: Oh god.
Speaker 1: We'll have to, we'll have to finish it up next time we can get together, but that's, yeah that's the hardest part of the job, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah and that happened throughout my career there [Motown Records] you know where I had to take the best for what and let the other one go.  But, I would never fire anybody.  I told Joe man, "Okay man," sometimes I just let him just play some chords in a song while Earl played the colors, you know what I mean.
