Story_ID: 57174
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Etheleen Renee Shipp.  Etheleen, E-T-H-E-L-E-E-N, Renee, R-E-N-E-E, Shipp, S-H-I-P-P.  And I'm called E.R. or I'm called Shipp.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, I've heard you give an explanation of the E.R. that was kind of a comic explanation of it.  I don't think we've ever read anything about the actual--
Speaker 2: The actual name?
Speaker 1: Yes, right.  So thank you.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born June 6, 1955 in Conyers, Georgia.  Conyers was then a town, and now it's considered part of Metropolitan Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Atlanta was an exotic, far-away place though, when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: And now, it's caught up with Conyers?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I am a journalist, and currently, I am an Associate Professor of Journalism at Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland].  I'm also the journalist in residence here.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is July 27, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in one of the rooms at Morgan State University's communications building.
Story_ID: 57175
Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions that we always ask that only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Currently, crab cakes.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, black.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: That's a tough one.  Paris [France].
Speaker 1: All right, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 57176
Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'll ask about your mother's [Minnie Shipp] side of the family and your father's [Johnnie Shipp] side.  And then we'll bring them together, but we'll talk about 'em separately first.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother, Minnie Ola Shipp, M-I-N-N-I-E, Ola, O-L-A, S-H-I-P-P.
Speaker 1: And what's her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Her maiden name, surname, was Moore, M-O-O-R-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 3rd, 1927 in Covington, Georgia, C-O-V-I-N-G-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: I've been working on family history for a while so I can trace several branches back at various rates (laughter).  Or I can go back in time at different rates with those branches.  My mother was born in Covington, Georgia.  And her parents, Norman Moore and Ethel Mae Akin Moore, met in Covington.  Both--well, Ethel had been born in Covington in 1903 and Norman had been born in Atlanta [Georgia] in 1902.  They met in Covington when Norman actually moved there as a child and grew up in an orphanage.  The orphanage was run by a woman named Dina Watts Pace.  She had amazing history, I recently learned.  She had studied education at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University] and had gotten to know many of the people there that we associate with Atlanta University, the intellectuals that would have included people like Booker T. Washington.  She knew some of the leading feminists of the day.  She was quite one, herself, and decided to go to Covington to teach after she graduated.  While teaching during her first year, she realized that a number of the kids there were, didn't have parents.  So she decided that she would take some of them in, and that led to her taking in more and more and eventually renting a house.  And that ultimately led her to seek the assistance of an older brother and others to purchase land and build an orphanage and school.  So she had set up there in Covington, Georgia at a time when my grandfather was in Atlanta and his mother had decided to leave behind her children.  She had my grandfather and two older daughters.  She decided to leave them behind and go to New York for work.
Story_ID: 57177
Speaker 1: So my [maternal] grandfather [Norman Moore] went to Covington [Georgia] to--they called her Aunt Dina [Dina Watts Pace], to her place [an orphanage], and the two girls [her grandfather's sisters] went to Ms. Chadwick's Orphanage in Atlanta [Georgia].  And that orphanage was affiliated with Spelman [Spelman College in Atlanta, Georgia].  The two girls ended up going to Spelman, which was then more or less a high school than the college that it ultimately become.  And my grandfather studied at Ms. Dina Watts Pace's place.
Speaker 2: What's her last name?
Speaker 1: Pace, P-A-C-E.
Speaker 2: Pace, okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: He studied there, and apparently, he was one of her favorite students as the story goes.  And she took him underwing and actually sent him to a teacher's school.  And he came back and actually began teaching some of the older kids there at her school.  The, one of the stories I've discovered about that school is that George Washington Carver was one of its many benefactors.  And he came to teach the children how to farm because they were self sufficient there, raising their own food for the school and for the orphanage.  So that was my grandfather's upbringing.  He and my [maternal] grandmother [Ethel Moore] met when he was working in, I guess a soda fountain or something.  And he courted her by bringing her ice cream (laughter).  They were married in 1924, I think, 1924, something like that, and moved into Ms. Dina's place.  And that's where my mother [Minnie Shipp] and her older sister and--were born there.
Speaker 2: Okay, so they had living quarters on that land--
Speaker 1: Yes--
Speaker 2: --that Dina Watts Pace--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --they lived there.  So my mother, who just died in June of this year [2013], had a few stories to tell about Ms. Dina.  She called her Aunt Dina.  But Aunt Dina died a tragic death when they were children.  She became dizzy while trying to--she was on a ladder, became dizzy, fell and ended up falling into the fire, and ended up dying a horrible death from burns.  But that was one of the stories I learned about recently in, after I met someone who's doing research on her and how she was able to get a number of Northerners to support her school in Georgia.  Every year for a while some of the faculty at Wellesley [Wellesley College in Wellesley, Maryland], for example, would raise money to send to her school.  So she was actually quite well known.  And my grandfather was part of that growing up.
Story_ID: 57178
Speaker 1: He [her maternal grandfather, Norman Moore], for a while was a teacher, and then something happened.  So there's a bit of a mystery as to what happened.  I learned from a young man who's doing research in Atlanta [Georgia] now that my grandfather was nearly lynched at some point in early '30's [1930's].  There was an incident where he supposedly was accused of being a little too friendly with white women.  And he, he was set upon by a number of white males and was incarcerated for a little while for his own protection, they said.  Somehow--and this is a mystery that I now am working on trying to unfold, his story became one of those cases that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] took upon itself, as it was campaigning against some of the conditions blacks were living under.  For a while, one of the big causes that the NAACP was pushing was an anti-lynching bill, anti-lynching bill.  And his case was somehow one of those that they were citing as a reason that the federal government needed to protect blacks.  So that's the story I wanna know about.
Story_ID: 57179
Speaker 1: But, ultimately, my [maternal] grandfather [Norman Moore] who, the older people to this day still refer to him as Professor Moore, he took his family to North Carolina, to Statesville, North Carolina, where his father lived.  His father was Samuel Moore.  And he and his growing family lived there for a short while before moving on Northward.  They ended up in Newark, New Jersey for a while.  I'm not quite sure why Newark, but there is a joke, of course, that a number of Southern blacks thought they were going to New York [New York City, New York], and when the conductor announced where they were, Newark, sounded like New York to them (laughter).  So who knows if that's true.  But my grandfather's two sisters were living in New York, and they had suggested that he come North, and that he could find work for himself and take care of his family there.  But he was in Newark for a while, and that's where their third child was born, a son named Robert.  And for about a year, they remained there with my grandfather working as a night watchman.  But apparently, work was becoming scarce.  We're now talking Depression [the Great Depression], and they decided it was better to go back down South.  So they came back to Georgia, and instead of Covington [Georgia] where he had the troubles, they went to Conyers [Georgia], which was nearby.  And apparently, my grandmother, Ethel Moore, had been hired by a woman there in Conyers to do domestic work.  And I think she was initially the breadwinner, but my grandfather found work too.  He did a variety of things, but he never really taught anymore.  He was still known as Professor Moore, but he never taught.  He did a lot of--when I was a child, I only knew him as kind of being a handyman kind of person.  And later, I kind of thought of him as Hoke, the character in "Driving Ms. Daisy" because he would go every day, well into his advanced years, he was traveling from Conyers to a town that was closer to Atlanta [Georgia], Avondale [Georgia], to work for an aging white woman whom he had worked for, for many years.  So he was taking care of her, but he was, to a child such as myself, he seemed old as Methuselah, and we couldn't understand how he was taking care of anybody.  But he did that for many, many, many years.  And it was while he was working for this lady, Mrs. Spitler (ph.) was her name, that he would bring home various things, including old copies of the "New York Daily News".  She was a transplanted New Yorker, apparently, and would get--
Speaker 2: And it sounds like a Jewish lady.
Speaker 1: Yes, and she would get the "New York Daily News" in the mail.  And he would bring the paper home and that was one of the things that motivated me to learn to read.  I started with the comics, of course, because the "Daily News" had a great comics section.  And it had a section for kids.  There was an area where you would connect the dots to form a picture, and then you would color the picture.  I was great at that, and so through all of that I started reading the newspaper.  And many years later, of course, I ended up at the "Daily News".  Who would have thunk it?  But that was my mother's side of the family.  My grandmother [Ethel Moore] did domestic work, initially, but as she started having children, she became a full-time homemaker.  She had eight children.  My mother's [Minnie Shipp] older sister, Marian, then my mother, and then six more children.  They settled in Conyers, Georgia and most of them remained there.  There were very few of us who strayed too far from there.
Story_ID: 57180
Speaker 1: My mother [Minnie Shipp] went to the black school in Conyers [Georgia].  Now, Conyers was considered "town", and then, of course, the rest of the county was the rural area.  So my mother went to the black school in town that was called the Bryant Street School because that's where it was located.  It was considered fancy by some standards.  But over time, black people really were not satisfied with the conditions in which their children were being educated.  For many, many years, the more activist people in the county tried to persuade county leader to build a real school for the kids.  The Bryant Street School was a huge building that was kind of barn-like, as it was described.  It was--it did not have heating other than a--it had a coal stove.  It did not have electricity.  There was no running water, no indoor plumbing.  At night, if there were any events taking place there, people brought lanterns and such to light the place.  It was not the greatest thing.  But that's where my mother went to school until about ninth or tenth grade.  She and the principal had a run-in, and she decided that she just could not go to that school.  And she wanted to drop out.  Her mother, my grandmother [Ethel Moore], said, no.  And my [maternal] grandfather's [Norman Moore] two sisters in New York [New York City, New York] agreed to send money for my mother to be able to go to school in Atlanta [Georgia].  Because she didn't live in Atlanta, she had to pay tuition.  So they paid tuition for my mother to go to Booker T. Washington High School in Atlanta.  And that's where she graduated.
Story_ID: 57181
Speaker 1: One of her good friends back in Conyers [Georgia] was a girl named Clancy Mae Shipp.  And through Clancy Mae, my mother [Minnie Shipp] met a young man named Johnnie Shipp, Clancy Mae's older brother.  And they began courting.  So after a few years--I have pictures of my mother and father [Johnnie Shipp] on a date where the date consisted of going to church at the Macedonia Baptist Church.  And they were photographed in one picture with my mother on one side and my father on the other with lots of people in between when they took a picture of the congregation that day.  So we laugh about their hot date was going to the Macedonia Baptist Church.  They married in 1950.  Now, my father was, I guess mostly he was working as a shoe cobbler, and he also was a good repairman.  He could repair televisions.  That was before we got the kind of televisions we have now.  But in those days, you had tubes (laughter), and if a tube went bad, it had to be replaced, and you had to know which tube and anyway, my father was very good at that.  So he was known as a repairman.  And he did various other things.  But they married.
Story_ID: 57182
Speaker 1: Maybe we should go to your father's [Johnnie Shipp] side and then catch him up to this point, maybe--
Speaker 2: Yes, my father--
Speaker 1: Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father is Johnnie Will Shipp, and he spelled Johnnie, J-O-H-N-N-I-E.  Johnnie Will Shipp was the son of Clarence Shipp and Celia Holden Shipp, H-O-L-D-E-N.  They were from that Conyers [Georgia] area, but they were, a lot of them were back and forth between Conyers and Covington [Covington, Georgia].  Those two towns are quite close, and, in fact, Conyers is in Rockdale County which was created, in part, out of Newton County.  So it was all that same area.  And they were back and forth so from one census to the other, sometimes they would be in Newton County, which was Covington.  And sometimes they would be in Rockdale, which is Conyers, but my father grew up in Conyers more or less.
Speaker 1: What was his date of birth?
Speaker 2: My father was born November 4th, 1922.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he died in June of 1993, 20 years before my mother [Minnie Shipp].  My father was one of nine children, and they were more of a farming family.  The Shipps had been around quite a while in that area, Rockdale, Newton, Walton Counties, and they could trace some of their history back to some of the farms and plantations in that area.  The name, Shipp, comes from some of those who owned my ancestors, of course, as did the name Moore and some of those names in the family line.  Sometimes now whites named Shipp call me cousin because I'm doing so much family history research that I actually know more about the Shipp history than some of them do.  We figured out that my [paternal] grandfather, Clarence Shipp, was the youngest son in a family that had about 12 children.  And the oldest of them were born just after the Civil War.  My grandfather, Clarence Shipp, was born around 1896 as best I can tell.  So there was a great span in their ages.  And it's been a challenge trying to track the various family members because some of them did go in various directions.  Some ended up in the North, while my grandfather, Clarence Shipp, remained in Georgia.
Story_ID: 57183
Speaker 1: The--my father [Johnnie Shipp], like his father [Clarence Shipp], was a veteran.  My [paternal] grandfather, Clarence Shipp, was one of those soldiers in World War I.  I guess they were, Pershing was the General [General John J. Pershing], and they were one of Pershing's troops.  He was, the United States entered World War I relatively late [April, 1917].  And he went in, I think, around 1918.  So he was there for like the last year of World War I.  And then came back to Conyers and continued farming.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, Pershing was nicknamed "Black Jack" Pershing--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --because he commanded black troops.
Speaker 1: Because of the black troops.  Well, my grandfather was one of those troops.  He came back and started raising his family, did a lot of farming, as I said, was very active in church.  Church is very important in my family on both sides of the family.  My father went to school up to about seventh grade, I think, which was the norm in those days.  He enlisted for World War II and he was involved in the campaign that began with the D-Day Invasion [Normandy Invasion on June 6, 1944].  He was among that first wave of blacks who went in, and they were not allowed to fight.  They were the ones who, among other things, were driving the trucks to get the supplies to the troops at the frontlines.  My father was one of those truck drivers.  Some of them were also the ones who were bagging all those bodies.  There were so many deaths there, as you recall, on D-Day.  And one of those young men began learning what would become his trade.  He became an undertaker, but he got started by doing the work there as part of that D-Day Invasion.  So my father served in World War II.  When he came back to the States, he was among those troops who were helping to integrate a base in Virginia.  That was about 1947, he was doing that.  And he never really talked about his service in the War, and it was only after I began digging into our family's history and actually had found his service records and could be very specific about asking him, well, what was it like when you were over in France or Germany, and he wouldn't really talk about it.  He would just say, "It was rough, it was rough".  And that's about as much as I got out of him in discussing World War II.
Story_ID: 57184
Speaker 1: I learned something every interesting.  As I started doing family history research, and that was that my father [Johnnie Shipp] was among the young men who came back from the War [World War II], who wanted to do something to improve the lives of their family and their friends, their neighbors.  I did not know my father was as civically engaged as he was, but he helped to found a Boy Scout troop for black kids.  He worked with a civic group that was trying to improve infrastructure, delivery of public works in the black areas.  He joined the Masons.  They had a chapter of the Prince Hall Masons there.  He joined the Benevolent Society where black people, mostly men, would essentially pay dues and use the money that they raised to provide burials.  So they, and that burial society of benevolent society had its roots in one of the churches, and it went back to the very early 1900's.  So my father was involved in that when he got back from World War II, and a few other things.  But those young men who went on to raise families and become involved in their churches and what have you, never really talked about those things that they did.  And so I was very surprised when I learned all the things he had done as a young man.  And it helped me to maybe understand why so many of those young men, not--they worked hard, most of them, but they also found the only escape in alcohol.  So a lot of them abused alcohol, and my father was an alcoholic.  And so when I thought of my father, when I was growing up, I often thought of him as the man who came home on Friday's drunk, and it was very hard for me to understand why and who that affected where we lived, how we lived, and a lot of things that only made sense later when I learned that they had such a struggle to make the lives that they were trying to make for us there in Conyers [Georgia], which was supposed to be one of the easier places to live compared to some other parts of Georgia.  But it still was a struggle if you were black to make a decent living there and a dignified living there.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, that story of the War and people not talking about the War, only to say it was rough, and, that's a common thing we hear.
Speaker 1: Very so, very much so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: People don't seem to know (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Some of the documentaries that have been made in the last two decades have helped some of the people to open up a little bit more about their stories and seeing that their story was similar to what others had done and also maybe seeing that their, that they were a part of a bigger story.  And seeing that, I think, makes them maybe a little proud of what they did do, what they did accomplish in the circumstances.
Story_ID: 57185
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you consider your parents' [Minnie Shipp and Johnnie Shipp] personalities, their--well, you already talked about how they met, right, sort, you know, but they--do they--so that's the story they tell.  They were introduced by your father's [Johnnie Shipp] sister?
Speaker 2: Right.  They probably would have met anyway in this small town.  You know, I don't know to what extent they did socializing, but a lot of social life revolved around church.  And I think there was such a proliferation of churches in our area because people generally stayed in their little part of the county and didn't move around that much.  But I think my father's generation was used to moving around, partly because they had been in the War [World War II], and so they had left the farm and had gone on to see other things.  They would go to Atlanta [Georgia] sometimes, so it's--there's a chance my parents may have met.  But it was through my father's sister that they formally met and began dating.  Their, they didn't seem to have any great ambitions beyond wanting to have a family and to live a regular, nice life.  My mother [Minnie Shipp] worked as a domestic.  She took care of other people's children, and she did a lot of cooking.  She was very, known for her cooking.  My father continued to work as a shoe cobbler, but he also joined a number of black men at a cotton mill that was one of the big employers in that area.  Other than farming itself, the cotton mill was a big employer of black men.  And it was owned by the Calloway family, the same Calloways that were involved, I think in, oh, was it the Kennedy administration [President John F. Kennedy] or the Johnson administration [President Lyndon B. Johnson].  One of them was Secretary of the Army [Bo Calloway].  But anyway, that family had the cotton mill there and a whole bunch of black men worked there.  When it closed down, a whole bunch of black men had no work.  And they, many of them ended up going to a trucking company in Atlanta where they basically loaded trucks, unloaded trucks, that kind of thing and made a good living for their families.  So for about 20-something years my father worked at this trucking company in Atlanta, he and many of his neighbors and friends worked there.  My mother, after she had--well, my mother had--well, I should say my mother and my father, had six children in the space of five years between June 6, 1955, my birth, and July 18, 1960 when the last set of twins were born.  They had six children.
Speaker 1: You say the last set of twins?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, can--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My parents had two sets of twins.
Story_ID: 57186
Speaker 1: Now, can you name your siblings in the order and place yourself in the order for us?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.  I was born June 6, 1955, as I said.  My sister, Virginia, was born exactly 13 months later, July 6, 1956.  And then on September 1, 1958, which was Labor Day that year, my parents [Johnnie Shipp and Minnie Shipp] had the first set of twins, Norma, Norma Elaine and Johnnie Will, Jr.   And then a little less than two years after that, they had another set of twins, two boys, Clarence and Christopher.  Now, some of the old ladies in church would sometimes kid my parents and say that, obviously, for the first five years they were married, they didn't quite know what they were doing.  And once they figured it out, they didn't know how to stop (laughter).  So that's how they had six children.
Story_ID: 57187
Speaker 1: And Conyers [Georgia] was such a small place that when they had the first set of twins, it was considered such an unusual thing that people came from all around to look at the twins.  And I'm thinking now, wow, they could have made money like the Kardashians or something if they had, you know, sold tickets or done something.  But people would come around to see the twins, and then when mama [Minnie Shipp] had the second set of twins in less than two years, we had four babies in the house.  Now, okay, it sounds like it was nice and cozy and all that stuff.  Well, it wasn't (laughter).  As the oldest of this bunch, I had to take on a lot of responsibilities.  So I'm still a baby myself, but mama taught me early on how to change the diapers.  We had real diapers in those days.  And you had to wash the diapers.  I have to go, back up a minute and say, we didn't have indoor plumbing most of the time.  So you'd have to go out and get buckets of water and bring them in and then my mother would heat water on the stove and that's how we'd get the hot water.  So the process of bathing the babies could be drawn out, as I found out once when I was in charge of trying to get the babies bathed, I would bath one, and get it all powdered up and everything, put it down, go to Baby Number 2, but Baby Number 1 would then crawl around and start getting dirty all over again.  I finally realized you had to put the kid in the bed and whatever.  Anyway, so it was a crazy, long, drawn-out process when we were growing up and just trying to take baths.  But we had, for most of the time, we lived in shotgun houses and others that did not have proper facilities for plumbing, etc.  We lived in small houses, so there was no such thing as having your own bedroom.  We, at one point, I remember in one of the houses, my mother and father essentially slept in the living room, and then in the bedroom, they had two--well, they had sets of bunk beds.  And that's where the kids slept, and then there was a kitchen.  And that was kind of it.  And in the backyard was the outhouse.  Periodically, you had to take your turn carrying the, you had these containers that were used as a bathroom at night.  So slop jars is what we called them.  But you had to carry those out to dump them in the outhouse and you didn't wanna do that in cold weather, but you had to.  And you definitely did not want to fall and drop that thing.  It was a disaster.  Occasionally, of course, that would happen.  But we, we did all the things that people think about when you think about folks living with outhouses.  We used the Sears Roebuck catalog was our toilet paper sometimes.  It was, it was not a wonderful existence when it came to those kinds of things.
Story_ID: 57188
Speaker 1: Now, let me just ask you this.  When you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, their talents, their habits, the way they walk, talk, the way they look, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Who do I take after?  (Laughter) I don't know.  People now keep telling me that I look like my mother [Minnie Shipp].  I don't know, maybe.  I think there's a little bit of me looking like my mother.  And I think she looks like her grandmother.  So I see a lot of that.  In terms of--well, my mother loved cooking and all of that kind of thing.  I like cooking.  For me, it's a way to relax, to be creative and a way to relax.  So I like that.  My father [Johnnie Shipp] thought of himself as an intellectual, I guess.  He loved reading the papers and knowing what was going on, you know, stayed abreast of current events and all of that.  So I suppose I got a little of that from him.  They both were very much into church world.  And I did not get that from them (laughter).  I, I am involved in church, but not to the degree that my folks are.  My, my family can sit around, even to this day and all the conversation can revolve around the Bible or about what they're doing in church or what's coming up at church.  And they could care less about what's going on in the world beyond.  That's too confining for me.  So I, my family and I are not on the same page when it comes to that world.  But it is their world.  We all like singing, so that's, I get that from both sides of my family, I think.  But my mother's side of the family was more into music, the church music side than my father's side.  But I think that's it.  There was not a lot of humor in my household.  And everybody was, you know, as I said, they were into this, the Bible.  So there was not a lot of joking about that.
Story_ID: 57189
Speaker 1: My grandfather, my mother's father, Professor Moore [Norman Moore], was the storyteller.  He was the one who would tell jokes that would take forever to get to the punch line, but they were worth it when you did get to the punch line.  He was funny, and he had all kinds of stories to tell about just life.  Some of them I now know were tall tales, but they were entertaining tall tales.  And my--
Speaker 2: Do you remember any of them?
Speaker 1: I, on the spot I can't think of any--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but he was, I just remember the kids, my siblings and my cousins would sit on the front porch and just listen to Big Daddy.  We called him Big Daddy.  We'd just listen to Big Daddy tell his stories, and that was just an amazing thing.  I'm sure some of my cousins probably can remember some of them.  I just remember the, being there and remember the feeling of being embraced by him in those stories that he had to tell about life, about--well, I can't remember them specifically.  But I just remember it was a nice thing when we gathered there on the porch to hear Big Daddy's stories.  My [maternal] grandmother [Ethel Moore] was more stern than my grandfather.  So we always knew that he was fun guy in the family more than my, my grandmother.  But I guess she had to be the disciplinarian 'cause he was not so much that.  They were all about work, so there wasn't a lot of socializing.
Story_ID: 57190
Speaker 1: On rare occasions, my family might go to someone else's house for dinner.  But I guess, you know, you can't really invite a family with six kids to come over for dinner too often.  So there wasn't a lot of that.  To the extent there was any social events, and generally, again revolved around church, so about once a month or once every few months, it would be my mother's [Minnie Shipp] turn to feed the preacher.  In those days, the preachers kind of worked a circuit.  You didn't have church every Sunday, and you didn't have a full-time minister.  A preacher would have three or four churches, and he would go from church to church on various Sundays.
Speaker 2: They called 'em C.C. Rider or circuit--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Circuit, yeah.  So, so the various families would take turns feeding the preacher.  I suppose it could sort of be an honor for the hostess to be able to show off her culinary skills and all that.  It was torture for the children because, first of all, we had to clean the house, you know.  And it had to be really, really clean.  And no child can ever get the house clean enough for their mother's inspection.  But then you had to help with the food and there seemed to be endless chores to do from washing a potato to whatever.  Even as a little kid, there was something for you to do.  But then you would see your mother doing all this wonderful cooking and smell all this wonderful food.  And we couldn't have any of it until after the preacher had eaten.  So the preacher would come with his family and then visiting preachers who were there for the Sunday, and then, of course, the other grown-ups.  And we were just sitting there.  We couldn't eat until they finished.  And sometimes, there wasn't so much left.  So we did not look forward to have the preacher coming to dinner in those days, but that was a big social thing,
Story_ID: 57191
Speaker 1: --and "the" big social event of the year when I was growing up, when I was a child would have been homecoming, which was held at the end of the summer.  And the theory behind it, I guess is that those family members who had gone North or wherever, would come back.  It was also the end of the season for farming and whatever.  So it was a time to reflect.  And so our homecoming was the third Sunday of August every year.  And we looked forward to people coming back from wherever they had been to come for that weekend, and all the ladies in the church would cook.  And they would put out a big spread on the church lawn, with long tables.  And ladies would, you know, put out their stuff, and the trick was to try to eat something from all the ladies so you wouldn't offend anybody by not taking some of theirs.  But you couldn't overfill your plate or you'd just stuff yourself.  So there was an art to being diplomatic and also eating well on homecoming Sunday.  They still carry on that tradition but now it's catered, so it's not the same thing.  But then it was all the ladies bringing out their best stuff, putting it out there and everybody sharing food and competing.  The ladies were competing with, you know, who could cook the better sweet potato pie or whatever.  I remember my first kind of crush was on this cute young man who played piano.  His whole family was musical, and they were from Lithonia, Georgia, a nearby town.  And for us, that was kind of exotic 'cause they were not from Conyers [Georgia].  So his family was there, and they were just brilliant at playing music.  And I wanted to get his attention, so I made sure that I was, you know, positioning myself to be in his face during homecoming one year.  And so I volunteered to be the person to fan the flies off the food.  So, of course, I had to be around doing all of these kinds of things.  But he could care less about me, but I remember that was one of those big, homecoming highlights, was trying to get the attention of LaSalle Smith.  I think he went on to become a preacher and all kinds of things.  But that was one of those homecoming moments that we had.  Some years later, I took some of my colleagues from The New York Times to homecoming.  I think there must have been a NABJ convention, National Association of Black Journalists convention in Atlanta [Atlanta, Georgia].  And so I took them down.  And they got a kick out of it, but they didn't know how to juggle getting something from every one of the ladies, but not too much because you're gonna be expected to eat all of this food.  So they got a kick out of trying to figure out homecoming etiquette (laughter).  They still do that, and it's, it's an interesting time to get people together, but it doesn't have the same meaning because, as I said, people cater the event more than anything else or even if the ladies put out their food, they're getting it from Kentucky Fried [Kentucky Fried Chicken] or somebody else for the chicken.  And it's not the same kind of thing.  So that's one of those traditions I really, really miss.
Story_ID: 57192
Speaker 1: So homecoming is something that goes way back, huh, and--
Speaker 2: It goes very--way, way back.  And it was a time when you think about it too, that when families were spread out in these areas on the farms they were working, they didn't see each other all that often.  So this was a time, that particular Sunday in the month, in the year that they knew they would all go to Macedonia Homecoming or Double Springs Homecoming or Ball Rock's Homecoming.  So it was easy--
Speaker 1: So these homecomings were at different times of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, each church had it a different time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you could maybe go through the month of August or September, going to different ones?
Speaker 2: You could if you had the transportation.  Now, again, remember in the way back days, we didn't have that great of transportation.  So you might go to a couple, but you knew that there were--you might go to a couple, but you knew there were some going on all around.  And then throughout the State of Georgia and perhaps throughout the South, there were these kinds of things going on where people had an opportunity to leave their farms and get together and have a social life.
Speaker 1: I guess that would be the time of the year when they--you'd have the most resources too to put out that, you know, a big spread of food?
Speaker 2: You'd probably have a little bit more money then, yeah, at the end of the summer.
Speaker 1: After selling a crop or something or, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, having saved up for that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Produce coming up, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, a lot of people would be selling their produce too.  So, yeah, they would probably have a little bit more money then.  And they were also, of course, saving money up for the kids for school coming up too.  So they had a little money to put--but remember too, a lot of the food, they were raising themselves--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --up until the time we got Kentucky Fried Chicken.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: They were raising all this food themselves.  So they were using some of their own produce and their own chickens and their own cows, whatever.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay--
Speaker 2: But that's how I grew up.
Story_ID: 57193
Speaker 1: All right, so these are, those are--we always ask the question, "What are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?"  But you've covered a lot of it.  Do you have anything additional to add, sights and sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: I remember honeysuckle was always a harbinger of Spring.  We always looked forward to that, when the honeysuckle was in blossom.  We'd go out and pull the stamen out of there and drink the, whatever you call that, the fluid that was in there.  Anyway, we loved to drink that.  It was just, it was great.  And I do vaguely recall people making syrup and stuff.  So Spring was a special time for a renewal, but also just a special time for people beginning to plant and we loved, not so much the planting, but when the first shoots started coming up, we were all excited about what was growing.  And sometimes we didn't wait for some of the fruit to be ripe before we start plucking thing out of people's gardens.  I do recall that was really funny.  I was a good tree climber, and so I was often one of those who would climb trees to shake 'em for the pecans.  And we would make a few dollars, probably more like a few quarters, for shaking some of the pecan trees.  But mostly, you were paid in pecans themselves, and we got a lot of pecans.  And we would, you know, go and get apples from people's trees.  So we had that kind of life when I was a kid.  It was pretty carefree in that sense.  It was relatively safe.  So you could go around the area, walking around and not, the parents didn't really worry that somebody would do anything bad to you.  First of all, you were around people who were related to you, for the most part.  And then there were always the number of older people who were looking out for the kids.  So we ran around and had a lot of great fun outside, but enjoyed the Spring in particular.
Story_ID: 57194
Speaker 1: Okay, now, where did you start school?  What was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: I started school at that J. P. Carr School.  I have to--let me back up and tell you how we got the J. P. Carr School.  The, my father [Johnnie Shipp] and other young men, after World War II, were studying at the Bryant Street School, the black school in Conyers [Conyers, Georgia].  They were studying for, I guess, would be, kind of the equivalent of a GED, but they were getting certificates in things like television repair and that kind of thing.  And my father [Johnnie Shipp] got some certificates in that.  But while they were studying, they became more and more upset at the surroundings they were in, this big, old barn of a building that was totally inadequate for teaching the kids, and they thought it was totally inadequate for them, grown-ups in there trying to study at night.  So they came up with this plot that my sister, Norma and I, uncovered in 1997, 1998 when we were doing research for a volume called 'The Heritage of Rockdale County.'  We found out that they came up with a plan.  They knew that under Georgia law, black kids were entitled to have decent schools.  So they decided to burn down the Bryant Street School.  And as we pieced the story together, late one night in March of 1950, they went there.  They probably had the help of some spirits (laughter).  I'm pretty sure they had a few drinks before they did this.  Before they burned the building down, they made sure to take out all the coal from the coal bins because one of the young men involved had just started his undertaking business.  And it was fueled by coal.  So they took all the coal to his place.  So he had enough coal to last him for some time.  But they burned the building down.  And the, the blaze caught the attention of everybody.  It was so huge, the fire.  By late that morning, the city fathers had gotten together in an emergency meeting to try to determine what to do with all these little Colored children that didn't have school.  And they immediately decided that they would have to build a new school.  So the first thing they did was try to figure out what to do with the kids in the meantime.  And all the churches stepped in and some of the other institutions in town, including the pool hall were converted into temporary schools for the kids.  And the city fathers, the white people who ran Conyers, Georgia, started studying what other places were doing when they were building new schools.  So they visited various other counties and came up with some plans and decided to build a school on a different site than the Bryant Street School.  And they acquired some land nearby, and there was some confusion over the years.  But people thought that John Phillip Carr donated land to the county to build this school.  I don't think he did, but he was very much involved in helping to champion education for black kids, and he was very active in his church.  He was very prominent in the community.  But I think the county actually bought land.  In any case, the school was named for Mr. Carr, John Phillip Carr.  That was the black school.  Even the kids in the rural area came in to J. P. Carr.  That was the school I attended.  I began school there in 1961, I guess.
Story_ID: 57195
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were six years old then [in 1961], first grade.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  Now, the summer before that, I had been running around, and the J. P. Carr School had a big playground area.  And the school, both the school and, of necessity, a kind of community center because the auditorium, well, the cafeteria doubled as an auditorium, and the auditorium was used not only for school activities, but for after-school programs too.  So the, it was a place where kids ran around in there all the time.  So even a pre-first grader, such as myself, was running around in the yard of J. P. Carr School.  And one of the teachers, Mrs. Thomas, who was the librarian, saw that I was kind of the leader of the pack.  And now I realize that there was a strategy behind what she did.  But she invited me to come into the school and showed me a book.  And it was a nice, beautiful picture book.  I recall it was a book that had animals in it, and I was just fascinated by this book.  It was so beautiful.  And she hooked me.  So I got into reading (laughter).  And then I brought in my little friends, and a lot of us just fell in love with books that summer before we entered first grade.  When I got to first grade, I was one of the kids who was really prepared for first grade.  A lot of the children were not.  So from the start, I was one of the star students, one of the teacher's pets.  But I loved the books, and for me, it was a way to escape from my home life, which was, you know, it wasn't the worst home life, but it was nothing special about it.  It was stark, and as I said, on Friday nights, my father was often loud and violent and drunk.  But those books took me to places I couldn't imagine.  So Mrs. Thomas hooked me, and got me ready for first grade.  First grade, I had a teacher named Mrs. Hall, and she put me in the smart group.  And we got special attention because we seemed to be more interested in school.  So we got the good books, and then we were asked to help with reading--teaching reading to some of the younger kids.  But we knew we were the special kids.  So from the beginning, I loved school.  It was an alternative to my home life, and it was, it looked like it was gonna take me to some world that I was seeing in those books that I couldn't see otherwise.
Story_ID: 57196
Speaker 1: All right.  So you're in the smart group in--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) At the J. P. Carr School.
Speaker 1: J. P. Carr School.
Speaker 2: That was a wonderful place.  The, a lot of the young teachers lived in Atlanta [Georgia] and came to Conyers [Georgia], which is really about 30 miles away.  But as we traveled in those days, Atlanta was a place, we would get on a Greyhound Bus a couple times a year and go to Atlanta.  And it seemed to take forever because the bus would go through every little nook and cranny to get there.  But we would go there for maybe Christmas shopping or Easter shopping at the store.  So for me, Atlanta was a far, far away place.  The teachers, though, young teachers who were from Atlanta, would sometimes come to Conyers to teach.  But, and they would live with the various families during the week or there was a dormitory built near J. P. Carr School for the women teachers.  So we often had these teachers there in our midst.  And we thought they were the smartest, brightest people ever because they talked differently and they knew so much about the world that we did not know.  But I was blessed that some of these teachers took me under their wings.  So Mrs. Hall was local, but my second grade teacher, Mrs. Alfren (unclear)--no, Alfren was third grade.  I'll think of it--Mrs. Gardener.  So Mrs. Hall, Mrs. Gardener, Mrs. Alfren, Mrs. Tillman, Mrs. Patrick, all these ladies were very much, I guess we would call them race women because they and some of their male counterparts--there were more female than male, but, and their male counterparts, I think, were committed to finding the best and the brightest among these group of nappy-headed little kids in Conyers.  And in my case, they would supply me with some of the things I needed for school that I couldn't get from my parents.  If I needed extra books or things like that, they would give them to me, buy them for me, whatever.  I decided I wanted to be a majorette in the little second grade majorette corp.  And they bought me my little majorette outfit and my batons and that kind of stuff because my family said they didn't have money for that.  But the teachers would sometimes take me to Atlanta for a weekend.  And I was exposed to the zoo or a museum or something that I would not have seen otherwise.  So those teachers were very, very special in helping to shape my early years and to give me some confidence, I guess, that there could be a life beyond where I was growing up and that it could come through education.  So I was all into school.
Story_ID: 57197
Speaker 1: In some ways, it was a way to escape some of the chores at home if you had to do homework, but not always 'cause my folks still thought that I was wasting too much time on books when I could be doing some other things.  So that was always difficult to negotiate how much time I could spend with school things.  But I was, I grew into a very confident student when I was at J. P. Carr.  I ran for Queen.  They had a big celebration every spring.  They would have May Day.  And May Day in, during the Cold War years had a bad name because somehow it was sort of--the word "May Day" sort of had the connotation of the big celebration of labor in the Soviet Union.  But May Day was a spring festival that was celebrated in many places.  And at J. P. Carr School, they had a big May Day celebration.  We decorated the school with all kinds of spring things.  It was really a spring festival.  And each grade had a Queen (laughter), and then we--and you had to vote on the Queen.  So the teachers would nominate kids to run for Queen.  The teachers always nominated me.  And I always lost because it was almost always the light-skinned kid would win.  We had all of that going on when I was growing up.  So the light-skinned girl who was usually not very bright, not nearly as bright as I was would win.  And, but I ended up not minding that because the teachers would always give me all these consolation prizes that were much better than some little stupid crown to wear for the May Day parade.  I would get books or something, you know.  So I didn't mind losing as Queen.  But we would have the big parade, and I remember in second grade, they had a little majorette corps, and I joined that little majorette corps.  And we had to march behind the band.  Now, our little J. P. Carr band was considered one of the best in the state, won all kinds of awards.  And we had to march behind the band, but they didn't tell us that that was kind of a long route that we had to take, and our little second-grade legs got tired (laughter).  So I remember somebody came along in a car, and we all piled into a couple of cars for a good bit of that parade route.  And then when we got to where the crowds were, we got out of the car and marched again.  And our parents thought we had done the whole thing.  But it was a big, kind of communal thing, every spring, with this old big, May Day thing.  And the teachers, we went through the ritual every year, nominating me to be Queen, never won.  But I ended up with the better prizes, I think, as I said, books and things.
Story_ID: 57198
Speaker 1: Now, the Civil Rights Movement was reaching intensity when you were in school.  Did, I think I read somewhere where you remember Dr. King's [Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speech from television or on--in '63' [1963], the March on Washington, I guess?  It wasn't that?
Speaker 2: No, when I was growing up, my family was not particularly engaged in any Civil Rights [Civil Rights Movement] kind of activities.  They were very much focused on keeping their lives as uncluttered as possible.  They didn't wanna make waves.  My mother [Minnie Shipp] did something that in hindsight, it looks like she was kind of challenging the system.  But I don't know if she thought of it that way at the time.  She decided to take a job at one of the factories there, Ace Hardware.  And they had not ever had a black woman working in that production line that they had there.  So they hired her to be a maid, something she had done in their houses.  So she was a maid.  She joined the union though, and she didn't let that be widely known because that was a bit controversial if you joined the union.  She joined the union, and she was convinced at a certain point that she should apply for one of those jobs on the floor in the production line because she could make more money on an hourly salary.  She did, and because she had seniority built up as a maid, she was able to get ahead of some others who had applied for that job.  She got the job, and there was resistance to her having the job because she was black, and she was a woman.  And it got so bad that white men would spread feces all over the men's restroom, knowing that she had to clean it up.  They did all kinds of things to harass her.  So she complained, and her union rep and also the person that was the supervisor took my mother's side and told the men that if they continued doing that, they were gonna lose their job.  Anyway, it was a big thing for mama to go from being a maid to being a person working in production in this Ace Hardware factory.  So that was the kind of thing they were doing.  It was very quiet kinds of things, the things that don't make headlines.  But in their own quiet ways, they were challenging the conditions under which they were living and working.
Story_ID: 57199
Speaker 1: They were not marching.  In fact, when they heard that Martin Luther King [Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] might be coming in that direction, everybody was nervous because they thought he would make things worse for them if he came to town.  So that's, that was how I thought of King until 1968 when he was assassinated.  And I remember that because--
Speaker 2: You 10 then, right?
Speaker 1: Well, '68' [1968], no, I was about 12.
Speaker 2: Twelve then, okay.
Speaker 1: Twelve, yeah.  And I remember that I was trying to cook.  I think I was trying to make some biscuits or something, and when the news came over the television that he had been shot and that he died.  And I always say that's why I don't--I can't make biscuits to this day 'cause the trauma of trying to make biscuits then kicked in.  But that was when I started focusing on who Dr. King was, really, then.  And that's when more people began to talk about Dr. King and what he stood for and what it meant for us.
Story_ID: 57200
Speaker 1: It was around that time that some of the people for whom my mother was still cleaning houses suggested that she should let me be one of the kids to go to the white school.  In 1968, after King's death, the folks in Rockdale County [Georgia] were finally gonna get serious about integrating the schools.  Now, that was a long time after 1954 and the Brown decision [Brown v. Board of Education Supreme Court case].  But they were just getting around to it around then, and they were doing it under what was called a "Freedom of Choice Plan."  In actuality, it meant that black kids had the freedom to choose to go to one of the white school, but white kids were not even gonna come to a black school.  So I went to Rockdale County High School in 1968.  I was not looking forward to that because it was not--at a time when a black man who was pushing for the advancement of black people was murdered by a white person, you didn't--I didn't feel like I wanted to take on the system and go to the "white" school.  But mama insisted, and I did.  So I was one of the few black kids who went to Rockdale High School in September, I guess it would have been, of 1968.  And it was there that I began to focus more and more on what the Civil Rights Movement was all about because at that point, I guess I felt that I was somehow a part of it by having gone into, into that place.  It was not a very friendly place even though some of the kids there were kids that my mother had helped raise, and I knew them from when some of their family would bring over their hand-me-down clothes and hand-me-down toys and all that to us, I knew some of them from that.  But it still was not a very, very friendly place.  And as smart as I was at J. P. Carr School, at the "white", I was placed in the vocational track.  So they, all the black kids were pretty much placed in that.  So the girls took typing and home economics.  The boys took shop and some mechanics stuff until a couple of courageous white teachers realized that I did not belong in those vocational classes and to pretty much petition to put me in college prep classes.  And so I ended up, I guess, by my sophomore year, I was in college prep classes.
Story_ID: 57201
Speaker 1: But I, at Rockdale High [newly integrated Rockdale High School], I was one of those kids who became one of the leaders because we were kind of there to mediate between the white kids and the black kids.  By my junior year, I think, the Rockdale County school system was consolidating.  So no longer would it be Freedom of Choice Plan.  There would just be one school system at that point.  So those of us who had gone over at the beginning of high school years, had a little experience.  And we could interpret black folks to the white folks when all these other black kids started coming to the school.  So I became one of the, one of the leaders there.  So I was a good student, but I also was in the student government and I worked on the yearbook and I did all those kind of things while I was in school.
Story_ID: 57202
Speaker 1: But one thing that pushed me towards learning more about history and learning about racism was a teacher who did not mean to lead me in that direction at all (laughter).  Mrs. Helen Archer was a member of the Daughters of the Confederacy.  She was very proud of that.  She was a very warm person, but she was an old, Southern woman.  But she would tell us all these stories to make history a little bit more interesting to us.  So she would tell us stories behind the stories.  She would tell us how George Washington [President George Washington] really died, that he had been tipping out at night and Martha got tired of that and told him if he didn't stop, she was gonna lock him out.  And she locked him out one night, and he got caught in a rainstorm and caught pneumonia and died.  And then it--well, I guess John Adams [President John Adams], maybe, died because he ate so much that he died of overeating or something, indigestion or whatever.  So she would come up with these stories.  And as she told these stories, I'm wondering about some other characters in history.  And I started looking up Abraham Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] because all black people loved Mr. Lincoln.  And there were black people in Conyers [Georgia] who were proud Republicans to the day they died because they said, it was Mr. Lincoln's party.  So I wanted to know about Mr. Lincoln, and I discovered that Mr. Lincoln was not a great lover of black people that we kids thought from the stories we had been told.  So I did a little paper on Mr. Lincoln and what he really thought, and that he would have done anything to save the Union, even if it meant keeping slavery.  And so I started becoming more questioning about history as it was being taught and the real history--
Speaker 2: How was that received by the class?
Speaker 1: It was (laughter) not very well received by and some of the teachers.
Speaker 2: Now, this is in the South, where Lincoln's not necessarily a big model, right?
Speaker 1: Well, it's not that they love Lincoln, but the idea that I kept asking questions about not just--I didn't stop with Lincoln.  And I said Lincoln was not such a great guy, but, but I just kept asking questions about a lot of people 'cause I didn't trust any of the stuff once I discovered that Mr. Lincoln was not the great savior of black people the way we had been told.
Speaker 2: And I'm curious as where your re--where you got your research?  I know it's out here.  I just wondered how you got it?
Speaker 1: Well, just started finding different books, you know, and reading between the lines and finding newspapers, and I'm--I don't remember all the various sources I would have had.  Wouldn't have been great resources, but whatever they had in the library.  I could find just enough to get me to know that the story about Mr. Lincoln was not quite right.  And then as I, as I got older, I started doing even more in-depth research.  When I--by the time I got to University of Georgia, I was very much into that.  But I started reading whatever I could.  I--whenever we could get "Ebony" and "JET", that was still a big deal.  And I remember everybody subscribed if they could afford it, to "Ebony" and "JET", and it was definitely in the barbershops.
Speaker 2: Now, I know Lerone Bennett wrote an extensive article about it in "Ebony", and then he followed up with a--there was another article in the "Defender" [Chicago Defender] years before that.  And he wrote a book finally--
Speaker 1: I'm sure I was reading some--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --about Lincoln--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --those things coming out of Johnson Publishing.
Speaker 2: It's called, it's 'Forced into Glory,' yeah, about Lincoln.
Speaker 1: I'm not really, exactly which one, but I know I was reading those kinds of things.
Story_ID: 57203
Speaker 1: And at graduation, I was one of the undergraduates, and I was going to give a graduation speech.  And Mrs. Archer [a member of the Daughters of the Confederacy] was one of the advisors to the seniors.  But because she knew I was experienced at giving speeches--I'd entered many oratorical contests and won.  And that's how I got a lot of money for college, by the way.  So she knew I knew that kind of thing.  And Mrs. Archer didn't look at my speech that I was giving.  And I essentially gave a speech at--this would have been in the spring of 1972, yeah, spring of '72' [1972], I basically gave a speech that was "I'm Black and I'm Proud."  And that was considered revolutionary (laughter) back then.  It was not well received.  The--
Speaker 2: This is before her class?
Speaker 1: No, this is a graduation speech--
Speaker 2: Graduation speech?
Speaker 1: Graduation speech.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, and so I delivered it in the stadium before all of these people assembled, and I was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So were you the Valedictorian--
Speaker 1: --and I was the first--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  Were you valedictorian or salutatorian?
Speaker 1: Salutatorian.
Speaker 2: Salutatorian, okay, all right.
Speaker 1: So, I gave this speech, and they didn't know how to take it.  They thought I was being a militant.  And for many years, students were not allowed to give graduation speeches anymore.  They could come up and thank their parents.  Somebody would give a "thank you to the parents" thing, and they could introduce the speaker, who was a grown up, but they didn't have kids giving graduation speeches for a while.  Some years later when I was invited to come to Rockdale High [Rockdale High School in Georgia] to be a speaker for Black History Month, I essentially dusted off my graduation speech, updated it, of course, but it was the same speech essentially.  And they loved it.  But it was, of course, 20 years later.  But back in 1972, first of all, being--it was controversial for them to have allowed me to speak anyway 'cause they hadn't had a black person speak before in graduation at Rockdale High.  But then for me to talk about being black and proud was a bit much for them.
Speaker 2: Now, this, in '72' [1972], wasn't Lester Maddox the governor of Georgia?
Speaker 1: I've forgotten who was governor, but he had been governor, so he probably was around that time.
Story_ID: 57204
Speaker 1: It was not a--I mean it was a big thing when I decided I wanted to wear an Afro.  Rockdale High [Rockdale High School in Georgia], particularly when the black kids came to Rockdale, when the school system was consolidated.  I think that's when they really went into overdrive in coming up with a dress code 'cause I wanted to make sure that, you know, we were appropriate.  Girls couldn't wear pants suits.  Boys, their hair could only be a certain length.  It had to be above the ear, and some other kind of rules.  I've forgotten all the various things, but I was kind of a rabble rouser.  And I used my status as one of the smart kids, one of the good kids, to talk to the other smart kids and say, "Look, why are we letting them push us around this way?  Why can't, you know, we wear a pant suits, a nice pants suit?  Why can't I wear it?"  So some of us actually got together, mostly white kids 'cause that was, mostly at that school.  And most of the good students, "good", quote, unquote students were white kids.  So I few black kids and these white kids got together, and we decided to come to school together one day with, in violation of the code.  So the guys' hair was not exactly according to code.  I had on a pants suit.  Somebody else had on a pants suit, and they really realized they couldn't do anything to us.  They couldn't suspend all the good kids (laughter).  So they had to come up with some kind of compromise, and we were able to do tasteful pants suits, and around that time, I started deciding I wanted to have an Afro.  And it was very complicated to come up with an Afro in those days.  And everybody's hair was permed in those days or it wasn't even so much permed.  It was straightened 'cause we didn't have enough money to get the perm stuff--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was straightened with a hot comb.
Speaker 1: --it was just with a hot comb and grease.  And it was torture.  So my wanting an Afro was as, was probably more about wanting to escape having my scalp burned every so often when I was getting my hair straightened, as it was about making some kind of political statement.  But in any case, you had to, you washed your hair, and as I recall, you had to twist your hair up, kind of braid it, and then roll it up on some curlers and, you know, go to bed with that.  And then the next morning, you'd undue the hair and then comb it out with your little Afro pick.  And it was kind of a Fro.  It was not a Linc Hayes Fro from the 'Mod Squad,' but we were aiming for that kind of Afro.  And that was controversial.  So I had to convince the--
Speaker 2: Were you the only girl in town--I mean--
Speaker 1: There were a couple who were doing that, but I was the smart kid, so the other kids, you know, they could pressure on them to do a lot of things.
Story_ID: 57205
Speaker 1: Okay, so University of Georgia.  Now, did you work during the summer before you went to school?
Speaker 2: I always did little jobs, even if it was helping with some domestic kind of house cleaning stuff. I don't remember specifically whether I worked that summer.  But I did occasionally do things like work in a hamburger joint, the Dairy Queen.  I think I worked for a little while.  I wasn't any good so it didn't last long.  But I did little odd jobs.  Then I went to the University of Georgia in the Fall of '72' [1972].  The year I entered, that was the largest group of black kids that the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] had had.  Just 11 years before, 1961, was when Charlayne Hunter and Hamilton Holmes had become the first two black students there.  And they had had a horrific welcome (laughter).  They were not welcome.  The troops had to come out to help them to get into school.  Charlayne Hunter went on to become Charlayne Hunter-Gault, the notable journalist, and Hamilton Holmes went on to become a physician.  He actually was one of my mother's physicians at one point.  But University of Georgia, 1972, was not a very welcoming place.  Those of us, blacks gravitated towards each other.  There was a Black Student Union, and we sort of gravitated towards Black Student Union.  Those students who were so inclined also gravitated towards the various Greek organizations--Greek letter organizations.  I was not one of those.
Speaker 1: Now, these are the--
Speaker 2: Alphas, Kappas--
Speaker 1: Yeah, African American Greek organizations.
Speaker 2: Yes, we had the Alphas and the Kappas and the Deltas and all of that stuff.  I think we had eight black fraternities and sororities, which was entirely too many when you only had about 200 black students.  And so a good chunk of the year, people were involved in pledging and all of that kind of stuff.  So they didn't have time for what I considered the serious work of school and the political activism that was necessary.  I became very involved in Black Student Union and became president for a while of the Black Student Union.
Speaker 1: Now, was that the name of it, Black Student Union?
Speaker 2: Black Student Union, yes, BSU.
Story_ID: 57206
Speaker 1: It was, as I said, it was not a very welcoming campus, but there's this big caveat.  I found some of my teachers to be very, very good and encouraging.  I was able in my first year at Georgia [University of Georgia in Athens, Georgia] to take advanced classes.  So at the end of one chair, I was actually a junior, I think, instead of a sophomore.  But I was chosen, I was named "Freshman of the Year."  And that was the first time a black person had been named Freshman of the Year at University of Georgia.  And I was tapped to join an honor society, a women's honor society.  That was kind of funny because the young ladies would dress in robes and then come around to the dorm of the person they were going to tap to join them.  And I don't know where I was or what I was doing, but somehow the word got to me that some people in robes were looking for me (laughter).  So the last thing I did was to go back to my dorm (laughter).  It took a little while to figure out that it was this girl's honor society trying to get me to become a member.
Speaker 2: So, and it was probably formed in the 19th Century with that kind--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  So we had to laugh and say, that is not exactly the way to welcome a black person, is to come around at night in a robe (laughter).  But it was an interesting time.  It was frustrating in that there were some things that we, as black students, wanted that we couldn't get.  And we were protesting various things.  The only really good thing about my time at University of Georgia was the choir that I joined.  It was called Pamoja [the Pamoja Singers]. And Pamoja was a good choir, and we traveled around singing.  We went to Atlanta [Georgia], and performed at some Christmas pageants.  And we went to other schools and sang.  And so that was really good.  That was a good release.
Story_ID: 57207
Speaker 1: But other than that, you felt like you were constantly struggling against something, curriculum or particular faculty members or racists students who were doing things.  There was a group--I forgot its name, but we just called it the Junior KKK.  And the Junior KKK group was always doing things to make, to try to make life miserable for us.  They invited, for example, Dr. Shockley, remember that name.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. William Shockley.
Speaker 1: William Shockley had won a Nobel [Noble Prize] in physics or something.  But he was going around as if he were an expert in genetics.  And he was talking about the genetic inferiority of blacks.  And he had a big following for that nonsense.  He was invited to come to the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] to speak.  And black students wanted to prevent him from speaking.  I was head of the Black Student Union.  And, and I'm a journalism major.  I believe in the First Amendment.  And even then, I was one of those people who learned that sometimes they had to take a difficult stand because there was a principal involved that even though it was painful, you had to adhere to it.  I believe in the First Amendment.  And we tried to have a meeting of the students in the BSU to say, "We can protest outside of the hall where he's gonna speak, but we can't stop him from speaking.  We can try to persuade the other folks from having him speak, maybe to disinvite him.  But if he's here to speak, we really can't stop him from speaking."  Well, okay, that made sense for a while.  We were outside protesting, but a few hot heads decided to go in and rush the stage.  And they did, and Professor Shockley was not allowed to speak.  It was nasty.  We were brought up on charges.  The Junior KKK group went before the Student Government Association and filed charged against the Black Student Union.  And we had to, you know, defend ourselves from that.  That was, that was hard to say he has a right to speak, when I didn't wanna hear what he had to say either.  But I truly did believe he had that right.  I later learned that in the audience there were representatives from the Justice Department's unit that dealt with community relations.  And I met a person who was there.  He remembered me, and we were trying to figure out where he remembered me from.  And it turned out, he was there in the audience monitoring that particular event.  So I, I knew I had some kind of file somewhere in FBI records.  There must be something about me.  But that was a big event.  We lost our little case.  I forgot what the penalty was.  But we lost that little case for not letting Professor Shockley speak, to tell us how inferior we were (laughter).
Story_ID: 57208
Speaker 1: There was a lot of that going on around the country at that time.  But we had other speakers who would come [to the University of Georgia in Athens, Georgia] to kind of lift our spirits there, and sometimes I didn't quite believe in what they were saying, but it--but a part of me liked the idea that they made some of our white students feel uncomfortable.  So it was fine.
Speaker 2: So who came?
Speaker 1: A woman named "Queen Mother Moore" came, and she was--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --a super black nationalist.  And she came, and she would speak about, you know, how we were the kings and queens of the earth, and, you know, the white people were the inferiors.  And she would give her message.  And we kind of felt good hearing her talk a black nationalist talk.  I didn't believe all that king and queen stuff, but it was okay.  But where I really found fault with her was when she got upset when I showed up after her speech--a few of us came for an after talk.  And she was upset that I had a boyfriend.  She said I was very selfish, that there were not that many black males to go around, so we should have a little group, a group of black women should take care of one black man (laughter).  That did not go over well (laughter).  The guys thought it was a great idea, of course (laughter).  But that was where I broke with Queen Mother Moore, right away (laughter).  But she was one of the people we had to come to campus.  We didn't have anything too radical, but almost anything was radical for University of Georgia in those days.
Story_ID: 57209
Speaker 1: They've [University of Georgia in Athens, Georgia] changed since then.  I didn't go to a single football game while I was there because that was, that was still considered white people's territory at that stadium.  It was only later that Herschel Walker was there, and, you know, became the star and black people--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's after you left, right?
Speaker 1: That was after I left, but black people really started going to those games and enjoying that.  And the University of Georgia has changed over the years.  I keep up with them through the alumni association.  I'm on the mailing list, and I can see they've done a number of things.  I actually did a lot of my research for my Master's thesis.  I actually used a lot of the resources in the library at University of Georgia.  So I've gone back to campus since then.  But it took a long time.  I didn't--I didn't finish the story.  I didn't graduate from University of Georgia.  After my second year, I stopped.  I was just too worn out from there.  I decided to take a year off.  So I took a year off from college--
Story_ID: 57210
Speaker 1: So let me ask you this though before we leave University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], were there any significant teachers, instructors or mentors, either one or the other, students on the campus that had an influence on you?
Speaker 2: No teachers come to mind, but there were a number of students who I admired.  And in many cases, they had connections to Atlanta [Georgia] or occasionally, outside of the state.  So they knew about possibilities of what was going on in terms of culture or politics or what have you.  So there were a few friends.  I still am close to a few people from those days.  One of my best friends who became eventually, kind of an adopted son to my mother, is Karneal, with a "K", K-A-R-N-E-A-L, Thomas.  He became a landscape architect, and he lives in London [England].  But he was from Georgia, and he and I were great dance partners.  That was one of my releases.  But he was a very--he was also in the choir.  So he was a good partner and friend who's very adventurous.  So we explored a lot culturally together.  There was another friend, Karen Phillips, who also came out of architecture now that I think about it.  But she went on to become big in development in--community development in New York City.  She was head of the Abyssinian Development Corporation in New York which built lots of houses and created businesses there in Harlem.
Speaker 1: And associated with the Abyssinian Baptist Church?
Speaker 2: It's part of the Abyssinian Baptist Church.  So she went on to do that.  Another good friend, Kenny Roberson, is a dancer and choreographer on Broadway, and we were all good friends.  So we were, we were good friends who explored a lot of things together and had great ideas of what we wanted to do.  And some of us actually ended up doing it.  One young lady was the daughter of people who owned the Atlanta Voice.  So I was able to do some writing for them in--over time.  But it was that kind of thing.  No, as I said, no particular faculty member jumps out.  Somebody may after I finish talking to you, but nobody jumps out from that.  I remember more high school teachers than college teachers.
Story_ID: 57211
Speaker 1: Now, was there any black faculty around that were the advisors to the Black Student Union [at the University of Georgia in Athens, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: We had some advisors, but they didn't really have much of a black faculty, and definitely didn't have anybody in journalism, which is where I was.
Speaker 1: Did anybody advise the Black Student Union?
Speaker 2: Yes, we did have a few administrators who would be advisors, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But they didn't really--
Speaker 2: They would, they wouldn't--in order to have their jobs, they could not necessarily be those who would upset the status quo.  So we didn't really have anybody pushing us in the direction of being very activist or outspoken.  It was study, do well, and come out of here with a good job was more of what we got in my day.  Now, they're--we were arguing for more diversity in the faculty.  They've gotten more of that now.  So the University of Georgia is a totally different place than what it was when I was there.
Speaker 1: A lot more conservative, I guess--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure about its politics now, but I know that it's more diverse in terms of race and ethnicity than it was when I was there.
Speaker 1: No, I was saying it was more conservative then, I guess, when you were there, yeah.
Speaker 2: It was very conservative when I was there, and it was also a place that was trying to get used to having that many black people around on the campus.  There were black people in Athens, Georgia, but they were servant--the servant class.  They were not used to having that many of us there.  I remember being afraid to cross the street, the main street there, in Athens, if I went into town and was coming back to campus because I thought white people were gonna mow me down with their car.  It was that kind of hostility that you felt.  So I would wait until other white kids were crossing the street, and I would cross (laughter) with them.  (Laughter) And I did that for a long time.  You would find these crazy things, and you look back at it now, and it's ridiculous.  But that was one of the things I did to make sure I wasn't gonna get mowed down by somebody who was upset that we were there.  But as I said, it has changed differently, and I'm, myself, trying to accept the idea of just having a relationship with the University of Georgia.  There is an alumni association in Baltimore [Maryland], and I keep getting invitations from the alumni association to get involved.  I think about doing so only because I would like to be in a place to be a mentor to current students who are--current black students in particular, at the University.  So I may become involved, but it's still a painful memory mostly when I think of University of Georgia.
Story_ID: 57212
Speaker 1: Okay, so you took some time off before you--
Speaker 2: I took a year off.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I conned my way into being hired as a legal secretary.  Now, I credit those teachers at Rockdale High [Rockdale High School] who insisted that all the black girls had to take typing because I was a very good typist.  And in journalism, of course, you were typing.  We had those typewriters then.  So when I left college, I knew I needed a job.  And I just went through the want-ads and saw various jobs for clerks, typists, etc.  So I called one place, and the person answering the phone rattled off a long name.  And I called several times until I could make out enough of the name--it was a law firm.  So I wanted to make an appointment.  And they said that whoever was not able to come to the phone and call again and blah, blah, blah.  So I decided to just dress up and go and show up.  So I went there to this law firm.  And I noticed that they had all kinds of University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] paraphernalia around.  They were Bulldog boosters.  So guess who became a great lover of University of Georgia.  I went in there and I was rah, rah, UGA.  And they liked me and said I could take a typing test.  They gave typing test in those days.  So the person in charge said I could go and warm up.  So she put me in a little room to warm up to get ready for the typing test.  And I asked her if the material I was using to warm up was, if that was the material that I would be using during the test.  She said, yes.  That was great.  I pretty much memorized the material that I was warming up on.  So when it was time to take the test, I could really look at the keyboard (laughter) and type, looking at it rather than typing the way you're supposed to with all 10 fingers and not looking, right?  Well, I was looking at the keys, and I scored a crazy score like 120 words a minute or something.  But anyway, I was hired, knowing that there's no way that when you have the job that you'll ever need to type that fast.  You're typing a form letter, you're typing a report, whatever.  I was pretty good at that kind of thing, even then, sizing up what's required and being able to do it.  So I talked my way into getting a job, and for a year I worked as a legal secretary and started taking some classes at Georgia State University in Atlanta [Georgia] and eventually decided to--I was finished with the part-time thing.  I left that to finish up the last semester full time at Georgia State and graduated.  I graduated from there in 1976.  So I still graduated with my class that had entered in '72' [1972], even though I'd taken a year off.  They caught up with me.  So in '76' [1976], I graduated and by then, I knew I wanted to continue studying journalism.
Story_ID: 57213
Speaker 1: Well, let's go to Georgia State [Georgia State University].  We can't breeze through it that fast (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, well, we can in a way because Georgia State for me was like I was working and taking some courses and--so there was no--Georgia State University was a commuter school.
Speaker 1: I know it's in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: In Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: So it was no real campus life.  There was no real anything really.  It was a commuter school.  So you took your courses and you went back home or you went back to your job or whatever.  So I have no real recollection of much of anything about--
Speaker 1: Was there anybody there who taught you anything?  I mean or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I had classes, but I, nothing stands out--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Nothing as a--
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: No real connection with anybody?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I'll have to go back and look again.  But I was trying to think of that.  Nobody jumps out at me.  I did my coursework, and I did some little writing for a publication they had periodically, but there was no real connection to Georgia State, which is why I sometimes laugh when I get materials in the mail from their alumni association, talking about them.  Now, Georgia State University has developed into a, what I would call a real serious academic institution.  But it really wasn't that then.
Story_ID: 57214
Speaker 1: But what about Atlanta [Georgia] itself?  Atlanta was a boomtown back--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Atlanta was "Hotlanta."  It was a place that black people from all over the country were moving to because it had such a great reputation for being "the" place for young, black professionals in particular.  Maynard Jackson was in office as mayor, and that opened the doors for lots of blacks in various professional ranks.  Blacks were doing well in the tourism and hospitality areas.  So it was a good place to be then.  Black athletes were coming in and out of town.  Black entertainers were coming in and out of town, so it was kind of an exciting place to be for a young person.  And especially if you had a job, so they could afford to go out to some of these places.  So I had a pretty interesting life in Atlanta while finishing school and working.  I lived in the Southwest side of Atlanta, and it was in a development that had a number of people who had government jobs, and there were some professionals.  But it was kind of a nice, little middle-class community.  And I got very involved there in mentoring a lot of the little kids.  I always somehow do that.  I tell people I really don't like children, and I have told them for--I did tell them, at least up to 12 years ago, I didn't like animals.  But now, I have two cats that I always have to talk about, and kids, I ended up, some kids in New York City called me the homework lady because they knew I always could help them with homework.  And out on Fire Island [New York City, New York] where I lived for a while, kids called me the cookie lady.  So I guess I--that kids do rub off on me at some point.  So I got very involved with my community in Atlanta.  And there I met interesting people who were encouraging because they, many of them, even though they didn't necessarily have, you know, advance degrees and all that, understood where I was coming from when I was excited about pursuing something higher in the academic field.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: I, I volunteered, when I was in Atlanta too, I volunteered for a number of things.  So I was exposed to the Urban League Convention coming to town.  I would volunteer on the host committee.  So I would do meeting and greeting and taking the celebrities from here to there kind of thing.  So I got to go to those kinds of things.
Story_ID: 57215
Speaker 1: I guess one thing I left out.  While I was still at University of Georgia, I managed to get a summer internship at the Atlanta Journal in the summer of '74' [1974].  I think that would have been, the year Nixon [President Richard Nixon] resigned.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, that's it.
Speaker 1: I was working at the Atlanta Journal when Richard Nixon resigned.  That summer, when I was hired for an internship, it was unusual for a number of reasons.  The Journal was then separate from the paper, The Atlanta Constitution.  Now, it's one paper [The Atlanta Journal Constitution].  But the Journal was the afternoon paper.  They made a big deal of the fact that they didn't normally hire people who were not juniors or seniors, but they hired me.  And they had not really hired a black, journalism major before.  They had had a few students here and there from Spelman [Spelman College] or Morehouse [Morehouse College], but they were English majors.  So they didn't have anyone who supposedly knew journalism until they got me.  I came in that summer and I was gung ho about writing and reporting.  So I was finding all kinds of stories to do.  I remember doing a story on John Lewis [Rep. John Lewis] who was then in charge of a voter education project, I believe, and had long conversations with him.  I remember I interviewed Julian Bond [Rep. Julian Bond] for something.  He was involved in many things.  He was, he probably was a State Legislator still then, but he was involved in politics and Civil Rights activities.  I remember interviewing Maynard Jackson [Mayor Maynard Jackson] and some others.  And they invited me once to, somebody was having a cookout, and they invited this black intern from the "Journal" to come.  And I had a chance to have really enlightening conversations with this caliber of people.  And I liked that.  And I knew that journalism seemed to be the ticket to being able to interact with people like that.  So I knew I was on the right path in my studying journalism.
Story_ID: 57216
Speaker 1: I covered a trial that was a kidnapping trial there [Atlanta, Georgia], that I covered, that lots of attention.  And that introduced me to the courts and to the high drama that can emerge in some of these high-profile cases.  I really got caught up in that.  And then I loved the idea that the lawyers who were involved as prosecutor and as defense lawyer were really playing roles.  And I was able to see that they were kind of acting out their role in a way because at the end of the day, the two lawyers would head out together and have cocktails together.  And they were buddies.  In the courtroom, they were adversaries.  And they would have people, you know, rooting for one side or the other, and they would go and have fun together.  So I realized that the law was--what we were seeing was kind of theater.  And the law was not as complicated as these lawyers would have you believe, but somehow they had crafted this world.  And I was beginning to see that--I could figure it out, I guess.  I could see who was operating the Wizard of Oz, I guess.  So I became very fascinated by law and decided I probably wanted to do law.  Also, law seemed to have been the way that many people in Civil Rights [Civil Rights Movement] were finding a way to channel their interests.  So that summer as an intern, I not only became interested in serious journalism, mainstream media journalism, but also start thinking about law.  And I applied to law school, and when I graduated from Georgia State, I was headed to New York [New York City, New York], to Columbia [Columbia University].  Now, I picked New York because--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Now, what year did you graduate from Georgia State?
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 57217
Speaker 1: So I headed to New York [New York City, New York] in '76' [1976].  I had never been to New York before.  I had never been on a plane before, and there were so many new things that I was engaging in as I was making my way to Columbia [Columbia University].  I chose Columbia because I wanted to be away from Georgia.  I was old enough to make that decision now.  Mama [Minnie Shipp] wouldn't let me leave for college, but for graduate school, law school, I could make that decision.  And I did.  I was accepted at Columbia, and--
Speaker 2: Is this in journalism or law?
Speaker 1: I went there--I was accepted in law, but realized when I got there that they were just starting a joint program with journalism.  So I was able to enroll in both schools, journalism and law.  So I was one of the guinea pigs in that program.
Story_ID: 57218
Speaker 1: Did the, I have to ask this question, did the Watergate [President Richard Nixon's Watergate Scandal] hearings kind of excite you about the law, you know?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, the Watergate hearings were interesting, I guess because, I don't know.  I'm kind of one of those nerds or policy wonks so I like that kind of stuff.  But I liked seeing black people asking some of the questions there.  That was fascinating to me, to see them.  And I'm thinking, I could do that.  I could, I could be there.  For a hot minute, I thought I wanted to do politics.  But I know that law might be a better way for me to accomplish what I wanted to do in terms of making an impact on society, helping the folks back home, that kind of thing.  I was very much an idealist.  But I now know that I picked the wrong law school for fostering that kind of idealism because Columbia University [New York City, New York], while it had been kind of a hotbed of student activism in 1968 at the end of Vietnam War kind of thing, by 1976, the law school was switching more towards, you know, providing lawyers for corporate America kind of thing.  There were some of us who were not caught up in that, but if I wanted to really be in an environment that was nurturing future activists, it would not have been Columbia.  I loved my time at Columbia, though and partly, I think because I was going back and forth between the law school, which was on one side of the Morningside Heights campus, and the journalism school, which was on the other.  So I was able to get to know students in both places, students and faculty in both places and to not take either one too seriously because I had the other school as an outlet; also because the program was new, the "journalism and law" was new, the faculty members in both schools were not quite versed in what it was we were supposed to be doing.  So when I didn't feel like going to some law school classes, I would say that I had a journalism project and vice versa with journalism.  And so I didn't go to quite a few classes.  I did the work, but I just didn't think it was a good use of my time to be sitting in a classroom all the time, particularly because when I went to New York, I thought I was gonna be there for those three years, which would have been then three and a half, once I added the journalism to it.  So I thought I would have that three, three and a half years.  And then I was gonna go back to Georgia and be a lawyer, probably in the rural South doing Civil Rights [Civil Rights Movement] work or something like that.
Story_ID: 57219
Speaker 1: But I fell in love with New York City, and was fortunate that the summer after my first year of law school, the summer of '77' [1977], I went down to Georgia as a law student intern assigned to--well, eventually, I was assigned to a group called Team Defense.  And Team Defense was basically designed to save the lives of people who were about to be executed.  So Team Defense would be assigned a case, maybe a few days before an execution was scheduled, and it was our job as the interns to, in a very short amount of time, come up with various motions that we could file to delay the execution.  It was very intense work, and we were really caught up in it.  You didn't wanna take a day off because somebody might die as a result of you missing an opportunity.  While we were doing this that summer, a case broke that was called the "Dawson 5" case, Dawson as in the name of the town, Dawson, Georgia.  Five young black males had been charged with murdering a white man in a little country store in Terrell County.  This is down near Albany, Georgia, in Southwest Georgia.  The state was planning to seek the death penalty against these five young men, claiming that it had confessions from them.  It was clear from anyone who had examined the case that the murder probably did not occur the way the authorities were saying, that the store owner probably had something to do with the killing and that the five young men were illiterate or semi-literate and had been taken advantage of and forced to confess to something they could not have done.  So while normally Team Defense was getting these cases on appeal, trying to save people from death row, from execution, they got a case that was at the beginning stages, and the leader of Team Defense, Millard Farmer, decided we were gonna take that on.  And because it was 1977, summer of '77' [1977], it was Jimmy Carter's [President Jimmy Carter] first year in office as President of the United States, and he was making a big deal about human rights.  So he was talking about human rights abroad.  And when the Dawson 5 case made headlines, people from all over the world were asking, "Well, what about at home, Mr. Carter?"  It turns out Dawson, Terrell County, Georgia, was part of that area that Jimmy Carter had represented when he was a state legislator.  So he was very much familiar with it, and, of course, he had been governor of Georgia.  So he knew that.  Plains [Georgia] was not that far from Dawson.  So we got lots of unsolicited media attention for the case because of timing and location.  Millard Farmer was a master of garnering attention to his cases, and he did so with abandon, with the Dawson 5 case.  The students who he had working for him that summer were from law schools all over the country.  Most of them, though, were from the North, and a couple maybe from the West.  I was the law student from, who was originally from the South, even though I was attending a Northern law school.  So I understood the South more than the other kids, and I was black and the other kids were not.
Story_ID: 57220
Speaker 1: So we decided we were going to try to find a way to get black people to come to a rally so we could tell them about the case and what we needed them to do, and maybe to prepare them for jury duty, if they were called.  So we decided to, we convinced a pastor there at Sardis Baptist Church to let us use his church for a rally.  So we decided to come to town and pass out fliers to invite people to come.  So we're in downtown Dawson, and passing out our fliers.  And some people did not want to be seen near us.  But a number of people did take them.  Well, I needed to go to the restroom, and I'm thinking, well, the courthouse is right here, and it's a public building.  Maybe there's a restroom facility in there.  So I went into the courthouse and went to the clerk's office.  The clerk was a woman, as is often the case in these little courthouses.  And I was wearing my little Bloomingdale's "dress for success" suit, and I said, "Excuse me, ma'am, can you tell me where the ladies' room is?"  And she without missing a beat said, I don't know.  Now, I'm thinking, how can she work here 40 hours a week at least and not know.  So she asked another woman, "Do you know where the ladies' room is?"  And at that point, I knew what was going on.  They said, I think it's downstairs.  Okay, and so I head downstairs.  That's to the basement floor, and there was a room that said "toilet".  And that was meant for all the black folks, men and women to use.  It was a raggedity old room.  It was not clean, but I didn't have time to make an argument at that point.  That evening when all the students gather, we were staying on a kind of Christian commune called Koinonia Farm because the motels there in Dawson said they were full.  They didn't have room for us because we were an integrated group.  This is 1977.  So we were staying at Koinonia Farm, and we started talking and comparing notes about our observations about the town.  And somebody asked about the courthouse.  And I said, they've got the funkiest bathroom.  And one of the white guys said, oh, no they don't.  And he started describing where he had gone.  So I realized that I had gone downstairs to the toilet, but on the second floor there was a ladies' room and a men's room.  So Millard Farmer, our fearless leader, decided on the first day of the hearing we were having on some of the motions we had made that we were gonna integrate the bathrooms 'cause we had television cameras there covering this case.  And with all that attention, I went into the sheriff's office.  And they had put the key to the lady's room and the men's room on the desk in the sheriff's.  So I went into the sheriff's office and actually got the key and went to the ladies room and integrated the ladies' room at the Terrell County Courthouse in Dawson, Georgia in 1977.  And there were a few black ladies went in after me and nobody needed to use the facility.  They just wanted to see what it looked like.  But that was the kind of thing we had to do throughout the time we were having these hearings, trying--we brought so many motions trying to have the charges thrown out and also trying to create a proper atmosphere for picking a jury that we'd use.  So we were doing all kinds of things and getting this attention.
Story_ID: 57221
Speaker 1: I was writing some articles for black press about the case.  And among the reporters who were in there covering the case was Tom Wicker from The New York Times.  He was an editor and a columnist and a liberal.  And he was originally from the South himself.  He and I would have conversations about the new South that [President] Jimmy Carter was promoting, but the old South that still existed.  And as an upshot of those conversations, he called me some months later to offer me a job working for him at The New York Times.
Story_ID: 57222
Speaker 1: I'll get back to that in a minute, but I'll tell you the end of the Dawson 5 case.  During that summer, we discovered that a lot of black people did not vote, were not registered to vote because they had been told a variety of things, including the fact that they had to have college degrees to vote.  This is in 1977.  This is the rural South.  There was a lot of misinformation there.  So we had to--we registered a lot of people to vote.  We had to do voter education.  We had to also teach them how to answer questions if they were called for jury duty for the case.  We knew some of the kinds of questions that will be asked.  If the state were gonna be seeking the penalty, they would probably ask black, church-going people, "Do you believe in the bible?"  And, of course, we would say, yes.  And "Do you believe the 10 Commandments?"  Yes.  And isn't one of the 10 Commandments "Thou shallst not kill?"  Yes.  "Do you believe that?"  Yes.  If you were on this jury, could you give the death penalty to someone if you believe in the 10 Commandments, and 'Thou shallst not kill?"  They would ask those questions so that a person would kind of be backed into a corner saying that Capital punishment was killing and they didn't believe in killing and therefore, there was a good chance that we wouldn't get black people on a jury who might be more sympathetic to our defendants.  So, in any case, we had to educate them about how to answer those questions.  So the whole--the ham that I am (laughter), I took on the task of getting in the pulpit in a couple of churches and kind of being the guest speaker for the Sunday.  And I could sing the old hymns.  And I knew enough of the bible, 'cause I--it had been drilled into me as a kid.  So I kind of gave my little sermonettes.  And they all came around to various things to give courage and comfort to people, that they could be on a jury.  They could apply the law, and it wouldn't really condemn them to hell.  It didn't mean they had to give the death penalty, but they can say that they're willing to consider it.  So we had to teach them to language to use so that they could get on the jury.  So we did that.
Story_ID: 57223
Speaker 1: We did--we had to go and do research on the potential jurors.  Once a list was available on the people who might be called for jury duty.  We had to go around and do little mini-profiles on them.  So we had to go around town and as subtly as possible, ask questions that would let us know whether people were racist, whether they would be likely to listen to the defense, whether they would be likely to have made up their minds already, whether they knew or were connected somehow to the person who had died or the store owner or any of those people.  So we had to find key people in the community that you could talk to, who would be truthful to you.  And we found various places to do that.  One of them is always find somebody who's a good gossip, but who's a reliable gossip.  We did that.  But we found one man who ran a little general store himself.  But he had a lot of engagement with people, blacks, whites.  And he thought of himself as someone who was kind of open minded.  So I started talking to this gentleman.  And my colleagues with me, my white colleagues who were Northerners, did not understand what the heck I was talking to him about.  I was talking to him about the corn crop and about the weather and all kinds of stuff.  And he started telling stories about his interactions with black people.  And he used the term "Nigra", and they, of course, he was the most racist person they'd ever met.  But I kept talking to him and realized that "Nigra" to him was a word of respect because it was much better than saying "nigger".  So it was those kinds of interactions that I had that summer with people like this man as we were trying to figure out who these people were who might be called for jury duty.  So he became a good source for us in sorting out those people who were probably gonna be okay and those who were gonna be trouble for our defense.
Story_ID: 57224
Speaker 1: We continued with a series of hearings on all these motions.  And we were planning to integrate the swimming pool across the street from the courthouse because one of the things we had found out is that when in the '60's [1960s], it became evident that the public swimming pool would have to let black people swim in it, the town fathers suddenly discovered that there was a malfunction in the pool.  And they had to order some kind of equipment, some part for the pool.  And so when we announced were gonna have a pool party to integrate the pool, they announced that they had to shut the pool down and order a part from Japan or somewhere and the part never arrived all the while we were there that summer.  But we got, brought attention to the town based on that.  We brought attention to the town through some of the rallies we were having and the BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation] came and actually did a piece on that case.  And I remember they came one night when a gentleman had donated a pig to us so we could roast this pig and have a barbeque and invite people to come to one of our rallies and have barbeque (laughter).  So we're sitting around this pig roast.  And some of the old ladies were there, singing some of the old hymns.  And I think a lot of them were still testing me because here I was a law school student from up North.  I kept telling them I was from up the road in Conyers [Georgia].  So part of the testing me, I thought, was when they started singing some of these old hymns.  And they would get to some of the more obscure lyrics, and I actually knew the lyrics.  So we had a good ole time singing these old-time hymns.  And some of that, I think, was recorded by the BBC guys for the piece that they did.  So we were getting attention for this case from Britain, from France, from Germany, from Italy, from all over the United States and from the White House.  When it became evident that the judge who had been assigned the case was not inclined to rule in our favor.  He was one of the good-ole boys, we now know that some pressure was put on from the White House.  And the judge suddenly had to step down because of health reasons, and another judge was appointed.  That judge was a little bit more reasonable, and ruled in our favor on a number of the motions.  We ended up winning the case on motions.  So the Dawson 5 kids were freed.  But they were scarred for life because they had been tormented.  One kid had been hooked up to a polygraph machine and was told it was the electric chair and if he didn't say--and they fed him the lines to say, he would be electrocuted.  So he said what they told him.  Another kid was taken out--and they told him they knew that he had tossed the gun in some creek.  And it was in the winter, I believe, they had him walking in the cold weather.  He didn't swim, so he was terrified, of course, and I think one of the deputies had put a gun to his head before then.  They had him out there, looking for this gun because they knew it was there.  They did all kinds of things to force some statements out of these young men.  So we were able to win the case, pre-trial, but got lots and lots of attention.
Story_ID: 57225
Speaker 1: And out of all of that, and all those discussions, I later, as I said, was called by Tom Wicker, to see if I would work for him as one of his assistants.  He had not calculated that I still had another semester to do because I was doing the joint program.  But I called him when I was finished at Columbia [Columbia University] and said, I think I'm interested.  By then he had filled the job that he had as his assistant.  But he took my resume to the newsroom and introduced me to editors there.  I, because I was more of a [New York] Daily News person than a New York Times person, I didn't know that I was meeting some of the most important people in American journalism like Abe Rosenthal [A. M. Rosenthal], for example.  If I had known who Abe Rosenthal was--he was, of course, the executive editor.  But if I had known he was this tyrant (laughter), some people would say, I probably would have been intimidated, but because I did not know how important these people were, I was just myself.  And I had a fairly relaxed, interesting interview and was hired.  And so my first job after Columbia was at The New York Times, which was something also quite unusual and quite unprecedented.  At that time, The New York Times was looking for people to have at least five years of experience on a medium-sized newspaper before they would even think about bringing you in for an interview.  But I went in.  I was considered a trainee, I guess, but I didn't know what that meant.  I just knew I had a job, and I took it very seriously.  So in my first year, my first six months, I was, I was doing a lot of work, good stuff.
Speaker 2: As a trainee, who was training you?
Speaker 1: It's not so much that you were getting any training, but it was under the union rules that was the way they could bring in people in various categories without calling you a full-time employee, entitled to all those benefits.
Story_ID: 57226
Speaker 1: So you were, I was on the Metropolitan staff [of The New York Times].  So I was doing the work that, you know, your junior reporters would often get, general assignment stories.  That meant that when I came into work--I think my shift started around 11:00 in the morning.  So when I came in at 11:00, the good stories of the day probably had already been assigned, either to the beat reporters or if there was a breaking news story, the lead news writers probably were on that.  So I would probably get soft, feature stories, that kind of thing.  But I did a lot of good stuff with those stories that I did get.  And I remember one story was, I don't think they expected much of it.  It was an anniversary of the death of Mark Twain.  He had lived in Greenwich Village in New York [New York City, New York].  And the house where he had lived for a while was a landmark building.  A group of little old people (laughter) would gather there for his birthday or the anniversary of his death, that kind of thing and have their little "old people" kind of ceremony.  And so the editors didn't expect much.  They sent me down to do a story.  And because I was a nut about history, since those days in Mrs. Archer's classes at Rockdale High [Rockdale High School], I decided to look up Mark Twain, Samuel Clemmons, look up what he was doing when he was in New York in those days, and how the paper covered his death.  And as it turned out, he became ill and had to be taken to his home in Connecticut.  And there was kind of a death watch for a number of days.  So there were stories almost every day in all the papers.  So I kind of recreated what New York was like then.  And then I got some of the recollections of some of the older people who were there, who were young people when he died.  And so I ended up with a really nice little feature story about Mark Twain in New York.  So that made the page 1 of the Metro section.  And I did some other stories like that.  So it was kind of the classic, when they give you a lemon, you make lemonade.  So I had a number of those kinds of stories, and then I was enterprising enough that I would find other kinds of stories that had not occurred to them.  I decided I wanted to do a story about how people used the piers in New York along the waterfront.  And many of them were disused, but people were finding ways to turn them into kind of informal parks.  So I went around--it was, for me it was an excuse not to have to wear real clothes for a few weeks and to be able to ride my bicycle and just hang out.  And I went around the city and did an article and used a poem by Walt Whitman about walking around Manhattan [New York City, New York].  And I had great pictures.  I always knew to work with photographers, had great pictures and great stories about the waterfront.  That got a lot of attention.
Story_ID: 57227
Speaker 1: So, and I did a few legal-related stories.  I resisted doing any stories that were clearly black stories, stories about something specifically happening in Harlem because I knew that I could end up being the Harlem {New York City, New York] reporter.  And I wanted to be a law reporter.  So I did a variety of things.  I did some things involving law and by that fall, I think around November of 1980--I joined the paper in January of 1980.  In November of 1980, I had my first beat assignment.  I was assigned to the courts in lower Manhattan.  And often up until the time I took on that beat, the court beat was either something you gave a rookie reporter who didn't know what he or she was doing or you gave it to the over-the-hill reporter who didn't care.  You didn't really get anyone who was thoroughly excited about law and excited about journalism in that job.  So I came and kind of transformed that beat.  And not only did I write about what was going on in the Manhattan criminal court, I started writing about what was going on in the civil court, the family court, the Appellate Court.  So I turned it into a legal beat, not a court beat.  And I knew that The New York Times was not really interested in every day crime stories.  That was more for the tabloids.  What I knew would be more interesting to The New York Times were stories about process and stories about how effective the system was working, stories about legal strategies and any kind of trends.  So I started getting a lot of well-placed stories, to the point that one of the reporters who was a veteran who was based in Brooklyn was wondering why I was getting such great play for my stories and he was being relegated to the back of the Metro section to the news summaries.  And it was because he was focusing on those little, everyday crimes.  So I ended up transforming the beat and having great success for that for three years.
Story_ID: 57228
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I always ask these kind of questions.  But who were some of the other African American journalists at The New York Times when you were there?
Speaker 2: When I got to the Times, I didn't know any of the people there.  And I think some of them were a little suspicious of me.  When I came to the Times in January of 1980, there was a lawsuit pending that blacks and Latinos had brought against The New York Times.  It was a Title VII federal lawsuit, charging discrimination and alleging that the Times had discriminated in hiring, but also in promoting blacks and Latinos.  The litigation process had been drawn out with depositions and such and in comes this black person they had never heard of.  I had not come through any kind of internship program for minority journalists kind of thing or any of that kind of thing.  I was not on their radar.  So some of them were wondering about me and wondering, probably rightly so, if the Times had had to go to trial, whether I would be Exhibit A, that the Times would say, well, see, when we find someone who's qualified, we hire them (laughter).  So they were kind of slow in embracing me, but eventually found out that I was, I was okay.  But among the people who were there were--let me go through all my names now.  You can prompt me with some.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, Thomas Johnson.
Speaker 2: Oh, Tom Johnson was a senior person there, a senior reporter and correspondent.  He went on to do some things.  He became a foreign correspondent even after I was there.  But he was kind of a leader.  Sheila Rule was there.
Speaker 1: Sheila, how do you spell her last name?
Speaker 2: Oh, R-U-L-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, Sheila--
Speaker 2: Sheila Rule.
Speaker 1: --Rule, okay.
Speaker 2: Lena Williams was there.  She was a sports writer, and that was a first for The New York Times to have a black woman covering sports.  C. Gerald Fraser was writing about culture.  And he was a veteran.  There were others I'm going to blank on, but I'll think of in a few--
Speaker 1: I thinking--well, we got like Winston Williams.
Speaker 2: Winston Williams was there.  He eventually covered business and made a name for himself there on the local and national staff.
Speaker 1: William C. Rhoden.
Speaker 2: Bill Rhoden came after I was there for a while--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --covering sports.  Bill Rhoden is a graduate of Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland](laughter) so he's one of our alums.  There were others.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, Chester Higgins, a photographer is still at--
Speaker 1: Oh, Chester Higgins, okay, all right, yeah.
Speaker 2: --The New York Times.  I'll think of some others.
Speaker 1: Was Nathaniel Sheppard there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But anyway, that was--pardon me?
Speaker 1: Nathaniel Sheppard, Jr.?
Speaker 2: Yes, and that was, I think in the Atlanta [Georgia] bureau, perhaps.  He was not in the newsroom--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in New York.  He was on the staff, and there were a few others, Lee Daniels, I believe was there then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He later left 'The Times' and worked for the Legal Defense Fund as their public relations person.  There were quite a few people there, and many of those I named were very active in the lawsuit.
Story_ID: 57229
Speaker 1: So they [journalists for The New York Times] gradually warmed up to me, and we became good colleagues and in some cases, good friends over the years.  The newsroom though was very much, white people kind of stuck to themselves, and black people kind of stuck to themselves to some extent.  And some whites were feeling threatened by blacks asserting their rights and bringing the lawsuit.  Women had, by the way, brought a lawsuit previously and had settled their case.  So there was also still some friction, some tension because of the women's lawsuit.  I was embraced by the women too.  So shortly after I got to the paper, the lawsuit was settled.  I got there in January.  I believe the lawsuit was settled in that September, something like that because part of the term of the settlement was that we were supposed to get some kind of compensation.  And I remember getting a check for about $30.00 (laughter), which I laughed at because I guess I'd had $30.00 worth of discrimination in the nine months since I had been there.  But the, the terms were more serious than the little money that was distributed.  There were pledges to do better in hiring and promoting, and there were specific steps of the paper saying it was going to take.  They didn't live up to those standards, and I ultimately became one of those who was bringing it to their attention periodically that they needed to do better.
Story_ID: 57230
Speaker 1: But anyway, I was there [at the New York Times] for--my first beat was the law beat, and my first--I had two big cases right off the bat.  The first big one was the murder of John Lennon, the Beatle, occurred in December of 1980.  And the town was in shock it seemed, that part of the town that was reflected in The New York Times.  A lot of people on the Upper West Side [New York City, New York] and in The Village [Greenwich Village in New York City] were totally, totally distraught.  And that was when I realized how exciting a news operation can be because everybody knew that they had a role to play and people rushed back into the office to see what it was they could do.  But I realized that, and there was nothing really for me to do in the newsroom.  My job will be to be there for the arraignment because the person who killed Lennon was apprehended on the spot, Chapman [Mark David Chapman], and I knew that I had to be in court for the arraignment.  So I positioned myself for that and began covering the case as it unfolded.  The person who killed Lennon was Mark David Chapman.  He had flown in from Hawaii.  It turned out he was mentally disturbed, but we didn't know that.  And there was a lot of attention to this story.  Everybody wanted to know who the guy was, what he had done.  So I was in a position to write all the time about the legal strategy, what was going on, and it came to a point when the trial was supposed to start.  There had been a series of motions.  We had done stories about those, but the trial was supposed to start jury selection.  Those of us who regularly covered the courts had assigned seats, so we thought we were very special.  I was working out of the courthouse in a press room that they had.  In those days, there was a press room in the courts, and there was a press room in City Hall in the Capital there would be press rooms, in the state capital, that kind of thing.  So I was one of the regulars there, and along with a reporter from The New York Daily News, The New York Post, The Associated Press and the UPI, [United Press International] I believe Newsday also, we had assigned seats.  So we're all standing outside the courtroom, waiting for the door to open.  Other reporters who were just there for the story were there, and they were gonna have to, you know, fight for their seats.  But we were cool.  So we're standing out there and the court was supposed to begin at 9:00 o'clock, something like that.  And the doors didn't open.  Ten o'clock, they still hadn't opened.  So we knew something was going on, but we didn't know what.  Eventually, the doors open, and we go in, and they announce, Mr. Chapman had pleaded guilty (laughter), and the sentencing would be on such and such a date.  And we're all in shock.  For one thing, I was guaranteed I was gonna have a page-one story that day.  Now, I'm a journalist, thinking about myself, of course.  And I was looking forward to having this great page-one story.  And all I had was Mark David Chapman pleaded guilty.  Well, that was before we had some of the resources that are available to anybody writing about the courts now.  Now, in many jurisdictions you actually have cameras in the courtrooms so a lot of this would be recorded.  We didn't have cameras in the courtroom then.  We didn't have any of us in the courtroom as he was saying he was pleading guilty and as he was asked a series of questions about why he was pleading guilty, had anybody pressured him to do so, was he doing it of his own free will, that kind of thing.  But I knew how to get the story.  I had learned early on to become good friends with the court personnel.  So I knew all the bailiffs who had been in the courtroom and heard Mr. Chapman give his plea.  I knew the court clerks.  I knew the court stenographer.  So I was able to talk to, starting with the bailiffs, who were called "court officers" in New York, I was able to talk to them and say, tell me some of the key questions that were asked and about when in the process they were asked.  Then I went to the court stenographer and said, I know you can't read me the whole thing, but can you go to that part where he asked--was asked, blah, blah, blah.  And so I got huge chunks of what was said, and I was able to do a nice page-one story, recreating a lot of what was, had happened in the courtroom.  So I was very proud of myself.  My colleagues were not so happy with me because they were waiting for the official transcript to be released, and I had a story.  And that was kind of the way I worked that beat.  I was very aggressive, but I used my law training to kind of know exactly where to get the documents and who to talk to.
Story_ID: 57231
Speaker 1: This is, this story reminded me of another story that happened in Atlanta [Georgia]--I don't know if you had anything to do with it.  But do you remember when Dr. King's [Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr.] mother [Alberta Williams King] was shot in Atlanta.  That was in the late '70's [1970s], '77' [1977]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I wrote about that for The Atlanta Journal.  That was the summer I believe that I--well, it had to be.  When I was an intern, I covered her funeral or helped cover her funeral, yes.
Speaker 1: Right, her being shot in church by another mentally disturbed fellow, Marcus Chenault.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum, yes, I'm very familiar with that story and did some writing about that.
Speaker 1: Did you--did one coverage influence the other one, I mean in terms of, was it like a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't know that I was really thinking about that case.  But I was familiar with those kinds of arguments when you had a prominent person being killed by someone who claimed that they heard some voices.  So I may have known enough about that case to think about that.  But I'm not so sure now that that was a big influence.  I just knew, I knew from law school more than anything else that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --it was difficult to prove insanity, but he was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I just wanted (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --he [Mark David Chapman] wasn't so much claiming insanity even.  He said he was doing this of his volition.  But he did say he had heard voices, and the judge had to be very careful.  Did he--did the voice talk to him?  Did God actually talk to him?  So the judge actually walked through--and that was one of the parts of the "voir dire," it's called, that I was able to get the stenographer to read back to me because I knew that was gonna be a key thing.  Was he insane when he shot Lennon [John Lennon]?  And he was very clear as to what kind of weapon he used and what kind of bullet he used.  He was specific and he picked whatever the bullet was because he knew it was gonna explode once it entered the body, and he wanted to cause maximum damage.  So I knew that key too, to show that he knew what he was doing, even though God did tell him to confess his sins, kind of thing.  So it was a very interesting case.  It was, it got lots of prominence and fed into my competitive nature because I loved being ahead of all the other guys on that case.
Story_ID: 57232
Speaker 1: Around that time [1980-1981], there was another case that got lots of attention.  And it came to be known in the tabloids as "The Phantom of the Opera Murder" case.  A violinist in the orchestra at the opera disappeared during intermission.  And there was a big search, and ultimately, her body was found thrown off the roof and sandwiched between two buildings, kind of thing.  In any case, it was a big mystery.  And a lot of people who attend the opera are people who either own or edit The New York Times (laughter) or have friends who were there.  So it was a big story from the jump because it affected that part of society in New York [New York City, New York].  And it was my story.  So I did a lot of interesting stories related to that trial, and my greatest achievement, I think, was when the--we knew when the trial was opening, we knew at that point that the defendant had supposedly confessed.  The defendant was a stage hand.  And apparently, he had accosted the violinist, and tried to engage her in a romantic liaison.  Of course, she was having none of that.  And he ended up raping and killing her.  Well, we knew that the prosecution said that it had confession, a confession from him, but we didn't know the content of the confession.  So jump ahead, we're there at the beginning of the trial, opening statements by the prosecution and the defense.  And the prosecutor gets up and tells us what he's going to prove.  And he gives a narration of what happened from the time Helen Hagnes Muntiks, I think was the name, from the time she left the orchestra pit to the time her body was found.  And as I'm listening to that, I'm thinking, he's telling us the confession.  Who else knew this stuff except whoever confessed?  So I wrote a story, rushed and wrote a story that said, we finally heard the details of the confession in the opening blah, blah, blah.  So I go home, all proud of myself that I'd done this wonderful story, and late at night I get a call from the copy desk.  You never want a call from the copy desk late at night.  And they said are you sure that was the confession?  And I said, yeah, I'm sure.  They said, well, no one else is reporting it that way (laughter).  And they had just reported that the prosecutor opened and said he was gonna prove yaka, yaka yaka, didn't make a big deal out of the fact, we were hearing, for the first time the details of the confession.  So I said, "Of course, I'm sure."  And hung up the phone, and, of course, then I got nervous.  I'm thinking, oh, my, I'm a rookie.  All these other people have been covering the courts forever.  I'm gonna be a, look like an idiot if I got it wrong.  So I go into court the next morning, and the prosecutor walks over to me and said, "Shipp, you're the only one who was listening to me."  And I'm going, "Yes", (laughter), I got it right (laughter).  So from that point on, the older guys started looking to what I was doing, and I kind of set a pace for some part of the coverage of that trial.
Story_ID: 57233
Speaker 1: But it was a really fascinating case, and it taught me a lot.  In particular, it taught me that it works to your advantage to try to be straight down the middle when you're reporting these cases because if you stray and try to take sides, you're not doing your readers a service, and you could ultimately be wrong.  In this particular case, I had a natural aversion to the police account of having gotten a confession because I knew from other experiences and from hearing black people, in particular, talk, that it's not unusual for the police to force confessions.  I had seen what had happened in Dawson, Georgia [Dawson 5 Trial].  So when the defense started saying that the stage hand was not so bright and had been misled and tricked into saying these things, I was listening.  And his mother, the stage hand's mother, probably figured that I was sympathetic.  So she kept feeding me all kinds of information about her wonderful son and how he was being taken advantage of.  But, because I worked at The New York Times, in those days, you didn't have too much flexibility.  You had to write the story, just the facts kind of thing.  Thankfully, I did because it turns out that the stage hand did do it, and the mother was kind of playing me.  And the mother was doing what a mother is supposed to do, help her son (laughter).  Another reporter got the same treatment from the mother, and she was a television reporter.  She actually reported the story, very sympathetic, based on what the mom was saying.  But I went straight down the middle, and later on, the detectives on the case actually thanked me for giving them the fairest coverage.  And I had to say, you don't know how close I came (laughter) to questioning everything you guys were doing up there on the stand, but I was forced--and I think I learned that valuable lesson there, "Don't let your feelings get in the way.  Try to stick to the story."  And that helped me in other big cases that I covered over the years, including Mike Tyson's rape trial, many years later, where I had to hold my emotions in check because I felt very strongly there that the black establishment was siding with Mike Tyson because he was a celebrity and were ignoring the charges that a black woman, Sunday school teacher, no less, had brought against him.  But I had to hold the emotions in check and focus on the facts.  And the facts did make a better argument for his guilt than I ever could if I'd gone off the deep end.
Speaker 2: Okay, and that's like the Mike Tyson case was in the early '90's [1990s], right?
Speaker 1: It was about '91' [1991], '92' [1992], something like that.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I often heard he was my, my last--I was his last knockout because the judge required us to be in court all day, would not allow us to bring recording devices.  And I had to take notes by hand.  And then sit down and try to type my story.  So my, I already had some problems with repetitive stress injury, RSI, and that was exacerbated.  So I ended up, after the Tyson trial, I really couldn't do my job with my hands for about a year.  I had to go into hand therapy (laughter).  So I was a knockout by Mike Tyson (laughter).
Story_ID: 57234
Speaker 1: Now, you actually got your, received a J.D. from Columbia University in 1990 [sic, 1996].  Did they give you a journalism degree too or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got a journalism degree and a law degree, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And some people sometimes ask me was it a waste of time and money to get a law degree and not practice law?  I'd say, no.  I learned a lot.  I think people would be surprised that a lot of people have law degrees who don't actually practice law.  But it opens your eyes to a lot of things, to critical thinking.  It helps you enormously in doing research.  As a journalist, I've been able to use some of those skills.  But it opened doors because people think you know more than you know (laughter).  When I had that first beat, covering the courts in Manhattan [New York City], the word got out among the judges that I had a law degree.  And the fact that I knew something about law made them feel comfortable to talk to me.  A lot of them would never talk to reporters because they felt whatever they said would be misconstrued somehow.  But judges would sometimes let me sit on the bench with them so I could actually see and hear more clearly what the defendant was saying or whatever.  And if there was some controversial thing going on involving the judiciary, the judges would be okay in talking to me because they kind of thought I knew what I, what they were talking about.  I did, but I wasn't as smart as they thought, but at least, it gave me an entre.  So I'm glad I did the law degree.  For a while, I felt guilty that I--one of the scholarships I got was from the Legal Defense Fund.  And it was given with the idea that the fund was going to encourage lawyers to go back and work on Civil Rights in the South especially.  So I felt guilty, but I rationalized it.  And I think it was legit, but it was a rationalization.  I figured that writing about legal issues at The New York Times and bringing attention to those issues would be much more effective than handling the case of one person in one little jurisdiction in rural Georgia.  I think that's true.  Over the years, I was able to write about some matters that I think made a difference.  And I think helped to educate people about the law.  So they understand it better than they might have otherwise.  So I, I don't regret not practicing law.  I'm grateful though that I have the law education.
Story_ID: 57235
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, what was going on in New York from 19--now, you were there in New York City with The Times from '80' [1980] to '83' [1983], right?
Speaker 2: Well, I was at The New York Times till '93' [1993].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I went to Chicago [Illinois]--well, first I went into Atlanta [Georgia] in the summer of '83' [1983] to fill in, in the Atlanta bureau.  'The Times' had found itself with nobody there.  For various reasons, both correspondents had left.  So somebody decided they should send me there.  And they hadn't really thought about the fact that they were sending me home.  So I thought of it as a nice extended summer vacation, living in a nice hotel in downtown Atlanta while going down to mama's [Minnie Shipp] house in Conyers [Georgia] for a good meal every now and then.  I had the best of both worlds.  In Atlanta that summer, again, I didn't know that it was okay for a national correspondent to do one story every week or every other week.  I was following something every day (laughter).  I was working it.
Story_ID: 57236
Speaker 1: And it got to the point that I met someone from Time Magazine.  The bureau chief then was [HM] Joe Boyce [Joseph Boyce].  And we met, something was happening at the governor's office.  And it was a news conference.  I went to cover it, and other national media representatives were there.  I met Joe Boyce there.  And he said he was glad to finally meet this E. R. Shipp.  He thought that they were just putting that name on every story that the interns were writing that summer (laughter) because nobody could write that much.  So that was kind of fun.  But I wrote a lot of interesting stories, and at the end of the summer, the national desk and The New York Times offered me an assignment on the national staff.  So by the end of the summer, early fall, I was sent to Chicago, to the Midwest bureau of The New York Times.
Story_ID: 57237
Speaker 1: Now, in Atlanta, was the Atlanta child murder--
Speaker 2: That was, that had happened already.
Speaker 1: That had already--it was solved by the time you were there?  Or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't remember the exact dates, but I think, I think Wayne Williams had been convicted by then.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in Atlanta in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: When the--
Speaker 1: --1982, was it, it would have been--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, what?
Speaker 1: You were there in '81' [1981], '82' [1982]?
Speaker 2: I left for New York in '76' [1976] to go to school.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I came back to Atlanta with The New York Times in '83' [1983].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I was still in school, the child murders happened.  In fact, I went down a couple of weekends to volunteer in the search.  So that case had passed by the time I went--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --back as a reporter in '83' [1983].  So when I covered a lot of interesting stories that summer, was able to use some history, did some legal stories.  I managed to go to Sea Island, Georgia which is kind of a resort community.  There had been a murder there.  A wealthy--well, mostly wealthy people lived there, but a wealthy couple had been found murdered in their house.  They called their houses "cottages."  We would call them mansions (laughter).  But I saw this, and I saw that there was suspicion that some of the domestic help, particularly, the gardeners, may have been involved in the homicide.  And I thought it looked like a good murder mystery story.  I watched a lot of 'Murder She Wrote,' you know, Jessica Fletcher.  And I thought, well, this could be an interesting kind of story to do.  And it was on the waterfront.  So, hey, it could be interesting.  So I volunteered to my editors in New York that I wanted to find out about that story.  I was gonna go to Sea Island.  And my editor said, well, hope you have some kind of uniform because the only blacks on the island are generally, you know, nurses, nannies, janitors and that kind of thing.  And I said, heck, no.  There's no way I'm gonna do that.  I knew, because I'd done just enough research, I knew that a lot of the people gathered at the clubhouse or something in the afternoon around 4:00 o'clock for cocktails.  And they kind of dressed for the occasion.  So I decided I would just get something to wear to the cocktail hour.  I, on The New York Times dime, I went out and bought an outfit (laughter) and I got there to Sea Island and I was fortunate in my initial conversations with people.  I met a man who had been the president of the Ohio Arts Company, the folks who did the Etch-a-Sketch (laughter).  And it turns out that he had one of those "cottages."  Many people who were there were people from the North who had those houses there on Sea Island, which is near Savannah for anyone who's trying to figure out the geography.  But it's on the ocean.  So he became my entre to those people there, and he encouraged them to talk to me.  So I ended up doing a really nice story, talking about this crazy world, this beautiful place and this fear that the black help was rebelling somehow against the "master class."  So I wrote about that and got a lot of attention for that story.  As it turned out, I think the gardener was charged.  But it had nothing to do with rebelling against the master class (laughter), nothing so revolutionary as that.  It was just some basic crime.  But I wrote about that and did some stories about the South, about race relations in the South, that kind of thing.  And that landed me the job in the Chicago bureau, which was one of their better news outposts.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right on the eve of the Harold Washington--
Speaker 2: Harold Washington had just become mayor.
