Story_ID: 419142
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewing today for the HistoryMakers project.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: James Herman Stith, J-A-M-E-S H-E-R-M-A-N S-T-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My day of birth is 17th, July, 1941 [July 17, 1941] in Brunswick County, Virginia.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a physicist.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July 14th, 2010 [July 14, 2010].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at Morgan State University.  I think that's 1700 Coast Spring Drive, I believe, East Coast Spring Drive.
Speaker 1: In Baltimore.
Speaker 2: In Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now--
Story_ID: 419143
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight "People Magazine"-ish-type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, probably chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I have two.  Blue and green.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Green is the folding kind.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Any cruise.
Speaker 1: And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  Bad news doesn't get better with age.
Speaker 1: (Pause)
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 419144
Speaker 1: There used to be a little Air Force Base or something in Columbus [Ohio].
Speaker 2: I think there used to be.
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but will ask about your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Ruth, R-U-T-H S-T-I-T-H, and later got married, Morgan, M-O-R-G-A-N.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Fifteen, November, 1915 [November 24, 1915].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Brunswick County, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, has her side of the family always been, as far back as you know, been from Brunswick County?
Speaker 2: Yes, as far back as I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What can you tell--how far back can you trace your mother's side of the family?
Speaker 2: I can go back to her grandfather, Wiley Stith, who was born around 1825.
Speaker 1: This is not a grandfather, but a great--
Speaker 2: Her--her, my mother's grandfather.  My great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  All right.  So, okay.  So lived a pretty long time, you go back to 1825.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  He died in around 1941 or something of that nature.
Speaker 1: Oh, well, if he was born in 1825 and died in 1941, he'd be over a hundred.
Speaker 2: Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait.  No, no, he died in eighteen something.  Her father [Martin Stith] died in 19--and, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he died when?
Speaker 2: He died, okay, around 1870--'75 (1875), somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So he was about fifty or somewhere--
Speaker 2: Yes.   His name was Wiley Stith.
Speaker 1: Wiley Stith.  Now, are there--was--are there stories about him in slavery or--
Speaker 2: Don't know much about him before slavery, I mean before end of the Civil War.  He got married in 19--in 1865, as many slaves did, 1865, and when he got married, there were two siblings, and he went on to have about half a dozen more.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he had two children after he got married--
Speaker 2: He had two children when he got married--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And clearly, he and his wife were together in slavery and then simply got married in 1865 at the end of the Civil War when they could do so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard stories of mass marriages.  Whenever the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Union Army would bring hundreds of people together and formally marry them--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --who had been together.
Speaker 2: And there were a lot of marriages in 1865.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So any--are there any stories passed down from that side of the family--(unclear)(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Not much.  Not much.  Unfortunately, I didn't get interested in asking those questions until all the people who knew them no longer knew the answers.  But, he then had--and I could find nothing out about his siblings, if there were any.  I'm certain there were, knowing the Stith family history in that area, because if you take a look at that part of Virginia, you see a lot Stith families that ring what used to be the old Tyler plantation.  And so I'm certain that many of those were his siblings.
Speaker 1: Now, what part of Virginia really is that now--
Speaker 2: Brunswick County--
Speaker 1: --for those of us who are not from Virginia?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Brunswick County is in Southern Virginia.  It borders North Carolina.  The highway system 85 runs through it and 95 is to the east.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's about sixty miles south of Richmond, Virginia.
Story_ID: 419145
Speaker 1: All right.  So, you told me, I think off-camera, that you finally--you had never heard of any white Stiths until you were an adult.
Speaker 2: Until I was an adult, that's correct.
Speaker 1: You met some in Ohio?
Speaker 2: I met some in Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I talked to many of them in Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because my--what I used to do is every time I went into a city, I would open the telephone directory and see if there were any Stiths, and if there were I would call them.  And so, up until that time, I had never called a person who was white.  Every person who answered the phone, we talked, they were African American.  And in Columbus, this one guy said, "Well, I'm white."  And I said, "Where you from?"  He said, "We're from Virginia."  I said, "What about all your other--"   And it turns out that they were all from Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it turns out that they took their ancestors back to William Stith, who was at William and Mary [The College of William & Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia] on the faculty there.  And that's what I had assumed that my family got the name because I could chronicle that he slaves on the Tyler Plantation.
Speaker 1: So he taught at William and Mary.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there's a building there named Stith Hall.  I should have brought that picture with me because I went there and took a photo beside it.
Speaker 1: And we were also discussing you might be related to Bryant Stith, the basketball player [retired, Denver Nuggets, 1992-2002].
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Well, Bryant's father and I went to high school [James Solomon Russell High School, Lawrenceville, Virginia] together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we used to always say that we were beyond second cousins and there enough before we got there, we didn't need any more relatives.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We've interviewed a Hana Stith in Fort Wayne, Indiana [2002].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it's still got to be explored (unclear)
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But that's an unusual name in the black community, but there are--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Now, it turns out that I met the Stith clan in Columbus, and a lot of those folks came from Oklahoma, and there's a large section of Stiths who are in Oklahoma and Indiana, that part of the country.
Speaker 1: So the Stiths spread out--
Speaker 2: Yeah, spread out.
Speaker 1: --across the country.  Now, can you, now, did you meet your grandfather, your father (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No.  My grandfather died before I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On my mother's side.  His name was Martin--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Stith.  And he married a Carrie Macklin, and with her he had five children.  And when she died, he married her youngest sister, and with her he had another thirteen children.  They were farmers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's how many children altogether?
Speaker 2: Well, thirteen and five is eighteen children.  And a number of them died early.  They were on the order of nine from the second set and five from, all five from the first set, who I got to know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So also, we were discussing how, you know, I guess when you're on farm it's good to have a lot of children.
Speaker 2: Right, I mean.  And the--now the thing I have not been able to figure out is how my grandfather amassed the land that he had.  He had two hundred acres of land.  And his brother, my great-uncle, Saul (ph.), also had two hundred acres of land.  And I've never been able to find out precisely how they accumulated that much land.  By the--but when my grandfather died, my grandmother slowly sold off pieces of the land to take care of the family, keep the family together.  So by the time I came along, we're down to about sixty acres.  And that's the farm that I got to know.
Story_ID: 419146
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did your mother [Ruth Stith Morgan] say about growing up in Brunswick County [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: My mother just didn't talk much about her life.  They were farmers, and they worked hard on the farm, you know, taking care of it.  And I know that, as many kids did, they went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], New York [New York]; my family chose Philadelphia, New York to go to when they escaped from the farm.  Yes.  And it was there when she was in Philadelphia that she became pregnant with me.  And then came back home.
Speaker 1: Now did your mother have a chance to go to school in Brunswick?
Speaker 2: She, my mother stopped school at about third grade. Yeah, third grade.  And the same person that taught her in third grade taught me in third grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A lady by the name of Ida Coleman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is during the [Great] Depression [1929-1941] that your mother grew up?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so, very little money.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I've heard it said that if you own a farm, you can eat.
Speaker 2: Well, it turns out that we were dirt poor but didn't know it.  Because we grew everything essentially that we ate.  We had a wild honeybee hive on the farm, and we would raid the hive every spring, you know, for the honey; leave them enough to make sure they sustained themselves.  We had apple, peach, pear, had a grape orchard, had cherry trees, had plum trees; then we had lots of wild grapes and muscadine and things of that nature that grew in the forest.  We had lots of black berries, blue berries, strawberries; they grew wild in the area.  So we had always had plenty food.  The--we had lots of pigs.  And we would kill pigs every year.  In the spring of the year, my mother would order two hundred chickens.  They would come in through the mail and we would raise them to frying size and then we would kill those chickens and my mother would can them.  We would--we had cows on the farm that we would breed the cows each year; we would get two calves a year.  We would sell one calf and slaughter the other for ourselves.  And so, we had plenty of meat, plenty of fruit; had a large garden, plenty of veggies.  So food was not an issue.  Clothing was another story.  So you tend to got a lot of hand-me-downs, so you learned to take care of what you had.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mother lived--you grew up, I guess, on the farm.
Speaker 2: I grew up on the farm.
Speaker 1: But your mother grew on the same farm--
Speaker 2: She grew in the same farm.
Speaker 1: --do you imagine life was any different when you grew and when she did?
Speaker 2: Probably not much because we never got much mechanized equipment, and so, the techniques that we used for farming were basically the same techniques that they used when she was growing up; clearing land, you know, basically the same way; go out and cut the tree down and then out there with a, we called it a grubbing hoe and cut the roots up and use the horses to pull the stumps up and you clear a new piece of land every spring to start to increase the available land for farming.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So life hadn't changed there for--almost since the day--(unclear)
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --I mean except for. I guess, the telephone or maybe--
Speaker 2: Well, you see, electricity came through when I was in the second grade.  So I remember when electricity came through.  We got a telephone, I guess, I was in college when we got it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're talking about electricity coming in the late '40s [1940s] and--
Speaker 2: Yep, but I was in the second grade so it was about 1950.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It meant that I could stay up late at night and read.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now your mother, she went to the third grade, then she was there on the farm, and she went to Philadelphia; did she have relatives in Philadelphia somewhere?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  We had--her--the first set of kids that my grandfather [Martin Stith] had, settled in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And the second set of kids stayed at home with their mother [Dinah Macklin Stith].  And so, my Uncle James, Aunt Irene, Uncle Garfield. they were all in Philadelphia, is where they went to live.
Speaker 1: So your mother went up and joined them in Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: And joined them in Philadelphia, right.
Speaker 1: So she went up and she became pregnant and came back?
Speaker 2: And she came back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then she had me.  And then I understand she went back to Philadelphia and my grandmother [Dinah Macklin Stith] raised me.  My grandmother died when I was about four and a half.
Speaker 1: So you basically were raised by your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Until I was four and a half.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But your mother came back?
Speaker 2: And then my mother came back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--because when my grandmother died, my mother was the oldest of the second set, so then I had an uncle who was about seven years older than I was, and so she had to raise him and her next oldest--next youngest brother.
Story_ID: 419147
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I want to go to your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I have absolutely no knowledge of my father's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother [Ruth Stith Morgan] never told me who--what his name was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So we don't know his name.
Speaker 2: I know absolutely nothing.
Speaker 1: And nothing else?
Speaker 2: Nothing else.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah.  So she didn't--no one else in the family mentioned what he might have--(unclear)
Speaker 2: No.  I mean, I'm sure people know because I had the conversation--I had the conversation with my mom because I guess I was around, oh, seven, eight, nine [years old], when it became very obvious to me that I didn't have a father figure in the house.  And I started asking who my father was.  I had learned about the birds and the bees.  And she would say, "You don't need to know that."  And I asked that question up until I was around fifteen, and I asked for the last time and she said, "You didn't need to know that," so then I declared my father dead and that I didn't need to know to use any more time to think about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is a story we've heard before and it does happen, and, you know, you just never--your mother just passed away?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother has passed [in 1990].
Speaker 1: And you've never been told?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And her sisters won't tell you?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now your mother got married.
Speaker 2: My mother got married when I was in the fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, I recall these three new girls coming to school that I used to tease unmercifully, and then one day they moved into the house with us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was your stepfather's name?
Speaker 2: Griffen, G-R-I-F-F-E-N, Pierpoint, P-I-E-R-P-O-I-N-T, Morgan, M-O-R-G-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's quite a name.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Griffen Pierpoint Morgan.  Now that sounds a lot like J. [John] Pierpont Morgan [1837-1913], the financier--
Speaker 2: Yes.  I don't know--
Speaker 1: --J. Pierpoint Morgan?
Speaker 2: --I don't know if there were any connections, but he grew up, they were up in the Blackstone [Virginia] area.  He had lost his first wife and then moved into our community [Brunswick County, Virginia].  And next thing I know, they--my mom had got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was he like?  And did he have an influence?  Did you consider him a father growing up?
Speaker 2: No.  We had a stormy--we had a stormy relationship at best, you know, throughout my childhood.  I mean, because frankly, I resented this guy coming into the house and trying to exert, you know, influence and control.  He was a laborer, and he took over the farm because by that time my uncle, who had been farming, decided that he could no longer make a living farming, and so he moved away.  And so, my stepfather took over the farm.  And frankly, he was not a very good farmer.  There were things that I knew better from having lived on the farm than he did.  But he was a proud person, very proud, and did not like to take advice from younger people or others.  And so he never made a go of it.  When I--and so, when I left home and went to college [1959], we still had a stormy relationship.  Fortunately, before he died, I matured and realized that he was doing the best he could.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now did he and your mother get along pretty well?
Speaker 2: As far as I know.  He died suddenly from a heart attack.  Came home from work and went in to take a nap and never got up.  He died, as I recall, it was around 1968 [September 12, 1968], somewhere in there.
Story_ID: 419148
Speaker 1: Okay.  But now you had a different relationship with your stepsisters, correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We had a very close relationship.
Speaker 1: All right.  And can you give us their names and--
Speaker 2: The oldest was Wilma Morgan [Debrew, 1941- ], I think her middle name was Anna.  W-I-L-M-A A-N-N-A M-O-R-G-A-N.  Second sister was--stepsister was Aldrena Marie Morgan [1943-1995], A-L-D-R-E-N-A M-A-R-I-E M-O-R-G-A-N.  And the sister was Joyce [1945- ]---I don't know if she had a middle name, Morgan, M-O-R-G-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now where--I mean, where did you fit in this group as far as age?
Speaker 2: I was the oldest.  It turns out my oldest stepsister and I are four months apart.  I was born in July, she was born in October [1941].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Same year.
Speaker 1: And you say you used to tease them in school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you got to know them--(unclear)
Speaker 2: I got to know them, yes.  I mean, you know--you know how kids are with kids, new kids in the school.  And they were as new kids are in school.  And you know, I teased her unmercifully, I remember that.  And we still got along well when she moved into the house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So we're fairly close.
Speaker 1: All right. Now, I guess we have only parent to think about in this regard.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I should say there was one more; my mother and my stepfather had a child together, and her name was Gwendolyn Juanita Morgan [1949-1963], G-W-E-N-D-O-L-Y-N J-U-A-N-I-T-A M-O-R-G-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she was--
Speaker 2: She was the youngest.  She was born in '49 [1949].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's about an eight-year difference?
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, that can't be true.
Speaker 1: It's an eight-year difference between you two?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah.
Story_ID: 419149
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now--oh.  Now, your grandmother [Dinah Macklin Stith] that raised you for four years--
Speaker 2: I have almost no recollection of her.  I mean, my first conscious memory was her funeral [1945].  That's the first thing that I remember because at that time they used to keep the body at the house.  And that's my earliest memory.  For some reason that stuck with me.  But I don't remember her at all.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Dinah, D-I-N-A-H, Mclin Stith, M-A-C-L-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Stith, S-T-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: All right.  But she took care of you for four years?
Speaker 2: For four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then when she died, Mom came back home, and after that I was with Mom.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 419150
Speaker 1: Now, I always ask this question.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so, I'm going to ask it again, but there's not a lot of choices, but there could be more choices then, too.  When you consider your mother's [Ruth Stith Morgan] personality and talents and peculiarities, and disposition, and all the--the stepfather, and you didn't know your grandmother [Dinah Maclin Stith] really--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --consciously.  But who do you take after the most in the family?
Speaker 2: Mostly my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, she was a--she was not an educated woman, but she was a smart woman; deeply religious, and quiet, I mean, and so, many of the characteristics that make me the person I am today really I got from her.  You know, I remember I was a bright kid in school; I did well in school.  And I thought I was pretty good.  And I recall sitting at the dinner table one day talking--I was talking about how well I was doing in something, and I don't remember the something.  And she said, "You know, I have learned that if a person needs to talk about themselves, there isn't much there.  If it's worth saying, somebody else will say it."  And I thought about that for a while, and said, "Okay.  It's time to change the way I, you know, talk about the things that I do."
Story_ID: 30183
Speaker 1: You embellish it, do the whole nine yards and she'll say, "You know (unclear)."  I've learned that, you know--one of those things she says I've never forgotten, so.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  (unclear)
Speaker 1: I'm trying to get out of the shot.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Forwards not to the side.
Speaker 1: Coming backwards is the solution.  Sir, do you have an earliest child--well, you just told us the earliest childhood memory that you had.
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory is of my grandmother's [Dinah Macklin Stith] death [1945].
Speaker 1: Is the funeral.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, now just kind of set the stage for us.  What did your home look like, and you owned sixty-eight acres of rural Virginia countryside.
Speaker 2: Of rural Virginia countryside.  Our nearest neighbor was about a half a mile away.  It was rolling hills, very fertile farmland, and we always, I mean there were always animals, there was always farm work to be done.  During the summers when it got real hot and you couldn't work during the middle of the day, we'd break off around 10:30 [A.M.] or a quarter to eleven and go back around two-ish [2:00 P.M.]  And Virginia's farm--it's a pine country.  And when a pine forest gets to be mature, the canopy is so thick that the undergrowth just dies away, so there's nothing there.  And there's nothing like walking in a pine forest because there's an eerie quietness and peacefulness when you're there.  And I used to love to go down to the pine forest and take a chair and a book and read during that timeframe.  So that's one of my favorite memories of being, you know, on the farm at home.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now this is a lifestyle that's quickly disappearing in the United States.
Speaker 2: Yes, very much so.
Speaker 1: Especially for African-Americans--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --who lose a lot of land.
Speaker 2: Yes, very much so.
Speaker 1: Well, I'll ask you this question, too.  We all ask it.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The smell of the pig pen.  We were tobacco farmers, so the smell of tobacco.  During the curing season, the smell of curing tobacco in the barn.  It was distinctive, and I still miss it.  And always having lots of animals.  In the evening, just listening to the frogs and the crickets and all of the--those--nature's creatures that are out there.  And people tend to think that it's quiet when they're in the humid (unclear) south, but it really gets quite noisy out there.
Speaker 1: Now, was your community, did your community have a name?  Was there a--
Speaker 2: Well, we really didn't we were somewhere between Alberta and Lawrenceville.  And so, that's why I always say I was born in Brunswick County, Virginia, because, you know, that was the county.  We used to call it--there were two stores on the corner.  There was Lucy Walker's store on one corner, there was Agnes Walker's store on the other corner, and so, we used to tell people we lived on the Lucy Walker-Agnes Walker Road.
Speaker 1: Now was Lucy Walker black?
Speaker 2: She was black.  These were all black people.
Speaker 1: Now was this area mostly black?
Speaker 2: Yes, there were mostly black in my area, and then there were white people, who lived at various, you know, there were also white farms, you know, around, because that's who we worked for.  But they were about--the nearest white farm was about a mile and a half, two miles away from our house.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But your closest neighbors were black?
Speaker 2: All my closest neighbors were black, and everyone that lived on that road were black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And as far as I knew they all owned the land.
Speaker 1: I just wondered if there was a name for that area because I know there's--I knew another Virginia--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's in Totaro.
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: It's Totaro District.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Totaro.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Totaro.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Cochran [Virginia] was nearby.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So and people had been there, I guess like your family had been there--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --since slavery--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, they were all there.  And when you go back and take a look at the census, and I'm trying to do some genealogy, the same families were there each time the census came through.  I mean, there was the Walker family, there was the Collier family; and it turns out a lot of inter-marriaging.  I mean, for example, my--one of my aunts married a Collier and one of my uncles married a Collier, and they were both sisters and brothers, you know.  So and then the Fishers were another family that was there, and there were a lot of--so we were all in the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Small community.
Story_ID: 30184
Speaker 1: Right--. When you--oh, what did your house [in Brunswick County, Virginia] look like?  Was it a big house (unclear)(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, it was relatively large for a, you know, two story.  It had a kitchen, a dining room, living room and a base--bedroom downstairs, and then there were three bedrooms upstairs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  I figured it had to be pretty large house.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what did you--you talked about liking to read, but you had a lot of chores to do, too.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, you know.
Speaker 2: All the chores.  I mean, all the plowing, and as a kid growing up, I couldn't realize--couldn't figure out why it was every other farm in the area had a tractor, we still had the mules.  And so, we did all our plowing with the mules.  We planted all the tobacco and all the other things that we had to plant.  We had to get it in and so, that was--so farming was a hard, backbreaking work.
Speaker 1: So this is you and your stepfather [Griffen Pierpoint Morgan] and your uncle? (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, basically what happens is the farm--the family next door to you, by the time I came along, you know, all the kids had gone.  So the family next door to us and us, we worked together.  And so, they would help us get our crop in, we would help them get their crop in.  We would do all the plowing ourselves though, and get all of that done.  So it was a--you know, by the time you finish getting the weeds out of one field, it's time to start back on the other field to--so it was never-ending work.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It sounds like a lot of work--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and--
Speaker 1: --you know, you being the youngest male around.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was the only male.  And my father believed in males work and women's work.  And so, my stepfather that is.  So, therefore, I did a lot of that of that, you know, that work.
Speaker 1: Did you have very much time to play growing up?
Speaker 2: We played on weekends.  For example, we played baseball, and there were a group of us who would get together, cousins, who would then, you know, we walked half a mile, five miles was nothing to do.  And we had a pick-up baseball game almost every Sunday.  We played horseshoes almost every Sunday.  We--there were lots of things.  We played touch football, tackle, whatever.  And so, you know, boys will be boys and you do the things that boys do.
Story_ID: 30185
Speaker 1: I imagine there was a pretty regular church experience [in Brunswick County, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  We went to church.  Sunday was--church was an all day affair.  You go in there in the morning and you have Sunday School, then church, then you'd feed and have a second service, then you come back home.  So it was an all day affair.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: It was the Johnson Grove RZUA Church.  You probably never heard of it.  RZUA stands for "Reformed Zion Union Apostolic."  You only find them in Southern Virginia.  As I understand the story, it's an offshoot of the Baptist Church and so service was very close to Baptist.  But there was a disagreement about whether you stand up or kneel to pray.  And the kneelers split off from the standers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And which ones was the--
Speaker 2: We were the kneelers.
Speaker 1: You were the kneelers?  Okay.  All right.  This is the first time I've heard of the RZUA Church.
Speaker 2: Yes, RZUA.  And you only--you saw them--I've never seen them--that church anywhere except in Southern Virginia.
Speaker 1: So it didn't migrate north with anybody?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If it did, I'm not aware of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was there a Methodist Church in the community or Baptist, too, or--
Speaker 2: I know there was a Baptist Church in the community.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was basically it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The community would be, like, about how many miles around would you say it was?
Speaker 2: Within the first--I'm not aware of a Methodist Church within a fifteen mile radius.
Speaker 1: I'm just talking about for your community, what would you say (unclear)(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, we drew--our church drew from the Collier family, the Stith family, and the Lambert family were basically our church.  Small church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then Oak Grove [Virginia], there was a Walker family, you know, people who lived along Cochran Road; Pleasant Hill [Virginia], the Wyatt family, the Harrison family.  And so, there were--and so, you knew by their name what church these people went to.  Every now and then we would have a joint service.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have the same reverend all the way through?
Speaker 2: No.  RZUA, they belonged to a conference, and the Bishop decides where the--who the preacher is going to be.
Speaker 1: So it's sort of like a Methodist Church.
Speaker 2: In that respect, yes.  And if we came home for--on Sunday early, typically the minister came and had dinner with us. (laughter)
Speaker 1: That's what they--ministers like that.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was the religious experience a profound one for you or let me ask this; do you think that you learned most of your moral guidance from the church or from home--or both?
Speaker 2: Oh, both.  They're one and the same, almost, you know, really.  I mean, I was--I mean I was superintendent of Sunday Schools at fifteen [years old].  And I still don't know why they did that to me.  But when I would go to the conferences, all the other superintendents were adults who were, you know, well in their years.  And so, I learned my leadership, you know, as the superintendent of Sunday Schools at my church.
Story_ID: 30186
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you know now, there's not--there is a correlation between farm work and practical work in science.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did--did you have any thoughts of becoming a scientist now on the--
Speaker 2: Not there.  But I was a--I was always an inquisitive kid.  And, you know, I read everything I could get my hands on.  And if you grow up on a farm, you're always seeing nature.  You always see things.  And I would ask questions as to, "Why does that happen?"  And no one could tell me.  And typically they would just say, "Look, boy, go away."  You know, "Give your brain a rest."  So you know, things of that nature.  And I remember, I'd sitting on our front porch because we had a screened-in porch.  I mean, you couldn't--I mean, you didn't have air conditioning, you didn't have electricity, so every house had a screened-in porch where you could sit out there in the evening and relax and be cool, because you get a good breeze going through the screen.
Speaker 1: And you would not be tormented by the bugs.
Speaker 2: And not be tormented by the bugs.  And one of my earliest recollections is that on a full moon, the moon was quite bright, and if I looked at the moon through the screen, I would see what appeared to be a cross superimposed upon the moon.  And I would go outside and it wasn't there.  And I kept asking why is that the case.  And, of course, no one could tell me.  And if they had observed it, they had not recognized it.  And it was when I got to high school and learned something about diffraction of light, then I learned what caused that phenomena that I was seeing.  And that's what really, when I was in high school, that I realized that physics was going to be the vocation for me.
Story_ID: 30187
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was school attendance difficult in a rural setting like that?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: I mean, where was your school--what was the name of your school first of all?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to Oak--
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Let's pause here.
Speaker 2: A lady that was one hundred years old told me, I said, "What were things like growing up?" "Just like they are now."  Anyway.  Oh, can you give us the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 1: I went to Oak Grove Elementary School in Cochran, Virginia.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, was this a segregated school or--
Speaker 1: It was a segregated school, three-room school.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So all the students were black?
Speaker 1: All the students were black.
Speaker 2: And do you recall what the name of a white school was in that area?
Speaker 1: There wasn't a white school there in that community because we basically a black community, and I don't recall--I know the black high school, but not the elementary school.
Speaker 2: Oh, the white--(unclear)
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The white high school was Brunswick High School [Lawrenceville, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Okay. In Brunswick County?
Speaker 1: Yes.  We had county schools.  There was one black school and one white school in the county.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  So Oak Grove now--well, tell us about the school, I mean, about how many students were in it--it had-it's three rooms?
Speaker 1: It was a three-room school.  We had the--started with first grade, and first and second grades were in the one room; and then we had third, fourth, and fifth in another room, and then seventh--sixth and seventh in the last room, and then we went to high school.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, did you like school?
Speaker 1: I loved school.  That was my escape.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So it was a--school was a place that I loved to go and the advantage of being in a three-room school was that, in the classroom you could perform at whatever level you were capable of performing.  And so, I did my math with the--when I was in the third grade; I did my math with the fourth and fifth grades, as time would go.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you were--you were advancing faster than your grade level?
Speaker 1: I was a good student, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So rather than nowadays having gifted classes you just moved on up a grade?
Speaker 1: That's correct.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And you did that part that you--and when I was in seventh grade I taught the classes.  I taught math and I taught science.
Speaker 2: Okay. Then that's unique.  How did you feel, a seventh grader teaching the students?
Speaker 1: Well, that's what we did.  We had--I did math and science and another colleague of mine, she did English; another colleague did history; and that's what we did.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So it wasn't just you?
Speaker 1: No, it wasn't just me.  There were about five--four or five of us.
Speaker 2: So you taught it to the younger kids--
Speaker 1: To the other kids in that grade.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  The same grade?
Speaker 1: Same grade.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I did--I just did all the math and all the science.
Story_ID: 30188
Speaker 1: Now, what kind of resources--now these are the days when they're school systems, we say, were being sued.  You know, the school system of Virginia was being sued by--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, when school systems were being sued by (unclear) and for lack of resources, and what kind of--how would you describe the resources?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't recall the resources at all.  I mean, I recall the teacher more than anything else.  Mrs. Mark, my first and second grade teacher, she was, I thought, was a fantastic teacher and always challenged us.  Mrs. [Ida] Coleman, who was my teacher from the third through the fifth grade, and she was the teacher that taught my mother and all of my aunts and uncles.  And so, and she just pushed you, and you know, but didn't do a lot of repetitious stuff  But would give you extra stuff to do that she thought you should be able to do.   And so, she was a dedicated teacher.  And I have come to believe that dedication, you know, is more than lots of other things that one can do in terms of getting the most from students.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you have proper desks and such?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had the, you know, the typical student desk, had been there since probably--there were a number of names on them; they had been there for a while (laughter).  Yeah, but they weren't broken or anything.  And we were in a farming community, so folks would come out and fix--we could fix anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did the students tend to respect the--(unclear)
Speaker 2: That was not a problem.  I mean, it was a true community school.  They used to drive me up the wall.  I'm sure it's not true, but it felt that way.  But if I did something at school, and we had no telephones, but by the time I got home, my mom always seemed to know about it.
Speaker 1: So what kind of trouble would you get into at school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was mischievous, but, you know.  Do things like pin the girl's hair to the desk behind her.  You know, just--those kinds--we didn't do anything that was bad, just mischievous.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was a mischievous kid.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 30189
Speaker 1: Now, you said you read a lot.  Now, what was the source of your books?  Did the school [Oak Grove Elementary School, Cochran, Virginia] have a library?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, the school had some, but mostly I had an uncle [Theodore Stith] who--that I really modeled my life after.  And he was the very first member in my family that I knew of who graduated from high school, and he loved to read.  And when he left and went to the [United States] Air Force, he would often send me books, and they were old school books of--that, I guess he had had, I mean, for example, I remember--there was "Beowulf," that was at the house, and didn't have the first few pages, you know, the first chapter.  It didn't have the pages in the last chapter, it had all the stuff in between.  So I remember reading that and often wondering--how did it end?  And I joined The Reader's Digest Condensed Club, and see, you'd get the book of the month.  And that would come and you would read those.  But really, anything that I could get my hands on, I just read it.
Speaker 1: Newspapers and magazines, could you get those?
Speaker 2: Not many newspapers and magazines, but, I mean, I sold "The Grit Newspaper."
Speaker 1: "The Grit?"
Speaker 2: "Grit."  Yes.  And I had a bicycle route.  I sold that.  I would read it from cover to cover.  But basically, you know, or when I--and when people knew that I liked to read, they would often give me books and I'd read them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a favorite book or books from those days?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Or a favorite genre?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Anything that was available.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems unusual that--now, how old were you when you read "Beowulf"?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think I was in--think that was the year that I was sitting at home, when I was a freshman in high school [ca. 1955, James Solomon Russell High School, Lawrenceville, Virginia], I think.
Speaker 1: You were convalescing with a broken leg.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I broke my ankle playing basketball, and at that time, my parents couldn't afford to do a lot of things, so I would go to MCV [Medical College of Virginia] in Richmond, Virginia.  And my parents would take me to the train station.  I would take the train station to--take the train to Richmond and then take the bus from there to MCV, go see the doctor and then retrace my steps and get home late that afternoon.  And I was about thirteen [years old].  And so, on one of those visits, my mom said, "Well, what did the doctor say?"  And I told a white lie, I said, "The doctor said I wasn't supposed to go to school with a broken leg."  I was not in the habit of lying so she believed me.  And so, I sat at home for about six months.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you spent that time reading or--
Speaker 2: I spent most of that time reading.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And did you have a radio in those days?
Speaker 2: We had a radio, but you know, A.M. stations weren't that good.  And so I didn't listen to that much radio, except for Jack Benny [Program] and Amos 'n' Andy [radio show] on Sundays, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I don't recall listening to too much radio when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Now, television didn't come in until (unclear)--
Speaker 2: We didn't have--we never--we didn't get a television until I was in college [ca. 1959].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We were a poor family.
Speaker 1: And there wasn't any peer pressure to get one, I guess in that area--
Speaker 2: My uncle got one, and, oh, they were good kids.  Every night we would go up to his house and we sit there and watch T.V. until around 8:00 [P.M.], then we all have to go home.
Speaker 1: Now, that's an experience now that people of today would find that strange.  But I've heard that kind of story before, that somebody on the block or a relative--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --had a television--
Speaker 2: They had a television.
Speaker 1: --and everybody would come and sit and watch it.
Speaker 2: I mean, as I recall, the biggest change in my life was when electricity came through the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were about--
Speaker 2: I was in the second grade, I believe, when electricity came through [ca. 1948].  And the ability to stay up at night and be able to read was just, you know, great for me. You know, I didn't have to go to bed when the sun went down.
Story_ID: 30190
Speaker 1: Had you--what was your sense--did you have a--do you think you had a profound sense of wonder growing up, I mean, beyond that of other kids in terms of how things worked?  You know, growing up to be a physicist, you would think--did you think about, you know, what this, the universe is made of?
Speaker 2: Well, mostly I asked why things happened and what made things work.  And so I asked lots and lots and lots of questions.  I mean, I remember, and I was very inquisitive.  And (cough) excuse me, as a young child, and at that time I was the only child, and people thought nothing of leaving a young child at home, you know, back in those days.  You know, couldn't get in that much trouble.  And I recall one day that my mom [Ruth Stith Morgan] was gone, and I was by myself.  And I looked up on the mantel and we had a clock.  And I'm wondering what makes this clock work.  And so, next thing I knew, had all these parts of the clock all over the floor.  And then realized that it was about time for my parents to come back home, my mother to come back home.  And so I started trying to get the clock back together; couldn't.  And so, when she walked in the house and saw all the parts of the clock all over the place, well, the ritual was to walk down to the forest and pick out a nice switch and bring it back and you'd get a few lashes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you have to do that.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I did that.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Didn't work, though, because next time she left, I said, and after she bought a new clock, "I think I know what I did wrong last time.  I'm sure I can get this one back together."  Well, I never got a clock back together because you just didn't have the right tools, you know, put all those fine pieces, you know, back together, back in the clock.
Speaker 1: So did you manage to get them back in the casing before she got home?
Speaker 2: No, because I knew it wasn't working so, you know, so I just did the ritual of going down to get my switch.  But then I decided to stop taking clocks apart.  I realized what was wrong.
Story_ID: 30191
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you for the most part, you think that people, older people encouraged you to inquire or were they discouraging?
Speaker 2: Mostly dismissive.  Because, keep in mind that most of the people I hung around with were not formally educated.  You know, they were, they were good tinkerers.  Now, anything that broke on the farm they could repair it.  And so, I watched that and learned to repair things.  But in terms of, you know, how nature worked in the kind of the scientific questions I asked, you know, they had no clue.
Speaker 1: So your teachers, were they encouraging--
Speaker 2: My teachers encouraged me, but I still didn't get answers to those kinds of questions from my elementary school teachers.  Those answers didn't come until I went to high school and started taking science courses.  And I remember when I took my first physics course and all of a sudden, you know, it seems as if the answers started pouring out to most of the questions I had been asking, and that's when I got hooked.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now before that, when you were in grade school, was there any--I mean, did you get enough information about the outside world, I guess, to answer any of the questions that you had?
Speaker 2: Not really.  And in terms of--now, you know, I--until I was probably a junior in high school, I had never been more than fifty miles from my hometown [Brunswick County, Virginia].  And so, we'd be fascinated when--I recall when one of my teachers took a trip to New York, and she came back and showed us the pictures of New York.  And it was not New York City [New York], and that's when we realized that there was something to New York other than the city of New York.  And I think that's when I really started thinking about I would love to be able to see, you know, the United States when I grew up.
Speaker 1: Now, did you go to movies and stuff when--
Speaker 2: We had a movie, but segregated movie.  Whites sat downstairs, blacks sat upstairs, and we'd go occasionally.  But mostly we would see [Thomas Edwin] "Tom" Mix, Lone Ranger, you know, that genre of things.
Speaker 1: So nothing that would stretch your scientific curiosity?
Speaker 2: No, nothing at all.  No, not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 30192
Speaker 1: Let's see, I graduated from high school in '59 [1959], so I must have gone into grade school in '53 [1953]--into high school in '53 [1953].
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, high school in '53 (1953) because I--it took me an extra year.  Five years to graduate instead of four.
Speaker 2: Okay. So this is Dwight Eisenhower is the president?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And what kind of state is Virginia.  I hadn't asked you, but now, you said you lived in a black community--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but what impression did you have of the wide-open state of Virginia?
Speaker 1: Well, keep in mind that at that time there was a poll tax.  And so, many people could not vote.  And so, it was, even though it was--the county was predominantly white, all of the officials, all of the people in charge were--even though the county was predominantly black, I'm sorry.  All of the officials were predominantly white.  We had a white superintendent of schools, the entire police department was white, and keep it in mind that this was back in the era when it was not believed that blacks had enough intelligence to do anything that required machinery.  And so, if you saw people working on the roads, the only thing you saw blacks doing was with a pick and shovel.  And it was also during time that you had the first black Greyhound Bus driver, because it was not believed that blacks had the intelligence to operate that kind of machinery.  So that's--
Speaker 2: Now, you--
Speaker 1: So that's the, you know, that's the community in which I, in which I grew up [in Brunswick County, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Okay.  So did you--what were encounters with white people like, say, at the show and (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Well, see it's a--the thing about segregation in the South is that, everyone knew what their place was.  And so, as long as you knew that, there were no issues.  And it was only if--and so, what used to really upset me was to see my parents behaving totally different when they were in the presence of white people.  They became very submissive.  And they used to--and that used to bother me as a kid growing up.  I knew better than to ask that question though in the presence of the white people they were around, but to wait until we got back home (cough).  They wouldn't give me an answer as to why, but "Yes, that's the way it is."  And so, but even though we did things, you know, to rebel, we didn't do them, you know, overtly.  Me, as an example, to make money, I would caddy at the local golf course and you soon learn those who treated you well and those who did not.  And for those of us who were--we were all black kids who were caddying, and sometimes the person who we would be caddying for would call us a "nigger," and which meant that he was destined to have a high score.  Because every time he hit a ball into the rough, instead of finding it we'd step on it and pushed it down into the dirt, and we'd look, and look, and look, and look, and can't find it, and after a certain times, I'd say, okay, drop a ball, take a stroke and move on.  So that was, you know, the subtle way that we got back at some of these folks with some of these things.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: Do you all have this kind of a fraternity of caddies?
Speaker 1: Yes, oh, yes.  Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 30193
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, okay.  High school.  Now what--what's the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: James Solomon Russell High School.  J-A-M-E-S S-O-L-O-M-O-N R-U-S-S-E-L-L.  It was named after the Archdeacon Russell, who was the president of Saint's Paul College [Historically Black College located in Lawrenceville, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Historically, I think the black high school opened in, around 1950.  Before that, those blacks who went to high school in Brunswick County went to Saint Paul's College.  And they would--
Speaker 1: For high school?
Speaker 2: For high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But most kids didn't go.  Many kids didn't go to high school.  But in about 1950, they built, and this was after "separate but equal," [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896] they built two high schools in Brunswick County, one white, one black.  One on one side of town, one on the other side of town.  The high schools were identical in structure.  They were built from the same road map.  I don't know about the equipment because we had decent equipment then, because they did make an effort to make sure that we had reasonable equipment to work with.
Speaker 1: Were your books used books from the white schools or were they new?
Speaker 2: No, no.  We had new books as I recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's the first time I've heard that, new books going to a black school.
Speaker 2: Yes, we had new books.  But we were there for Saint Paul's, and Saint Paul's was a college, and our teachers were all-faculty--were spouses of the faculty members at Saint Paul's College.  My math teacher, as an example, had a master's in mathematics from Columbia [University, New York City, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, just for the--tell us a little bit about Saint Paul's and the origin of Saint Paul's.
Speaker 2: Saint Paul's is a small Episcopalian college, private, in Lawrenceville [Virginia]; population of around five hundred, six hundred; and it's been there for as long as I can remember. Quite small.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a black college?
Speaker 2: Black, yeah.  It is an HBCU [Historically Black College or University].
Speaker 1: So traditionally.
Speaker 2: It is an HBCU.
Speaker 1: So set up by the Episcopal Church.
Speaker 2: Set up by the Episcopal Church.
Speaker 1: Right, which is a--
Speaker 2: A private school set up by the Episcopal Church.
Speaker 1: Which is really an American name for the Anglican church.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, okay.  So Saint Paul's a small--they're one of three small Episcopal churches in the South--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I --colleges in the South?
Speaker 1: And I don't know them all.
Speaker 2: Voorhees [College, Denmark, South Carolina] and Saint Augustine['s College, Raleigh, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Those two?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So are there any black Episcopals [sic, Episcopalians] in that region because you named the Baptists and the rest, but--
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, actually I forgot about them.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But they were all on Saint Paul's campus basically.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I just wondered.  There should be some.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: All right.  So now--so you had to commute, I guess, after--how far was Lawrenceville [Virginia] from your--
Speaker 1: The high school was about five miles from my house [Brunswick County, Virginia], and the elementary school was about two miles from my house.  And the first three years I walked to school.  And after that, there was a lady who started, she had kids and so she used a station wagon and gave me a ride.  And then when I was in about the fourth grade, they started the bus that took me to school.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So that's like an hour and a half walk or something to school?
Speaker 1: About an hour.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: But kids, sometimes it took longer than that (laughter).
Story_ID: 30194
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So your teachers were--you say you had real--your teachers are highly trained.
Speaker 2: I had, I was blessed with having very good teachers from K [Kindergarten, sic Stith's school didn't offer kindergarten] through twelve [twelfth grade].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you told us before, and now we're going to try to pin it down.  You really encountered higher science in high school [James Solomon Russell High School, Lawrenceville, Virginia].
Speaker 2: In high school.
Speaker 1: And well, did you start with biology?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I took biology, took physics, took mathematics, took chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when I was coming along, we teach physics after you took biology--
Speaker 2: Right.  Those same courses.
Speaker 1: --and chemistry I think would be the third science.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was the third science.
Speaker 1: Well, okay.
Speaker 2: General science the first year, and then biology, then chemistry, and then physics.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that was the king of them all.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--but did you take--did you have to wait to take physics your last year or did you--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I did, because it was a progression.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did they skip students in high school--?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm going to say yes and no.  Because when I was a junior in high school, and I hope I get the facts right, but I think it was the Ford Foundation.  They had this program to see if people's--kids could go from the junior year straight to college.  And they came to my high school and gave an exam to a number of us, and four of us were offered the opportunity to go to college right after.  Two of my classmates took it.  They went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and two of us decided to stay at Russell for our senior year.
Speaker 1: Okay.   Did you--you passed the exam (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  The offer was made.  I was eligible.  And frankly, one of the reasons I turned it down was that I hadn't planned to go to college.  So it was not--that was never in my ambition to do that.
Speaker 1: So you took the test your--was it your junior?
Speaker 2: Junior year.
Speaker 1: Junior year
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 30195
Speaker 1: But as late as your junior year you weren't really thinking about college?
Speaker 2: No, I was not.  I mean, there--no one in my family had ever gone to college.  And so, my ambition was to graduate high school and join the [United States] Air Force.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But it was not to stay a farmer?
Speaker 2: Anything to get out of Brunswick County [Virginia, Stith's childhood home], and I figured the Air Force would do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had an uncle in the Air Force, and so, he was a guy that I admired, so that's what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us a little bit more about your uncle because you--I think we talked about him off camera more than we did on camera--
Speaker 2: Right.  Yes.
Speaker 1: --but what was that relationship like?
Speaker 2: He was a--and I thought he was just brilliant.
Speaker 1: Well, what's his name first of all?
Speaker 2: Theodore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was my mother's--he was the second from the baby boy, so he was at the end of the line.
Speaker 1: He's Theodore Stith.
Speaker 2: Theodore Stith, yes.  And he was very studious, always, you know, trying to dissect things and figure out what made things work.  And then when he--he finished high school and he was the first in the family to finish.  I don't know if any of his brothers finished high school.  And then he joined the Air Force, and whenever he'd come back home in his uniform and with his new car, you know, that was for me, life can't get any better than that.  That's what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: He's the one that shared books with you--
Speaker 2: He shared books with me, and he was the one who would talk to me about things that required you to think.  He is the one who really got me to really, when people said something, to ask questions, "Now that doesn't make sense.  Why does that work?"  And to be critical.  He gave me my first experience in critical thinking.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm going to ask you for an example now.  What kind of thing would he--would you all discuss that--
Speaker 2: We would talk about the seasons and what made them so.  He would talk about why fertilizer worked.  We would talk about why plants needed water; and those were the kinds of things we talked about.
Story_ID: 30196
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, was science your favorite course of study in school?
Speaker 2: Math was until I took physics.  And now, let me back up.  When I--when I was in elementary school [Oak Grove Elementary School, Cochran, Virginia], I was quite small, and my teacher in seventh grade used to always tell me I was too small to go to high school [James Solomon Russell High School, Lawrenceville, Virginia], and she was going to keep me there for another year so I could grow up.  And she didn't.
Speaker 1: She was serious?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I don't know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --if she was teasing me or not, but she didn't do it.  But when I got to high school, I was not--well I had been a very good student at elementary school.  My first year in high school I was at best a "C" student.  And I really wasn't having a lot of fun in high school.  It was not--I didn't enjoy it.
Speaker 1: Were you picked on?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, but not that much.  But it just that I wasn't--the teachers didn't notice me; it was--it was just a different experience.  And so when I broke my leg, it wasn't easy not to go to school because I wasn't having any fun going there.  When I went back, I looked around and saw that my classmates were going to graduate, and if I didn't catch up, I was not going to graduate.  Now, what I didn't realize was that, my taking--having to take English every year, there was no way that I could catch up.  But I started working.  Well, I go into this math class, algebra class, and this algebra teacher takes me aside and says, "You know, you're good.  I want you to represent the state at the State Science Fair."  And my comment was, "I'm not from Saint Paul's," because the belief system of kids in the county was that the kids who lived on Saint Paul's campus and were sons and daughters of the faculty there were the favorites, and they are the ones who got all the breaks.  And those that's in the county, we're just there.
Speaker 1: To fill up (unclear)
Speaker 2: Yes.  And so, she looked at me and said, "I know where you live, and that has nothing to do with the kinds of things you can do. I want you to represent the school at the State Science Fair."  I went, placed, and after that, my confidence in what I could do, you know, just sort of grew.  And from that point on until I took physics, I didn't make less than an "A" in any course I took.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So then I developed a reputation as being a very good student.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Before that I was not thought of that way.
Story_ID: 30197
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, tell us about physics [at James Solomon Russell High School, Lawrenceville, Virginia].  Now, who was teaching physics, and how did this--
Speaker 2: Evelyn Davis taught me physics.  She was a young woman.  This was her first teaching job.  She was trained as a mathematician and not as a physicist.  But in talking to her in later years, she said that Mr. Jowls (ph.), who was our high school principal, told her, "If you want a job, you have to teach physics."  And getting a teaching job at this high school was tough because they only hired people who had good experience.  So it was high quality teaching.  Well, I took my--I'm taking physics and we take our first exam.  And then the first grading period comes out and I get a "B."  And I go to her and I says, "Mrs. Davis, there's been a mistake."  And she says, "What mistake has there been made?"  And I says, "I have a 'B'."  And she says, "Well, that's what you have."  I says, "Mrs. Davis, I know I am the best student in class, and so why is it that the best student in class gets a 'B'?"  And then she looked at me and said, "Had it been anyone else in class who did your level of work, they would have gotten an 'A', but you are not working at your potential.  You are only working hard enough to be the best in class.  So until you start working at potential, you're not going to get more than a 'B' in this course."  So that changed the way I approached, you know, doing my science.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did you do to reach this potential?  What did she--did she--I mean, what was the level you had to--
Speaker 2: Well, she--she had to feel that I was working as hard as I could, and she knew I wasn't.  I wasn't.  I mean, I--I was just working hard enough--I mean, frankly I figured at that time that if I had to take a book home, there was something wrong.  That, you know, I should be good enough to be better than anybody else who was in that class based upon my ability to think about things.  And, I was cocky.  But she turned, you know, she turned that around.  And she was also a teacher that at the time I didn't think she knew much physics.  In retrospect, I think she knew a lot more than we gave her credit for, because when we would ask her a question, she would never--her standard answer was, "I don't know.  Let's find out."  And then we'd go to work to find out the answer to the question.  What I now know is that, that's the best way for students to learn.
Story_ID: 30198
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So at what point during this process did you decide, well, I should go to college?
Speaker 2: That was during the exercises to get ready for commencement.  I was valedictorian of my class [James Solomon Russell High School, Lawrenceville, Virginia] and we were sitting in the room getting ready, and my math teacher was our class sponsor.  And we were sitting in the room and she was going around the room asking people where they were going to go to college, and folks were giving her an answer.  She got to me and I said, "I'm not going to college.  I'm going to the [United States] Air Force."  And she looked at me and she said, "You are not going to the Air Force.  You are going to college."  And I gave some feeble excuse about my family didn't have any money and, you know, nobody in my family had ever gone to college, at which time she said, "My husband is a teacher at Saint Paul's [College, Lawrenceville, Virginia].  You can live with me and you can go back and forth with my husband to Saint Paul's, and I can get you into Saint Paul's."  And being the, I now say, disrespectful kid that I was, I said, "Mrs. Thompson, when I graduate I want out of Brunswick County."  And she said, "If I get you a scholarship to Virginia State [College, Petersburg, Virginia], will you go?"  And I said, "Yes."  And so several weeks later she came back and she had managed to put together a package for me to go to Virginia State and the rest is history.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I take her out to lunch at least once a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she's really responsible.
Speaker 2: She's responsible.
Speaker 1: Now, at this time, we have to point out, too, that, you know, when you were at (unclear)--oh, this is your grade school class.
Speaker 2: This is high school.
Speaker 1: --you were president in middle school, right, of the class in middle school--
Speaker 2: Oh, we didn't have a--I was vice president of my class in high school--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --junior class.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was vice president.
Speaker 1: So you were pretty popular in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you had a pretty good social life (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yes.  I mean, I was well thought of.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, it was a--and high school for me after that first year was just an absolute joy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, a physics student is not supposed to be the popular guy in school; according to popular culture, you know, portrayals, you know, he would have thick glasses and walk into stuff, and all that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  But I was also a softball player.  I played baseball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and I thought I could play basketball until I didn't grow.  I started my JV [junior varsity] Team and then realized it that I was like a midget among giants, and so I decided to do something else.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So on the verge of graduation, what did your mother think of--
Speaker 2: Oh, my mom [Ruth Stith Morgan] always believed in education.  And unlike--the difference between me and many kids in my neighborhood was that I never missed a day of school to work on the farm; whereas many people around me kept their boys at home to work on the farm.  I never did that.  That always got done in the evening or on weekends.  But she didn't allow any of that to interfere with schoolwork because she knew how much I enjoyed school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That is important for us.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Story_ID: 30199
Speaker 1: Okay, Virginia State [College], that's in Petersburg?
Speaker 2: That's in Petersburg, Virginia, Historical Black College University.  And so, I went there as a physics major.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was like Virginia State like for you?
Speaker 2: Again, first year, I repeated my high school [James Solomon Russell High School, Lawrenceville, Virginia] in that I knew I had to keep a "C" average to keep my scholarship, and probably had a 2.00123.  I mean, I was right on the verge.  And people would talk to me, the whole nine yards.  But, you know, when I was a kid growing up we didn't have a car, and so, my social life was kind of spotty because I had made these great friendships with young ladies at school, but I couldn't see them.  I couldn't get there, you know, so we, you know, you could drive, you know, twenty miles to see--it's too far to walk.  So I could never keep a girlfriend because she would soon get tired of the fact that she never--the only place she saw me at was at school; and so parties, couldn't go because, you know, couldn't get there.  And so my social life was kind of nil until I got to Virginia State.  And so, my freshman year, I made it a point that a party wouldn't shut down if I weren't there, and then to do the amount of work that I needed to do to keep my scholarship.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were having a good time.
Speaker 2: I was having a great time.  I was having a great time.  But during the summer between freshman and sophomore year, Mrs. Thompson took me aside, high school teacher, and we had a conversation about what I was doing.  And I decided it was time to pick it up, and after that I became a much different student.
Story_ID: 30200
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, who were some of the people in Virginia State [College, Petersburg, Virginia] (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The--we had Doctor John Hunter, who was the professor of physics when I was there.  Doctor Hunter was the third African-American to get a Ph.D. in physics, and he got that Ph.D. from Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York].  He grew up in Tyler, Texas and somehow gotten his undergraduate degree from M.I.T. [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] So M.I.T., went to Cornell got a master's, came to Virginia State to teach and actually grew the Physics Department; and then went back to Cornell and finished up his Ph.D.; and he was there with his Ph.D. when I got there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in mathematics we had Dr. [Ruben R.] McDaniel.  Dr. McDaniel had a Ph.D. in mathematics from Rutgers [The State University of New Jersey].  And in chemistry we had Doctor T. Nelson Baker.  I don't know where Dr. Baker got his Ph.D. from.  Dr. Baker just didn't talk.  And in biology we had Dr. Dickie Dunn.  And I forget where Dickie got his Ph.D.  But in the department, I mean, at the school we had what we called "The Big Four," and these were men who we knew, knew their subject matter and prepared us well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you had all these?
Speaker 2: I had all of them.  And Dr. Hunter was my teacher, but never could get close to him.  He was--I mean he was my physics professor, but I could talk to him about physics but nothing else.  Dr. McDaniel, I could walk into his office and talk about life.  So Dr. Mack [McDaniel] became my mentor.  He was a person that I learned, you know, everything other than physics from.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, now you became an Alpha [Phi Alpha, fraternity]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --at Virginia State, correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And so I pledged in my sophomore year and went over.  And that may have had something to do with my change in attitude.  Because the University had a plaque that was given every year to the sorority and the fraternity that had the highest cumulative G.P.A.  And Alpha had had that for as long as anybody could remember, and we were determined to keep it.  So even during pledging, we had mandatory library hours and study hall to make sure that when we came into the fraternity that we didn't pull the average down because our averages had dropped while we were on the line.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So in tradition, academics are actually (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so you started in college in--
Speaker 2: In 1960--1950.  1959.
Speaker 1: '59 [1959].
Speaker 2: I graduated high school [James Solomon Russell High School, Lawrenceville, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Right, '59 [1959].  Same thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yes, fall of '59.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 30201
Speaker 1: (unclear)
Speaker 2: But happened with that, there were people really around trying to get out the vote.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, 1960 we had the Presidential Election, John F. Kennedy versus Richard Nixon.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Dramatic one in the black community because the black community was split between Republicans and Democrats in those days.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Tell us, you said it was a good story.
Speaker 1: Well, the story was that in Virginia they had the poll tax, especially in my county.  And there were many, many people who could not vote because they couldn't pass the test that deemed that you were bright enough to vote.  So you go and you take this literacy test, and if you pass the literacy test you were allowed to pay your poll tax and therefore vote.  If you couldn't pass the literacy test, then you couldn't get your card to vote.
Speaker 2: So these are two barriers we're talking about.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: First, there's a literacy test--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and then the poorest people in the county, the black people, had to pay--
Speaker 1: Had to pay.
Speaker 2: --a fee.
Speaker 1: A fee.  I think everybody paid the fee, but it was just that, you know, many of the--and they would ask you things like, "Recite the Declaration of Indepen--the Preamble to the Constitution."  And, you know, just anything that--I mean, it was designed to narrow the voting rolls.
Speaker 2: Now, did you think in those days that white people knew the Preamble to the Constitution?
Speaker 1: We know they didn't.  We know they didn't.  But when I was a senior in high school, and leading up to the election there were a group of people from Saint Paul's [College, Lawrenceville, Virginia]--senior in high school and I did this--who worked with adults in the community to teach them enough so that they could go, pass the literacy test and therefore vote.  So that was a huge project as I remember, to increase the voting rolls and, for example, I'm sitting there, you know, talking with my mother [Ruth Stith Morgan], you know, because she could barely write.  And, but, you know, working with her, trying to get her prepared to go down and pass the literacy test; and with my aunts and uncles and my step-father [Griffen Pierpoint Morgan].  So that's what we were doing.  And, as I say, that county turned out for Kennedy.  I don't recall how the state went that year [Virginia went for Nixon in the 1960 election].  I don't remember that one.
Speaker 2: Now, was that effort organized by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or (unclear)--
Speaker 1: I'm not quite sure who it was organized by.  It may have been by the NAACP.  I don't remember that.  But a lot of things came out of Saint Paul's.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So if there was an NAACP it would be there, wouldn't it (unclear)--
Speaker 1: It would have been at Saint Paul's, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I know the NAACP youth (unclear), I know they were really involved in a lot of efforts like that.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So in college [Virginia State College, Petersburg, Virginia] now, so your mentor was Dr. Mc--
Speaker 1: My mentor was Dr. [Ruben] McDaniel.  But, you have to add Dr. [John] Hunter, too, because he did all the physics for me.  But I just, and I tell most students there's no single person you can go to for--I went to Dr. Hunter for my physics I went to do there; I went to Dr. Mac [McDaniel] for everything else.  And I went to Dr. Mac to talk about Dr. Hunter.  (laughter)
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 30202
Speaker 1: All right.  So anything else remarkable about Virginia State [College, Petersburg, Virginia] before we get to your graduation?
Speaker 2: You know, well, the other thing is that in the spring of my senior year [1963] at Virginia State our home burned, and so, we lost--we lost everything and my half-sister [Gwendolyn Juanita Morgan] died in the fire.  And so--
Speaker 1: You mean the youngest one?
Speaker 2: My youngest sister, yeah.  This is Juanita.  And I remembered the R.O.T.C. detachment coming to the house with just a truckload of furniture, you know; couches and chairs and tables, the whole nine yards, to replace the furniture that was lost in the fire.  And so, that had, you know, an impact.  And so, you know, but we got through that.
Story_ID: 30203
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, were you following, like, all--the Civil Rights Movement had kicked in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, as an R.O.T.C. [Reserve Officers' Training Corps.] student, you know, [Rev. Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] came up several times to talk Wyatt Tee Walker [Civil Rights leader, co-founder of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference] was still in the area and he would come over to Virginia State [College, Petersburg, Virginia]--
Speaker 1: He was in Petersburg (unclear)
Speaker 2: He was in Petersburg at Gillfield Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: That's right.  Petersburg Improvement Association.
Speaker 2: Yes, right.  Yes.  And we had our sit-ins to integrate the Trailways Bus Station, and the PMS [Professor of Military Science] had pulled us all aside and told us not to participate because if we got arrested we'd have a police record, and then we couldn't get commission, and we couldn't go into the military.  Well, there were a number of us who ignored him, and I was one of those and I would sit-in on the Trailways.  And one day--we had shifts, because what would happen, when we go into the Trailways Bus Station we sit down, and as soon as we sat down, the cleaning crew would come out and pour ammonia all over the counter as we were sitting there.  And so, we learned that we could tolerate that for about half an hour.  And so, we did things in shifts.  So in about half an hour one shift would leave and the other shift would go in.  And so this morning, I forget what day it was, I go for my shift, the ammonia comes out, and I leave to go and, you know, get your lungs squared away.  When I come back, all of my colleagues are gone because the police have come down and arrested everybody and carted them off to jail.  And that was close enough that then I stopped doing the sit-ins.  Now, I also took--I went with a group of students from Virginia State down to Saint Paul's College [Lawrenceville, Virginia] and sat in at the local drug store there, because for some reason folks in Saint Paul's weren't doing it.  So we decided that we were at Saint Paul's, and there they did it very quickly.  They simply came in while we were there and removed all the stools.  And so, nobody could sit down.  And so, after that, that issue was over.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were acting out of the consciousness of that time--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --doing what you could do?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 30204
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, when you graduated, did you have any special--(unclear) had you been elected to some office or anything?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  When I graduated from Virginia State [College, Petersburg, Virginia] and I was due to go into the [United States] Army to fulfill my R.O.T.C. [Reserve Officers' Training Corps.] obligation, but for some reason I had requested to go into active duty in October and hadn't thought about what does one do from May to October without a job, with no money.   And so, that created a slight problem.  So I was walking through campus one day and the master's of art in the teaching program had just been sent out trying to upgrade the teachers in the state of Virginia.  And so, [Dr.] Dickie Dunn, says, "Stith, what to do in the summer? Would you teach the lab of--the physics lab for that?" And he agreed to pay me.  And so I did that.  Well, that meant I was hanging around the school a lot, and this guy walked up to me and said, "Jim, I need one course to graduate and get my master's.  The Virginia State won't offer the course unless there are two people taking it.  Will you take this course so that I can graduate?"  And I said, "Well, what's the course?"  He said, "Mathematical physics."  And said--And for some reason I said yes.  My recollection says a week later, he decided the course was too hard and he dropped it.  And so, that left me in the course by myself.  Well, I was cheap.  I had paid my money for this course and so therefore, I was going to take it.  But I worked a lot harder that summer than I had ever planned to work.  And I walked into the hall and Dr. [John] Hunter called me in and said, "Stith, would you like to go to graduate school?"  And I said, "Can't, got to go to the Army."  And after a lot of conversation, I said, "Yes, I do."  He called Second [United States] Army and asked them if he could keep me for a year while I got my master's because he had the money to pay for it.  So I stayed there and got my master's.  During that year, the Ford Foundation, because if you recall in 1959 after Brown versus Board of Education [1954], Prince Edward County, Virginia, closed all of its schools.  And so, there were no schools in the county because rather than integrate, they shut down all schools.  Well, in 1964, the Ford Foundation gave money to open a private school in Prince Edward County that all kids could go to.  But when the money came, they weren't ready yet.  So a group of us from the Virginia State went up to Prince Edward County and worked with them for a month, because that's how long Dr. Hunter said we could miss class, until they sorted things out.  And so, that I think is what changed my view of what education was.  Then I came back and got my master's.  And, you know, that year Dr. [Ruben] McDaniel called me in and asked if I would stay there and teach for a year.  I said, "I can't.  I got to go into the Army."  And he called, picked up the telephone, calls and asked if he could keep me for another year.  They said yes, and then asked for me on the phone.  And some crusty old colonel said, "Lieutenant, what's your branch?"  I said, "Artillery, sir."  "What kind of artillery?"  I said, "I don't understand," because I didn't know there were any kinds of artillery.   I said, "Air defense," I selected that one.  And he said, "Don't call me next year.  Be at Fort Bliss, Texas, on the 5th of June 1965."  So that's when I went on active duty.  Now, that was the very fortuitous decision on my part because choosing air defense artillery, the North Vietnamese did not have an air force [Vietnam War].  So there was no requirement for air defense artillery people to be in Vietnam.  So that's how I missed the Vietnam War.
Speaker 1: That makes sense.  Perfect sense.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 30205
Speaker 1: So, well, go back and tell us a little bit about your teaching experience.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, here you are just out of college, and you're teaching college.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: About a year later.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so, was that a (unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, it was a--
Speaker 1: --remember speaking at a luncheon about some of the pressures of the young teachers.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, backed up and said, I just met the girl who has become my wife [Alberta Hill], and she was an undergraduate, and so when the president called me in and I said, "Probably can't accept the job."  He says, "Why not?"  I said, "Well, I'm dating an undergraduate, and it's not clear to me that faculty members should be dating undergraduates, and so, I probably--and I kind of like her so I don't want to take the job."  And so, he said, "Is she in your class?"  I said, "No, she isn't."  He said, "Then I don't have a problem with it."  My first course I taught was a course on household physics, and it was a required course for all home economics majors.  And they were--
Speaker 1: Household Physics?
Speaker 2: Household Physics.
Speaker 1: What was that about?
Speaker 2: That was the physics of the household, meaning, for example, how do irons work?  That when water boils, that by turning the flame up it doesn't get any hotter, it just evaporates faster; and, you know, the physics of household wiring, because they felt that home economics majors ought to know these kinds of things, you know.  Things about the heat of vaporization, why steam is hot, you know.  Those were the things that we taught.  And, but typically, it was not a well-liked course.  So home economics majors, all girls, waited until they were senior to take the course.  So there I was around twenty five years old, and there they were, around the same age, and I had dated several of them previous to that.  So it was a very interesting class.  And my wife says that's why I stayed in teaching.  (laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 30206
Speaker 1: Okay, so now when you joined the--you joined the [United States] Army--
Speaker 2: I go into the Army in June of '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Go to Fort Bliss, Texas, I'm at Fort Bliss for officers' basic [training] where I get introduced to Hawk and Hercules Guided Missiles.  And I should state that it's at, when I went to--I was called in by the PMS [Professor of Military Science] before I left for Fort Bliss and so, he said, "Stith, most people don't think that the graduates of HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] are really any good."  He says, "I want you to make sure you finish in the top quarter of your class at OBC [Officer Basic Course].  And there were about three of us that he brought in, and we all finished in the top quarter of our class at OBC.  But, anyway I left there, my first assignment was in Korea.  And by this time, my wife--my wife and I, we had become engaged, and the plan was to get married when I got back from Korea.  But then we decided why wait.  And so, when I left Fort Bliss, I stopped in Petersburg [Virginia], we got married, stayed together for thirteen days, and I left for a year.
Speaker 1: Okay. So now, what year is this?
Speaker 2: This was in 1965.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  So--
Speaker 2: November 1965 I head to [South] Korea [Korean War, 1950-1953].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right after being married.  Now, okay.  Well, what was your impressions of Korea?  Where did you serve in Korea?
Speaker 2: I served in, just below Osan in a place called--in Pyeongtaek.  And when I arrived in Korea, I got called, because when I stepped off the plane, they were asking for Lieutenant Stith.  And, because I was scared to go to a Hawk battery, and I was told that because of my physics background that this new system they were putting in place, and so, I was being pulled to work this system, to help get it installed.  And so, I spent a year doing that.  Stayed in Korea--I had a great time in Korea.  I--it was my first time to a foreign country, loved stopping in Japan on the way over there.  I was the club officer in charge of the Officer's Club, which meant that I had Korean workers who worked for me, and they took me into their home.  I would have dinner with the mayor of the local village on holidays and those kinds of things.  They would take me out into places in Korea that where I was the only American that was there, and because I happened to be a black American, you know, I drew a lot of attention during that timeframe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they must have really liked you.
Speaker 2: They did.  They really did.  They really did.  And they treated me very well.  And so, I had fond remembrances of my year in Korea.  And my style has always been to get to know the culture of any country where I go.  And so, I was teaching them English, they were teaching me Korean.  They had a much more difficult job than I had.
Story_ID: 30207
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Korea?  I come back to the States, I request a Hawk Battery [Hawk Guided Missile System] in Washington, D.C., because we had at that time of the Cold War, we had lots of Hawk batteries surrounding major cities.  Okay.  And that result was that, they sent me to Washington but not Washington, D.C.  They sent me to Seattle, Washington, to Fort Lewis and I was the commander of an Infantry AIT [Advanced Individual Training] Training Company.  So again outside of my branch.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This was Fort Lewis.
Speaker 2: Fort Lewis, Washington.  That was 1966 when I go out there.
Speaker 1: All right.  So what was the other assignment like?  Now, was--your wife [Alberta Hill] went with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was my wife went with me.  We were living in our first home.  Interesting.  I enjoyed the assignment.  We--the Vietnam [War] was really starting up.  And so, my assignment was to open up the old North Fort at Fort Lewis, which had been closed down for a while.  And we were assigned to get ready to bring soldiers in--recruits in to train them to go to Vietnam.  And so, I arrived and had my talk with my Battalion Commander, Colonel [John W.] Marr.  He assigned me to my company and said, "Your job now is to go find some"--
Speaker 1: Recruits?
Speaker 2: Not recruits, but help.  My staff.  And so, I went down to the in-processing station and just took a seat and just watched people getting off the plane and coming in.  And I--after a while I'm sitting there and I see this guy walk in and he just strikes me as being a guy who's well put together.  And I walk up to him and I said, "Sarge, I'm Lieutenant Stith, and where are you coming from?"  He told me Fort Raleigh [City, North Carolina].  "What are you doing?"  And he said, "Well, sir, I don't have an assignment."  And I said, "Well, my job is to open up a training company and I'm looking for a First Sergeant.  Would you be my First Sergeant?"  And he says, "Sir, I think I'd like to work for you."  And that was Sergeant Rogers in that picture that I showed you.  But he--and he taught me everything that I knew about soldiering.  I mean, he was a--and his story was that was at Fort Raleigh, he was being trained to go to Vietnam; when they were being shipped out, they found out that he had had a tour in Vietnam and they weren't sending people back unless they volunteered to go.  And he says, "I will go wherever my country sends me, but I will not volunteer to go into harm's way."  And so, he was then sent to there.  And then he said, "And, sir, I'd love to be your First Sergeant."  I says, "Fine.  I'm going to go over to the officer section and try to find some platoon leaders.  You find some platoon sergeants."  And the short story is that, we were the first company in our battalion to come up to staff.  And so, we had the first set of recruits in our company.  And it was just a--that part was a great experience.
Speaker 1: So you out-organized the other--
Speaker 2: We were the first to get ready to go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it was all due to him.  I mean, he was just--he was fantastic.  And, you know, and I was always told that my job was to pick good people and get out of the way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 30208
Speaker 1: All right.  So--now, so how long were you in Seattle [Washington]--
Speaker 2: I was in Seattle until June--July of '67 [1967], and what happened was that in--earlier that year, Branch (ph.) came up and said that, we got to figure out how to get you to Vietnam, because they weren't sending our defendants out there.  And I had not had an assignment in my branch.  And my next promotion was going to be to captain.  The logical position would have been commanding a company, a battery, an artillery battery.  And I had never been in a battery, and so, that was a recipe for disaster if you ever saw one.  And so, I talked to Colonel [John W.] Marr and I said, "Sir, this does not look good for a career.  What should I do?"  And he said, "If I were you, I'd get out."  And, but he said, "But if you stay in for three more months, I'll promote you to captain, and you'll join the [United States Army] Reserves as a captain rather than as a lieutenant, and that will be better for you."  And so, we agreed to do that, and I got out of the [United States] Army at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you just go out of there--
Speaker 2: I just got out, and I was a Reserve officer and, so, my commitment was for two years and I had fulfilled my commitment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, now is this when you started working for RCA [Radio Corporation of America]?
Speaker 2: That's when I started working for RCA.
Speaker 1: Okay. Yes.  I went to work for RCA.  Went to interview, met a man by the name of Bob Ponts (ph.), and at the end of the interview, the person said, "What do you think?"  And I said, "If Bob Ponts offers me a job, call me.  If he doesn't want me, then I'm not interested."  Because I had an offer from IBM [International Business Machines], but I really liked Bob.  And I learned an awful lot from him from the time I was at RCA.
Speaker 2: (04:23:27 - 04:24:16) Okay.  Now, what did you do at RCA?
Speaker 1: I was a phototube engineer.  I made photomultiplier photo-diodes.  Those are tubes that, if I shine light upon the cathode, a current will start to flow.  And you use them for counting things.  Every time there's a pulse of light--every time you interrupt a beam of light, you know, you interrupt the pulse, so, you know, one, two, three.  And so, that's what I did for two years.  And really had a ball doing it.  Got a couple of good promotions.  I was making more money than I had ever seen before in my life.  But my wife [Alberta Hill]  got pregnant.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now this time you're living in--
Speaker 1: I'm living in Lancaster, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2: Lancaster, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Lancaster, Pennsylvania--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --working for--working for RCA.  And when she got pregnant, we both agreed that if I didn't get back to graduate school right away, I'd never go because, you know, starting a family, we were going to have to put down some roots and do some things, and I'd better get back to school.  So I then applied to Penn[sylvania] State University in University Park, Pennsylvania, thinking I was applying to University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.  But since University Park was not on the map, I had no idea where it was.  I got in and it was a good place for me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now so Penn State's up in State College--
Speaker 1: In State College, Pennsylvania, yes.
Speaker 2: --and University of Pennsylvania is in Philadelphia?
Speaker 1: In Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: You thought you were going there--
Speaker 1: I was going--yeah, that's where I thought I was going.  And actually, I was going up there for an interview and I had spoke to a colleague at RCA the night before, and I told him I was going to Penn State--I was going to Philadelphia to have an interview at Penn State.  And he said, "You're going in the wrong direction."  And then took out a map and showed me where State College was and that's where Penn State was, and so, I--no one but he and I knew that I had come very, very close to making a serious mistake.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: At first I was embarrassed about it, now I laugh at myself about it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, this is what year?
Speaker 1: This was in 1969.
Speaker 2: 1969.  Okay.
Story_ID: 30209
Speaker 1: So Penn[sylvania] State [University], State College, Pennsylvania [in 1969]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So--you worked on a Ph.D. in physics?
Speaker 2: I enrolled in the Ph.D. program in physics, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What were--do you have any special teachers or mentors there?
Speaker 2: Well, the head of the department, Dr. [D.H.] Rank eventually became my advisor and mentor.  Otherwise, no one really stands out.  As an institution, Penn State wasn't a very friendly place.  So, but, you know, I ran into a couple of friends and that's what--and we would get together and--for a social life.  But academically, I mean, I did okay.  But it was not a warm, friendly place.  And there were things that happened that--I left there a little bitter.  But that's a different story.
Speaker 1: Well, wait.  That's the kind of story that we need--well tell us--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean--as an example--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At Virginia State [College, Petersburg, Virginia] I had taught modern physics, I had taught thermodynamics and they were using the same textbooks in the courses that were being taught at Penn State that were required courses for Ph.D. students.  So I couldn't understand why I needed to take the course, but the option was to validate it or to take it.  And so, I applied for validation.  I validated modern physics with no problems.  When I tried to validate thermodynamics, the professor said, "Come in on this day, I'll give you an exam; if you pass it, you validate; if you don't pass it, you don't."  I go for the exam and my recollection is very vivid.  There were ten questions on the exam, multi-part, and I looked at the exam; it looked kind of long, but I said, "Should I be able to finish this in two hours?"  He says, "Most people do."  I sat down and started to work; he came in and said, "You have ten minutes."  I looked at the clock, sure enough, I had been in there for almost two hours and I had got to problem three.  And I had been writing furiously for the entire time that--and, you know, I filled up several, you know, books.  And so, and I said, "Are you sure that I should have been able to finish this test in two hours?"  And he says, "Most people do."  So I walked out of there quite dejected.  I walked into my colleague's office, a graduate colleague, and he said, "Jim, what's the problem?"  And I said, "I just failed an exam in a subject that I thought I knew."  And so, he says, "What was on the exam?"  I told him.  And he said, "That was the take-home, open-book exam that we had when I took the course from him last year."  At which point I was furious.  And I tell everybody that I got out of graduate school back in those days because I had been in the [United States] Army and I had matured a lot, and so, I was no longer intimidated by things at that period of time.  And so, I went into the department chair's office and said, "Dr. Rank, you've got a problem."  And he says, "Stith, tell me what my problem is."  And I told him.  And he said, "There are problems you fight, there are problems you don't fight.  This is a problem I'm going to ask you not to fight, but go see [Dr. Greenville Kash] Strother," another professor, "and ask him to give you a validation exam."  I did, he did, I passed, and the rest is history.
Story_ID: 30210
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Now, with some people--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --what happened to you on this previous story a teacher would discourage them and they wouldn't even go in to see the other professor, and they would have assumed there was a conspiracy on the part of Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania] to keep--you know, you from graduating or whatever, but you were able to--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know--
Speaker 1: And I attribute that to my military experience, and as I say, I had become more mature.  And had a wife [Alberta Hill] and a child [Adrienne Stith Butler, 1968- ], and I was determined not to be there forever.  And I was not in the habit of starting things I didn't finish.  So I had planned to walk away with a degree.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, it's been--what was your dissertation?
Speaker 1: Okay.  My dissertation was "Stimulated Brillouin Scattering in Liquids at High Pressure."  And basically, what we did was we fired a laser light, seventy-two megawatt [MWe] laser ruby light, through a liquid that we had placed under high pressure, and we would vary the pressure.  And we would see what the effect of that pressure would be on the light beam, and what you would get would be stimulated brillouin scattering.  You get something like SOD (unclear) bands on radio; otherwise, different frequencies are set up.  And so, you take a spectra of what you see, and based upon the frequency shift, you can then go back and calculate certain properties of the liquid like the speed of sound in that liquid.  And what you would find is that the speed of sound had significant pressure dependence, depending upon, you know, what the pressure was; and that the laser light acted much differently than, let's say, white light did when you measure the speed of the sound in the liquid.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But it was about this time though, I should divert, that I had made a decision not to be a Ph.D.  I made the decision to get a degree called doctor of education.  Because at this time, there was a lot of experimentation going on about how to improve college faculty.  And so, Penn State had this program, and I think I may have been the second student through it, that you did all of the coursework that you took for a Ph.D., but you took five courses from the School [sic, College] of Education.  And then you did your dissertation in physics.  Okay.  And so, that was now the program that I was in.  And--
Speaker 2: This program was to improve the--
Speaker 1: College teaching.  Because I knew that I wanted to teach at the college level.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so, I thought that I would be better prepared to teach at the college level if I knew something about the way people learned and those kinds of things.  And so, I shifted from the Ph.D. program to the D.Ed. program.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, at the time, I wasn't fully aware of the--what's the word I'm looking for--prejudice, if you will, of the Ph.D. degree versus other degrees.  And that--and so, anything else just looked--is not valued as highly as a Ph.D. degree was, I simply was not aware of that.  I was simply was not aware of that.
Speaker 2: You thought a doctorate degree was a doctorate degree and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  There you go.  And so, and I did not get that kind of mentoring to get me to change my mind.  But the upstate of that was that I was able to finish the program in three years.  And so, I graduated in 1972 with my doctorate of education in physics with [Dr.] Dave [H.] Rank as my advisor.
Story_ID: 30211
Speaker 1: I should tell you one more story, at the risk of this.  When I got ready to start doing my research, you go out looking for someone to do it with.  And the problem was that people didn't have any money.  And so I was having difficulty, and I didn't want to be a T.A. [Teaching Assistant] while I was doing my research because that just took too much of my time.  And so, I walked around trying to find people who had money, and I finally talked to a professor who cobbled together something with the Engineering School [Pennsylvania State University, College of Engineering, State College, Pennsylvania] that would allow me to do--to spend less time than I would have had to spend if I had been a T.A., but I could get my--to get funded.  And I supposed to go see Dr. [David H.] Rank to get the permission to do that.  Well, when I first arrived at Penn State, I'm an early morning person so I was always in the lab, in the building early in the morning, and Dr. Rank was always there; and I grew up in Virginia and when you see people, you speak to people; and I would speak to Dr. Rank and he wouldn't--he wouldn't answer.  And so, each morning when I would see him, I kept raising the octave until it got to the point he could no longer ignore me and started speaking.  And so, we'd come, and we'd speak.  So now I come back and see Dr. Rank, who is chair of the [physics] department, to get permission for this special program that we cobbled (sic) together to fund my research.  And so, he says, "Stith, I like your style.  Before I say yes, listen to my proposition.  I've got a project that I think you will love and I've got money, and I'd love to have you working for me."  And so, I said, "Sorry, I can't.  I promised Dr. Vadum (ph.) that if you said yes, that I would do this program."  He says, "Well, the door is always open."  And so, I went back to see Dr. Vadum and he asked what had happened, I said, "It was approved."  And he said, "Did anything else happen?"  So obviously Dr. Rank had called him, and so, I then told him the story about Dr. Rank offering me the opportunity to work for him and do my dissertation, and he said, "You'd be stupid not to accept the offer, so I release you from your promise to me.  Go work for Dave."  And so, I went to work for Dave Rank.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, this is--where are we, 19--
Speaker 1: This is 1971.
Speaker 2: '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.  1971.
Speaker 2: You're still at Penn--
Speaker 1: I'm still at Penn State working on my degree.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: And then one day in 19--in the--I think it was--no, this must have been 1970.  This must have been in '70 (1970) because I worked for a year and Dr. Rank walked in the office one day and says, "Stith, have you started writing yet?"  And I said, "No, I haven't."  And he said, "Why not?"  I said, "Because I don't have enough for a dissertation."  And his comment was, "You should understand what's required for a dissertation and what's required for a first-class paper.  You have more than enough for a dissertation, not enough for a first-class paper.  But my job is to get you out of here.  So write it out."  And so, I went home and I banged out an outline and I brought him, my recollection says in about three weeks, I brought him my first draft and I gave it to him.  And he looked at it and he said, "My Ph.D. dissertation was twenty-six pages long.  This is eighty pages.  You don't know this much more than I did."  (laughter)  So I took that as a hint to go back and cut.  And so, I went back and I cut and, you know, condensed, the whole nine yards; gave it back to him, he said, "This looks better.  Give it to [Dr. Thomas A.] "Tom" Wiggins to read.  Tom was my associate advisor.  So Tom read it, and to make a long story short, by around the first of December it was done.  And I gave it to him and he said, "If I turn this in to the graduate office, you will graduate in December.  No one hires physics faculty in December.  So I'm putting this in my desk drawer.  I'm going to forget to turn it in. I'll do it in January.  You will then graduate in May.  You now have six months to get the research done for a first-class paper.  And you don't have to worry about all this other stuff.  Go to work, and I'll still fund you."  And so, that's what we did.
Speaker 2: Boy, you were lucky.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  No, no, no.
Speaker 2: And you had good fortune to meet the right people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  People have treated me well.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: I mean, there's been some bad stuff, but the good stuff has outweighed it.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: And it does seem that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's what you did, and was it hard to get through your committee?
Speaker 1: No.  As a matter of fact, it was--I went in to set up my dissertation committee for my final oral, and I gave a time, and [Dr.] David [Rank] said, "You're stupid.  If we go in there this time, physics faulty don't eat lunch.  They don't care about lunch, and they'll keep you in there forever.  Now, I have a faculty meeting at 3:00 [P.M.] on that day.  We're going to schedule your dissertation defense for 1:00 [P.M.]."  And so, I said, "Yes, sir."  And so, we did.  And we went in and, you know, they were asking, you know, all the questions.  And whenever they'd ask a question and I would hesitate, he would say, "That reminds me of a story," and he'd tell a story.  And by the time he finished his story, I had gotten my thoughts together and I was ready to move on.  I mean, so really, it was a pleasant experience.  And it was the first time in my graduate career that I realized that I knew more about subject than anybody sitting in the room.  And so, once I realized that, you know, it was--and it was the first that I remember talking to a group of professors where even though they were judging me, I felt as if we were equal.
Speaker 2: So you really felt you really had earned your--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, I mean, I thought I knew what I was doing.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now old are you at this point?
Speaker 1: That was in 1972, I was born in '41' (1941), so that makes me thirty-one.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 30212
Speaker 1: And so, what happened?  Did they try to keep you at (unclear)
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I had--I started applying for jobs.  And 1972 was the peak year for production of Ph.D.'s in this country.  And so, the recession was in and nobody was getting a job.  And I was applying and applying and applying and applying, and getting absolutely nothing.  Until one day Dave [Dr. David Rank] called me in and said "How's the job hunt coming?"  I said, "It's not."  I says, "I'm putting everything into a black hole."  And he said, "Well, let me see your resume."  And I showed it to him.  He looked at it, he says, "Where's your picture?"  And I said, "Everything I have ever read says you don't put your picture on a resume."  He says, "That applies to white folks, it doesn't apply to you.  Put your picture on the resume."  Well, I didn't really--so I had ten resumes done where I put a picture on and I sent them out.  And from those ten, I got seven call-backs, five requests for interviews, and four job offers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So which job offer did you take?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, none of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because when I left RCA, I was making $14,000 a year, and I was getting 8 to 10 percent raises a year.
Speaker 1: For those days, put it in perspective.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: For those days--
Speaker 2: That was fair money.
Speaker 1: --I guess a college graduate out of--my brother, for instance, came out in 1964--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with an accounting degree; he was making $6000 a year.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So you were making over twice as much.
Speaker 2: Right.  And I was not getting an offer from any of the colleges--the maximum I got was $13,000.  And I was just really upset that I had spent three years, busting my butt to take a cut in salary.  And I'm sitting at home one night, the telephone rings.  And a person on the other end of the line says, "Captain Stith, this is Colonel Chiles." (ph.), and I hadn't been captain for a long time.  And I says, "Well, yes, sir.  What can I do for you?"  He said, "How would you like to come back into the [United States] Army?"  And my answer was, "Why should I do something dumb like that?"  And he says, "Well, before you say dumb, talk to us."  And to make a long story short, I went up for an interview, fell in love with the place, and decided to back on active duty and go into the military.  Dr. Rank's assistant called me in, Professor Webb, Dr. Webb, and said "Jim, you are ruining what might be a good career by going to West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], because you're not going to be doing real physics there."  No one knew what it was like at West Point, and there was a misperception of what happened at the place.  I decided that--
Speaker 1: (unclear)--because of the separation between military and civilian life--
Speaker 2: Yes, I mean, and the folks at West Point didn't interact with the civilian colleagues.  They didn't go to professional meetings, they just didn't do those kinds of things.  There were very few Ph.D.'s on the faculty.  They're mostly master's.  I mean, they did a fantastic job of teaching, but it just weren't well-known.  And the cost of what--and Wayne was a person whose advice I respected.  I made the decision I would go there for three years and sign up for a three-year commitment, and then I would leave and go off and get a real job.  And I went there and, you know, the next thing I knew I had been there for a while [Stith works at West Point from 1972 to 1993].
Story_ID: 30213
Speaker 1: Now, this put you closer to your mother [Ruth Stith Morgan].  Was your mother still living?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  My mother was still living at the time.  My stepfather [Griffen Pierpoint Morgan] had passed [1968].  My mother had moved from the home place in [Brunswick County] Virginia, and she was in New York, Mount Vernon with my oldest sister, Wilma [Morgan Dexter].  And so, this put me very, very close to her.  And it--And, but the plus thing was they were going to pay me $21,000 a year, and I could count.  So I decided to go there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So well. West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --now, did they have a physics department?
Speaker 2: There was a physics department.  There were thirty-six faculty in the physics department.  And it was a--and they really cared deeply about teaching.  Every cadet took a calculus-based physics course; every cadet graduated with--well, actually took the three semester calculus-based physics course whether they were--when I got there were no majors.  And so, everybody graduated with a general major.  But you took three semesters of physics, two semesters of chemistry, five semesters of mathematics through differential equations; you took law, you took English, you took social science--I mean, it was a well-rounded degree program.  So--and very rigorous.  Excuse me.  And I used to tell people that I would take my students at West Point and put them up against the best students at any school in the country, and I will let you name the school.  I mean, I was proud of the fact that every year that I was there, we had a Hertz Fellowship winner.  Kids who got in and got out fully-funded Ph.D. program, get a Ph.D. and the recipient, and we typically had, you know, one or two or more Rhodes Scholars coming out of that class.  So we had some fantastic students, and it was just a great environment in which to teach.  And why do they want me there?  They want me there because they were just beginning to--coming out of Vietnam [War, 1955-1975], we learned a lesson that there just weren't enough officers of color.  And that was one of the things that led to many of the problems that they were having in Vietnam.  And so, the idea was to really crank up West Point's production of underrepresented officers.  And they had no black faculty, and except that when I got there four black faculty; Dave and Jesse, who were in the Department of Physics, and then one in history and one in social science.  And so, that was basically it.  There were twelve black officers at the academy when I went there.
Speaker 1: Out of how many?
Speaker 2: Out of roughly five hundred.  Yeah.  So we were a small number.  And very few black cadets.  We would bring in a class of thirty or so.  But--and so, we were there to mentor these kids who were coming in and make sure they graduated.
Story_ID: 30214
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, your position on the faculty, you were a--
Speaker 2: I'm an assistant professor--
Speaker 1: --assistant professor.
Speaker 2: --because I had a Ph.D. [sic, D.Ed.]  So I came in as an assistant professor.  And I taught in the basic course, and because I had teaching experience--at that time, West Point used to rank their students by order of merit.  You would take test scores and you placed the highest scoring cadet, that's number one; the lowest scoring cadet at the bottom.  And then all classes were roughly fifteen people per section.  And so, they never allowed more kids in a classroom than there were blackboards they could go to, to work, because part of the tradition was to watch those kids work at the blackboard every day, because that's where you were able to assess their learning.  And so, they gave me the bottom section.  And so, I would seldom have anyone in my section who was passing the course when I got them.  And so, I would then, you know, they would--get them up to the point where--and they re-section after every major exam.  So you move up, and I'd get a new crop of students who were failing.  So that's what I did for my first two years.
Speaker 1: Now it would seem that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --a student at West Point was highly motivated and all that, but--.
Speaker 2: Oh, they are.
Speaker 1: So what was the reason--what was some of the reasons for--
Speaker 2: I mean, they were--they come from the cross-section of America as everybody else does.  And this was a calculus-based physics course, which you wouldn't have--they wouldn't have had to take at any other school in the country that they went to.  If they were a English major, how many take calculus physics?  Very few.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: And so, but West Point believed that it was best served by having a cadre of officers who were well prepared, who could go to graduate school in any subject that we needed and bring them back and mess up here (unclear).  And so, I had a kid, Carl Reed (ph.) that I spoke to.  He was an Arabic major when he was at West Point.  He got his master's at-- from Naval Postgraduate School [Monterey, California] in physics.  And that was the flexibility that you got, and that's how you justified the high cost of the West Point experience.  And they formed a core of the active duty military.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 30215
Speaker 1: Alright.  So was it--were the students [of the United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] who were struggling, were they--now, typically on college campuses there are these programs that help minority students to reach a level.  Were the ones that were struggling typically minorities at all?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, there were many students who struggled.  It was not unusual to see a number of minority students who were struggling.  And so, while I was at West Point, we formed this group called "BOAWP (ph.), Black Officers at West Point."  And we saw it as our function to give these kids the support they needed to excel.  The other thing that was done was to establish a gospel choir at the academy.  And this gave the kids an excuse to meet every week in a non-threatening, relaxed environment.  Most of them couldn't sing a lick.  But, and so, when you gave concerts you tell the non-singers, you know, work your mouth but don't let anything come out of it.  But it was--but almost every black cadet at the academy belonged to the gospel choir.  Because that's where you could get together and find out who was having difficulty and say, "Okay, Paul, work with John here.  He's struggling in mathematics; you're pretty good in it," and set that network up to try to get a good, you know, experience for these kids.
Speaker 1: That's the first time I've heard of "BOAWP"--
Speaker 2: Yes.  You know, that's the only place I ever heard of it was there.  We called ourselves, "Black Officers at West Point."  In the early years, you know, I got called in one day and says, "Jim, are you a member of this group called 'BOAWP?"  "Yes, sir.  Just a group of black officers who get together."  And I recall my boss saying, "You shouldn't do that."  I said, "Well, why not, sir?"  And he said, "Well, because, you know, we're supposed to be integrating, and that's just segregation."  I say, "Well, sir, you guys do it all the time."  He said, "No, we don't."  I said, "Yes, you do."  He said, "No, we don't."  I said, "Well, as an example, you had a party at your house last night, over the weekend, and you didn't have any black folks there."  And he says, "How do you know?"  I said, "Well, I'm the only black guy you know and I wasn't there."  And so, after that, he stopped talking to me about that.  And the leadership at West Point kept wanting to know who was the leader.  But it was a group without a leader.  We just got together and had conversations and we did social things together.  And for those few of us who were there, that was our social outlet and the therapy just sort of kept us going because we knew we were, you know, under the spotlight.
Speaker 1: This is, you know, I'm not surprised to hear about this; I just never heard of it.  Black police executives have formed their own organization; the black school teachers--social workers, everybody for similar reasons--
Speaker 2: This was just at West Point.  Yeah, for similar reasons.  The other thing that I did was to form a chapter of fraternity [Kappa Upsilon Lambda Chapter of Alpha Phi Alpha] because I found that I needed to get away from West Point every now and then.  And go out to meet--I call them "real people."  And these were all professionals in the mid-Hudson Valley because, you know, 1967 IBM [International Business Machines] started bringing a lot of people to IBM--I was offered a job with IBM.  And so many of those folks were living in the mid-Hudson Valley along with [Eastman] Kodak [Company] across the street, along with Xerox [Corporation], and the school system.  So--and so, that formed the people that were the first were the charter members of the chapter.  So it was a good experience.  There were bad things that happened, but all in all, it was a fantastic place in which to work.
Speaker 1: Now you formed the Honor Society, too.
Speaker 2: I formed the Honor Society of Sigma Pi Sigma.  That, after I became tenured [1976].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But before that--
Story_ID: 30216
Speaker 1: Well, was it difficult to get tenured?
Speaker 2: Well--(pause)  Well, put it this way, I was invited to dinner at this superintendent's house one night, and I went to dinner, and military protocol says when a general invites you to dinner, you arrive in a window of five minutes before or five minutes after.  And so, at the appointed hour, I stepped on this general's porch and I looked around and there was no else coming.  And my invitation said this was for cadets and other officers.  And I was on time, right night, but no one else was coming.  And so, I was a little bit, you know.  Then I said, "What's going on?"  I rang the doorbell and the sup's aide comes in and says, "Captain Stith [HistoryMaker Col. James Stith], the general has been waiting for you."  I go into the living room, and General Beringer [ph.] is standing by his fireplace, and we talked for forty-five minutes, and then people started arriving.  I got home that night and my wife [Alberta Hill] said, "Well, how was it?"  And I said, "I was interviewed for something.  I don't know what."  So about two weeks later, my boss called me in and said, "The academy would like to offer you a permanent position at West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], and if it is offered would you accept?"  And then we started that process.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So then I became a tenured professor at West Point.
Speaker 1: Now, how long did--
Speaker 2: This was 1976.
Speaker 1: 1976.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So I had been there--this was my fourth year there, and I was a Captain, which was--it was highly unusual for a--because typically they were lieutenant colonels.
Speaker 1: Okay. We have to pause here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Story_ID: 30217
Speaker 1: All right. So, well, now you were telling us about some interesting things going on at [United States Military Academy] West Point [New York], but were there until 1993.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So that's twenty years [1972-1993].
Speaker 2: Twenty years.  Twenty-one plus.  I was there a little over twenty years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So out of a twenty-four year military career, I spent twenty-one plus years in the same spot.
Speaker 1: So you were there when West Point became co-educational.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  So that's a story we need to talk about.
Speaker 2: The--in the--when I first got there, there were already lots of people politicking to make West Point coed.  And the military fought it, you know, as hard as it could.  And then in 1975, we got the word that they had heard our arguments against it, but the decision was that with the Class of 1980, which would start West Point in 1976, that women would be there.
Speaker 1: Now, what did you feel about that personally?
Speaker 2: I had no strong feeling over another.  I mean, I had always operated in a coed educational environment, and frankly, I thought that, as I look back, it was a good thing for the academy because the kids at West Point were terribly immature, and they grew up a little bit when women came.  I mean, their social skills were just-it was just lacking.  You know, they were a lot more immature than I thought they should have been for the age at, you know, where they were.  But so we went through--and we went through a whole year of exercise whereby we tried to decide exactly how we were going to do that.  Things like, what should the physical fitness standards be; they couldn't do all the push-ups and things that the men did.  That wouldn't be fair.  But what would be fair.  And so, how do we determine what the cut-off points--and so we worked on that.  What the uniform should be.  And the thing they didn't think about was what the calorie intake should be.  Cadets at the time were eating about 4500, 5000 calories a day.  And they needed it for all the physical activities they went through.  And women just blew up on that diet.
Speaker 1: Now, that's interesting.  I never would have guessed that.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And, you know, the other thing that we--what we did was, they even did things like modify the language at West Point.  For years and years and years, all third class, all juniors, were called "cows."  And the legend goes that we they got to be juniors they could leave the academy.  They could go down into the city, New York City, and there's a train on that side of the river at that time and it stopped at a train station at West Point.  And so the train would stop in New York, all the cadets would get out and start walking up the hill.  And people started saying, "They look like the cows coming home."  That's the legend.  I don't know whether it's true or not.  But someone thought that if you called a female cadet a "cow," there would be some issues.  So the word "cow" was banned from the vocabulary.  Didn't last.  By the time they got to be juniors, they were back to called "cows" again.  So those were the kinds of things we thought about and worked on.  The question of where should they live, should they be in a barracks by themselves, or should we integrate them with the male cadet--just as we had been doing for years and years and years.  The decision was made; we would integrate them in the other cadets and identify male and female bathrooms.  And then that was our solution.  The Air Force Academy made a different solution.  They had all the women in a single place.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they had their own special dorm?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 30218
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Now, the year that women came [to the United States Military Academy, West Point, New York, 1976] was the year that I was on sabbatical to the Air Force Academy.  Because when I became tenured, I was a Captain.  And as I say, no one knew what to do with a Captain who was tenured.  And so, the secretary of the Army wanted the academies to get to know each other better and proposed an exchange program.  So I volunteered to go to the Air Force Academy for a year.  That gave the people back at West Point a year to figure out what to do with me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you went to Boulder [Colorado]?
Speaker 2: Colorado Springs [Colorado].
Speaker 1: Colorado Springs.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And that was a wonderful year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In what respects (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I was treated very well.  I was given a full Air Force Air Academy experience.  I taught a number of courses.  I would go with the cadets when they did their navigation training.  We would fly to San Francisco [California] and back.  Excuse me.  (pause)  The cadets would take me gliding.  And so, I tried to see as much of the experience at the Air Force Academy as I could in a year.  And so, I got it all in.
Story_ID: 30219
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, it just dawned on me, you went into West Point, I guess, after--as the Vietnam War was closing down (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  It [Paris Peace Accords of 1973, marked "official" end of United States involvement in Vietnam War] was signed while I was there [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York].
Speaker 1: And you left, basically, right after Desert Storm [Persian Gulf War, 1990-1991], I guess.
Speaker 2: That is correct, yes.
Speaker 1: So is there any difference in the attitude of the students near a war than it is when it's not?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not really.  Even now [2010, Iraq War and War in Afghanistan] if you go up there, you know.  Because they know that's what they're being trained for.  And you have generations of kids that, you know, all the males in their family, for two, three, four generations, have been, you know, have been West Point graduates.
Speaker 1: Now, did you encounter [Gen.] Colin Powell [first African American to serve as United States Secretary of State, 2001-2005]?
Speaker 2: I met Colin several times, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was he like?  Is there a story about him?
Speaker 2: He was a good officer.  And I really enjoyed my conversation with him.  Now, the year at the Air Force Academy,  [Daniel] "Chappie" James [Jr., first African American four-star general], who was already a four-star [general], was the commander at NORAD [North American Aerospace Defense Command].  And he let it be known that he wanted to have breakfast once a month with all the minority officers at the [United States] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado].  And there were twelve Air Force officers and me.  And I mean, I recall in the Physics Department where I was being housed we had a bunch of officers who were grumbling about why the general would stipulate that he wanted to meet with the minority officers.  And my comment to them was, "Now, look you guys are Air Force, I'm Army.  What I've learned is that when a four-star [general] says he wants to see you, you salute and you report.  Now, the Air Force might be different, but if General James says he wants to have breakfast with me, you can bet your bippy I'm going to get up and I'm going to be there."  And that was also a very good experience.  And General James would walk into the office; we had a room in the Officer's Club, and he'd walk in and he said, "Gentlemen, park your blouses at the door."  Which means, take off your jacket because all of your rank was on your jacket.  Your shirt didn't have any rank structure on it.  And so, we got around the table, there was no rank.  Now, we all knew who the four-star was, so that didn't change anything.  But, and we'd have just frank conversations about what we needed to do to become effective leaders, what we needed to do to have a good military career, and how we were to take care of ourselves.  And so, I've always had a special thing for "Chappie" for--for doing that because, you know, he didn't have to do it.
Speaker 1: Now that's a side of "Chappie" James that a lot of people don't know.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, you know, he--"Chappie" James, he's passed now?  He passed away--
Speaker 2: Oh, he's passed, very soon after retiring [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, his wife [Dorothy Watkins James, 1921-2000] was always the sick one.  And she couldn't come to up to the [Air Force] Academy because it was too high and she had difficulty breathing.  So she was never there.  And she lived for quite some time after that, and he had a massive heart attack and died.
Story_ID: 30220
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so you taught--I mean you were there [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] through 1993; is there anything--well, as you were getting ready to retire, I mean, was it--were you coming up on a mandatory retirement or did you choose--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  I could have stayed for six more years.  What really made the decision was that, at that time we were working on getting more black faculty to West Point, and we had gotten up to fifty-four faculties as I recall, of color, and we could no longer meet in--each of our living rooms.  But I was a tenured professor, but I was not a permanent professor; i.e., the one that was the department chair.  And that was a position that you could stay in until you were sixty-five [years old].  And when you retired, you were retired as a one-star.  Okay.  And there had never been a black professor department chair.  And so, when my boss retired, I applied for the position.  Now, for a lot of reasons, I knew I wasn't going to get it because his deputy and I had--we had butted heads for as long as I had been there.  And so, I would have been his deputy.  The sequence was you hired a deputy, and when the department chair retired, the deputy took over, and then he'd hire another deputy.  So I would have worked for this guy for a while, and I didn't get selected.  But when I didn't get selected, even though I said I don't want the job, I'm not quite sure that I will take it if it is offered, but I was really disappointed when I didn't get it, to be frank.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 30221
Speaker 1: And so, I've been active in AAPT, the American Association of Physics Teachers, for as long as I've been at West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York].  I've been going to meetings, I've been giving papers, I've been professionally active.  And so, I got a decent reputation in the academic--physics community.  And I was asked to run for the presidency of the American Association of Physics Teachers.  And I had been pushing for a better integration of people of color into the association.  I was disappointed that it took [Julius] "Jules" Taylor [Physicist, established the physics department at Morgan State University, interviewed by The HistoryMakers in 2010] so long to get his Distinguished Service Citation because he should have gotten that years ago [Taylor received the award in 1976].  But it just didn't happen.  So, and I had been asked to serve as second chair, as chair of the--a second term as chair of the Minority and Physics Committee.  And I declined because I had told them that I had seen that women only serve on the women's committee, minorities only serve on the minority committee, and it was time for the association to step up to the plate and do what was right.  And I was asked to put together a list of minorities that I would like to see serving at various places in the association, and [Robert] "Bob" Resnick (ph.), a well-known author who was president at the time, said that, "If you do that, I'll appoint them."  I did.  He did.  So now I'm asked to run for the president of the AAPT.  I said I don't want the job.  And the person talking to me said, "Bob, thought you would say that.  And he told me to tell you that it's time for you to put money where your mouth is."  And so, I said, "Okay.  I won't get elected, but I'll run."  To my surprise, I was elected.  Well, as the president of AAPT [1992-1993], they gave me an insight into the other side of physics, the policymaking and all of those things.  I met a large number of national leaders, I started doing lots of things with the National Research Council, starting doing lots of things with NSF [National Science Foundation], and serving on national boards and so forth.  And I had just made colonel, and I says, "It's time for me to do something else, because if I stay here [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] for the next six years, I'm not going to get promoted again and I can retire with benefits now.  So basically, I'm working for half salary so it's time to go.  And I got a call from Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio].  They were starting a new research group out there.  And about this time, my research was in how people learn, physics education research.  And we then, and we had a number of departments, physics departments, in the country that were conferring Ph.D.'s to--in physics, to people whose specialty was how people learn.  And when [Kenneth] "Ken" Wilson [theoretical physicist] was enticed to leave Cornell University [Ithaca, New York] and come to Ohio State as faculty [1988], because everybody wants a Nobel Laureate on their faculty, he did so on the condition that they started, as I understand it, a research in physics education group.   So I went there to start that group and working with another colleague, Alan Van Heuvelen.  And then, and so, I took the job and I think we were successful.  We had a good group of graduate students, and the rest is history.
Story_ID: 30222
Speaker 1: Is it because, now, physics is rocket science, and a lot of other sciences are.  Is that why physicists are concerned about how people learn in order to more easily teach some of these really advanced scientific concepts?
Speaker 2: Well, back in 1976, a group of us at AAPT [American Association of Physics Teachers] had started having discussions about why it was that so few students took physics, and why it was that so many people thought that physics was exceptionally difficult.  We didn't think so.  And so, we started thinking about, now, why was that the case.  Well, as my wife [Alberta Hill] says, we were brash enough to think that as physics Ph.D.'s we could learn enough psychology, learn enough educational theory, learn enough sociology to do that kind of research.  Our conclusion had been that one of the reasons that this was so difficult was that the people who were doing the research didn't understand physics at all.  And so, it was going to take physics-trained people to really make a breakthrough.  And so we started having discussions at national meetings.  We went from it being a task force to a standing committee, and then we started--Arnold Arons went out to the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] and started a research group there.  We had people at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] who were--a nuclear physicist, [Edward F.] "Joe" Redish, who switched and starting doing physics education research.  We had [Robert] "Bob" Fuller at the University of Nebraska, Lincoln, who stopped doing traditional physics and started doing, you know.  And this was what we called the fundamental research on how people learn.  So that's what I had started doing at West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] because I couldn't carry on the research that I had done at Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania] there because of the equipment shortage, and the support just wasn't there.  But I felt that West Point was a wonderful laboratory for education research with the kinds of students we brought in, and our ability to flex the curriculum without going through a lot of work.  I mean was that at West Point, we had people who were willing to make a decision if he had a good idea.  And I found I had much more flexibility than many of my civilian colleagues to do things that weren't traditionally being done in the course.  And, so anyway, I had become known for some of the work that I was doing, so [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] asked me to come out there.
Speaker 1: So you had written and published on the subject--
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's what I had started doing then.  And so I went out to Ohio State to do that [in 1993].
Speaker 1: Okay. The Ohio State University?
Speaker 2: Yes, The Ohio State University.  Yes.
Story_ID: 30223
Speaker 1: So, now, when we shot the photos, the pictures with you Stephen Hawking--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and other people, I guess that's in the capacity of head of the--
Speaker 2: Of, of the American Institute of Physics.  Not the head, but as the vice president for resources at the American Institute of Physics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had--I was responsible for all of the--well, all of the educational programs; the Center for the History of Physics, where we archived the history of the physics community; the research--the Statistical Research Group, where we collected the statistics on the physics community, how many Ph.D.s do we offer every year, how many B.S.s, how many master's [degrees], what were the annual salaries.  Any, you know, all those kinds of things.  So, the media and government relations, we did the lobbying that non-profits were allowed to do.  And we tried to make known to the lay public and to all folks out there what was going on in physics.  So we interacted with Congress.  We interacted with--I mean, I started producing three, ninety-second TV clips a week that we sold to TV stations to try to get a steady dose of good peer-reviewed science on local TV  And we ended up a hundred stations across the nation, with a 60 million audience reach with that effort.  So those were the things that I did.  And people would give us money to give prizes, and we would select people who were the--who had done the most to advance the science, and that's what Stephen Hawking got his award for.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: I would guess in the last--this is a layman watching this and, you know, tuning into public radio and TV every now and then, more than any other time there's more physics education going on-
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --than, you know, from Carl Sagan--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to Stephen Hawkings--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to now Neil deGrasse Tyson (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To Neil deGrasse Tyson.
Speaker 1: Tyson, he's a media superstar now, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: Talking about physics.
Speaker 2: And so, people are beginning to think about that.  And so, we're making an effort.  We still have a lot of work to do, but that's what they're working on.
Story_ID: 30224
Speaker 1: Okay. So you were at Ohio State until--
Speaker 2: Until 1998.
Speaker 1: Until 1998.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And I left because I found myself spending most of my time in [Washington] D.C. doing pro bono work and serving on the Committee for the National Academy for AIP [The American Institute of Physics], for APS [American Physical Society].  Since I was there so much and my predecessors left, and they asked me to put together a list of people that they should bring in.  I did so.  But they persuaded me to take the job.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you got--you were hired by the--
Speaker 2: I was hired by AIP in 1998, January 1, 1998.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so from January 1, 1998 to May 1998, I worked at both AIP and Ohio State.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I spent two weeks--a week at each place, so I was going back and forth.  Worst decision I ever made in my life.
Speaker 1: You had to buy two houses like a (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I had two houses; I had one in Columbus [Ohio] and one in Washington, [D.C.] where I live now.
Speaker 1: And did you like living in Columbus?
Speaker 2: Oh, I did.  Columbus was a well-kept secret.  I just didn't imagine that the cultural activities would be in Columbus that I found there.  But between Bank One [Corporation], Huntington [Bancshares Incorporated] and Nationwide [Insurance], there was always something going on.  And so, and I knew people at Huntington, at Nationwide, and at Bank One.  And I get a phone call that said, "Jim, we're sponsoring the--the opera is coming in town tonight, and Huntington has bought up a block of seats because we want to make sure that enough people know this.  Would you and Bert like to go?"  My wife [Alberta Hill].  And we'd go.  Or we'd get a call from a colleague at Bank One.  "We got this thing going on.  Would you and Bert like to go?"  You know, "Be our guest."  And so, we were--I mean, I expected a lot of cultural activities because of Ohio State.  But I never expected Columbus to be as it was, because last time I had been there, it was a one-horse town, you know.
Speaker 1: It's really grown in the last few years.
Speaker 2: It just shot up.
Speaker 1: I think it's the only town that's actually growing in Ohio.
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was the largest metropolitan area in Ohio when I left there.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: So I had--I felt, me--but frankly I have never lived in a single place I didn't enjoy, you know.  So I would--we've have good friends wherever we've been.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you've been at the American Institute of Physics [AIP]?
Speaker 2: I was at the American Institute of Physics from 1998 to 2008.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In 2008 I decided that it was time to hang up the spurs.  And so I retired.  What happened was that we had a new CEO to come in, and we wanted to do long-range planning.  And I said that I could not in good conscious write a long-range plan that I did not plan to implement.  So I said, "Fred, hire somebody and let them write their own long-range plan.  And so, I will stay here until you find that person, but then I'm going to leave."  And so I retired.
Story_ID: 30225
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let me ask you a little bit about what you do, I guess, in a--you, I guess, got involved in a niche of physics education--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --which--is this (unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's my niche.
Speaker 1: --and so what did you learn or what--about how people learn about physics?
Speaker 2: Well, first thing is we say that people don't learn passively.  Somehow they have got to make it their own.  People have lived in this world for their entire life, and they have theories about the way nature works.  In order for you to change that, you have to show them that their model of nature no longer works.  I mean, as an example, most people believe that if I throw a ball, the hand imparts a force to that ball, and they believe that that force persists with that ball until it's overcome by something else.  Okay?  We walk in and tell them that Newton's second law, I mean, Newton's first law says that a  body at rest remains at rest; a body in motion remains in motion in a straight line unless active by some outside force.  Their experience says that to keep a body in motion, you have to keep applying the force.  We ask them to walk into this frictionless situation that doesn't really exist.  But, and so, therefore, it's no wonder that people have difficulty, you know, moving from their world into the world of physics.  So what we have learned is that, we have to show them where their model breaks down.  People believe that when current goes through that light bulb, the light bulb uses up the current.  Now, that's a strongly-held belief.  So what you have to do is to show them that that belief is wrong.
Speaker 1: Like the bulb is feeding off of that current.
Speaker 2: That's right.  And so, what--I mean, for example, I mean, and what we do is simply is, we set up a series circuit, put some light bulbs in it, and we say, okay, if your theory is correct, let's just say the current is going this way.  When it goes through that first light bulb, it uses up some of that current.  Yes.  So on the other side there's not as much left.  I say, what's coming in, if your theory that says that the light bulb was using up the current is correct.  They'll say yes.  Okay.  So, now it goes through the second light bulb, and when it goes through it, it uses up some current.  Eventually, there's going to be no current left.  So if I put enough bulbs in a straight line, I can get to a point where that last bulb is not going to light because there's no current left to do anything.  Yes.  Set it up, okay.  Take two bulbs, set it up.  Oh, yeah.  What's the indication of how much current going through the bulb?  It's brightness.  So if those two bulbs are the same brightness, they must have the same current going through.  So they say, well, but the first bulb doesn't take much.  Some my eyes just can't detect that there's a difference.  Okay.  Put in a third bulb.  Put in a fourth bulb.  Put in a sixth bulb.  And what do you notice.  Every single one is exactly the same brightness.  Maybe there's something wrong with my theory.  Now, let's go back and talk about what happened.  And if you do that, you can get that student's attention.  Most students will tell you what--a volume is length times width times height but they have no physical strong construct of what volume is.  So what do we do?  We say, okay.  Here's a block of one-centimeter cubes.  There is this block.  Make a model of that block, which means, put it in a one centimeter cube and take it up to the same size(unclear).  Okay.  Now count the number of cubes that you have.  What does that number of cubes represent?  That's the volume of that block.  And then we take them from there to the irregular objects and what you have to do.  But what we try to do is to give them a conceptual understanding of what things is, and once you do that, you can then go on to--and start generalizing.  If you don't do that, students have a way of memorizing solutions to problems and they can parrot their way through that solution, but they don't understand what's going on.  So that's the kind of thing that we try to do in physics education research, and understand fundamentally what's going on in the human mind, and then once we understand that, try to build curriculum that takes advantage of what we know about how people learn.
Story_ID: 30226
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let me just ask you about the, I guess, the profile of physicists in the black community and the profile of black physicists, you know, on college campuses and in research today.  I know those are two things that you are working on with the National Society of Black Physicists [NSBP]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and other organizations.
Speaker 2: Yes, and it was also part of my job at AIP [The American Institute of Physics] to collect those numbers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It happened to have been something I was interested in, so that's what made it--that's one of the reasons I went to AIP to make sure that we made that story known.  My belief has always been that if people know the true story, they would do the right thing.  And, but, when people don't know the numbers, they make them up.  And after a while, the make-up don't become the lore.  And so, my--one of the things I've always tried to do is to let people know what the numbers are.  For African Americans, they've always been around 1, 2 percent of, or less than that, of Ph.D.'s.  When I got my Ph.D.--when I got my doctorate [D.Ed.], there were less than seventy-five of us in the country.  I knew the third guy to get a Ph.D., who was my professor [at Virginia State College, Dr. John Hunter, Ph.D. in physics from Cornell University in 1937].  The--when I started working as a professional, we started working, trying to crank the numbers up, and we started producing six and seven Ph.D.'s in physics a year.  I've always felt that out of about 1200 to 1500, that was an awful small number.  We've done an awful lot of work, and we've doubled that number.  We're now up to about eleven to twelve a year.  I still think that that's a paltry number and that we need to do something about it.  And my colleagues in the industry understand that, because they recognize that they can't compete in a national way when they have a staff and there's only one ethnicity; when they go to Germany; when they go to China; when they go to the African continent; people want to see some diversity.  And so, it's our challenge to do that.  Unfortunately, many people have the belief that the reason there are so few is because of the poor education that people of color and other--Hispanics tend to get.  I call that a socioeconomic problem because there's a higher correlation between people who are of a lower socioeconomic status; i.e., don't make a lot of money; who happen to live in inner cities where that's prevalent; who happen to have the worse teachers because they just--because good teachers want to teach good students or inner cities have extreme difficulty getting good students.  And so, there is--part of the story is the lack of preparation.  But the numbers that we have collected show that even for those students who, by all measure are qualified, well prepared, they enter the sciences at numbers much lower than one might expect.  And until such time, my belief is, until such time we solve that problem, then even solving the underprepared problem is not going to change the numbers that we see because there are other things going on.  I firmly believe that students give you what you expect, and if you expect quality, you get quality.  In my teaching career, I have never, you know, had students give me less than what I asked for.  Freeman Hrabowski [President of University of Maryland-Baltimore Campus since 1992], over at University of Maryland-Baltimore Campus, has done a magnificent job because the expectation there is that if you come there, you belong there; and if you work, you will succeed, and I expect no less of you than to do that.
Story_ID: 30227
Speaker 1: In physics, 65 percent, 60 or 65 percent of all African Americans who get B.S. degrees in physics get them from historical black colleges and universities [HBCUs].  There are 780 institutions in this country that offer at least a B.S. degree in physics.  There are thirty-four HBCUs.  And so, it makes no sense to me that thirty-four institutions ought to be able to outperform the other 750.  If you take a look at African Americans who go to college, only about 20 percent or less go to HBCUs.  So if we put it in that perspective, those HBCUs are getting a better yield out of that twenty percent than all the other universities are getting out of their eighty percent.  And I for one don't believe that's all the student's fault.  And so, there is a systemic problem that needs to be solved, and so, that's what I devote most of my time to; trying to work with those institutions to change the way they do things and put the pressure--and fear is--not fear, but guilt is a wonderful devotion that--and I'm not above using that to get people to give these kids a chance.  I think it can happen.  When I look at--when I talk to my colleagues at Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California], at Cal Tech [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California], who graduate the Ph.D.'s, but they say they can't find physics faculty or science faculty because it's a chemistry problem as well, it's a math problem as well; that when you don't want your own students, take Cal Tech's students, take Stanford's students, take M.I.T. [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] students.  But we still find that the employment of most of physicists is--who are in academia--is at HBCUs.  And those are some of the systemic problems that we have to work on if we are going to stay productive in this country.  The other issue is that for years and years and years, we relied upon white males to populate the field of physics.  There's evidence that shows that those white males have a lot of other opportunities and are beginning to go elsewhere.  There are fields that are open that weren't there when we came through school.  And so, not only are we not getting underrepresented into the field, but we are losing many of those students that we have traditionally relied upon to give us the graduates that we want.  And the other issue is that we step back and take a look at the change in demographics of this nation.  And there are projections for what it's going to be in, you know, in 2050.  And we will be a minority-serving nation in almost every state, if you believe the projections.  And so, if that's the case, what I tell my colleagues is that we have adopted a going-out-of-business strategy, and we had best do something about it if we plan to stay in business.  And I believe that we're already beginning to see that as we see many of the prizes that we thought that used to--Americans are always getting [more] Nobel prizes than any other countries are getting there.  When I was in China in January, I walked through the Jiao Tong University [Shanghai, China] and, you know, I (unclear) some of the stuff that they've got there to work with.  They're doing some good work.  I go to places like Singapore, I mean, we used to rely upon non-U.S. kids coming here to get their graduate degrees and saying, "We have the best education in this country," because everybody will come here to get it.  But a lot of kids are now going to Alaska--I mean Australia, who are going to Europe is emerging again, China is producing some, you know, some good people.  So those are the things that as a nation I believe we have to worry about.  And, I worry, not to so much about whether or not I fulfill the individual person's wishes in terms of what they want to do.  But, I think as a nation we need to worry about how do we educate our population so that the nation has the expertise that it needs to move to the next century.  So, I mean, that's a long-winded, you know, diatribe, but that's--those are--that's what I see as the issues that we have to face.
Story_ID: 30228
Speaker 1: Now, were you in on the founding of the National Association of Black Physicists [sic, National Society of Black Physicists NSBP]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was.  It was done here at Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland], 1976.  We were meeting before that, but we decided to formally become an organization at Morgan.  [Walter] "Walt" Massey, Shirley [Ann] Jackson, [Julius] "Jules" Taylor, Warren Henry; those were the people who were here.  And we used always have our meeting at the end of an APS [American Physical Society] meeting, because we did not want to be seen as a threat to the traditional physicists community.  And we believed that it was in our members' best interest to go to those meetings, but that's where they met, the people who were doing things; that's where they made the connection.  And not going to them was a mistake.  So we always tried to never overlap with a major physics meeting because we wanted our people to go there.  But we saw NSBP as a place where we could nurture people.  We saw NSBP as a place that we could bring students to give talks and listen to those students give talks and critique them so that when they went out into the larger community, they understood the kinds of things that were necessary.  One of my regrets is that when I was a young physicist, I did not have a sense for the value of publishing.  And early in my career, I didn't publish as I should have because at West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] that was not necessary.  And so, I regret, I mean, I go, every now and then I go through some old things that I've done that--I put aside to write up, I just never got around to it.  And, but, and though the culture, you know, was different.  Well, the culture that we have now is that you got to do research.  And the culture at Morgan and the culture at Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] are getting very, very similar., even though it's very, very difficult for a place like Morgan, with its teaching load to compete with a place like Ohio State with its teaching load.  When I was at Ohio State, I taught two courses every--well, I taught a course a quarter for two out of three quarters.
Speaker 1: And made a salary?  (laughter)
Speaker 2: But I was there to do what?  To drive research.  To mentor research.  I also taught, but that was not the major thing I was doing.  I mean, I was expected to be a national leader; I was expected to do quality research; I was expected to do good teaching.  And now we take my colleagues here [Morgan State University].  They probably each teach three or four courses.  But yet, an administrator will say, "You have to publish two times a year in a refereed journal.  In my view, that's an untenable request with the kind of work that those people have to do in teaching.  And the service load, I think, is higher than mine was.  And so, it was like shooting free-throws from under the other basket [in basketball] in terms of--and so those are the kinds of things that we have to get across to the administrators at our schools in terms of, you know, what's realistic.  But, I used to do a lot of departmental evaluations, and it got to the point where when I would ask for the admission of the department, based on what they told me, had I been blindfolded, I wouldn't have known, I couldn't have--based on where I happened to have been, because the mission statements sounded the same wherever I happened to have gone.
Story_ID: 30229
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you look back on everything that you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: The one thing I might have done differently is that, had I realized the value of the Ph.D. over the degree that I got, I might have gone that way.  But realistically, once I had been in the community for about ten years, nobody asked ever me what my degree was anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But that was a--but I know some people hiccup when they see what it is.  And lots of people change it when they see it written down because they say it can't be true, even though I wrote it down.  That I would do--that I might do differently.  But I'm sure about that.  Otherwise, no.  I'd do it the same way.
Story_ID: 30230
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: That I count progress.  Not based upon the first, but when the second and third appear.  And I hope that in my lifetime I'll stop hearing about first instead of the other.  I hope that I can go to--see, I have never worked anywhere in my entire career other than at Virginia State [College, Petersburg, Virginia] when I was on the faculty there, where there was another person of my ethnicity at my position.  And we need to change that.  And so, and I hope that we can produce enough of us to go around and do all the things that we need, because we need to be at the Notre Dames [University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana], the Stanfords [Stanford University, Palo Alto, California], the Cal-Techs [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California], just as badly as we need to be at the Morgan States [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], the Virginia States, and those places.  With no disrespect, I worry about what's happening at HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] because there was a time when we stopped, we started hiring as many non-U.S. as many other institutions were.  And when I go to some--(unclear)
Speaker 1: (unclear) Non?  Foreign nationals--
Speaker 2: --foreign nationals, yes, yes.  I don't mean any disrespect by this because many of those folks have worked very hard and have created outstanding departments and have been wonderful mentors to the students.  I mean, Lowell (ph.) at Xavier [University, Cincinnati, Ohio] has done just a fantastic job.
Speaker 1: Who's this?  What's his name?
Speaker 2: His last name is Lowell.  I'm having a mental block on his first name.  He's been there forever.  He's an Indian from India, not necessarily Native American.  And students have loved (unclear)--wonderful thing and every time there's a problem, he comes back and he's the chair again.  And they have produced more African American--their--on average, produced more African American physics majors than any other school in the country, and they've only got two thousand students.  Okay.  So that says something about what's going on there.  But, I go to many universities and the faculty behaves like adjuncts; i.e., they are there when they're teaching, and they aren't there otherwise.  And I go to many and they tell me, "Well, Dr. Stith, you understand, we don't have very good students."  And so, whenever I hear a faculty member talking about the fact that he or she doesn't have very good students, then I say, "You shouldn't be here, because if you don't believe in your student, nobody else will."  And I expect the minority-serving institution to believe in their students.  And I get evidence that in some cases that's not the case, and that bothers me.
Story_ID: 30231
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you're in a unique field.  But, what would you consider today to be your particular legacy in it?
Speaker 2: I think the kinds of things that I was allowed to do in the larger physics community, I'm exceptionally proud of the discovery and breakthroughs inside science T.V. series that we put together.  NSF [National Science Foundation] said it couldn't be done, and we showed that it could be.  And I think we've made some progress in getting scientists to be able to talk about their science in ways that are understandable to the layman.  I think that we have made some progress in getting scientists to believe they also have to make an effort in order to have a conversation.  It's not just the layman's fault, it's not about them.  And we're beginning to have that conversation.  And ultimately, I hope that--what I've tried to do through my entire life is to, whatever I've touched, I left it a little bit better than I found it.  I don't know that we're able to do that, but that's what I'm trying to do.  So that's what I hope.
Story_ID: 30232
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us a little bit about your family.  You know, you've got a--you have daughters, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have three daughters--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --That I am extremely proud of.  My oldest daughter [Adrienne Stith Butler] has a Ph.D. in psychology.  She works for the Institute of Medicine [IOM] and she does research on--not research, but she does studies for the nation on problems that our--that are brought to bear.  As an example, her group did a study on the disparity in healthcare between minority and majority; did a study on the psychological impact of terrorism; and so, that's what she does.  And so, when I look at what she's done, I'm proud of what she's done.  My second daughter [Andrea Stith] is a biophysicist, Ph.D. from the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia]; but she is now doing science policy; she is on--she's a research associate at Jiao Tong University in Shanghai [China]; and that's what she does, and is having too much fun for it all to be legal.  My youngest daughter [Alyssa Stith] was a competitive figure skater-dancer.  She lives in Aarhus, Denmark, and her graduate degree is from NYU [New York University, New York] in dance.  And her passion is to translate the artistry of the ice to the stage.  So she's the rebellious one in the family.  But they are all, I think, decent, ethical human beings and that's the piece that I'm most proud of.
Speaker 1: And you've been married now for how long?
Speaker 2: I've been married for--this will be my forty-fifth wedding anniversary this year [2010, married in 1965].  And my wife [Alberta Hill] has been a good trooper.  She has followed me all over the country, and typically, whenever I've said we want to go someplace, she said, "When do we move?"  And so, she has been--and early in our career, we made the decision that she would be a stay-home mom.  I'm extremely fortunate that we were able to do that because it, in my view, has paid great dividends now with the kids as now having, you know, mom at home when they left, and mom at home when they came back.  She sacrificed her career for that.  That's a regret that I have because she could have, you know, done much more had, you know, she not made that decision.
Story_ID: 30233
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there anything I have not asked you that we need to address before I ask my last questions?
Speaker 2: The--I'll say one thing.  A regret was, and partly my fault--the not having someone around at many critical points in my life to bounce things off.  I look at my daughters and they call me, says, "Dad, I'm getting ready to do this, what do you think?"  And we'll walk our way through these things.   I have students around the country who call me, former students of mine who call me, and we talk about things.  I made most of those decisions between, my wife and I made them once I got married, and frankly, we didn't know what the hell we were doing in many respects, because we just--we simply did not know enough about what was going on.  And I look back on some of those decisions and they could have benefitted had I known more.  But even after saying that, I'm very pleased with everything that I've done, you know, over the years because I've learned an awful lot from them.  So that's a, sort of mixed things when you go to that one.  But I have found that people will be people.  There is an awful lot of good in most of them, and those that are out to do things that you would prefer them not to do, sometimes if you would just turn your hearing aid down, you know, just let them go.  But, by and large, in my lifetime I have found that folks--I have been supported by an awful lot of good people out there and had some wonderful experiences all over the world.  And that's why I enjoy this life that I lead.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay
Speaker 1: Now, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: That I did the best that I could with what I had.  That I was ethical, I was honest, and I didn't make excuses for the things that didn't happen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you, sir, for sharing your story with us.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  Thank you.
