Story_ID: 235499
Speaker 1: Ma'am, could you please state and spell your name, including your middle name?
Speaker 2: Yes, my name is Marian Alexis Scott, and it's M-A-R-I-A-N, middle name Alexis, A-L-E-X-I-S, the last name Scott, S-C-O-T-T and I use my middle name, Alexis.
Speaker 1: Could you please state your date of birth and the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born February 4th, 1949 in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is September 22, 2004.
Speaker 1: And the address of this interview?
Speaker 2: This interview is being conducted at the Atlanta Daily World office at 145 Auburn Avenue in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation is publisher and CEO of the Atlanta Daily World.
Story_ID: 235500
Speaker 1: I'll be asking you five People magazine-ish kinds of questions, just bear with me.  It's something that we use to begin to warm the interview.  Could you tell me what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is fried chicken (laughter).
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is summer.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is red.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The beach is my favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my favorite word is wonderful.  I don't particularly have a favorite saying.
Story_ID: 235501
Speaker 1: Next we're going to begin by exploring your family's background.  Could you begin by telling me about your mother, what her name was, where she was born and where she grew up?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Marian Willis Scott, and she was born in Atlanta [Georgia] on November 5, 1923, here in Atlanta, did I say?
Speaker 1: And what do you know about her background and her growing up?
Speaker 2: She grew up as an only child.  But I think she had a nice childhood.  She went to private school for elementary school.  She went to Oglethorpe [Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], which was then a part of Atlanta University's [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] laboratory system, where they did teacher training and they had a school for the children to attend.  She went to [Atlanta University] Lab[oratory] High School [Atlanta, Georgia] too, which was also part of Atlanta University Center.  And she attended and graduated from Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] in 1945.  So she had a fairly privileged life for a black person during that period of time.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother is a lovely woman who is completely devoted to her family and she is one of the nicest people that I've ever met.
Speaker 1: And did she ever share stories with you regarding her growing up?
Speaker 2: A little, a few of the stories she shared included, she liked to play baseball or softball.  And she used to like to listen to the games on the radio with her father [James Willis].  And she liked walking to the--there was a drug store near her house called Amos Drugs [sic. Amos Drug Store, Atlanta, Georgia], and they would walk up there to get ice cream sundaes and ice cream during the summer.  And she and my father [William Alexander Scott, III] were classmates from second grade.  And they became boyfriend and girlfriend in tenth grade, in high school.  So they were in school together the whole time and were really a couple for a very long time.  And my dad went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], but they were together a lot throughout their lives.
Story_ID: 235502
Speaker 1: What was your father's name?
Speaker 2: My father's name was William Alexander Scott, III.  And he worked for his entire life here at the Atlanta Daily World newspaper.  He was one of two boys born to Lucille McAllister Scott and William A. Scott, II.  And William A. Scott, II was the founder of the Atlanta Daily World [Atlanta World].  My father died in March 1992, when he was sixty-nine years old.
Speaker 1: Where was he born?
Speaker 2: My father was actually born in Johnson City, Tennessee.  It was during 1923, January 15, 1923.  And that was during a phase when his family was moving from Mississippi, first to Tennessee and then to Atlanta [Georgia].  My father's--let me get this straight, my father's grandfather [Reverend William Alexander Scott], who would be my great-grandfather, was a minister and his church involvement kept him moving some.  And he also had health issues, with asthma and other breathing conditions that made him continue to look for a drier climate, which made him move from Jackson, Mississippi to Tennessee.
Speaker 1: And did he grow up there, in Tennessee?
Speaker 2: No, my father actually grew up--finally moved to Atlanta when he was about four or five years old with his mother and his father.  His parents were divorced though, when he was quite young.  So he lived with his mother and she raised him.  And also, his father, W.A. Scott, II, who was founder of the paper, was killed in 1934 when my father was only eleven years old.  So he was not around for his upbringing.
Speaker 1: Do you know what happened related to that killing?
Speaker 2: The circumstances around the killing of my grandfather were never officially solved.  There was an inquest that was held and there were people who said that a Maddox [ph.], I can't remember his first name now, was the shooter, but there was no eyewitness.  They never found the gun, and so he was never convicted with the crime.  But he was the brother of my grandfather's fourth wife.  Scandal.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).  What else do you know about your father's background?
Speaker 2: My father, as I said, grew up with his younger brother in Atlanta, not a long distance from where my mother [Marian Willis Scott] grew up.  And they--he also attended Oglethorpe Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia] and [Atlanta University] Lab[oratory] High School [Atlanta, Georgia] and then Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].  He, I guess, liked to do the things that boys liked to do.  I've seen pictures of him with his bicycle, with a football, you know, when he was playing football when he was a kid.  He was very smart, I kind of characterize him as being a Renaissance man.  He was a photographer and I guess he played chess, he did a lot of things that were maybe not typical, or stereotypical for sure, of black men.  He painted; he did oil painting.  He liked classical music as well as Duke Ellington.  So he was just kind of an all-around person; loved to tell stories; was very personable and charming; very brilliant, I think.
Story_ID: 235503
Speaker 1: One of the important things I think that impacted his [Scott's father, William Alexander Scott, III] life, well, besides the death of and kind of the murder of his own father [William Alexander Scott, II], when he was a young man he went into the [U.S.] Army during World War II [WWII] and his battalion was one of the units that participated in the liberation of the Nazi concentration camps.  And he was, as I said, a photographer and he actually took pictures at Buchenwald [Germany], which was one of the camps. And he eventually wrote kind of a reflection piece about that and talked about how horrific it was, and how he couldn't believe the inhumanity that was exhibited there, and that it just, it showed that you can't fight fire with fire because there is no end except annihilation.  And that certainly is not the way to solve problems.  But he had pictures of stacks of dead bodies and they had jars of eyeballs, and scrotums, and just really horrible things on display in the barracks in the concentration camp.  So that really had an impact on his life and the things that he did when he got back from the war.  He applied to Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] and was turned down and he did that to challenge segregation.  He had not completed his studies at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], but he didn't return to Morehouse.  He came to work at the family business here at the Atlanta [Daily] World [Atlanta World].  But he used his photography to sort of take pictures of things of uplift and some of his oil paintings were more abstract, and some, not really ominous, but they were always kind of haunting with kind of layers and layers of things going on.  And he was the first black artist to be displayed in the Piedmont Park Arts Festival, which was an arts festival started in the early '50s [1950s] in Atlanta [Georgia], which doesn't continue now, but he had his work displayed despite the fact that the park was still segregated then.  And he took us down to see the work and it was his way of kind of confronting the system in kind of a confounding way, because people didn't quite know how to react to him.  And when he took us down there to see it they didn't tell him he couldn't come in, because he was one of the artists.  The same--he did the same thing with chess.  He was a chess player, and he ended up with an expert rating and he would play in tournaments, you know, national tournaments.  He played, I think it was back in 1953, he played in the U.S. Open Chess Tournament in Nashville, Tennessee [sic.], which was at the Peabody Hotel [Memphis, Tennessee], which was of course, segregated.  And, so it created quite a stir when he walked into the hotel to go to play.  But, the people in the tournament said that if he can't stay and play, we're all going to leave.  And so they just let him come in.  And they had all these restrictions about where--they put him up in a ballroom instead of a guest room.  And they put a cot in there, bed, rollaway bed for him in there and wouldn't let him you know, use any of the general facilities.  But he said he came to play chess and that's what he wanted to do.  So these were his kind of ways of confronting the system without being a part of a protest line, or an official kind of picket.  He also played golf, so that they could--they went to the public golf courses when they were turned away, but they continued to go until finally, the lawsuits enabled them to go.  And once the Public Accommodations Act [sic. Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title II] was passed in '63 [1963] [sic. 1964], he and my mother [Marian Willis Scott] would go to a different restaurant downtown every day, just because they could do it now and he wanted people to know that it was all right.  And he just was that kind of person that wanted people to know that he--people had nothing to fear from him or people who looked like him.
Story_ID: 235504
Speaker 1: Did he [Scott's father, William Alexander Scott, III] ever share any other stories with you?
Speaker 2: Isn't that enough?  No, okay, let me think (laughter), what do you want from me?  He, let's see, more stories about--
Speaker 1: Perhaps about his growing up, or kind of coming into the business?
Speaker 2: I think he--it was always assumed that he would come in the business and that they--kind of the untimely death of his father [William Alexander Scott, II], and the way it happened really kind of, I don't know, energized, or galvanized, or really grabbed the guts of everybody in the family and everybody rallied to try to keep the business going.  And actually at that time there were forty newspapers being published by the Atlanta Daily World [Atlanta World], and as well as a (unclear) section, which was kind of a magazine style newsprint piece that ran every Sunday.  And so it was a fairly big enterprise and my grandfather's brother, one of his brothers, C.A. Scott took over the paper in 1934 when my father was still a little boy.  So he use to work down here in various kind of menial capacities, like inserting sections and you know, helping around the back shop and stuff like that.  But, I think he always knew that he was going to work at the paper because it was a family business and because the family had become so dedicated in the wake of my grandfather's death.  And so that was really the driving force I think for my father, was to keep the business going and to really be a good father for his own children and a good husband for his wife [Marian Willis Scott].
Story_ID: 235505
Speaker 1: Could you again tell us the name of your grandparents on your mother's [Marian Willis Scott] side?
Speaker 2: My mother's mother's name was Queen Benning [ph.] and she married James Willis, so her name was Queen Willis.  And they were both born--well; my mother's father was born in Washington, Georgia.  And my grandmother was born in Thompson, Georgia.  And they, I believe, met in Atlanta [Georgia], but I don't know, I don't remember the circumstances of that.  But they moved to Atlanta.  And my grandmother's parents were very fair skinned and so was my mother.  And they were able to do things--and sometimes I tease my mom, this is a story I remember her telling us, was that when she was young that her father would drive them out to the airport and they would watch the planes come in.  And I said, "Ma, you couldn't go to the airport and watch the planes come in because they wouldn't let black people do that."  And she kind of had this kind of puzzled look on her face, and I don't think she ever remembers that they made an effort to pass for white, but they clearly could have been mistaken for being white.  And her father was also an upholsterer for the railroad.  And that was something I didn't really realize until I was an adult and I thought he had been a porter, which was what most black men were who worked for the railroad, so I and she, we passed a structure near Decatur [Georgia] a few years back when we were driving out that way and my mother said that's the place, it was The Pullman Company, where her father worked.  And I said, "He worked there?"  I said, "He couldn't have worked there if he was black."  So I don't know if he was actually passing for white during his work days or not, but it seems to me that it did raise that question that possibly he did.
Speaker 1: And what about the names of your grandparents, again, on your father's side and if anything could you share something?
Speaker 2: Well, I just--the Scotts as far back as I can trace them go back to Jackson, Mississippi.  And I'm not sure if they were the names of the, you know, landowners, or how the black Scotts got their names.  But, that's about as far back as I can go.  My great-grandfather's father was also named William Scott.  And he was the son--wait a minute, no, he was a scout for a Union Army officer during the Civil War.  And he helped him to kind of navigate the swamps down in Mississippi during that time and at the end of the Civil War the officer wanted to do something for him, but he said, "Don't help me, help my son."  And his son was [Reverend] William Alexander Scott, and he ended up sending him to Hiram College in [Hiram] Ohio and he got a college education then.  This was in the late 1890s when he went to college there.  And he actually met my great-grandmother, who was Emmeline Southall, who later married him in East Liverpool, Ohio, which was where she grew up.  And she was the child of--her maternal parents, grandparents and paternal grandparents were freed slaves who had come to Ohio from Virginia.  And they had actually been able to amass a good bit of land and property.  And she graduated from high school in 1898, in East Liverpool with, winning the Latin prize and being the class spokesperson.  She was one of I think four girls in a class of nine students and she was the only black student in that class.  And she met my great-grandfather there when he knocked on her door to sell Bibles as a part of his way to make money through college.  So they met and married and after they married they moved back to Jackson, Mississippi, which was his home.  And her parents, they didn't disown her, but they said they would never come see her; that if she wanted to see them, she would have to come back up there because they didn't want to go to the segregated South.  And they together had nine children, and my grandfather, who started the newspaper [Atlanta World; Atlanta Daily World], William A. Scott, II, was their second son and second child.  They--there were six boys and three girls and most of the boys had these kind of Latin names.  There was Aurelius [Scott], Cornelius [Adolphus Scott; C.A. Scott], Daniel [Scott]--not Latin, Emel [Scott] and William A., did I say, William A., who was named after his father.  Back then they said they named the second child, the second boy, after the father because there was always the likelihood that the first child would die.  So, they never named the first son after the father.  I never knew that.  Did you know that?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: So, that's how the second son was named, after the father.  And then they had three daughters and they all had biblical names; and they were Ruth [Scott], Vashti [Scott], and Esther [Scott].  And only Ruth is still alive today, in 2004, and she's eighty-something.
Story_ID: 235506
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory of growing up would probably be my brother [William Alexander Scott, IV] covering me with body powder in the crib; my mother [Marian Willis Scott] walking in horrified (laughter).  I must have been like, less than two if I was still in a baby crib.  But, just, I don't know, I just have really good memories about my childhood of them being happy days and having a very loving family; and an older brother who, I wouldn't say he tortured me, but, we--you know, I was at his mercy most of the time (laughter).
Story_ID: 235507
Speaker 1: Could you share some other memories with us, perhaps describing what your family life was like, holidays, or special events, daily life?
Speaker 2: Life, as I said, my family life was really pretty wonderful.  My father [William Alexander Scott, III], as I said, was into many things and interested in everything.  I remember we got--one of, you know, our first television set back in 1952 or '3 [1953], we would sit and watch the test pattern waiting for it to come on.  So it was--my dad was, you know, interested in the next thing and was on the cutting edge of technology, and family celebrations were always fun.  We would get with the larger Scott family, usually during Christmas, the Atlanta Daily World had a Christmas party, an annual Christmas party for the staff and employees, but they also combined that with a project called the Christmas Cheer Fund, where they gave away groceries to needy families and that party was usually held down at the Butler Street YMCA [Atlanta, Georgia].  So that's where I remember my first contact with other members of the Scott family.  But, my grand--my great-grandmother [Emmeline Southall Scott], who I mentioned earlier, had a house down at the beach.  Some of my early memories are of going down there in the summer.  She would go down with different members of the family all summer long.  And we would drive down; it was outside of Daytona Beach [Florida] in New Smyrna [Beach, Florida].  She was good friends with Mary McLeod Bethune, who was president of Bethune-Cookman College [Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida].  And I remember going to visit her one summer as a kid not really knowing who she was.  She was just a friend of my great-grandmother's.  And I was afraid of the ocean initially when I was little, but I finally got adjusted on the last day of one of our visits and just, you know, didn't want to leave.  I remember having a matching swimsuit to my mother's [Marian Willis Scott] and my brother's trunks, I mean, we were just like this storybook kind of family.  And we even had--the lady that use to babysit us, we would take her with us sometimes; and she would go too.  And it was just pretty idyllic.  The house was right on the beach so we'd go out the back door and down the steps and into the water, so, it was just a great, great memory.  I'm supposed to be telling stories about my childhood and family gatherings.  Christmas was always great because we always had a wonderful Christmas tree with lots of lights and we always got whatever we wanted and we didn't actually ask for things, we would just get presents, and that was a nice thing too, just to come downstairs on Christmas morning and see lots of gifts under the tree.
Speaker 1: Could you please give us your siblings' names and birth order including yourself?
Speaker 2: I only have one brother and he is my older brother and his name is William Alexander Scott, IV.  And his family nickname is Rip.  And he was born in November 22nd, 1946.  And he is an air traffic controller and he's also the controller here at the newspaper and came to work here at the paper about the same time that I did.
Story_ID: 235508
Speaker 1: I remember some other growing up stories that I want to share.  They have to do with my mother's mother [Queen Benning Willis (ph.)].  She lived about a block from the [Booker T.] Washington High School [Atlanta, Georgia] where I went.  And I attended there from eighth grade through twelfth grade.  And I went to her house every day after school, Monday through Friday for those five years.  And every day when I would get to her house she would have fried me one piece of chicken, one chicken leg, and had some rice and made some gravy to go with it, so that was my afternoon snack, and she was a great cook.  But it just, it didn't--I didn't really think that much about it until in retrospect as an adult when I think about the fact that she would fry one piece of chicken and that seemed like a lot of trouble for just a little thing, but she was just, she was wonderful like that.  And she also was a great cook, but she ended up being diabetic, and she couldn't eat a lot of her cooking, but she baked great cakes and after she became diabetic, to go with the one piece of chicken she would make cupcakes, so that I would have one piece of chicken and one cupcake (laughter).  And my mother [Marian Willis Scott] says I got my cooking skills from her.  I like to cook.
Speaker 2: What's your favorite dish to cook?
Speaker 1: My favorite dish is my-- I, it's really a Thanksgiving menu, but I cook it on Christmas, and it's a turkey, a stuffed turkey with dressing and sweet potatoes and that's a sweet potato souffle and collard greens and green beans and I make yeast rolls with whole wheat flour that are really nice.  And we make homemade ice cream, usually peppermint.  And I bake a pound cake that's really good.  It's a recipe that I got from my ex-husband's aunt, and I call it "Aunt Ruth's Pound Cake with Poochie's Surprise."  And it's--and I call it, it's been renamed "Alexis's [HistoryMaker Alexis Scott] Version of Aunt Ruth's Pound Cake with Poochie's Surprise."  And it--I call it that because I changed a few things, like Aunt Ruth used Crisco, but I don't use Crisco because I'm not sure what that is.  So I use butter and margarine and then my cousin, Poochie, that's her nickname, her real name is Alicia Scott [ph.] came visiting one summer about twenty years ago when we were having a birthday dinner for our grandmother, Lucille [Scott], and I was making this pound cake, and she was looking through my cabinets, she said, "Here, put some of this in it."  And it was mace and I'd had it for some recipe, but I had never put it in the pound cake, so I put that in there and people went crazy.  It was very good so I've made it that way ever since.  And it gives it a really good special favor.
Story_ID: 235509
Speaker 1: Could you tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up [in Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: First would be the cooking smells of fried chicken.  The sights, I guess would be, I don't know, cars and buses whizzing by.  We had a fairly active life because of my parents [William Alexander Scott, III and Marian Willis Scott] working here in connection with the Atlanta Daily World.  We were always going somewhere, doing something.  My father used to be in charge of circulation for the paper, and he had responsibility for working with the paperboys and collecting from them, so every Saturday night it was a big family outing.  My brother [William Alexander Scott, IV] and I basically would be in our pajamas with pillows and blankets on the back seat and my parents would be on the front seat and we'd go from house to house collecting from the paperboys who had routes delivering the paper.  And the big highlight of that night would be to stop by the Rainbow Inn [ph.], which was a drive-in near the neighborhood, and I would get a ham sandwich and a milkshake.  So that made it fun.  And it just--we were just sort of incorporated into the whole family business, so it was always around us and we were always a part of it, but you know, just really on the edges.  The other sights and sounds I guess were my brother and his friends.  My brother put up a basketball hoop on the, on a tree at our house, so there were always you know, at least a dozen boys outside playing basketball.  I was a girl girl, girly girl, and liked dolls, so I had girlfriends that we'd play dolls with, played house and all that, typical stuff.  And in my neighborhood there was a kind of across the street backdoor diagonal neighbor who was also named Alexis, and at the time I didn't think anything usual about it except that very few other people were named Alexis back then, and here in 2004 it's one of the most popular girls' names.  But there were lots of girls in the neighborhood that we played with.  And in summertime we played outside a lot.  And we would play games like throwing statues or throwing poses, you know you had to end in a pose, so then you couldn't move; whoever moved first then you were out.  Then we played giant step, and that was a game where you had a leader who called everybody and you could run until they said, "Stop," and then you had to stop; and then if he caught you running he would turn around and catch you running, then you were out.  Then there was another game called "May I," and that was another kind of race game where you walked and you would have to ask permission, and if you forgot to say, "May I," then you were out.  So there were a lot of kids in the neighborhood that we grew up with, playing games with and having fun.
Story_ID: 235510
Speaker 1: Speaking of your childhood, what elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I also went to Oglethorpe Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia], which at the time was the same school that my parents [William Alexander Scott, III and Marian Willis Scott] had gone to.  That was a part of Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  One of the things that happened during the '50s [1950s] though, with the desegregation push, the Atlanta school board [Atlanta Board of Education] built a whole bunch of new schools in the black neighborhoods to keep the kids from going to school with the white folks, because they knew that was coming.  And so they built a brand new school called--right behind the school that I attended, and it--they made an offer to hire all the teachers who were in our school and make it a part of the public school system.  And so I transferred there in my, middle of my fifth grade year, to the new Oglethorpe School, which still exists today.  It's located over near the Atlanta University Center.  And my brother [William Alexander Scott, IV] and I both went there and then, as I said, from there I went to Booker T. Washington High School [Atlanta, Georgia].  And my brother, along with several other boys his age of my parents' friends, ended up going to prep school in New England.  And I think this was part of the--our parents' effort to protect them from the social turmoil that was going on at the time.  And the efforts to desegregate schools here in Atlanta [Georgia], and also to better equip them to meet the challenges of a desegregated society.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the prep school that he went to?
Speaker 2: My brother went to the New Hampton School For Boys [New Hampton School] in New Hampton, New Hampshire.  And he followed another guy from Atlanta, Jake Henderson [Jacob R. Henderson, Jr.].  His, Jake's parents [Jacob R. Henderson, Sr. and Freddye Scarborough Henderson] started the first black travel agency [Henderson Travel Service, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] and the first trips to Africa back in the 1950s, and Jake went there, and then another friend of ours followed my brother there.  [HistoryMaker] Al[ford] Dempsey, Jr. went--I'm sorry, yeah, Jr., he went to New Hampton as well.  And then others went to [Phillips] Exeter [Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire], some of the other better known places, Andover [Phillips Academy, Andover, Massachusetts]; I mean all the kind of the general prep schools in the Northeast.  And from there my brother went to Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts].  But when it came to my turn, I was afraid to go.  I didn't want to leave home, and wanted to stay with my friends at home, and I think I was a little intimidated by the going to a prep school in the Northeast coming from segregated schools in the South.  So, I ended up staying in Atlanta to go to high school.
Speaker 1: So during your elementary school years were there any teachers that influenced you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were several, and mostly because they were my mother's friends (laughter).
Speaker 1: What were their names?
Speaker 2: Harriet Chisholm was my mother's classmate and she was my, I think my fourth grade teacher.  Virginia Whatley was my mother's classmate and my fifth grade teacher.  The principal was the aunt of a woman who married one of my cousins.  Her name was Beulah [A.] Lewis.  Mrs. Montgomery [ph.] was my first grade teacher and she was a church member.  So it was a real kind of communal village type feeling of knowing the same people in different settings.  So--and it was a small school, I don't think we had 250 kids in the whole school.  So there were, you know, there was one class--it might have been 150, one class of every grade.
Speaker 1: And what kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was a very good student in that I did what the teachers told me to do.  I always did my homework, was always prepared, liked to read a lot.  I wasn't as crazy about math, and that showed up eventually in my SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Test] scores.  My verbal was always higher than my math.  But I was the valedictorian of my high school class.  So I got really good grades.  And you know, I was a good student.
Speaker 1: And what type of child were you?
Speaker 2: I was a wonderful child.  I just asked my mother, she'll tell you today.  I was a baby sister, so I sort of came at it from that perspective, and my brother was fairly aggressive and assertive about his wishes and wants.  And as a result of that, I usually just received things because they didn't want to do anything for him that they didn't do for me.  And so in the interest of parity, I was like, "Oh, this is for me, thank you?"  And so I had a pretty easy time of it.
Story_ID: 235511
Speaker 1: Did you have dreams and aspirations as a child?
Speaker 2: I'm sure that I did; they weren't particularly focused.  They were here and there about various and sundry things.  But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were some of those things and aspirations?
Speaker 2: You know--well, I use to think that I could fly.  So, I always wanted to do that.  And I was convinced in one nighttime dream that I had actually flown through my house and around and outside the house.  So, that--finally I realized that was just a dream (laughter).  But maybe it was, maybe it really happened.  I just--you can't do it if you think you can't do it, and when you're walking around and standing up awake you usually think you can't do that.  So, that was one of the wild ones.  But, I always knew that I would do something, but I really never focused on exactly what that was, but newspapers and news media was my comfort zone.  So, you know, I figured I would do something.  I always thought that I would do something in television because I was a child of television and that had such a great impact.  But when it came down to the actual practice of journalism, I was much more comfortable writing than performing, you know, in front of a camera.
Story_ID: 235512
Speaker 1: Did you and your family attend church?
Speaker 2: My family and I attended First Congregational Church [Atlanta, Georgia], which my great-grandmother [Emmeline Southall Scott] ended up joining after she moved here to Atlanta [Georgia] in the, you know, late '20s [1920s], early '30s [1930s].  As I said, she had been married to a minister [Reverend William Alexander Scott] and so church was real important to the family.  And in fact, I remember in 1977 when my great-grandmother died at ninety-nine, one of her daughters stood up at the family dinner after the funeral and held up a book of great, it was some kind of great stories of the western world or something of volume that they said had been presented to my great-grandmother at age thirteen for five years of perfect attendance at Sunday school and I went, whoa.  That must have had a great impact on her, which in turn had an impact on her children, which in turn had an impact on my father [William Alexander Scott, III], which in turn had an impact on me, and at that point I had sort of been out of church for maybe ten or fifteen years since graduating from high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia] and coming back home.  And, and my son [Cinque Scott Reeves] was seven years old at the time and I decided we were going to go back to church then, and I put him in Sunday school and I guess I've been going to church ever since then.  But, my parents made sure that we went to Sunday school when I was growing up.  But they would usually not come because that was the one day they had to rest, and so they would--because they had to work every other day.  And they'd kind of stay home and have a lazy day on Sunday.
Speaker 1: What was influencing you as you were beginning to come into your own as a young woman?
Speaker 2: I think the fact that I decided to go to college in New York City [New York, New York]; and one of the reasons I did that was because in addition to going to the beach as a kid growing up, we would also go to New York City because my dad used to love to go up there and play chess.  And he would just hang around--it was at the chess club.  The [United States] Chess Federation had an office there near Times Square [New York, New York], or somewhere downtown.  And he would go and just play chess all day long while we would do the tourist thing, and go to movies, and really do a lot of things that we couldn't do in the segregated South; just like go to the movies and, and sit down stairs.  So that was kind of my--it engendered a really warm spot in my heart for New York.  So when it came time for me to decide where to go to college, I decided to go to New York.  And one of the reasons also, was the fact that you know, this was the mid-'60s [1960s] and kind of the height of the desegregation, Civil Rights Movement and it--they were opening up opportunities and my school counselors encouraged us to take advantage of those opportunities.  And so I decided to apply to several colleges and universities outside of Atlanta.  And some of them with journalism--I wasn't so sure then, but, I was leaning towards something in journalism, but not sure what; but then finally decided on Barnard [College, New York, New York] because it was a women's college and my mother [Marian Willis Scott] had graduated from Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  It was in New York City, did I say that enough times?  And, so, I went there.  And at the time that I went, our class had nineteen black women, which was the largest class they'd ever had of black students, and in fact, more than they had in the rest of the whole school.  And so it really had a tremendous impact on my experiences there and my best friend now is, was--I met her as a freshman at Barnard.
Story_ID: 235513
Speaker 1: So when you were coming out of [Booker T. Washington] High School [Atlanta, Georgia], were you always aware that you wanted to go to college in New York [New York], or?
Speaker 2: Well, I always knew I was going to go to college, I just didn't know where exactly.  I had even applied to Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan].  But when I looked at that it was too cold, it was in the country and too big.  And the appeal of Barnard [College, New York, New York] was that it was a part of Columbia University [New York, New York], but it was a much smaller, you know, women's college as, as a part of that, and it was in New York City.  And so that made me realize it was going to be fun.  And the other thing that I knew when I applied, it was a one-page kind of application and they didn't want--I don't think they even had to do an essay.  They just wanted the basics of who you are and where you're from, and your test scores and references and they took it from there.  So that made it an easy choice too.
Speaker 1: Were there any extracurricular activities that you were participating in?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't participate in many.  I was part--I got elected to the dorm council which sort of surprised me because I, you know, one of my classmates said, you ought to run for that, and I had never run for anything in particular before, not in high school.  I'd participated in the yearbook staff and different activities like that, but I had not done you know, kind of a political office if you will.  So I did that and was on the dorm council, but I actually ended up quitting college after my sophomore year and getting married at age nineteen and moving to Milwaukee [Wisconsin].  I had met--my husband [Marc Lewis] had come back to Columbia to the School of General Studies after having dropped out of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and gone to work in Greene County, Alabama in the Civil Rights Movement.  And so he was my revolutionary hero, and we met in April and married in September and I was nineteen.  And my parents [William Alexander Scott, III and Marian Willis Scott]--I think they weren't real happy about it, but because they were who they were, they allowed me to make that choice and have that, make that decision.  And I also--once my sophomore year came up at Barnard, it was also during the big student protest movement and the movements against the war in Vietnam [Vietnam War].  And so in the spring of my sophomore year I marched with the students and a hundred thousand other people against the war in Vietnam that [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] spoke at.  And so, it was like I said, a whole time of turmoil and social change and also during that semester the students at Columbia took over the campus in protest of the college building another building that was going to impinge on the neighborhood, which was a black neighborhood in the area, and you know, Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] came down, and [H.] Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] came down and Percy Sutton, who owned the cable television system in the city and was the city councilman.  I guess he was president of the borough [Manhattan, New York, New York] at the time.  So there were all these people down, who came down to see what was going on with, with Columbia.  And it was the Students for a Democratic Society [SDS] and the Student Afro-American Society [SAS] that took leadership of the protests.  And the students held on to the campus for something like five days.  So it was a really, really crazy time and I was in one of the buildings, and I think on the second day of the takeover the leadership met, and they decided that the black students wanted to have their own building, and so the students, SDS, moved out and took another building and it was really kind of a scary time to be there because they had lots of police who came out to see--to get the students out of the buildings.  And they kept trying to negotiate to get them out.  And finally they decided they weren't going to be able to get them out and they wanted them out and what they ended up doing was taking the black students out through the underground tunnel system that was in place at Columbia and took them to jail.  And the rest of the kids they routed them out of the buildings and beat them and put them in paddy wagons and took them to jail.
Speaker 1: And were those--when you mentioned that they jailed the black kids, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --were they kids that they were beating white kids?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I--they were trying to prevent a race riot, if you will, by trying to protect the black students, but it ended up making it look all that much worse by separating them out like that.  And, so it took a long time for the campus to settle down and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And was this happening during your sophomore year?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, it was the spring semester of my sophomore year, and after that I sort of just lost interest, and I just didn't even go back to class.  So I just didn't even go back to class.  So I didn't even get grades in my--end of my sophomore year.  Or I was failing at the time, or whatever happened, but they said I needed to either leave or, you know, come back and make some kind of appeal to get back in.  So I decided to leave and in the meantime I fell in love and I said, I think I'll get married instead of going back to school (laughter).  So that's what I did in September.
Story_ID: 235514
Speaker 1: And that began clearly, a new chapter of your life.  Could you tell us about that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, it did because the--as I said the person that I married, his name is Marc Lewis, had come to Columbia [University, New York, New York]--his sister was at Barnard [College, New York, New York], and she was a year ahead of me, and that was one reason why he ended up coming to Columbia.  And so after we met, we decided to go back to Milwaukee [Wisconsin], which was his hometown.  And he worked for--they called it a settlement house, but it's like a social service agency and it was called the Northcott Neighborhood House [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and he was director of special projects and I was some kind of administrative assistant, I don't know.  I didn't--I actually didn't start there.  I started--my dad [William Alexander Scott, III] got me a job at the black newspaper there.  I worked for Gerald Jones who was the publisher of the Milwaukee Courier, and I was his administrative assistant.  And I did that for about a year.  And it was pretty funny because he couldn't remember my name, so he just gave me a name.  He used to call me Vinny [ph.], (laughter) and that was--so I responded to that.  I stayed there for about a year and then went to work at the social service agency, but almost as soon as I had started working there I realized I was pregnant and my first son was born in November 7th, 1969 in Milwaukee.  And during the summer we went to New York [New York] to visit some of our former schoolmates who were living there in the summer, and they gave me a baby shower and we were at Ntozake Shange's house, her name was Paulette Williams when we met at Barnard, she was one of my classmates, and we had the shower there, at her house.  And Marc was looking through [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett's 'Before the Mayflower[: A History of Black America],' and he came across Joseph Cinque's name, and he said, "That's it, that's what we're going to name our son.  We are going to name him Cinque."  And of course, we made up the pronunciation, we weren't quite sure how to say it, but we decided Cinque was how we were going to say it.  And that's what we named him.  His name is Cinque, and it was just kind of a, I don't know, an interesting time.  And after he was born I ended up coming home for a couple of months to be in Atlanta [Georgia] and to get some TLC.  And we stayed here, and then our friends who were still at Columbia at the time were about to graduate and everybody was moving to California because that was the place to be if you were an artist or a flower child or whatever, and that's what we--so we followed them to California and lived in San Francisco [California] from 1970 to '72 [1972].  And I--we moved about four times around the Panhandle, which is a neighborhood area that includes the Haight-Ashbury District [San Francisco, California], which was the, kind of the epicenter of the flower child movement during the, that--kind of the late '60s [1960s].  And we were there kind of on the tail end of it in the early '70s [1970s].  But that was an interesting time too.
Speaker 1: Were you participating still in (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I, at the--my job was to be the mommy.  I was the only one who had a baby, and so I was primarily doing that, and again, my folks came through.  My dad got me a job at the Standard Oil Company in San Francisco, so I worked there.  And, I'm trying to think, I don't even remember what Marc was doing, but my girlfriend who ended up being Cinque's godmother, Thulani Davis, she was also a classmate at Barnard, and they moved out and she was a writer for the San Francisco Sun-Reporter, which was a black newspaper out there.  And her boyfriend who was also at Columbia was a musician and he was a part of a group of musicians, and then Ntozake, who we called Zake, just, went to grad school at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], and so she was a little bit further away, but was around sometimes.  And so we just kind of had again, this little community that we all kind of stuck together and did things together--and stayed there until '72 [1972].  And everybody decided pretty much, that it was time to come back east.  And my marriage wasn't doing too well.  And I--my husband I think, had some problems at the time that I couldn't help him with, and so he decided to go back home to Milwaukee and I decided to come home to Atlanta.  And we got a divorce after I got back to Atlanta.
Story_ID: 235515
Speaker 1: How old were you at that time?
Speaker 2: When I moved back home in '72 [1972], I guess I was twenty-three.  And I was twenty when my son [Cinque Scott Reeves] was born, and got divorced [from Marc Lewis] right around that time.  But about a week after I got back home I met my next husband [David Reeves], and he was friends with my friends, childhood friends, the Dempseys.  I mentioned that [HistoryMaker] Al[ford] Dempsey, Jr. had gone to school [New Hampton School for Boys; New Hampton School, New Hampton, New Hampshire] with my brother [William Alexander Scott, IV], same prep school as my brother.
Speaker 1: Is that Al Dempsey who is currently a judge?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.  He's a superior court judge now.  And his wife, Colleen [ph.], he had met her at Barnard [College, New York, New York], and they--he introduced me to her so we became good friends because she didn't really know anybody in Atlanta [Georgia].  So when I came back, moved back to Atlanta in '72 [1972], I became goddaughter- godmother to her twin daughters.  And my next husband was their next door neighbor, and so I met him almost immediately, and--but we didn't get married until about a year and a half, in 1974, was when we got married.  And we were really good friends with them throughout.  And she just died last year.  She had breast cancer.  So that was a really hard loss for all of us.  But, we just, we had a great time raising our children together, and that was why it was important for me to have another child, and she and I both were trying to have kids, and she had a son about ten years after her daughters were born.  But, as I said, my son [David Leslie Reeves, Jr.] was born eighteen years after my son was born.  So, I--he's now sixteen and my older son is going to be thirty-five in November (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what has that meant to you?
Speaker 2: Well, that's been a real interesting ride.  Having a child late in life and late in my career at the time that my second child was born.  I sort of grew up with my first child.  My second child was born when I was vice president of community affairs at the Atlanta Journal and Constitution [Atlanta Journal-Constitution], so I was an executive.  And when I walked in and told the publisher that I was having a baby he kind of looked at me and was like, "What?"  You know, but, I think he told me I was the first vice president to have a baby that he had worked with.  And, but it worked out fine actually.  I mean I think I was at a place in my life where I kind of had the maturity to set the priorities and had the ability to be able to work it out so that I could manage it all.
Story_ID: 235516
Speaker 1: You were mentioning your participation in an event prior to going to [Barnard] College [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I remembered I wanted to talk about being a debutante, and that was a part of my high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia] life that actually took up a couple of years, as a junior, we were called junior debs, or sub debs, or something like that.  And we were--went through classes, had weekly sessions or monthly sessions just talking about, I don't know, that it was really like manners, as much as just being, just kind of a responsible young adult.  And we did that, and the debutante ball was presented by the Sigma Gamma Rho Sorority, and it was primarily a fundraiser for scholarships, and the top debutante was the debutante who raised the most money.  So we were all encouraged to do that and we'd have these monthly kind of sessions to teach us how to do better fundraising and that kind of thing.  But by the end of the whole event we had been presented to society and we had these formal-like gowns, and our fathers wore tails, and escorted us and then they presented us, and we had schoolmates or classmate boys who were then our escorts who danced with us, and they taught us ballroom dancing and it was down at the city auditorium [Atlanta Municipal Auditorium, Atlanta, Georgia].  And it was a really big event, and a big deal to be a part of.  And somehow or other I ended up being the president of the debutante club for that year.  And they were girls from different high schools and all over town.  So that was a really nice learning experience for me, participating in that.  And it was fun to have a pretty dress and get all dolled up by that.  The other thing that that just reminded me of that I did during my high school years was to participate in the Spelman/Morehouse pre-college program.  And this was a summer kind of tutorial program that paired public school teachers with Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] faculty members, who kind of helped us get a leg up on college preparatory classes.  And again, it was about sixty kids in the program who were from schools all over Atlanta [Georgia].  And we got a chance to live on campus for the summer and we had some really great adventures, and good times during that, and really got exposed to some of the top professors who were at Morehouse and Spelman at the time.
Story_ID: 235517
Speaker 1: Did you continue your education after Barnard [College, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I didn't go back to school until 1991, after, I guess, my son [David Leslie Reeves, Jr.] was what, two or three years old--my second son.  And my older son [Cinque Scott Reeves] was looking like he was doing the same thing that I had done.  He was a student at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and looked like he was about to drop out.  So I wanted to let him know that I thought it was important for him to finish school, so I decided to go back too.  And this was right after Johnnetta [B.] Cole had become president of Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and I was really crazy about her.  And I said, "Let me see if I can get back into school."  So I submitted an application and they let me in, but I could only take one class a semester because I had this child, plus I was a vice president at the AJC [Atlanta Journal and Constitution; Atlanta Journal-Constitution] and I was involved in so many things with, as a result of that position at the paper that I didn't have a whole lot of time.  But I wanted to make the effort.  And so I was able to sign up for a class that Johnnetta Cole taught with [HistoryMaker] Beverly Guy-Sheftall, and Beverly of course, is the director of the women's center [Women's Research and Resource Center, Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] at Spelman.  And it was a women's studies course for which we used Johnnetta's textbook (laughter).  So that was a great class.  I really had a good time in there.  And I--they called me the third teacher because I was bringing in all this stuff from my experiences at work and there were, I guess there were maybe twenty kids in the class and three guys, and the rest were girls.  And we even had one woman student from Agnes Scott [College, Decatur, Georgia].  So it--we really--and we only met once a week, for like three hours.  And it was pretty rigorous that way, but it--I really enjoyed taking that class, and it made me realize that education is probably wasted on young folk because they were only interested in getting the grade.  They didn't really care about the ideas or the things that we were talking about.  So that was an interesting experience to have at that age and point in time.  And the next semester I took a course from Mari Evans, and she was a writer-in-residence at the time.  Of course, you know, she's a great writer and poet.  And she taught this class--and I think the first day of the class we had about fifteen students, and when she said there was gonna be no test and only one paper to get your grade, the next week we had half as many people.  So she ended up with six students in her class because they just couldn't take the risk of getting a bad grade.  And, but again, I had a great time in that class with her.  And we studied Langston Hughes and other American writers.  It was some kind of American writers course, I don't remember, but it was a lot of fun.  But then I realized that I really couldn't keep it all together, trying to go to school and you know, work twenty-four hours a day, and have a baby at the same time, a toddler.  So I ended up dropping out again and as a result I have not returned to school.  But last year Argosy University [Orange, California], which is a school based here, it's actually based in Florida [sic.], but they have a campus here, a regional campus in Atlanta [Georgia], presented me with an honorary doctorate of humane letters degree.  So I'm now [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Alexis] Scott, thank you very much (laughter).
Story_ID: 235518
Speaker 1: Explain to us a bit the evolution that you went through professionally.  You mentioned that you'd come back to Atlanta [Georgia], you'd married, and then the next episode that we're aware of is your vice presidency at the AJC [Atlanta Journal and Constitution; Atlanta Journal-Constitution]?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a little bit in between there.  When I came back to Atlanta, the first thing I did was take a job as office manager in Newsweek.  Again, I had actually gone over to Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia] when I first got back home, and to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] to see about whether I should try to go back to school.  But it just seemed an insurmountable hurdle to figure all that out.  And I went to Clark Atlanta, where they'd just opened a communications center to see if they had any positions and the director at the time was [HistoryMaker] Charles Hobson.  He asked me if I had an advanced degree, they might have something, and of course I did not.  And so I had a nice conversation with him, but it didn't go anywhere.  But a couple of days later I got a call from the bureau chief of the Atlanta bureau of Newsweek magazine here saying that Charles Hobson had referred him to me looking for a job.  And I--one the things that I did, a little history footnote, was to go to the newly opened Women's Bureau of the labor department [U.S. Department of Labor] to get some help with putting together my resume.  And at the time the director of the bureau was [HistoryMaker] Alexis Herman and Paulette Norvel [Lewis], here in Atlanta.  And so that was where I first met her, and of course you know, she went on to become the secretary of labor for [President William Jefferson] "Bill" Clinton in his second administration.  But she got her start here in Atlanta.  So, I had this great resume that they helped me fill out and I went and interviewed with Joe Cumming, who was then the bureau chief at Newsweek.  And he hired me to be the office manager, which basically meant that I answered the phones, and this was back in the dark ages.  I had to telex all their stories to the New York [New York] office.  And this was before the Internet and before email and everything was so easy to do.  But that was a great experience.  And there was the bureau chief and two correspondents.  And I was replacing the woman who had been the office manager, and her name is Eleanor Clift.  And Eleanor had been promoted to be a correspondent and she went on to get the assignment to follow after I took her job, she got the assignment to follow this governor of Georgia, [President James Earl] "Jimmy" Carter [Jr.], as he was running for president, and once he was elected, Eleanor is now a White House [Washington, D.C.] correspondent and has been for the last thirty years for Newsweek and has done very well.  So I ended up working there a couple of years and watching the reporters work and helping the--I use to help out on some of the roundup stories, where they needed phone calls made and stuff like that.  And I would start doing movie reviews and doing some celebrity interviews that I would give to my dad [William Alexander Scott, III], who would bring them down here.  And they would publish them in the Atlanta [Daily] World--
Story_ID: 235519
Speaker 1: And that's when I kind of realized that that really was what I wanted to do was journalism.  But I knew I needed to go back to school to do that.  And one of the things that opened up during that period was a program called the Summer Program for Minority Journalists [Michele Clark Fellowship Program for Minority Journalists].  And it was a program at Columbia University [New York, New York] back in New York City [New York, New York] that was created in 1968 to get more people of color and more women into mainstream media, both in newspapers and broadcasting.  And in 1974, I decided to apply for that program, and I did, and I was accepted into the newspaper class and went through that summer, spent the summer back at Columbia, in New York.  And before I'd left I got married and married David Reeves, Jr., whom I had met when I first returned to Atlanta [Georgia], back in late '72 [1972].  And we decided that we wanted to stay in Atlanta because one of the opportunities that came with the fellowship, it was a fellowship to this summer program, was job placement.  So they helped me get a job with the Atlanta Constitution [Atlanta Journal-Constitution], and when I completed the program I returned to Atlanta and went to work as a reporter for the Atlanta Constitution, and did that job for another five years before getting promoted to becoming an editor and worked on the city desk as an assistant city editor.  And then worked on a special cable project that the newspaper did as the newsroom kind of editor on the project to develop these programs that we did in conjunction with the local cable operator.  We actually built a television studio in the newsroom and produced, at the height of our production we were doing something like--let me get it straight, I want to say seven weekly shows.  It may have been more than that and half of them were live.  It might have been more like ten.  And some of them were live call-in shows.  And some of them were pre-taped shows.  But I had the responsibility for recruiting the newsroom people to host and be on--be the talent for the shows.  And so I was kind of like the executive producer in TV language.  And then a year after doing that, which was in '84 [1984], the director got promoted to another paper and they offered me the position of director of the project.  And that was a really tough decision because it meant leaving the newsroom and going over to the business side, which was something I really had never planned to do, or really aspired to do.  But it was such an opportunity to learn the business side of the business that I decided I should take it and by this time I'd been working at the paper for ten, twelve years so, I wanted to, you know, be a good soldier, and so I took the opportunity to do that.  And that's when I kind of severed the tie with the newsroom.  The project lasted another year or two, but at that time, cable in Atlanta was very chopped up.  There were like eighteen different cable operators and none of the systems were interconnected.  And we never could build a big enough audience in order to make it a viable business venture.  So the paper decided that it didn't want to do it, and around the same time the position of vice president of community affairs came open, and so I took that position in the middle of '86 [1986] and shut down the cable operation at the same time.  And then for the next seven years I was the manager of the corporate philanthropy and the professional community volunteer for the Atlanta Journal and Constitution.  And then in 1993 the Cox Enterprises [Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] came calling, which is the corporate office that owns the Journal and Constitution, and wanted me to come out there and take over the position of director of diversity, and kind of do some journalistic think on that issue for the company, and how it needed to proceed in the coming years.  So I went out there in the spring of '93 [1993].  And as a course of that work, I established two affinity groups; one was a local group that I just learned a few weeks ago is still continuing.  It was called The Atlanta Diversity Managers Affinity Group [ADMAG], and what it is, is a compilation of corporate diversity officers and managers who work for the larger companies in town, just sort of help be a support group for each other and also compare best practices and try to help each other implement better policies.  I did the same thing on the national level with a handful of media companies, and we pulled together and met twice a year to sort of compare notes again and look at best practices to help support our companies and ourselves.
Story_ID: 235520
Speaker 1: How did you arrive here?
Speaker 2: How did I end up here at the Atlanta Daily World with Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia] and all its sounds and trucks going by?  I ended up sort of responding to a family call for help.  It's kind of--the paper got on my mind, first in '92 [1992] when my father [William Alexander Scott, III] died, because I always thought he would be the one to take it over and keep it going and then hand it off to somebody.  But when he died, that sort of wrecked that plan or that scenario that I had envisioned.  And I guess a couple of years after he died my cousin Portia [Scott] called and said she needed to meet with me because things weren't going well at the paper, and they needed some help.  And this was only a year after I had gone out to Cox [Enterprises Inc., Atlanta, Georgia].  And I told her, I wasn't sure there anything I could do, because the job that I had out there was so demanding, it was a traveling job, so.  And of course I still had this six-year old kid [David Reeves, Jr.] that I was trying to be the mother to, so I just wasn't able to respond to her.  And so another couple of years went by and she called again, and she said it's, you know, things are really not well.  Her father [C.A. Scott] was frail and her mother [Ruth Perry Scott] was losing her eyesight and we needed to do something.  And one of the reasons she was calling me was one, because I had, you know, the newspaper experience and two, our two families had the largest ownership of the paper.  Her father and my father were the largest, two largest single owners at the time.  And of course, my father was dead, so it was my mother [Marian Willis Scott], but my mother wanted my brother [William Alexander Scott, IV] and I to handle any of the business interest that might evolve.  So, I guess in '96 [1996] when she called again, I thought maybe I should take a look at this, and I was just trying to see what it was that I could do without leaving my job.  And around the same time a girlfriend of mine who lived in [Washington] D.C., sent me a Washington Post article about these joint ventures, these partnerships between these black publishers of black groups and major publishing, or major media companies.  One of them was BET [Black Entertainment] Television combining with Time Warner [Inc., New York, New York] to do the BET Weekend magazine, which was fairly short-lived, as it turns out.  It no longer publishes.  The other was a project that Don Miller [HistoryMaker Donald Miller], who had been a retired executive from Dow Jones [& Company, New York, New York], was actually trying to start a national black newspaper [Our World News] with the backing from Dow Jones.  And another one was the--I can't remember his name, who's the publisher of American History [sic. American Heritage] magazine, which is a joint venture with Forbes.  And it talked about how these, you know, two interests were working together to produce these publications.  So I thought, well, I wonder if there is something there for Cox and the Atlanta Daily World.  So I called, I talked with some of the executives at Cox and they didn't say no, they're always looking for new ways to make more money.  And I called Portia and I asked her would this be something that maybe the Atlanta World would be interested in talking about, but they weren't.  Her father was fiercely independent and felt like this was just a way to have the big media companies swallow up this independent family owned business.  And so that was kind of a blow because I thought I had found a solution.  And so I decided okay, I'm going to go back; I tried.  But she called again and she said, we really--it's not, things aren't going well.  We really either need to close, or just sell, or do something; something has to take place.
Story_ID: 235521
Speaker 1: And so it was at that point that she [Scott's cousin, Portia Scott] sat down with me and my brother [William Alexander Scott, IV], and my brother is an air traffic controller and has been for more than thirty years.  But at that point he said, "Well, what is the most pressing problem?"  And she said, it was the payroll because her mother [Ruth Perry Scott] had been doing it, but she was losing her vision and couldn't do it anymore.  So my brother said, "Well, if you'll get a computer and I can get some software, I can see if I can do that.  And I'll do it for half of what you're going to have to pay for ADP [LLC, Roseland, New Jersey] or some outsource firm."  So he actually started working and helping out before I did.  And it got on my mind more and more.  And during this period I was teaching high school Sunday school class.  And I had all--I had been teaching since I'd gone back to Sunday school for my older son [Cinque Scott Reeves].  I had made sure that I raised my younger son [David Leslie Reeves, Jr.] in Sunday school too.  So I'd always been either the assistant teacher or teacher, but I'd followed him.  And then finally I decided I wanted to sit--they asked me to sit with the high school class because they needed some teachers.  So with that, I--they had a curriculum for you to prepare you to do the class for the kids and then these call lessons came up.  And the first one was Samuel and Eli.  And this is a story of the--Samuel who, his mother [Hannah] had prayed to have a child, and God gave her Samuel and she said, "If You give me a child I'll turn him over to You."  And so she sent him to live with the priest, Eli.  And so he's in the temple sleeping one night and he hears his name, "Samuel, Samuel."  And he jumps up, and he goes into Eli and says, "You called me?"  And Eli says, "No, I didn't call you.  Go back to bed."  He goes back to bed and he hears, "Samuel, Samuel."  And he goes up and he says, "I know I heard you this time."  And the priest says, "What are you talking about?  It's the middle of the night.  Go back to bed."  Of course I'm paraphrasing here.  So he goes back to bed and then he hears his name again, "Samuel, Samuel."  So he runs and he says, "I know you're calling me this time, what is it?"  And then finally the priest got it and he said, "Oh, it's not me calling you.  It's God calling.  You need to go back and listen."  And so that was like a two-by-four for me, the point of listening, that somebody could actually be calling me, that I was not heeding the call.  And so the very next week the lesson was Jonah and it said, go ahead and read the whole book of Jonah, it's only three pages, you know.  And then it was a call lesson of Jonah not heeding the call and you know, getting tossed over the board and getting swallowed by the whale and finally he answers the call.  So I realized then that I was being called and I wasn't paying the proper attention.  So I decided I needed to kind of think about it and you know, things were changing at the company as well, and I--Cox [Enterprises Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] was getting so big and there were--the position that I had, the director of diversity, had, when I went out there was a number three and by the time I left it was almost a number six because the company was growing up all this bureaucracy around it.  And I realized that I--it wasn't as satisfying interacting on policy issues as actually being able to make a difference right away and seeing--getting that kind of immediate feedback.  So the last thing that I did was read this book that David Reeves, Jr., I'm sorry, David Reeves, Sr., who was my husband at the time had for his Sunday school class which was a Howard Thurman book called 'Disciplines of the Spirit.'  And by the time I finished reading that book I realized, oh, I need to make a decision here.  And really the only decision was that I was supposed to leave and take over the family business [Atlanta Daily World], or at least help with it.  I wasn't quite sure what my role was to be, and I had to sort that out in the next few months, but that's what I did.  I went in, I guess the beginning of '97 [1997] and resigned my position with something like a ninety-day notice because I was working on a couple of projects.  And then I began to sit with my cousin, Portia, and also during that period we tried to work out how it was going to work.  And we went to the assistance of the [Cox] Family Enterprise Center out at Kennesaw [State] University [Kennesaw, Georgia] and through that program realized that both of us wanted to run the business, but it--and, so we had to figure that out as well.  And we ended up having to get that resolved through a family shareholders meeting, which happened in August of 1997, and that's when I took over.
Story_ID: 235522
Speaker 1: What is the history of the paper [Atlanta Daily World; Atlanta World] prior to your coming onboard?
Speaker 2: Ooh, the history of the paper is quite long and extensive.  Of course it was founded in August of 1928 by W.A. Scott, II.  It became the first black daily in the country in 1932, in March of 1932.  And it stayed daily all the way through '71 [1971].  It even--even though it's not older than the Chicago Defender, it became a daily before the Defender did.  I don't think it became a daily until the '50s [1950s].  But it has a really long and illustrious history of being, particularly in the early years, of being the kind of the town hall meeting place, where all the issues of the day got discussed, and particularly in the segregated South, where there was very little attention paid to the black community, and certainly not in any positive ways.  The paper itself has had an interesting history along with the desegregation movement, came a brain drain on the paper, with people like me and others going into mainstream media, which sort of lead to the paper's decline.  I also think some of the internal politics--my great-uncle [C.A. Scott] became a Republican with [President Dwight David "Ike"] Eisenhower, and stayed a Republican all the way through [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan and [President George Herbert Walker] Bush, and did some things with the paper.  I think that might have disconnected with some of the readers because you know, more than 90 percent of the readers and elected officials in Atlanta [Georgia] are affiliated with the Democratic Party.  So between the internal and the external changes, I think those are things that sort of led to the paper's decline.  Plus my great-uncle, as it turns out had made this deathbed promise to his brother, my grandfather that he would take care of things.  And I think psychologically he could not stop and did not stop until he was just physically unable to come here anymore.
Speaker 1: And so where is the paper currently?
Speaker 2: Well, the paper now, we're in our seventh year of my management and we're trying to work our way back to prosperity.  We were making great strides until the economy went south; so now we're still in a kind of posture of trying the keep the doors open.  But I think we have done a tremendous job of modernizing the look and the infrastructure and the operations.  So we, we've made a lot of progress and we still have a ways to go, but I feel really happy that we have reconnected with the community.  We've received many awards and recognitions during the last few years.
Story_ID: 235523
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you'd like to add to the interview that we haven't asked?
Speaker 2: Well, the only thing--there's not a lot, but I did, would like to put in that the progress that the newspaper [Atlanta Daily World] has made in reconnecting with the community and the help that it still needs to do that, but just this past week the paper received the President's Award from the Atlanta [Georgia] branch of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And we received an award last year from the Concerned Black Clergy [of Metropolitan Atlanta, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia].  In fact, they presented it to the Scott family and the Atlanta Daily World.  So I think that we're really getting back to our goal of being a part of the heart and soul of the Atlanta community.  And I'm really gratified to see that happening.  I really can't think of much more.  I do want to say that I had oral surgery (laughter) over the weekend and I have the puffy jaw to show it.  And I actually don't quite look like this all the time.
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you've lived your life and what is important to you?
Speaker 2: Well, I feel pretty good about the way I've lived my life, and I've had many wonderful opportunities to grow and learn and develop.  And I think because of my upbringing with two very loving and positive parents [William Alexander Scott, III and Marian Willis Scott], I am, was able to come through an era of just huge social change and turmoil and not be a bitter person, and be a loving person.  And I think that has been a real blessing and it's been a gift that I can be to other people.  So, I just feel really fortunate that I've had a really good life.
Speaker 1: And what do you still want to do that you haven't done yet?
Speaker 2: I guess make lots of money; make the Atlanta Daily World make lots of money; have this be a very profitable business so that we can do even more.  We are able to do things to serve the community through the newspaper by highlighting stories and issues and people.  But it would be really great to also put money behind that to be able to support the community in that way as well.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you've done already that you would have done differently, any regrets, afterthoughts?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I usually don't spend a lot of time on regrets because I don't think it's a useful practice.  And because I'm so excited and grateful to be where I am now, I know that I wouldn't be doing what I'm doing now if I hadn't done what I did, if that makes any sense.  So, even with two sons [Cinque Lewis Reeves and David Leslie Reeves, Jr.] who are eighteen years apart in age, I think has been an opportunity to give each one of them special attention that they wouldn't have if they were closer together.
Story_ID: 235524
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: I guess my greatest aspiration for the African American community is that it becomes whole and healthy.  Because of the years of slavery and segregation there's been so much damage done to blacks as a group and both physically and psychologically.  I think that there is so much work that needs to be done that--to restore us to health.  That requires work on our part, but also the larger community's part too.
Story_ID: 235525
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life what stands out the most?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I've not done this reflection too much recently.  But, I would guess I would have to say being a part of the family that I'm a part of; having the opportunity to do the things that I'm doing.  I directly trace, you know, to being a part of this family from everything to my grandfather [William Alexander Scott, II] having started the paper to my great-grandmother [Emmeline Southall Scott] having gotten this book for perfect attendance in Sunday school; to having a great-grandfather [Reverend William Alexander Scott] who was a minister; to have that kind of foundation in a faith and a belief system.
Story_ID: 235526
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered, and what do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: That's an interesting question about how I want to be remembered and what I want people to say about me.  I want them to say good things.  I told you I had the experience of seeing my best friend--one of my best friends die last year.  And I, with her brother, kind of wrote her obituary, and that was a real kind of sobering experience to do that when you try to sum up somebody's life and the essence of who the person is.  And I'm not sure that I have enough perspective on my own self to do that at this point.  But I want people to know that I'm a decent, honest person who does the best that I can, who strives for excellence; who wants to do things to serve the greater good, and my particular way of doing that is through journalism; and I want to always be a constructive voice, but also want to be a fearsome, fearless voice for those who don't have a voice.  So, I kind of think that's sort of what I want (laughter) to be known for.
Story_ID: 235527
Speaker 1: If you were thinking about the past several years being here at the paper [Atlanta Daily World], what has your most memorable experience or issue been?
Speaker 2: Well, I think probably the biggest thing was celebrating our seventy-fifth anniversary last year, which was quite a milestone for us, and we got a lot of things done and documented that I think will be in place for years, well, forever.  We did an exhibit on the history of the paper that also attached itself to the history of the black press and the Civil Rights Movement.  And it has a study guide and that exhibit is available now, even for schools and other organizations to have and travel and visit with.  We also had a documentary done by Atlanta Interfaith Broadcasters [Inc., Atlanta, Georgia].  It was called 'Printing the Dream: 75 Years of Atlanta Daily World.'  And it has been recognized for honorable mention in the Peabody Awards, and has been put in the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.].  And so these are kind of lasting testimonials and documentaries about the impact that the newspaper has had and has made on the community.  So, and I think pulling all that together was quite an accomplishment for us as a struggling organization trying to revitalize ourselves.  We had a sold out event of five hundred people that we celebrated with and enjoyed recognizing newsmakers who have made a contribution to, not just Atlanta [Georgia], but to the world.  One of the people we recognized at that event was [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett.  And Lerone Bennett, as you know, is executive editor of Ebony magazine, and has written many books on history and black Americans.  And he actually got his start at the Atlanta Daily World as a student graduating from Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].  And he's only ever worked here and there.  So we were able to recognize him and pay tribute to him during that event.  We also recognized the mayor of Atlanta [Shirley Franklin], who is the first black woman to be the mayor of our city, recognizing her as a trailblazer, and also we recognized Arthur Blank as our community service recipient because of the work that he has done in the community.  Not only was he a co-founder of [The] Home Depot [Atlanta, Georgia], which has kind of changed the way people do home repairs, but he has taken that wealth and provided over a hundred million dollars to the community, primarily here in Atlanta, just during the last five years to improve the quality of life for people, and to improve the lives across differences; so we wanted to recognize him also as a champion of diversity.  And so I think those three honorees are kind of representative of the kinds of messages and things that we want to do as a newspaper: that we want to improve the quality of life, that we want to be champions for diversity and that we want to be--we want to tell our story.
Story_ID: 235528
Speaker 1: How do you think that history is important?
Speaker 2: I think history is extremely important because it prevents you from making the same mistake again.  If you don't know where you come from you can't figure out where you're going to go.  And I think that projects like The HistoryMakers are very important for documenting people's stories individually and institutions like ours, the Atlanta Daily World, document the community history.  And so I think that we're telling stories that, if we don't tell them, they won't get told and people need to know what we have to say.
Story_ID: 235529
Speaker 1: What do you want for your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I think I want my legacy to be that I didn't kill the paper [Atlanta Daily World] (laughter).  No, I'm just kidding.  That actually, that I actually saved, I won't say saved the paper because I think the paper has been and is such an institution that no one person, you know, can make or break it.  But, I think that I want my legacy to be that I did help to make the paper prosper again; to make it be a vital part of this community, and that I was a good mom, and that I loved my family and loved my community and did my best to serve it.
