Story_ID: 303989
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Richard Steele [HistoryMaker Richard Claude Steele], that's the last name is spelled S-T-E-E-L-E.
Speaker 1: Okay and you wanna give us your given name or do you think--can you tell the story behind your name?
Speaker 2: Well you know if you think that's important.  My birth name is Richard Slaughter, which is S-L-A-U-G-H-T-E-R.  When I got into radio I decided that that, the last name was too long and not very musical because I was gonna be in music radio.  Had I been a news person I probably would have left it, but Slaughter didn't have any particular ring to it I thought so, I wanted to keep my first name which was good so I wanted an S for the last name 'cause I wanted to keep that RS, so I went through a phone book, through the S's and just went down the S's until I found something I thought fit, and I settled on Steele sounded good to me so you know.
Speaker 1: Okay are there people--do you ever encounter people who think they know you or are related to you because of your last name is Steele (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, sure Commissioner Bobbie Steele [HistoryMaker Bobbie Steele] and her sons and a funny story about that is now that whenever I see, whenever I see Bobbie Steele's son he always says what he does now is just tell people, "Yeah, that's my cousin" rather than go through the whole thing about, no we're not actually related, because he and I had the discussion and I told him that that wasn't my real last name 'cause he thought we might be related and I said, "No not really I just, it's a stage name" and over the years we always laugh about that.  So when I see him now I say, "Hey cuz what's up," you know rather than tell people the whole nah that's not my cousin we're not related he just has the same name, forget that.
Speaker 1: Now do you have a middle name or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Claude.
Speaker 1: Any nicknames?
Speaker 2: If you go back to high school maybe you know, my family, my immediate family and that would, in this case not my children but my mother [Sylvia Gibbons Slaughter] and all of my older relatives on my mother's side call me Richie.  When I was in high school I had the nickname of Ivy because I liked Ivy League clothes, I was a big Brooks Brothers fan when I was in high school and I use to like to wear those kinds of clothes so they gave me that nickname, here comes Ivy.
Speaker 1: Okay now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 6, 1942.
Speaker 1: All right and where were you born?
Speaker 2: Brooklyn, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay and sir what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a radio personality and sometimes television person.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is March 22, 19-, I mean 2005.  I'm still in the last millennium.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  Where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at The HistoryMakers, 1900 South Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 303990
Speaker 1: Okay now before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask you because they ask me to ask you so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, I got some lightweight answers okay.
Speaker 1: All right (laughter), the first one is, they're kind of a warm-up.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well I guess probably good fried chicken is probably on the top of the list.  It used to be steak, but as I got older steak is, gets harder to digest so I don't and I love chocolate cake, but as I get older chocolate cake and a glass of milk, not good but I'd love to be able to do that though.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably as, as it relates to clothes probably black, I have a lot of things that are black in my wardrobe.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall, winter, early winter.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's an unusual answer, we don't get that much, early winters or you know okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I like, I like, I think I like cooler weather, summer, summer makes me very uncomfortable when it's like ninety degrees, eighty-five.  It took me a long time to be able to go to an island on a vacation and enjoy that 'cause I use to go, this is too hot, too warm, you sweat and in the winter, at least early winter I like winter clothes and I like sweaters and things that go along with that so I've always been kind of partial to, to winter, not twenty below, but you know twenty above is okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, that leads to the next question; do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: In terms of places that I've been or places I'd like to go to?
Speaker 1: Well I guess either one.
Speaker 2: Well places that I've been I've probably enjoyed Paris [France] tremendously.  I've never visited black Africa, I've been to Libya on a press junket but I'd like to, I really would like to visit a country in black Africa, perhaps Senegal or, or somewhere in West Africa and I'd like to go to Switzerland.
Speaker 1: Okay now do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Probably one I use a lot is 'cause I just--somebody just, I talked to somebody this morning and said that oh, it has its moments.  When people ask me so, how, how's it going, you are you feeling about or how some situation is working out.  It's always, I guess in an attempt to not say that something is terrible but also to not say that it won't get better, I always say well it has its moments, which means it's somewhere in the middle you know it's, it might be okay at some point.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you ever have a signature salutation at the end of, I mean at--on your radio shows or anything.
Speaker 2: No but there was a guy I use to work with by the name of J. Johnson [Jim Johnson] back in the '70s [1970s] and for some reason he thought it was clever to say--because, because my name was Richard Steele [HistoryMaker Richard Claude Steele], he started calling, when he, when I was coming on and he was going off he would say, "It's the Aluminum Soul Brother coming up."  I don't know how he made the connection (laughter) between Richard Steele and the Aluminum Soul Brother but that was his, he use to say that a lot.
Speaker 1: So it sounds like you needed a metallurgy class or something like that (laughter).
Speaker 2: For me it was always, back in the day it was the Real Steele.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's kind of what I use to use, not what he use to use, I didn't like that at all.
Story_ID: 303991
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your family history, I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sylvia Slaughter [Sylvia Gibbons Slaughter].
Speaker 1: Okay, what about her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Gibbons.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Brooklyn [New York], April 13, 1919.
Speaker 1: Okay and what do you know about her side of the family, how far back can you trace her side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know a lot, we don't, we weren't--that side of the family was not a family that kept a lot of family historical records if you will and we only had, only in the last, I guess the last six or seven years had a family reunion bringing a lot of family members together.  So my, my mother's family, my grandmother [Gertrude Gibbons] and my grandfather were from the West Indies from Trinidad and Barbados.
Speaker 1: Okay on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact my mother's generation was the only generation that was born in this country, everybody else, my mother and my late aunt her sister were born here, or born in Brooklyn but most of the people of that generation on that side of the family were born in the West Indies.
Speaker 1: There are lot of people that we've interviewed from Barbados that wound up in Boston [Massachusetts] and the New York [New York] area you know (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah in Brooklyn especially back in those days it may be still a lot of West Indians in Brooklyn.
Speaker 1: Okay, are they--do you know if any of them were involved with the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association] with Marcus Garvey's organization (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah my grandmother was--Universal Negro Improvement Association?  My grandmother was involved and very much an admirer of Marcus Garvey until, what did my mother tell me, Marcus Garvey, and I don't know how true it is, my mother was telling me my grandmother said she found out that Marcus Garvey had some kind of minor scandal with a woman or woman who was white and after that my grandmother was through with Marcus Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement Association.
Speaker 1: That's an odd kind of thing, I heard that before but only as a rumor.
Speaker 2: And I'm saying it as a rumor (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I never, yeah.
Speaker 2: But that's, that's what my mother told me in terms of why my grandmother decided to let it go 'cause she was a very big supporter.
Speaker 1: I know when I heard it, it sounded like a Jack Johnson story exactly, but I think somebody juxtaposed the stories or something (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well Jack Johnson though it's truth, there's proof and I mean that was part of his life.
Speaker 1: I know I've never read that historically about Garvey but I think that people get 'em mixed up for some reason (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well no I don't know but I mean this is not something I read, this is something that my mother told me because that's what my grandmother told her and my grandmother was definitely a big supporter of the Universal Negro Improvement Association, yep.
Story_ID: 303992
Speaker 1: Anything about those, anything else about those ancestors.  Did they ever go back to Barbados or Trinidad?
Speaker 2: No everybody pretty much stayed in New York [New York].  I think that the some of the offspring went back to make or went for the first time to make a connection.  My mother [Sylvia Gibbons Slaughter] visited and my late aunt visited at some point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to--I've been to Barbados I haven't been to Trinidad--
Speaker 1: Okay, so.
Speaker 2: And I was on a cruise so I didn't have time to really go and to some of, you know to see the people who were relatives, distant cousins and where they lived and all that.  So I've never, I've never done that.  They had, there was a big reunion last year or two years ago and my brother [Charles L. Slaughter] went.  I wasn't able to go and it was actually in, it was either Trinidad or Barbados, one of the two, but he went.
Speaker 1: Okay all right, well are there any stories from that side of the family about making a transition from the islands to the Brooklyn [New York] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No it's a typical story that when people talk about immigrants coming to America and I think people have found out pretty much that immigrants who come from places where there are not a lot of opportunities pretty much from that generation pursue things in a similar manner whether you came from Europe and were white or you came from an island and were black.  If you came from a place where there was a lack of opportunity and educational opportunities and some other things, people came to this country and couldn't believe that you know the stuff was here free education and all of that and took tremendous advantage of it.  As in the case of my family, my, on my mother's side many of them became educators.  I have one of my mother's cousins became a very well-respected professor at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] for a number of years.
Speaker 1: What's his name?  What was his name?
Speaker 2: Ira Gibbons [Ira L. Gibbons], he has since passed away and there were lots of stories like that in the family.  People who, who came to this country and took full advantage of the opportunities and worked hard two jobs, school at night that kind of thing, and really kind of beat the odds but, and one of the other things that was sort of a hallmark of that culture was to own some property.  So in, in because it was an interesting transition in Brooklyn where in the beginning a lot of the property was owned by people who were Jewish and there was kind of a very close relationship.  You know in some instances there was a real friendship, things I use to observe, people at my--that my grandmother [Gertrude Gibbons] and other relatives, people that they knew in the neighborhood who owned stores or owned the property, and then at a later point the thing for most West Indians was to own a house, own some property and that, that was always a sort of topic of conversation in the background about you know buying a house, a building, and so most of the people that I heard about in the family and other West Indians that they knew, everybody owned a building or was able to somehow buy a building, buy a house so that's, those are some of the things I would hear about education, buying some property.
Story_ID: 303993
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Sylvia Gibbons Slaughter] talk about growing up in Brooklyn [New York] at all, I mean did she talk about what life was about when she was growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah I mean to the degree that people from the '40s [1940s] talked about you know, growing up as a kid and liking, or be not as a very young kid she talked about, I guess more about the later years as a teenager and you know listening to Duke Ellington and Jimmie Lunceford and, and you know the big band thing and how important that was especially in New York and you know going to Harlem [New York, New York] and going to various clubs at a later point as a young adult, and how much fun that was and the thing was everybody had, I mean everybody really enjoyed each other's company.  They went to a lot of dances and a lot of--my mother's got some, she's got a couple of photo albums with a lot of photos from the '40s [1940s], picnics at various beaches, Jones Beach [Jones Beach State Park, Wantagh, New York] and Riis Park [Jacob Riis Park, New York, New York].  These were places in New York where folks went--Coney Island [New York, New York], and you know the photos that you see when you see documentaries about back in the day and it was just you know, when you look at those photos and some of the people I recognized, I was a kid and I recognized some of them, some of the people in the photos meant a lot and some of the other people, but really it just seems that people were even with segregation being what it was, people really were having a good time in some situations like that where there was family, there were very close friends and you know some of that has to do with as we found out by necessity, because the bonds were closer I think because of by necessity you couldn't go anyplace else outside of your own ethnic group in places that you visited, or partied or socialized you know it had to be someplace where black folks went.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your mother have a chance to go to college or anything?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that was much later, I mean she went to college, she graduated from Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] here and she worked for and that was during the period when she worked for, she worked for Loop [Loop College] before it became Harold Washington College [Chicago, Illinois] and before that she worked at Crane [Crane Junior College; Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois] when it was Crane Junior College on the West Side and so over the years she just continued to take courses of one course, two courses at a time and at some point she got a degree.
Speaker 1: Okay so she just made a, she constantly kept at it until she got it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah she was working but she, she always worked but she also felt that it was important to do that and she continued to go until she graduated.
Story_ID: 303994
Speaker 1: Well can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Charles D. Slaughter.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was December, what it is December 20 I think it was, 1922 I think or '21 [1921], or '22 [1922] I think.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: Here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Not a whole lot, they like a lot of Chicagoans I think their roots are in Mississippi.  My grandmother [Maggie Slaughter] on that side died when I was pretty young so I don't, I don't really know a lot, a whole lot about that side of the family.  My father had six or seven brothers and sisters, my uncles and aunts and they're all gone except two I think are still, yeah two are still living.
Speaker 1: Now did he grow up in, well you know he grew up in Chicago, did he grow up on the South Side or the West Side?
Speaker 2: Yeah he went to DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] like everybody else who's that age, Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] or DuSable, he went to DuSable.
Speaker 1: So are there any stories about that side of the family at all that are passed down about, about Mississippi or how they came to Chicago?
Speaker 2: No he never talked about it and you know so I don't, the only thing that I can remember him talking about a little bit and then it wasn't about Mississippi it was about World War II [WWII], he was in the [U.S.] Army and he had--we still have some photos at home.  He was stationed in Italy and it was a story I've heard frequently from when he talked to older black men who were in World War II and stationed in Italy.  There's, there's a large photo of he and some other GIs who are black at a club in Italy with some Italian women just partying, and this was like 1943 or '44 [1944], but he was talking about, I mean he talked about how significantly different the attitude was in Italy than it was in this country about race certainly you know, and they're some old photos of him and when he was in basic training at in Fort Huachuca [Cochise County, Arizona] I guess that was I think, but that's just about it, there's not a whole lot I can tell you on that tip.  He worked at the post office for thirty-five years, he retired, died about ten years ago.  He was a very responsible man who--he bowled a lot you know he had trophies, he bowled on post office teams so he had a lot of trophies and one of and one of the reasons why it's a little, it's kind of sketchy is because my father always worked nights.  All those years at the post office he worked nights, so he, we, he was always, we were always asleep when he was awake working and vice versa.  I remember we had to be quiet a lot (laughter) because he was, he was sleeping during the day and he worked at night, and so.
Speaker 1: So how many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have one brother [Charles L. Slaughter].
Speaker 1: One brother, okay.  Is, are you the oldest or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's six years younger than I am.
Story_ID: 303995
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Sylvia Gibbons Slaughter and Charles Slaughter] met?
Speaker 2: I would imagine, but I don't what it is.  I have no idea.  My parents, you know my parents did not--we didn't talk a lot about, we didn't talk a lot about you know the old days.  My mother's position on the old days was that things are a lot better in the new days and so she's not one to talk a lot about the old days.  Just now in the last couple of years now that she's in her eighties does she talk a little bit about a few things.  I did a radio documentary about a place we use to live and I, you know I had to convince her to, to even talk about those days 'cause she said, "Oh those were dark days and I don't like to talk about that," but it was an interesting situation.  I ran into a guy I went to high school with and he, I was at a Bed and Bath [Bed Bath & Beyond] or something, and he ran to he and his wife and I said you know the old, "What are you doing these days," he said, "Well you know we're--."  He's married to the woman whose parents were the people with Griffin Funeral Home [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Right, okay and that's an old Chicago family yeah.
Speaker 2: So his name is James O'Neil [ph.], so James, Jimmy and I went to high school together and so when I asked him what he was doing he says, "Well you know we, in addition to the funeral business with my mom, my wife and I have gotten into the bed and breakfast business."  I said, "Oh, really" and he said yeah, he said, "Right over on the next block, 'cause you know Griffin is on King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], we bought these two buildings in the 3200 Block on Calumet [Avenue]."  I said, "Really, I used to live at 3221 when I was a kid," and he said, "You got to be kidding me?"  I said, "Nah."  "Those are the buildings we bought," (laughter) and I said, "You have got to be joking guy."  He said, "No, no, no."  So I said to him, "One day I'm gonna call you and I'd like to do maybe a radio piece about that location because I haven't been there since we moved," which was '53 [1953] or '54 [1954] something like that.  And so about six months later I actually called him.  I set up an appointment, took my producer over and we went--it was interesting the way we came--we went upstairs.  We use to live in the basement by the way, they created a space in this basement to rent--now this is in the 19- early--
Speaker 1: This was the.
Speaker 2: In the '50s [1950s], yeah okay?
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-two [1952] yeah, so when we rang the bell and went upstairs and he said, we were talking and he said, "Of course you've been up here," and I said, "No, I never saw this part, we just--my parents paid the rent.  We never came upstairs."  The people who, the people who own that place, there was a congressman, I can't think of his name now.
Speaker 2: No De Priest [Oscar Stanton De Priest] or Dawson [William L. Dawson]?
Speaker 1: Nah, nah it wasn't Dawson either, it'll come to--anyway he owned the building and we rented in this little basement space, and so I had never been upstairs, ever.  So we went downstairs where we use to live--oh, let me say this first.  When I ran into him and I told him we use to live in the basement of that house he and his wife went back home he said, he told me later and they went down to the basement and they were trying to figure out how did, there was a family, my brother [Charles L. Slaughter] and I, my mother and father and he just said well, wow they live down here so then, we when we actually did it and we went downstairs I had my tape recorder and we're doing the walkthrough and I showed him on the walls where they had put the earlier--the daylight was gone now but where there were petitions [sic. partitions].  They were no doors we just had a petition here and then there was a little, there was a kitchen that was about as big as a closet.  There was no bathroom in there, it was out by the furnace.  You had to go out of, outside of the little unit and the other end of the basement to use the bathroom and then there was a tub in there (laughter) that you take a bath in.
Story_ID: 303996
Speaker 1: But the good news about that was during these, during this period people lived in kitchenettes, a lot of black folks lived in kitchenettes 'cause that's all you could get, you know you had your little place and then everybody shared the kitchen and the--so we didn't have, we didn't have to share the kitchen and the bathroom so as we reflected on that and talked about those times, that was kind of a good thing, but he also observed boy it's a good thing you guys were short because the ceiling was very low (laughter), so your father [Charles Slaughter] and mother [Sylvia Gibbons Slaughter] were short?  I said yeah, you know, but it was a really interesting journey you know.  I got my first bicycle then, and I was--we went to the actual door to the basement where you'd come out of the front and I recalled how when there was a heavy snow when you opened the door you couldn't see outside 'cause it was just, it's snow you know and you had to sort of dig out and I remember getting that bike outta there and up the stairs and so.  It was an interesting journey but part of it was me talking to my mother and getting her on tape talking about when we lived there and she really just, she was saying how, how tough it was because even with two people working they didn't want to rent, people didn't want to rent to people who had children just as much as it is today, and even though my brother [Charles L. Slaughter] was very small, when the potential landlord would say, "Well, what do you have, how many kids do you have and what are they?"  And she'd say two boys, they'd say oh, no can't do that, even though the two boys were like my brother was like a baby, so it was very tough and but it was an interesting trip back in time for me to go down to this basement.
Speaker 2: Now this is an era that your father's working at the post office, I mean but I don't think the people these days realize how crowded the City of Chicago [Illinois] was in the black community then.
Speaker 1: Oh, you had all these people coming from Mississippi.
Speaker 2: And the community had an invisible barrier around it basically, you couldn't move out of the black community so.
Speaker 1: Sure, right.
Speaker 2: So that's, that's the Chicago, that Lorraine Hansberry writes about in--
Speaker 1: It was tough.
Speaker 2: --yeah, 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun'] you know a lot, you know a lot of crowded spaces.
Story_ID: 303997
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you how your parents [Sylvia Gibbons Slaughter and Charles Slaughter] met, we've gotta get you from, we got somebody from Brooklyn [New York] to somebody in Chicago [Illinois].  How did they get in the same city and?
Speaker 2: I have no idea, we've never really had that discussion--I really don't know to be very honest.
Speaker 1: And you were born in Brooklyn?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So was your father in Brooklyn for a while?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they--I would imagine met when he was in Brooklyn, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay was he in Brooklyn immediately after the war [World War II, WWII] is that what?
Speaker 2: And then my mother, the other thing I think my mother, I think my mother came here to work.  I think that's kind of what as I recall her mentioning one time.  She rarely talks about anything but she came here to work, came to Chicago.  She always wanted to come to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Now they must've--well he was in the war but if you were born in '42 [1942], they must've met before.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He went overseas I guess right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so she had, she moved here to work and so he--he was from Chicago so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: So none of that has ever been really explained.
Speaker 2: Nah.
Speaker 1: Okay all right but you--when did you, did you grow up in any part of your life in Brooklyn or did you, or was it always here?
Speaker 2: Summers, all summers I spent with my grandparents.
Speaker 1: No, but did the family like move to Chicago right away, I mean after you were born did your mother just to Chicago or what?
Speaker 2: I don't really, I'm really sure what that history is, I really don't know to be very honest with you, I really don't know.
Speaker 1: Or how old were you when you, you know when you all moved to Chicago, do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know I guess eight, nine maybe about nine I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's I mean you're that's the age when you should really you know (laughter) be conscious of it I guess, what's going on I guess?  So you're conscious of making a move from Brooklyn to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yeah but I was always, we were back and forth a lot, I mean I was, I was very close to my [maternal] grandmother [Gertrude Gibbons] so you know all--my best recollection is that as I was, as I got older I spent a lot of time summers with my grandmother because here in Chicago most kids in grammar school spend time in Mississippi when it was, when school was out for the summer they went to Mississippi, I didn't, I went to Brooklyn.
Speaker 1: Yeah you're absolutely right, this is--Chicago is like largely Mississippi, that exactly what?
Speaker 2: It is, it's upper Mississippi so.
Story_ID: 303998
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up, of your growing up?
Speaker 2: Well I guess probably like any other kid, I mean it's you know the playground, loved riding a bike.  I got that first bike, one of my first experiences with that first bike was that I was learning how to ride the bike, just learning how to ride and at that same location at 32nd [Street] and Calumet [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] my parents [Sylvia Gibbons Slaughter and Charles Slaughter] told me of course never let anybody ride your bike.  There was a very pretty girl who lived next door, she was very, I mean she was really pretty.  I thought she was like the prettiest girl I'd ever seen, and she kept asking me if she could ride it around the block, ride it around the block, and one day I let her and she was gone what seemed to be three days, but it was like thirty minutes, but I'm like what if she doesn't come back?  What if my parents call for me right now and I don't have the bike, I was scared to death.  She was gone longer than I thought she should be and that was a really scary experience and taught me a lesson you know.  Pretty girl will, can get you in a lot of difficulty.
Speaker 1: Did you ever let her ride the bike again?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't let her ride, I let her, I think we rode on it together 'cause she was bigger than I was and so by--I didn't let her take my bike.  I couldn't do that again, but as with any other kid I mean it was--I remember the first major fight I had at Douglas [Stephen A. Douglas School, Chicago, Illinois] which was at 32nd and Calumet.  I can't remember what it was about but a kid, you know it was one of those you know okay I'm going to see you after school, see you after school and a bunch of kids were waiting for us to get into this fight and this guy and I tussled, he threw me to the ground.  I busted my lip and I looked around he was gone and I had a busted lip and was bleeding and I essentially lost the fight, (laughter) it was kind of like very embarrassing and I had to go to school the next day with a big lip, bottom lip.  You know it wasn't the end of the world but you know, you feel challenged at that point you know to do something about it, but I wasn't quite sure what I wanted to do so life just went on and I just lost a fight, next.  You know, that kind of thing.  Pleasant experience I was a patrol boy at one time that was a big thing, you know patrol boy at the corner you get a badge, you get a belt and you know one of the big deals about that was how to fold the belt so that you could fold it up into sort of a symmetrical shape and it was a part that would hook onto your belt and that was sort of like a big deal, I was a patrol boy my belt hooked onto my other belt and I was very proud of that.  One of the things that was interesting about going to grammar school though was that I, in going to Douglas I lived right across the street, directly across the street from the school.  You would think that if you lived directly across the street from the school you should never be late.  I was and when my report card came my mother could not understand 'cause she had to go to work in the mornings, she said, "How could you be late, we live across the street," but you had to go to the corner to cross (laughter) so you couldn't like cross in the middle of the street, that, that was not a reason.  The reason was because I was, I never left on time, but you had to go to--we lived in the middle of the block, you had to go to the corner and cross.  Douglas was a very big school probably one of the largest grammar schools in the city, it was three stories.  There were very few schools that were that big, huge school.  So that was kind of about the size of it.  One of the most sort of kind of traumatizing experiences is when we moved into--we moved unlike a lot of people who moved from 32nd Street to 51st Street or 43rd Street we moved directly from 32nd and Calumet to 74th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue], so we moved from an all-black neighborhood to a neighborhood that was in the process of change and that was in '53 [1953] so that was pretty, that was a stark contrast.
Speaker 1: That's a pretty nice neighborhood, 74th and Indiana, that's Park Manor [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: That's Park Manor.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And as a matter-of-fact when I went to, when I went to Ruggles [Martha M. Ruggles Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] I was the, maybe the sixth black child in that school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: That was not pleasant (laughter) it was not pleasant at all.
Story_ID: 303999
Speaker 1: Well how would you describe yourself as a little kid, I mean were you, you know what did you like to do and you know what were you interested in?
Speaker 2: I liked music a lot, my mother [Sylvia Gibbons Slaughter] was very big on making sure that we were exposed to all different kinds of music.  The first time I heard [HistoryMaker] Ramsey Lewis was--my mother took me to a concert at Wilson Junior College [Woodrow Wilson Junior College; Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois], I must've been about twelve I guess.  My mother always thought it was important to expose us to everything that was available whether it was classical music or whatever it was, that was had a cultural benefit or artistic benefit.  She thought it was very important to at least expose you to it you know if you never did anything with it, it was fine but at least you knew what it was and so essentially I really got introduced to jazz through my father [Charles Slaughter] and my mother.  My father use to have a lot of--he had records that that I would play only when they were not home 'cause it was, this was the old days where you never touched your father's record player, that was the rule or the threat of near death, right so. He had records by George Shearing and Dakota Staton, and a few artists that I really liked, I mean I liked my music from that day which were doo-wops but I also liked these records that he had a lot so when he was not home or when they were both out I would play these records and play them over and over again.  I really I think that was the beginning of my love for jazz, and then my mother would make sure that we would go, she would take us to different things as I pointed out the Ramsey Lewis thing was something that was something that was sort of a turning point.  I saw Ramsey and the Trio [Ramsey Lewis Trio] and I went oh this is great, I really like this, and I must've been twelve or thirteen years old.
Speaker 1: Now, yeah you came along during the time when doo-wops were popular on the radio and when and the emergence of rock and roll I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, it was.
Speaker 1: --in the late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: It was late '50s [1950s] early '60s [1960s] as a teenager so it was Little Richard, it was James Brown and the Flames back then.
Speaker 1: The Famous Flames.
Speaker 2: The Famous Flames, but I also caught the tail end of the groups from the--coming out of the war years, you know there's a transition musically from Louis Jordan to--he was sort of the beginning of that transition from sort of pre-war jazz, this was post-war [World War II, WWII] and Louis Jordan was the transition into rock and roll, or to rhythm and blues so from Louis Jordan it was The Clovers and The 5 Royales and groups like that, that Sonny Til and The Orioles that transitioned later into groups after that which became The Temptations and all of that, but a little bit later.  So I was, I always liked a lot of music, and I think one of the differences too is back then the schools had music appreciation--
Story_ID: 304000
Speaker 1: One of the good things about transferring to Ruggles [Martha M. Ruggles Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] from Douglas [Stephen A. Douglas Elementary School, Chicago Illinois] was that Ruggles had all these activities.  I'll never forget they had when Queen Elizabeth [Queen Elizabeth II] was inaugurated they set up five televisions in the auditorium and they'd bring different classes in and you got a chance to see the inauguration as while it was in progress and they handed out all of these materials, literature, explaining what the orb was and all of the, historical background of coronations and what each item stood for.  The crown and the orb and the--I was amazed that all this information was available to each student.  I mean they passed all this stuff out to each student and it was incredible.  The difference between going to Douglas and going to Ruggles was, was amazing.  It was amazing to me because I was not a particularly good student.  I didn't and I was not somebody who liked to study and I didn't like to do homework.  When I was at Douglas if you didn't do your homework when it was time to pass it up front a lot of people, a lot of other people didn't do it so you weren't you didn't look strange you know.  When I transferred to Ruggles the first week I was there (laughter) it was time to pass the homework up and on one particular occasion I didn't, I didn't hadn't done that, didn't pass it and I was the only one in the class and I went whoa what's up (laughter).  So, I got better study habits, not great but better because people did their homework and they, they studied and they did what they were supposed to do.  So, the racism was tough but the academic atmosphere at Ruggles was, was really great.  I think at that point in '53 [1953] it was one of the top ten grammar schools in the city.
Speaker 2: Okay, how was the teacher-student ratio, you said that Douglas was crowded but was Ruggles as crowded as Douglas?
Speaker 1: Oh no, not at all, it was one of my most memorable experiences, memorable experiences as it relates to race and to show you how it wasn't crowded because you could have, we had something we had music appreciation, we had--the gym classes we had at Ruggles I think were four days a week and then one day was devoted to something that was cultural for you to learn square dancing or waltzing or whatever.  Well, the first time that I had one of those classes and I forgot what the dance was that we were supposed to learn, but that was, that one day a week was the co-ed class so invariably when we lined--they lined the students up and I'd be lined up facing a girl who was white and with blonde hair, the girl would go to the teacher, the gym teacher, Mrs. Sunberg [ph.] was her name who was a very nice lady and the girl would whisper something in her ear and then the next thing I knew I'd be facing the one Korean girl or the one (laughter), the one Filipino child that was in the class or whatever, 'cause there weren't a whole lot of black students in the class, in the school.  So in this co-ed gym class I think in was in fifth grade at that point.  There weren't many options and I guess these people as students their parents told them to not make any physical contact with anybody black, especially a black male, and it was painful, it was kind of painful.  But I, I'll always remember that, though. I will never forget that.
Story_ID: 304001
Speaker 1: Any other incidents of racism that you remember at--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah they used to--some of the older kids there [Martha M. Ruggles Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] were a couple of kids in the upper grades, seventh and eighth grade and during recess was, oh that was an awful time because during recess some of the older white kids would take these kids, the boys and they would grab their hands and their feet and swing them back and forth and throw 'em up in the air and let 'em go in the gravel and the kid would hit the ground and that would happen and you know we, it didn't happen with us because we were younger and the kids they got meaner as they got older, seventh and eighth grade students were a lot meaner than the fifth grade students, fifth and sixth but when they got to seventh and eighth grade they were a lot meaner.  So that was a situation and I always all remember we had, this school was pretty advanced so we had a departmental situation for classes.  We changed classes for different subjects which was not the case and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's unusual for grade school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, we did but when we'd be waiting outside of class for the other class to come out, I'll never forget around, I think it was around the holidays when Christmas and kids it was--you know there was always two or three white guys who were really just I mean I guess they came from families where that was really just part of the mantra for the family and as we would come out of class this was during the holidays, and these guys would sort of be singing low under their, I mean loud enough for us to hear, "I'm dreaming of a black Christmas with all the niggers at the school," you know and I--you know we know we had to go through that.  It was unpleasant, the teachers I thought were pretty open and these people did not these things in front of the teachers and the--for instance the teacher [Mrs. Sunberg (ph.)] that I mentioned before in the gym class she was a very nice lady and I think she did her best to try you know to try the situations comfortable as possible but it was tough, it was really tough so, but you know my parents [Sylvia Gibbons Slaughter and Charles Slaughter] moved to that neighborhood [Park Manor, Chicago, Illinois] for a better school, you know I use to hate when I'd hear people say black people move to all white neighborhoods 'cause they wanna live next door to white people.  They're saying absolutely--what this was about is my parents wanted to move from this basement apartment at 32nd [Street] and Calumet [Avenue].  They saved enough money to buy a house and moved to a neighborhood where we had a house and where there was a school that was in the top ten grammar schools in the city, that was the point and when I use to hear people say that other thing I'd say that was so stupid, why would somebody do that just to live next door to somebody who was white as opposed to the, the reasons that make sense such as you know buying some property that was available, moving to a better neighborhood and putting your children in a good school.
Story_ID: 304002
Speaker 1: Now was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah if you didn't go to church, if you didn't go to Sunday school or church you didn't go to the movies, that was the rule.   When you know 'cause all kids went to the movies on Sundays, a certain age I think ten, eleven years old but the rule in our house was that if you did not, if you didn't--even if you said you didn't feel well and you were ill well you'd--it be best for you to continue to be ill in the afternoon because if you were too sick to go to church or Sunday school, then you're too sick to go to the movies.  So we had to go--every Sunday I was in the choir, I was an usher.
Speaker 1: Now what church did you go to?
Speaker 2: Carey Temple A.M.E. Church [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Oh where is (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was at 53rd [Street] and Michigan [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's now at 72nd [Street] and Greenwood [Avenue] but that was years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'll tell you a funny story about the, about being an usher.  The deal with being an usher was that you for the most part, you had to have a dark suit, blue suit, so I guess when I got to be about thirteen or so or fourteen I really got tired of blue suits, and I was, when they were about to buy me another suit, I said, I protested.  I said whoa, whoa, how about a different color suit?  And they said, "No because you have to usher and the blue suit is what you have to have 'cause you have to be, you have to be ready on Sunday to usher."  So my mother [Sylvia Gibbons Slaughter] said well how about if we talk to the pastor about it, so there was--our minister then was a Reverend Alienon Bailey [ph.].  What a man he was so (laughter) we went in for a conference with the pastor 'cause I was so upset about having to have another blue suit, and Reverend Bailey said, "The boy has a point" (laughter) you know what I mean.  So I think we got the blue suit, but I also got like a sport coat or something that was different and I could dress, it was a dress outfit when it provided me an opportunity an option for another dress outfit.
Speaker 1: To change up yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so no I spent a lot of time in church, an awful lot of time.
Story_ID: 304003
Speaker 1: What was the radio like, and did you pay special attention to what was on the radio when you were coming up, did I mean?
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're on radio now but I just wonder if you, if it was?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I listened to what my parents [Sylvia Gibbons Slaughter and Charles Slaughter] listened to in the early '50s [1950s] and that was in the mid-'50s [1950s] that was--Al Benson was on a lot and.
Speaker 1: Tell us who Al Benson was?
Speaker 2: Al Benson was one of the early radio pioneers, he was the one that everybody--his name was familiar with black Chicago [Illinois], everybody knew who Al Benson was he was on I think it was WGES [WGES Radio; WGRB Radio] at the time and the person that preceded Al Benson in radio would be a guy named Jack L. Cooper who was considered to be the black radio pioneer in Chicago probably in the country, but after Jack L. Cooper came Al Benson and Al, I guess Al's connection--Al was a great sales person, I mean he could convince these sponsors to buy time and Al was--Al had a very thick southern accent and he was from Mississippi and the deal was people connected these, you know these--he's talking to people who just moved from Mississippi so here you got Al Benson who is on the radio and he played everything, he played everything from Basie [Count Basie] to, to Jimmy Reed, the blues, rhythm and blues, you name it, but everybody listened to Al Benson.  Those were some (unclear)--and so my parents did too and to this day I can remember 'cause it was you know the one station and Al Benson and you remember the commercials, it was--Pekin Cleaners [Chicago, Illinois] was a major sponsor, Banner Tire Company [Chicago, Illinois] (laughter) and those were sponsors that we, we all can recall so that was I guess my first experience in just listening to anybody on the radio before that I use to listen to, I use to listen to soap operas when--my grandmother use to listen to a lot of soap operas and so I listened to a lot of soap operas which I thought were pretty interesting you know, 'Stella Dallas' and 'Just Plain Bill' and 'The FBI in Peace and War,' 'Gunsmoke' all that stuff on the radio.  I thought it was, I thought it was great, I really loved listening to that, and at one point my parents bought me a crystal set.  I don't know if you know what those are they I can't explain it technically, but it allows you to pick up radio signals and you put the kit together and you can move the little dial and you have your own little radio so that was, and that was in the early '50s [1950s] but I listened to a lot of soap operas and radio dramas and all of that before the Al Benson days and during the Al Benson days. And I also listened to in the mid-'50s [1950s] a lot of general market radio 'cause that's what they listened to.  There were people like Howard Miller who use to be on the radio here in Chicago, and was a big deal in the morning so I listened to a lot of that.
Speaker 1: Is that like one of those 'Breakfast Club'-type shows?
Speaker 2: Yeah it was more like the Don McNeil 'Breakfast Club' ['The Breakfast Club'] kind of thing yeah, that kind of stuff.  In terms of black radio, the one that I really listened to a lot and this guy was on late at night.  I had this, my parents bought me this transistor radio, it was a big radio, the battery was about this big (laughter) right and so I would, I wasn't supposed to have it one but I put it under the covers and listened to it late at night and early into the morning before I'd fall off to sleep and there was a guy by the name of Sam Evans who was a very well-known radio personality here in Chicago.  His, he was--his show was 'Jam with Sam' and--
Speaker 1: What did he play for the most part?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What kind of music did he play?
Speaker 2: He played, he played everything, all kinds of black music, mainly rhythm and blues but then he had a portion that he would do late at night called "Blue Lights in the Basement Music" [ph.] and he would, he'd play this theme song and he'd, he'd pretend he was going down these steps into the basement and then he'd say, he was going down in the basement to play some blues and he'd pull out an old orange crate to sit on and play, I mean that was, that was a--you could almost picture this thing you know what I mean and I use to love listening to that and then he'd play Jimmy Reed and Muddy Waters and Howlin Wolf and Lowell Fulson you know.  'Jam with Sam,' Sam Evans.
Story_ID: 304004
Speaker 1: Now was television a big deal when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Yeah I mean television was you know black families had the television with the, you know with the coat hanger trying to get the reception and all of that, we had one.  There was--I do remember seeing Nat Cole [Nat King Cole] you know for that brief period that he came on television in the '50s [1950s] but as a television viewer, I use--as a kid I watched 'Howdy Doody' and it was a show that use to come out of Chicago [Illinois] and when you look back on it, boy it was really cheap and tacky the way they made it, but we loved 'Captain Video and His Video Rangers' that was a big deal.  I mean I, I waited every day for 'Captain Video' to come on, that was, that was one of my favorites, and 'Kukla, Fran and Ollie,' but I was very impressed by 'Captain Video.'  So that was a lot of my TV watching and then as I got a little bit older and was able to stay up a little bit late on the weekends, they had a, they had a ten o'clock movie I think on Friday, and that was--there was a guy who use to come on with a--he had beard and the movie was brought to you by Community Builders [The Community Builders], his name was Clair Hinckley [ph.] (laughter), they put these additions on your house and all of that, but everybody knew about that show because I think after the ten o'clock movie which went off usually about twelve o'clock that was it television was over, you know.  So I think that was Friday or Saturday night, and of course Ed Sullivan when there was anybody who was an African American performer and there were a few, only a few, there was always Pearl Bailey, there was Louis Armstrong, Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.] occasionally but there were a few and we'd be all excited when somebody black was gonna be on 'The Ed Sullivan Show,' it was a big deal to call people up, "Hey guess what? Pearl Bailey's gonna be on Ed Sullivan," you know.  So, back in the old days yeah.
Story_ID: 304005
Speaker 1: Let's see now so you went to grade school at--you finished grade school at?
Speaker 2: Ruggles [Martha M. Ruggles Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: At Ruggles, all right and so you went on to is it Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, Parker High School [Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Parker, okay
Speaker 2: Parker, there was, at that point there was a Parker High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think now it's Robeson or something, but there was--it was Parker High School which was--Parker was situated right where Wilson Junior College [Woodrow Wilson Junior College; Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] and Chicago Teachers College [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] were, all right at 69th [Street] and Stewart [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Yeah, near where Kennedy-King is now I guess right, it's similar--
Speaker 2: Yeah that same approximate area, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to Parker High School, now you said you weren't much of a student in grade school.  Did you get better at Parker (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Not really, I mean there were some things I was good--I was always good in English and I was always good in anything that was an oral presentation.  So I mean I had some, I thought I guess some natural skills in--and I always you know, English I always liked and I liked writing and so anything that had to do with essays or anything to do with speech I was pretty good at without putting a lot of effort into it.
Speaker 1: Did you deliver those Easter presentations at church [Carey Temple A.M.E. Church, Chicago, Illinois] and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah I did some of those but that wasn't really a big thing for me.  I did some of those you know.  So I spent two years at Parker and then we moved to 79th [Street] and Eberhart [Avenue] so I transferred to Hirsch [Hirsch High School; Emil G. Hirsch Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois].  When I was at Parker though I was on the track team, and I enjoyed that a lot.
Speaker 1: So what did you run?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What did you run?
Speaker 2: The 100 meter and the 220 relay.
Speaker 1: Okay, now why did you stop (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, when I--at Parker if you--when you were on the track team you didn't have to take gym, you know you could substitute the credit--you get the credit if you were on a team, basketball, track, baseball whatever.  When I transferred to Hirsch you know, Hirsch was very academically inclined and so they didn't let you substitute, I mean if you were on the track team you still--which in essence really is a good thing, I mean you shouldn't be able to substitute one for the other, it should be just an extracurricular activity but at Parker you could substitute.  So when I got to Hirsch you couldn't substitute so I didn't join the track team.
Story_ID: 304006
Speaker 1: Okay so when you moved, you all moved into Chatham [Chicago, Illinois] I guess right, is that what they say or?
Speaker 2: We moved from the district for Parker [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois] ended at 75th [Street] or 76th [Street] on Cottage [Cottage Grove Avenue] on the East, 76th on the South and beyond that you were in the district for Hirsch [Hirsch High School; Emil G. Hirsch Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we moved to 79th [Street] and Eberhart [Avenue] then I became--and then I was in the district for Hirsch.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're near King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] on 79th Street--so were you on Eberhart or King?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is where my mother [Sylvia Gibbons Slaughter] is now, 79th and Eberhart.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so was that a big transition in terms of the school?  Was this again an integrated school situation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah it was a big transition.
Speaker 1: An integrated school situation?
Speaker 2: It was a big transition because Parker was very much a very social atmosphere plus you know Wilson Junior College [Woodrow Wilson Junior College; Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] was right here and Chicago Teachers College [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] was right there and so it was, it was an academic atmosphere to some degree but it was also a very social atmosphere with a lot of party mentality going on and you know there were kids at Parker who were like seniors who would, especially guys would try to pretend they went to Wilson for the girls, you know that kind of thing and so it was very social.  It was a beautiful campus that sort of connected the two you know, it's Parker right here and then Wilson and the Chicago Teachers College and it was all right there and it was just, it was a fun place to be, very fun place to be.  I mean Parker was, Parker was integrated and I think the percentages were, it might have been 70 percent black, maybe 30 percent white or 80/20 something like that but it was integrated it was no problem anything like and of course two colleges were right there.  When I went to Hirsch, Hirsch was still in the process of some transition and Hirsch when I got there was probably maybe 70 percent white, 30 percent black.  When I graduated two years later, it was probably 55 percent white, 45 percent black.
Speaker 1: Okay so it was in transition right?  Okay so did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Probably I would--I'd say English and social studies.  Social studies I thought was fascinating.
Speaker 1: Okay, what aspect of, certain aspects of history or, or (unclear).
Speaker 2: Especially when we had a teacher that was very--it was one guy there who, this was guy was really--he was funny, he was interesting and he made, he made the historical aspects of social studies very interesting.  We would talk about the French and I remember him talking--we were talking about the French and personal hygiene and how he used a lot of perfume cover up feeling that you know washing away the natural body oils was a bad thing and he'd make it pretty funny, but he'd also, he was a really good teacher who made it interesting and he was very funny, but I always thought the study of different people and cultures and what they did and how they did it was pretty interesting.  I found that to be very, very interesting.  I thought history was pretty interesting too.
Story_ID: 304007
Speaker 1: So were you involved in, did you get involved in clubs in high school and that sort of thing (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No what I really wanted to do was be in a drama club, but there was a--the teacher who was the head of the drama club was also one of my English teachers.  She and I did not get along very well.  I did not like her and you know, you know how as a young student I thought well she doesn't like me.  I'm sure she thought not one wit about me one way or the other but I really didn't care for her that much and I really wanted to be in the drama club 'cause I thought acting was a real challenge and I really wanted to do that, but I held myself back.  I didn't audition and I didn't go out for the drama club and I didn't--she was the head of it and I didn't want to do it.  So I felt that I had somehow tricked her one time.  I know we had to do a book report an oral book report and I was actually failing the subject, not because I was particularly bad in English.  I was actually pretty good but I didn't like to do homework so I, you know when they went to the book to look at what you've turned in, then it was very little that I had turned in (laughter) for the semester so she was actually gonna fail me and then we had to do this oral book report and I did a report on the 'Bridge of San Luis Rey' ['The Bridge of San Luis Rey,' Thornton Wilder] which was a book that I had not totally read at that point.  I skimmed through it, picked up the major points and I was always good at oral presentation.  So I did this presentation in front of the class and I think I was the only one that got above an A, or some A plus or something, some superior grade and she says you know you have the ability to--why don't you blah, blah, blah you don't do your homework and now I can't, it's gonna be almost impossible for me to fail you so (laughter).  So she didn't she passed me with a minimum passing grade but it was, largely based on, well I had some homework in but she gave me a better grade than I deserved based on the fact that I was the only one who was able to deliver to read, to write, read and deliver a report like that, and but she was head of the drama class so, I didn't go for it.
Story_ID: 304008
Speaker 1: Okay now did you have any sense at that point that you had a, now you've got, you're known for having this smooth voice, you've got a smooth voice and a lot of people from your generation even the aldermen have a smooth voices (laughter), but you have a distinctive voice on the radio.  Did anybody ever talk to you about getting involved in broadcast at that point?
Speaker 2: No not really but this and this may seem, this is a bit strange I have no idea why I said it at the time, but in my yearbook behind my name in terms of what your hobbies are, what would you like to do later in life.  For some reason I put I wanted to be a disc jockey.  It's in the yearbook and I can't remember why I put that in there.
Speaker 1: But you never got involved, did you have a high school radio station or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, no, I was--I probably, I listened more to as I got to be an older teenager like closer to eighteen I was big on--by the time I was like fifteen I was really big into jazz, and so my big hero.  A lot of people, I mean I listened to [HistoryMaker] Herb Kent back in the day, but my big hero was Sid McCoy who had this incredible voice and he was the sort of the reigning jazz disc jockey at the time and as a matter-of-fact he used to live next door to us at one point, but I love jazz and this guy was so smooth and I had said you know what, one day I'd like to be like that guy so but how I initially got involved with this business at all had to do with singing.  I mean I was, when I got to Hirsch [Hirsch High School; Emil G. Hirsch Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois] I got with a group of guys and we formed a singing group as did a lot of people during this era, but we turned out to be pretty successful high school singers.  We were all in the choir but we had this doo-wop group and we--Hirsch was a very straight-laced school.  There was a principal there by the name of Eugene Vandenberg and he was very strict, he even didn't, he didn't even allow for African American males even back then a mustache came fairly early, had to shave it off, no mustaches that was his policy.  That's how strict he was.  Academically the school was a winner, no question about it, but he had some real, I mean it seemed like every day there was a new rule.  I mean you get a memo from the office that would get read to the students and every day there seemed to be something else you could not do and that used to be very irritating, but you know when you look back on it in retrospect, those are the things that made the school a very good school, the fact that this guy kept a tight rein.  Well we formed a signing group and we sang at every pep rally, every, just about every assembly where there was something you know being celebrated, and we were the first group of performers who were allowed during the Christmas holidays, the week before Christmas to--we were excused from class to go through the halls at different, different points of the hallway where the classroom doors were open and we had, we had arranged some Christmas songs in a doo-wop fashion and we were allowed to sing those in the hallways to entertain the students.  That was the first time that ever happened at Hirsch's history, Vandenberg allowed it too which was kind of unusual but we were, it was, it was a pretty big deal and for us because you know in high school if you play on the basketball team or the football team you get girls.  Well in think one of our guys played football but I was a little guy and I was the lead singer too for the group so this was a great way to get girls if you sing, so we were, and we were the reigning, we were the guys we were The Belvederes, everybody knew who we were and we were very popular.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Belvederes, do you know?
Speaker 2: Just like it sounds I think, B-E-L-V-E, V-E, B-E-L, B-E-L-D-E-V-E-R-E-S [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah so that was a, yeah that was a pretty big deal for us, we were very popular and as a matter of fact (laughter), the guy I was telling you about, the history teacher, social studies teacher he had heard about us but had not seen us 'cause he had missed a couple of the assemblies so he came to--he was at one of the assemblies and the next time we had a class he said, "Well, Richard [HistoryMaker Richard Claude Steele] I had no idea you could sing, I'll have to pass you," (laughter) I was, I did pretty well in that class, he was being funny; but he was a pretty funny guy, but we were very, very popular and it made high school a lot more pleasant.
Story_ID: 304009
Speaker 1: Now when you were in high school did you--were you, I mean did--well, you're in high school during the, I guess the heart of the Civil Rights Movement activities and stuff you know when from '57 [1957] to?
Speaker 2: I was in high school from '56 [1956] to '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah a lot of stuff was going on in terms of civil rights, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was--you know.  Did your parents [Sylvia Gibbons Slaughter and Charles Slaughter] talk about the Civil Rights Movement a lot or did you talk about it at the home or in school?
Speaker 2: They did but as much as anybody else did.  I mean I got to tell you my parents worked very hard and so you know while certainly civil rights was important in a general sense as it was in black families overall, my parents were working very hard to pay for that house that, to pay for the--well at that point we had--we moved to a two-flat building that they bought but with them it was always about you know trying to work, save their money, make sure that there was, there were able to provide for us.  Making a living was, was paramount when they were, as it relates to anything else.  It was trying to keep your head above water, trying to keep the system from drowning you; and they worked very hard at that.  So while there was not--I didn't hear like dinner table discussions about civil rights and a lot of that had to do with the fact that my father worked these odd hours, so there wasn't a lot of time for discussion with the family, and you know my mother and father having these big discussions because they were always working.
Story_ID: 304010
Speaker 1: When you were a senior did you have aspirations to go to college at that point [at Hirsch High School; Emil G. Hirsch Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, actually I was sick of school, I didn't really want--here's what the deal was.  I wanted to, I wanted to go only if I could major in speech and drama because that's what I wanted to do.  My mother [Sylvia Gibbons Slaughter] thought that, that was kind of a ridiculous thing to do and nobody's gonna pay for that, but my mother had, my mother had saved, my mother and father [Charles Slaughter] had saved their money very specifically for college tuition, for education for my brother [Charles L. Slaughter] and I both whenever that time came.  My mother and I were at odds to some degree about--first of all I wasn't that enthusiastic about college.  I didn't like school that much, I was, I was pretty lazy in terms of studying and I didn't really like to study or do homework or any of that so, I was just kind of an average or even less than average student which use to bug my mother, because my IQ tests were always--when I was in grammar school I was I had very high IQ test scores and I was always way over the line in terms of reading.  I think if your grade average was like, in eighth grade you were supposed to be at an eight point something or other, and I was always like an eleven point something.  I mean I was--I, 'cause I really loved reading and all things associated with that.  I really early on liked the arts a lot and I thought it was just fascinating to see people as actors and that kind of thing and I thought that I'd be, even though I didn't take advantage of that in high school, I still thought it would be something I'd like to pursue if I was gonna do anything at all in college and my mother and I did not agree on that because you know my mother and father were old school, and I can understand when I became a parent later on that to spend your hard earned money for a kid to be educated in speech and drama, how you going to make a living doing that?  So the upshot was I decided--that summer I looked for a job and I was trying, I figured I'd decide what to do over the summer, and one day I was downtown, one day in August--I graduated in June, one day in August I went into the [U.S.] Air Force recruiting office and signed up.  I joined the Air Force.
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: That was, so that took up the next four years.
Speaker 1: Had you kind of planned to do that or you just?
Speaker 2: No, just--it occurred to me that if I wasn't gonna go, if I wasn't gonna go to and it didn't look like--I mean I did have some options, I mean they wanted to, they had saved their money so they could send us away to wherever we wanted to go and I don't know what I qualified for at that point, but I mean the other option was to stay here and go to Wilson, 'cause everybody I knew went to Wilson Junior College [Woodrow Wilson Junior College; Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois].  I mean if you didn't know what you were gonna do you went to Wilson, but I didn't really wanna do, you know I said well I'll still be here in the city and I'll still have the same misgivings about formal education and so I (laughter), so I thought--then I thought about well maybe the [U.S.] military is an option.  I knew people who had joined the [U.S.] Navy who graduated before me and they said that the Navy was incredibly prejudiced; you don't wanna join the Navy.  I said okay, that's out, then the [U.S.] Marines [U.S. Marine Corps], I had no intention of doing that 'cause I wasn't, I didn't wanna work too hard and then the [U.S.] Army was, I said well the ground pounders, no I don't wanna do that, so the Air Force was kind of elite at that point you know what I mean (laughter) and, and you--so I joined the Air Force for four years.  I never spent one night in the field.
Story_ID: 304011
Speaker 1: While I was in the [U.S.] Air Force the--I got with another singing group in Orlando, Florida.
Speaker 2: You were stationed in Orlando, Florida?
Speaker 1: I was stationed in Orlando, Florida.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: First duty station, we, we did--we sang at local talent shows and all that.  Well we got on a local television talent show and we won, and we were singing jazz, we were singing like The Hi-Lo's, Four Freshmen [The Four Freshmen] kind of stuff, so we won this local television talent show and we each got a savings bond.  One of the judges for the talent show was a local disc jockey, a white guy who had a girlfriend who owned a dance studio.  They were trying to cash in on the--you know the fact that there would, there was a moon shot or not--a space shot at Canaveral [Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Cape Canaveral, Florida].  She created a dance called The Astronaut Lift Off it was the hokiest, dumbest dance you have ever seen in your life.  He met us because he was a judge on the contest we had won this television thing locally.  So he came to us and said, "Listen how would you guys; would you guys be interested in recording a song?"  And we said, yeah sure you know we'd love, you know we wanna record.  We were all eighteen except one guy was seventeen, he had to get his parents' permission to sign onto this contract.  So we had some rehearsals, we learned the song, his girlfriend showed us how the dance worked, we didn't do it, we just looked at it.  It was really--but you never know I mean you know, we thought we might catch a trend or you know or space shot is big at that point, who knows?
Speaker 2: What did the dance consist of do you remember?
Speaker 1: The words were like (singing), "Do you like to limbo, no, no baby, maybe harlee garlee, un hun honey," and then getting to this part about limbo, lift off and there'd be some kind of lift so like you were lifting off, you know it was that kind of thing, so yeah it was as dumb as it sounds right, but you never know.  So we said okay we'll record this and we recorded it at a club in Cocoa Beach, Florida which is right where Cape Canaveral or Cape Kennedy [Cape Kennedy Air Force Station] was at that point.  We had a band that came in from Las Vegas [Nevada] that was performing in the club for all of these--they were journalists and all kinds of people there.  We didn't read music so we had to, we went to the club during the day to rehearse with the band and this was '62 [1962] I think it was.  So when we got to Cocoa Beach, the guy, the disc jockey who took us down there said, "Okay now look, the performance is gonna be at this hotel, motel tonight where all these journalists are blah, blah--we'll go to, we'll go there during the day to rehearse, but you can't stay there.  No black people can stay there so you have to stay, there was this little roach motel in Coco Beach," they took us to and we had to stay there until they came to pick us up that night and we dressed, put our uniforms on and all that.  So when they took us to the, this big time motel they said, he took us to a suite and he said, "Look you have to stay in the room 'til it's time to, don't come out of the room.  You know we have food and drinks and everything in here, and we'll come and get you when it's time to come downstairs to do the show."  That's how that went, we went down we did the show, we sang a couple of our own songs and we did this, this astronaut lift off, we did it twice while the woman showing people how to do this dance.
Story_ID: 304012
Speaker 1: During--and I just--I forgot to tell you this.  During the, this is really, this is incredible.  I wanted to do a story on this a couple of years ago and I said god you know I don't even have a copy of that record, it was so bad I didn't even keep a copy.  So I put an ad in the Orlando Sentinel.  I got a couple of responses wanting to know if anybody still had a copy of that record or remembered it from the year 1962, blah, blah.  Got some responses, talked to a guy on the phone who was in the band who played behind the record.  He sent me a copy of the record, he still had it.  I got it, put it on tape.  I was gonna do an interview with the guy who set this whole thing up but I, I talked him but we never did do the interview, it was a--I think we had a space tragedy at that point and it was a bad timing to do that, but anyway here's the bottom line.  The guy who was in the band who had sent me the record initially said, well I don't know if you remember he said, but do you remember we were rehearsing that day and a guy came in.  He was from Detroit [Michigan] he was you know looking for new talent and you know he was in Florida and he talked to you guys.  I said, I do remember a guy talking to us and he wanted to know if we were interested in maybe getting with a record company and there was this company fairly new in Detroit.  We were all--one guy was older than we were.  He was from Washington [D.C.], he was kind of slick.  So he actually talked to him and all of us, we were kind of, you know we were there, we had two more years to do in the service, we were kind of like, yeah you know whatever, but we weren't overwhelmed by it.  Turns out it was [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy who, who was in Florida looking for some talent (laughter).  He says, 'cause the guy in the band said man that was Berry Gordy, but at that point none of us knew it was gonna be like that, this was '61 [1961] or '62 [1962] and yeah, you know years later I interviewed him on his book but I didn't know this at the time.  I would have reminded him about it, but when I interviewed him I didn't have that information when I interviewed him.
Speaker 2: Now that's some story that's so, well he never?
Speaker 1: So, anyway long story short we heard our record about three times on the radio and we were thrilled and that was it, never went anywhere and that was sort of the--we did win, we won an [U.S.] Air Force, not an Air Force talent contest, they had, they'd have a contest on the base [Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Cape Canaveral, Florida] and if you won in your category then you'd go to the next level and we didn't, we went to Dover Air Force Base in Delaware and we, we came in second place.  I win in two categories, I win as a male vocalist in one category and win with a group in the group category, but I had thoughts about being a singer but when I went to that next level of competition and I saw all these people, heard these people who could really sing.  Some guy did a Johnny Mathis song and it totally like knocked me outta the box.  I went whoa, no chance whatsoever, so I gave up thinking along those lines.
Story_ID: 304013
Speaker 1: But about a year before I got out [of the U.S. Air Force], I use to live with a woman who had a roommate and her roommate used to go with a guy who was a disc jockey in Tam--this was later this was in Tampa, Florida and I would talk to him from time to time, but I really didn't have the total bug for radio at that point yet, but I use to talk to him.  I thought it was kind of interesting about radio and the fact that that's what he did for a living.  So I started, I said, you know what?  Maybe I can do this, maybe I have the ability and the personality, blah, blah.  So I brought a tape recorder from another GI, a used tape recorder and I would get Ebony magazine and I'd read the ads out of Ebony magazine and practice reading these ads and recoding them and I'd play them back, and I'd play them back for people I was stationed with and they'd laugh and they'd say, you wanna do what (laughter), no, I don't think so.  At that point I really had the bug, and so I said you know this is something I really think I can do.  So when I got out in '64 [1964] I was living in Brooklyn [New York] and I went to a couple of schools, schools for radio and I think I got my first job in '67 [1967] or '68 [1968] I think it was and this was, and I didn't, and this wasn't really a job, it was--I was in New York [New York] and there was a station that was an ethnic language brokered, time-brokered station and they use to run tapes of different ethnic groups, the Czechoslovakian hour, the you know the Hungarian hour and the student, the college student that use to do it, and I found this out through one of the instructors at the school I went to.  He said, "Well it's you know not much, it's just a little paycheck, a little part time thing.  When this guy goes home for the holidays you can work there."  So that's what I did.  When he was gone for Christmas or Easter or school break or whatever, then I'd come and I'd run the tapes and I got to do a ten second Lazzara Bread [Lazzara Bakery] commercial and read the race results.  It was at the top of the Park Hyatt Hotel in New York, and it was like a little room way at the top.  It wasn't a studio; it was like a little room where the transmitter was on the top of the building.  There was no bathroom; you had to pee in the sink.
Story_ID: 304014
Speaker 1: Tell us about the school you attended for broadcasting in New York [New York].
Speaker 2: I was in New York; when I got out of the [U.S. military] service I decided to settle in Brooklyn [New York].
Speaker 1: Was this in '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: This was in '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was pretty much determined at that point to be in radio so in the meantime I was working at Hertz-Rent-A-Car [The Hertz Corporation] which is another interesting story, but I went to a place called the New York School of Announcing and Speech [New York, New York], NYSAS, you know they use to advertise a lot in the newspapers and I thought whoa, this is my way to broadcasting fame (laughter) and so I signed up, you know essentially these, they were kind of shysters but you know you learn the basics of radio and the guy who ran it was very smooth, Joe Wippler, boy was he smooth and he used to, he used to do television commercials.  I think I first saw the school advertised in a television commercial and his receptionist was extremely beautiful and so when you, you know when came and trying to decide whether or not you wanted to sign up, you kept looking at her saying, well how much is it you know (laughter).  So you know but look I did learn some basics there and that--for a couple of years I tried to get jobs and send out tapes and all of that, and none of that happened and so at a later point I went to a place called career academy. Now career academy was a franchise and they were in lots of states, they had some major old time broadcasters as spokespersons and you saw their pictures you know on the literature and it was very impressive and they had an interesting thing where they'd have you come and they'd say, "Well we don't know if you're really suited for this or not, but we wanna make sure that you're suited for it before we sign you up, if we're gonna sign you up."  It's like a big mystery, "Are we gonna sign you up?" And the real mystery was, can you get a loan to pay the money for the school, but you, you're so enthusiastic about it at the time you don't even think about that.  So they asked you to, to bring a concerned individual from your family in with you when you come in for this interview.  So I went with my [maternal] aunt [Claudia Gibbons Austin] and they have you--I think the process was they had me come in a do a tape and then they had me come back with my concerned person, wife or girlfriend or in this case my aunt and they looked very serious and they said, "We've listened to your tape and we think you have real potential" (laughter).  Can you get the loan?  You know can you see?  And at that point I got a, I got a New York state higher education loan, which was pretty easy to get 'cause they had, they had it hooked up through the school and so I went there and you know that was the second place I went to and eventually I did a job--
Story_ID: 304015
Speaker 1: Let me tell you something interesting about while I was working in a regular job, I was working for Hertz-Rent-A-Car [The Hertz Corporation] and my job was a reservations clerk so when you called to rent a car, I would do the whole spiel over the phone and we would have somebody, a supervisor in the office who had access to all the--twelve of us or fourteen of us to monitor your calls to see if you were doing a good job if you asked for the business and blah, blah.  Then they'd tape you like every two weeks and then bring you in to give you an assessment of your, of your performance, and listen to the tape and tell you, "Well you didn't ask for the business" or "You did this pretty well, but you should have blah, blah" and all that.  Well I, everybody that I worked with knew that I wanted to be a broadcaster 'cause that's all I talked about being in radio, I wanna be in radio, I'm in radio school.  So they let me, the manager let me record the overnight message which said, "Thank you for calling Hertz.  Hertz reservations is closed and will reopen at 7:00 a.m.  Please call back then, thank you so much for your business."  That was my broadcast, so I would put that on the record line and I'd, when I'd go home I'd call, I'd call back to hear myself (laughter), 'cause I just was so thrilled at hearing my voice you know on this recording, and that was just a big charge for me you know.  My other foray into broadcasting was I had this kind of a part time I got through one of the instructors at school where there was a station--did I tell you this story (unclear).  It was a story, it was a station that did the, there was a station that did a lot of ethnic broadcasting and so they--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah the, the room at the top of the, yeah so you--that was your first job in broadcasting?
Speaker 1: The first, first little job where I would change tapes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now this is '60 [1960]?
Speaker 1: This was about '60 [1960], this must've been about '66 [1966] or '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: All right now that's the ethnic broad-, okay.
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967], and, yeah top of the Park Hyatt Hotel [New York, New York].  You had to take--you took an elevator to the last stop, then you walked up some steps and then there was a little like a ladder (laughter) that you climbed up to get up into this part of the building where the very top of the hotel because the transmitter was on top of that, but they had a little, it wasn't a studio, it was just a little something to operate from up there and I got to do a live ten-second Lazzara Bread [Lazzara Bakery] commercial and the race results, but it was live and it was on the radio, everything else was you know taped and you'd--I'd just change tapes and essentially be the engineer but the ten-second bread commercial and the sports, I mean and the race results--my aunt would sit up all night, 'cause this didn't come on 'til about one [a.m.] where I got to do the live stuff and the ID station identification, and my aunt would sit up all night to hear me do those little few words and when I'd come home, "How did I sound? How did I sound?"  She said, "Oh you were great!"  (Laughter) And so it was, she was a big supporter of what I did and you know she really encouraged me to keep to--'cause it's very difficult to get the first job, but she believed in me and she stayed behind me, and it did work at a later point.
Speaker 2: What was your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) First full time job?
Speaker 2: --no, no your aunt's name?
Speaker 1: Oh Claudia Austin [Claudia Gibbons Austin].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My mother's [Sylvia Gibbons Slaughter] sister.
Story_ID: 304016
Speaker 1: My first full time job?  Well let me tell you what happened first before the first full-time job.  I got a response from all these tapes and letters over these years I'd sent out, three years or so.  Now, I get a response from a station in Atlanta [Georgia].  I am overwhelmed, I'm thrilled; they sent me a letter saying, "We received your tape, we like what we've heard.  We're starting a new station, a rhythm and blues station and we think you would fit what we're trying to do.  We're gonna start sometime after the first of the year 'cause that would be like January or early February."  So I got this letter and it's like this must've been October.  So I'm too thrilled, I'm saying finally, I got this first full-time job in radio, man I'm, I'm ready to go now.  I use to dream about being on the air.  I mean you know I use to just, in my own head I was already on doing programs and being a disc jockey and personality and all that.  So now I get this letter and I was saying well okay my dreams have finally come true.  So October, November--late October so it was November, December then so when January came around, but the first week in January, I said you know I haven't heard from these guys let me--I think we had one correspondence after the first one and they said they'd be in touch.  So January came and I didn't hear anything and I called them and they said we'll be in touch, we'll be in touch, and so almost a month passed and now we're at the end of January and I'm saying well what's up, what's up?  So I--the guy that I was in contact with at the station, I kept trying to call him and he kept ducking me, you know, he's not here right now you have to call back at another time blah, blah so, finally when I did get hold of him, he said, "Well we've had some change in our plans and we don't think that's gonna work now, and you know we'll keep you in mind," and I was totally crushed.  I thought this was gonna be the opportunity of a lifetime, Atlanta!  And I'm like aw, 'cause I heard about certainly all these places that people would start, very small towns and I thought whoa in Atlanta that's not bad at all, it's not New York [New York] but nobody expects to start doing radio in New York in their first gig.  So that didn't happen.  About a year later I got another nibble from a station [WTOY Radio] in Roanoke, Virginia.  The only reason I'd heard of Roanoke, Virginia is because it was one of our rental stations when I was working at Hertz Rent-A-Car [The Hertz Corporation], very small town.  They liked the tape, we talked, seemed to be a good fit so I moved from Brooklyn, New York to Roanoke, Virginia.  I think that was in '68 [1968].  Salary was, I will never forget the figures, it was $80 a week, that was $160 every two weeks and after taxes it was $128 and change every two weeks.
Speaker 2: Now for those days that wasn't like big money, that was?
Speaker 1: In 1968 (laughter)!
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That was awful!
Speaker 2: That's less than a, say a person working for a General Motors or Ford plant, they're making much more than that (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was, it was--look, but I didn't care, they, as a matter-of-fact if they had wanted me to come down and work for free I probably would have done it.
Story_ID: 304017
Speaker 1: So I went to Roanoke, Virginia and it was a great learning experience, it was a, it was a very small station.  They had bought the station, the station use to be run by a college.  A guy [Barry Houseman] who was a local millionaire who owned a tourist attraction called Dixie Caverns [Roanoke County, Virginia] and some other tourist attractions, he bought the station.  His son-in-law had worked in radio I think in Atlanta [Georgia].  These people were white but they saw the potential of a black radio station in this small town.  The town had never had a black radio station.  When the college had this station, they use to program some rhythm and blues on some hours.  The people who had it the college or whoever had it, I think it was the college that had got into trouble with the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] and they had to sell the station.  So these people bought it.  Now the station was off the air so when we, when I get to Roanoke there was another, there's another guy in from Detroit [Michigan] and one guy was from someplace else, a fat guy. He went on the air he used to call himself Fat Albert as a matter-of-fact, his name was Albert [ph.].  So our first duty when we get down there you know I'm coming from New York [New York].  I'm the big time guy from Brooklyn [New York] right?  Get to Roanoke, Virginia and the owner tells us, well before we sign on the air, the FCC had, there were some violations that we had to clear up, one of them is to clean up around the transmitter because the people that had the station before, they use to come in and they'd sign on for a couple of hours and they, they really abused the thing and they'd throw beer bottles out the window and it was just a mess, so we all got in the car and the guy took--we followed him, I didn't have a car, one of the guys, one of the new guys had a car.  We drove to the site and the guy gave us some rakes and some shovels and we had to clean up (laughter) around the transmitter, pick up bottles, 'cause the FCC was coming out like at the end of the week to look at the site.  Everything was approved but they, the site still was messy.  So here I am from Brooklyn, New York thinking I'm about to do some really big time radio, and I got a rake and some shovels and we're cleaning up stuff around the transmitter.  The other part of that was the guy told us, "Try to get away from here before it gets dark.  This is the Ku Klux [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] part of town, and if you're over here past dark (laughter), it's gonna be a big problem," (laughter) so before we did that it was like around lunchtime.  We wanted to try to get, we got in the car and tried to get a hamburger at a hamburger joint that was about a block and half from there.  They wouldn't serve us, so we said okay forget that, so we went back to the transmitter and believe me we tried to, we hurried up, we did hurry up and get through before it got dark 'cause it, it truly was the Ku Klux part of town, Ku Klux Klan part of town, but that was, that was my introduction to Roanoke, Virginia, and being on the radio, but it turned out to be a very positive experience.  I worked there for about a year, a little more than a year.  I eventually believe it or not became the program director on my first job.  I worked under a guy, this guy's name was Bill [ph.], I can't think of his last name, but he was very giving and a great teacher.  He taught me about production, about the recording spots and I was the only one out of our crew, I think there were four of us disc jockeys, I was the only one that could type, so when we were typing up the new, when we were making up the new music lists, Bill use to do it all the time, and he said, "Can anybody type?"  I hated typing in high school, my mother [Sylvia Gibbons Slaughter] made me take typing and I thank her to this day (laughter) right, and I was I said well I can type and so I started typing up the lists, then I learned more and more about you know about programming, and so under his tutelage I became the program director.
Speaker 2: Now what was the name of this station, what are the call letters?
Speaker 1: WTOY [WTOY Radio]--
Speaker 2: WTOY.
Speaker 1: --Toy Radio in Roanoke, Virginia.
Story_ID: 304018
Speaker 1: So you were there [WTOY Radio, Roanoke, Virginia] a year and then what happened though?
Speaker 2: I got a call from a friend of mine who I went to one of these radio schools with in New York [New York], Tony [ph.] was from New York too and he was working in Boston [Massachusetts].  SO he called, he started before I did.  He actually got, he was had been in about maybe almost two years before I got in, maybe a year and half to two, but we kept in touch.  So he actually, he called my, he called my [maternal] aunt's [Claudia Gibbons Austin] house in Brooklyn [New York] and then my aunt called me and said look, Tony wants to talk to you, he's in Boston.  I talked to him he said, "Man you ready to leave Roanoke [Virginia]?"  I said, "Yeah" (laughter), he said, "Well we've got an opening and I'm the program director now."  So I said, "Well look how soon do you need me?"  And I accepted the job and that's kind of how I left Roanoke, but Roanoke was a very, very pleasant experience in terms of learning.  It was, it was the first time I had really, the first time I really got the feeling of how good it is to be a personality, the radio station was big news in Roanoke for this black-oriented radio station.  We went to make an appearance one time at a school that was out in the county, one of the counties outside of Botetourt County [Virginia], which was outside of the Roanoke County [Virginia] area, further out, a lot of country folk you know.  When we got to the school, I got there with our general manager and they heard we were coming, when we got to the school it was a line almost around the block and so I said, "Well what, what are they having?"  They said, "No this is, they wanna meet you" (laughter), I said I couldn't, I mean this was big because in Botetourt County which was again a very small location, even smaller than Roanoke but they were able to pick up our signal to have a--and this was a black school and to have a black-orientated radio station you know playing James Brown and playing all the hits and all of that, this was a really big deal and I was, I was truly amazed that I was kind of this local star.
Speaker 1: Okay, is this the first time it kind of dawns on you what the, what being on the radio actually does for one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, this was one, this is the first, this is my first actual real regular air shift.  I think I came I was working afternoons.
Speaker 1: Had you changed your name yet at this point had, were you?
Speaker 2: Yeah oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I was Richard Steele [HistoryMaker Richard Claude Steele] yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 304019
Speaker 1: Eventually I worked mornings and also our, the guy who did gospel on the station [WTOY Radio] was the guy, Brother Luther, Luther Frierson [ph.], but he was Brother Luther on the radio, and Luther was an older man who--great voice, but Luther was the guy who when you came to town new to work at the radio station, he would find a place for you to live because this is Roanoke, Virginia and this was 1968 and there weren't any apartments for like single people, you know they were like people stayed at home 'til they got married, so, so (laughter) if you came there and you were from you know, I'm from, coming from Brooklyn [New York], so he'd find you a place to live.  So he found this lady that I first moved with was an older lady, she must've been seventy, she was still teaching, she had a beautiful house in one of the suburbs just out, just outside of Roanoke, an area that had just integrated and I had, she had a, she had a three-bedroom house.  It was one bedroom downstairs and two upstairs, beautiful house, so I rented one of the upstairs bedrooms and she gave me access to the telephone and to show you, talk about the difference in terms of cultures between Brooklyn and Roanoke, the first woman I met that I thought was kind of attractive and we were in--the first week or two she had a car, I didn't.  So we were gonna go to the movies one day so she, she came by the house with me and I came and I introduced her to the lady, and then the lady went back into the kitchen.  I said, "Well come on upstairs, I gotta, I'm gonna change clothes and we'll go to the movies."  She said, "Well is that going to be okay?"  I said, "What do you mean okay, what I pay rent here, come on let's go, I'm just gonna change clothes."  I said, "We'll have a beer while we're--."  So we go upstairs, I change clothes, we go to the movies.  Later on when I came back the lady said to me, "Um, Mr. Steele [HistoryMaker Richard Claude Steele]?"  I said, "Yes ma'am" (laughter). She said, "Now I know you're from New York [New York] and everything but we do it different down here. Now you can, I don't mind a young lady coming over here, but she can't go up to your room, she has to wait in the parlor, not in the living room, in the parlor.  We just don't have that."  I said okay.  Now at this point I'm like I'm twenty-seven years old, I'm saying well what are you talking about (laughter), you know and I'd been in the [U.S. military] service and all of that, but those were the rules.  So the whole southern way of living in a small town was new to me and very difficult for me to adjust to because the thinking was very small in terms of how people related to stuff.  Not necessarily just that but I was gonna over, same woman I'm going out with one time on the weekend and we're at her, we're at her girlfriend's house, two or three of us on the weekend, and we're watching a game or something on television and having a beer and she lived in a housing complex and a knock came on the door and she looked out and she says, "Oh these are two kids that go to the school that I teach at," and she said "Hide the beer, cover up the beer cans."  I said, "What you're in your house it's Saturday."  She said, "Well no they'll go back and tell our parents you know Ms. So and So was drinking and had people over and then it's a whole big mess," and so that kind of thing, that small town thing was just, I, I had a real hard time (laughter) adjusting to that and recognizing you can't change them, you have to be however you're gonna be you know, but I enjoyed being a radio personality.
Story_ID: 304020
Speaker 1: Okay, so what, what was the station in Boston [Massachusetts] you went to?
Speaker 2: Boston was the same thing, a rhythm and blues station, it was a daylight, daytime station just like the one I left, which would be sun up to sun down.
Speaker 1: What were the call letters, do you remember?
Speaker 2: W-I-L-D [WILD Radio], it was an AM station as was the station [WTOY Radio] in Roanoke [Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay, so how'd you like Boston?
Speaker 2: It was kind of different for me because Boston was going through the--it was going through the sort of a black revolution, a revolutionary period.  Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] was going up in flames and I had been through that in New York [New York] already.  I mean I was living in New York when people on the rooftops shooting and I was trying to get from--I was working at CBS in New York in data processing in Manhattan [New York], so just trying to get from Brooklyn to work I remember they had, they'd canceled all the stops, three or four stops in Brooklyn where the train wouldn't even stop when the riots were going on.  I had to find way to get to work and find a way to get, so I had been through all that and now here I am in Boston, I'm saying, aw I'm going through the whole thing again, it was like the whole thing all over again 'cause Boston was into it at that point.  So that was one aspect of it.  The other part was that Boston has a lot of colleges and universities, it's, it's a college town to a large degree at that point.  So socially when I would go somewhere and go to a party and the conversation would invariably get to, "What school do you go to?" and I'd say, "Well no, I actually work for a living, I'm on the radio."  "Okay well yeah but you go to school too?"  No, (laughter) so I was sort of outside of that circle and they had highest insurance rates for automobiles in the country probably so there were a lot of things about Boston that I just, it didn't sit well with me.  It was, it was okay, I was only there for a little, about a year.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so where did you--
Speaker 2: I never got an apartment as a matter-of-fact, the guy who was my friend who I went to radio school with, I stayed with he and his wife for I guess I was there about eight months.  I never did get an apartment and then something came up, I slept on his couch, but something came up in Chicago [Illinois] and that's how I left Boston.
Story_ID: 304021
Speaker 1: Well what happened exactly?
Speaker 2: Well what happened was this, the rep firm that use to rep the station [WTOY Radio] in Virginia also repped WGRT [WGRT Radio] here in Chicago [Illinois].  The guy that I use to work for in Virginia called me in Boston [Massachusetts] and said, "What would you think about an opportunity that, you know an opportunity to possibly go back home, go back to Chicago," and I said, "That would be great what's up?"  He said, "Well our rep firm who also reps the station in Chicago said that there's a problem at a station here with a person that they're trying to get rid of and they want to replace him, and I said well I know a guy from Chicago who use to work for me, he'd probably love to come back there," and I said, "Man, I'm sure grate--I'm so glad you called me."  So he told me who to call in Chicago, I did and they arranged for me to fly in here on a Sunday for an interview.  The deal was if (laughter) if they hired me, they'd reimburse me for my expenses, I guess if they didn't hire me (laughter), I'm on my own right?  So I flew in here on a Sunday and I had this interview with four people, the general manager, the program director, the owner and it was one other person and they're all sitting around there asking me these questions and I'm whoa, I'm sweating, you know, am I gonna get this job, and then the owner said, "You know I've had people that in my--," and this guy was, he and his brother use to be big wigs in broadcasting in Chicago.  His brother use--his name was Ralph Atlass, and his brother Leslie Atlass [H. Leslie Atlass] use to own WIND [WIND Radio, Chicago, Illinois] years ago, BBM [WBBM Radio, Chicago, Illinois], they were big radio station people years ago.  Now this was just Ralph Atlass who just owned this one station, this WGRT.  He said, "Well I've had people that in the past have seen situations where you hire people and hire 'em on the tape," 'cause that's where they--'cause I sent a tape, and when they heard the tape they invited me to come, and he says, "Well I've heard we've had that situation occur."  Then he told me about some guy he hired as a sports announcer and the guy, he hired him on his tape and then the guy actually went on the air he was terrible.  So he said, "I wanna do, I wanna here you do what you do right now."  So, (laughter) he sent me in the studio with an engineer so that the guy could run the board on this same Sunday and they had it piped into the office.  I'm scared to death, this is a job or not, right?  But the guy, the engineer was black real cool and he and I got to be real tight later on but he really helped me.  He said, "I'll take care of it, just be cool, just do what you do, I'll handle everything don't worry about it, psh."  So we sat and did this live audition in the perform--in the studio and they sat and listened in the office, and when I, when they, when I got through, I think I did maybe fifteen, twenty minutes of show and when I got through they said, "Okay, we think you'll work out," so they agreed to hire me and told me to come in like, "How much notice can you give in Boston?"  I said two weeks, and went back, they sent me a check, reimbursing me for my flight and all that and I gave the people notice and that's how I got to--the reason that this guy wanted to fire the guy in Chicago is because the owner came in on a Saturday one time and the guy they wanted to fire was looking at the football game, he had the television in the studio and he was looking at the football game and, I mean he was a very competent announcer, he was really very good but he, he and the owner didn't get along at all.  He was very good friends, he and the program director came to Chicago together from Baltimore [Maryland].  So when I got here the program director was reluctant to fire him 'cause this was his good friend, they came to Baltimore together, so how it ended up is they didn't fire him and they hired me and so it was kind of a tenuous situation with him and it just kind of went on 'til you know he stayed, but that's how I got here.
Story_ID: 304022
Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois] at WGRT [WGRT Radio] then it's called (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Right it was called WGRT in 1970 and by the way that station before that use to be WAAF [WAAF Radio, Chicago, Illinois] and did all jazz with Daddy-O Daylie [HistoryMaker Holmes "Daddy-O" Daylie], and Norm Spaulding [Norman W. Spaulding] and, and Jesse Owens, use to be an all jazz, use to be the jazz station.
Speaker 1: Jesse Owens use to actually be, the Jesse Owens (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, he did jazz on the radio.
Speaker 1: Okay, WAAF (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then it was sold and it became WGRT.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is Atlass broadcasting?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, well tell us some stories about those days you know, those that you can tell now than they were (unclear)?
Speaker 2: WGRT was a, it was called great radio in Chicago [Illinois] and we, you know we were sort of the radio stepchild 'cause WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois] was obviously the reigning king of black radio at that point, but we had a, we had a pretty, we had a fairly strong impact for being a daytime station.  VON was twenty-four hours and they had all the big personalities with [HistoryMaker] Herb Kent and Butterball [Bill "Butterball" Crane] and, and Joe Cobb and all the names that you now know historically about black radio in Chicago, so and we were just, we were a daytime station and we, we got our share, but certainly we were not even near main line competitors for you know against WVON, but we got our share.  The good news for us is that we had, we were a daytime station but we had a, we had a stronger signal so we could go into places like Evanston [Illinois] where VON didn't go, so we had a pretty fair listenership north, but you know we, we had a pretty, we had a really good station.  We had a fair amount of success given our success given our size and our limitations.
Speaker 1: Where were you located?
Speaker 2: On the dial?
Speaker 1: No, in the city?
Speaker 2: Oh, we were at LaSalle [Street] and Wacker [Drive] in the American National Bank Building [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At a later point, [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson bought the station and it became WJPC [WJPC Radio, Chicago, Illinois] and at a later point also--I was there from '70 [1970] to '78 [1978] and it became JPC I think in '74 [1974], '73 [1973], '73 [1973] or '74 [1974].  Then I became the program director in '74 [1974], so I was program director from '74 [1974] to '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when Johnson bought it he moved it from that location into the Johnson Publication [Johnson Publishing Company] building at 820 South Michigan [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 304023
Speaker 1: So you were program director when Tom Joyner and some of these other people started, I mean?
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: When Tom Joyner started and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, here's the story with that, when Tom Joyner was hired, I was fired [from WJPC Radio, Chicago, Illinois].  I was--he was the next regime, [HistoryMaker] Marv Dyson was general manager, I was program director, then Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] decided to make a change and he hired Charles Mootry [Charles Mootry, Jr.] who has since deceased, but Mootry became sort of the, he got a title as vice president of, of programming or something like that, and anyway that was the first move to get rid of Marv and also to get rid of me and after that Johnson hired Charles Mootry as general manager and Mootry hired Tom Joyner, and replaced me as program director, and also morning personality, that was in '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay, so '78 [1978], that's how that worked all right, okay.  So, but you went to BMX [WBMX Radio, Chicago, Illinois] right, I think it was, wasn't it?
Speaker 2: Yeah and I'm trying to remember the chronology, but I went to, I worked at BMX, I worked at GCI's AM [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois], no actually I worked, actually I worked at VON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois].  I think I worked at VON the first time after that, VON was still 1450 VON at that point.  This is after the company had gotten, had fired all of the old guys, all the guys from the original crew of Butterball [Bill "Butterball" Crane] and--
Speaker 1: All the good guys of V (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Rodney Jones [E. Rodney Jones].
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Lucky Cordell and all those guys?
Speaker 2: Right, all those guys were gone, right, all the good guys were gone and this was a new company and they hired some new people and I actually came in with that crew for a while and then I think it was after that, that I went to BMX and then it was a later point in which the VON 1450 went off the air and there was a--people were trying to get the license.  Curtis Mayfield was trying to get the license, it was a bunch of people trying to get the license and at a later point, [HistoryMaker] Pervis Spann ended up with the license and the, the station became WXOL [WXOL Radio, Chicago, Illinois] for a while on 1450.  It's a real complicated story because of the changes but in the meantime the GCI, the company that had GCI became GCI AM and FM, but it was, no, before that it was GCI and VON, but we were VON after the VON call letters were up for grabs, the company that had GCI got the WVON call letters so we became WVON 1390 on a different frequency.  Spann had WXOL but on the old 1450 frequency.  So I never worked for XOL but I did work for 1390 VON.  This is real confusing, but I mean there were a lot changes during that period so and then at a later point that became instead of VON 1390, it became WGCI AM 1390.  I worked for them, then I worked for V103 which was WVAZ [WVAZ Radio, Oak Park, Illinois] at a later point, that was in the '80s [1980s] and then I, oh before that though I worked, before I went to V103 I worked at VON again which was now VON, they picked up the letters again, they dropped XOL, it was 1450 and it was talk.  So I did talk radio you know, Ty Wansley and I and some other people and then I went to WBEZ [WBEZ Radio, Chicago, Illinois], the first time I worked there full time then I worked for V103 (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now BEZ now it was BMX at one point I think back in?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: It never was?
Speaker 2: Nah, nah V103 was BMX.
Speaker 1: I'm getting them mixed up.
Speaker 2: V103 was BMX.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: I did, I worked for BMX somewhere in between there I worked for BMX, but I also worked at a later point for a different company when it was then V103.  BMX was what the station use to be, some different owners came in at a later point and then it became V103 WVAZ.  Those were the two you're thinking of that were the same frequency.
Speaker 1: Right, okay, all right okay, right, all right, that's the one out in Oak Park [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then they moved the studios to downtown. And so between that I worked at BEZ which was, which is Chicago Public Radio, non-commercial radio like WTTW [WTTW-TV, Chicago, Illinois] is for television and but I maintained a relationship with BEZ for about fifteen years and I work there now full time but I worked jazz fests, broadcasts, satellite broadcasts for blues fests, gospel fests, (unclear).  I did a lot of things as a freelancer while working full time at other stations.  I've had a, I've had a varied career to say the least in Chicago [Illinois] radio.  The good news is I've been able to stay employed for most of the time.  I think the longest I was ever out of work was maybe not quite six months and that was in 1978.
Story_ID: 304024
Speaker 1: I think most people would probably associate you with mellow music you know and talk you know (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I do a lot of talk radio too. I was always considered to be kind of laid back except in the early '70s [1970s] when I was at WGRT [WGRT Radio, Chicago, Illinois], I was just a frantic young disc jockey talking loud and saying nothing as the saying goes but I was what you know the style of the day was and I didn't have a problem with that, but later on I was more identified with being more laid back, real involved with talk radio at some degree and also I'm with music radio, still kind of laid back.  I also did gospel for about a year or so, gospel radio.
Speaker 1: What's your first love in terms of?
Speaker 2: In radio?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Probably jazz, you know I didn't--because look when I started this my idol was, was Sid McCoy who was like the reigning jazz disc jockey back in the day, back in the, in the '60s [1960s].  So I wanted to be that, I didn't--you know I really wanted to be a jazz disc jockey, but when I got, when I went to radio school and did all of that the opportunity for somebody to do jazz at that age, I was very young and not having the experience or the background to do it, there were no jobs, there were just no jobs available for anybody, for me to do that.  So I determined that okay you know, I have to really focus on trying to do the other thing, you know the Motown and the hits of the day and so I did and I became that and I loved that too.  It wasn't that I didn't like it but my focus was jazz early on.
Speaker 1: Okay what, what, do you have a favorite jazz artist or a favorite set of artists that you?
Speaker 2: Miles Davis of the late '50s [1950s] was probably I'd say at that point, and as I think about jazz today and my reflection on all I have liked or not liked that--Miles of the late '50s [1950s] was probably my most favorite artist.
Story_ID: 304025
Speaker 1: Now you've done a lot of public affairs broadcasting, and you know I know a lot of people have been on this show for one time or another promoting an event or some civic activity.  Do--
Speaker 2: I've done a lot of interviews with people period just because as a talk show set up both in black radio and also in public radio, a lot of interviews.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite interview or?
Speaker 2: One of my favorite interviews was [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis, he was probably the most--I always say he was the hippest old man I ever met.  He seemed to have his finger on the pulse of everything that going on today whatever day that happened to be.  He recently passed away.  I resurrected an interview I did in 1991.  Did a little editing and put it together and we ran it as a special and it sounded--the things he said sounded like things he could have said yesterday.  He was so contemporary and so aware of everything around him and everything about being black and the necessity to, to be involved, to preserve the culture, to get an education.  He wasn't stuffy, but he was just on it, just an amazing person, but I've had--because of what I do I've been able to talk to some really interesting people who were very impressive you know black folks that made a difference.  [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison with the Alvin Ailey Company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, New York, New York], she was so regal.  She was very tall and when she walked into the studio I went whoa, I'm not even going to be able--how, what do I do bow, or you know but she's regular, straight up, great person to talk to and I just, I had a ball talking to her.  Lena Horne was another one, who just--I interviewed her and she was absolutely gracious, beautiful and just amazing to talk to, and Harold Washington, that was pretty amazing.
Speaker 1: Were you doing talk radio during that era, during the Harold Washington era?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, well not with the Lena Horne, yeah I was doing talk radio for that, Harold talk radio, Judith Jamison talk radio, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have any Harold Washington stories?
Speaker 2: Any what kind of stories?
Speaker 1: Harold Washington stories about the, or about the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Harold, I was interviewing him one time and he said--there was something that, I don't know whether it was Vrdolyak [Edward Vrdolyak] or somebody else in city council you know the Vrdolyak 29 had, there was one of the aldermen who did something that was not to Harold's liking and he turned to his right hand guy Chuck Kelly [Charles Kelly] and he said, this is before we've gone on the air, and he said, Chuck said something about what this person had done and he said, "Aw he did huh.  Chuck, cut him off.  You know what, how to take care of that" (laughter), he was, he was pretty funny.  He--when I interviewed him one time when the Bears [Chicago Bears] were, was it after or before they were Super Bowl champs, but he was talking about how it sort of went along with his administration to have some winners you know.
Speaker 1: So he took credit for that one (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah; see I had a one-on-one thing with him.  You know we had, they had a press gangbang that the black press would do once a month and they'd have it at GCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois] and have people from the Defender [Chicago Defender] and other black stations and all different reporters and somebody from Ebony they'd come and they have a round table and I participated in that a couple of times too but outside of that I had a one-on-one with him once a month.  I had it at GCI and then I had it at when I went to--one of the reasons I--one of the things I think that helped me go to BEZ [WBEZ Radio, Chicago, Illinois] was I had access to the mayor, I mean you know, you know the situation had changed and so people who had access to the mayor looked more like me now at this point.  So when the BEZ thing came up they said, "Well you know like you have a fairly good relationship with Harold Washington."  I said, "Yeah, you know I was having a once a month at GCI."  They said, "Well you think you could arrange that for over here?"  I said sure.  The thing with GCI we called a 'Chat with the Chief' [ph.] and he'd come in, in the evening and we sit and I'd ask some questions and we'd take some phone calls and it was good.
Speaker 1: Yeah it was well done, I remember that yeah that was well done--
Story_ID: 304026
Speaker 1: He [Harold Washington] was such an articulate mayor.
Speaker 2: He was articulate, he had a great feel for the city [Chicago, Illinois] he knew the issues, he knew old time politics because he came up in the machine, but he, he really had feel for people and I felt really bad after you know he had been, he was in office six months and all, and we, he knew that would happen and we all knew all of us in the media knew it would happen that you know the public turns on you to some degree.  Black community who says, "Well it's been six months and he didn't do this yet."  Well come on, Jesus Christ you know the other administration has been in place for like you know I mean that whole, that whole set up has been place for a number of years even though it was Jane Byrne before him, but that whole process has been mired in muck for all these years and you expect the guy in six months and a year to change everything, to be able to do that?  And so it was kind of sad to see people do that but we fully expected that.  "Harold said he was gonna do, and it's been six months and I still, I don't have a job yet."  That was awful.
Speaker 1: Is there a highlight in that period of time that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well I'll tell you one of the really great things for me is when he was running for office the first time.  I use to get phone calls from people who were connected to him that I knew.  People that kept me informed about what was really going on. They would say, "Look, I heard you all talking so and so on the radio last night about this subject or that subject.  Here's the real deal just so you'll know. It's not for publication," but blah, blah and part of that was the process of doing what white folks had always done and that is this you know this not letting your enemies so to speak know what you were doing, you know you'd have one thing out here as the issue that was being dealt with for the public but the real deal was something else, and black politics was just getting to the point where people were able to start doing that, you know what I mean?  So that you know there'd--some issues we'd be talking about on the radio and we'd be beating it back and forth and that was just an issue that maybe they just put out for people to deal with, you know to throw the other guys off, but I'd have people who would call me who I knew who would say, "We want you to know what's really going on.  Keep on with you know 'cause that's what we got out there and that's what people wanna talk about and that's cool, but just so you'll know this is what's happening," and that was, it was a revelation for me in that people, our people were finally learning how to play the game, and b) I was inside, and I don't know if that was exactly what my media role should have been at that point, if you're talking about fair journalism, but the reality is not a whole lot of other were playing fair either, I mean WLS [WLS Radio, Chicago, Illinois] or whoever was doing, yeah LS was talk at that point I think you know or IND [WIND Radio, Chicago, Illinois] I think it was at that point, WIND and people were making moves and helping you know make shifts happen and so I didn't feel bad about that at all.  I was you know, I felt that I played, I felt that I played a part in helping that whole push to get Harold Washington in office and I'm not going to apologize for that.
Speaker 1: Okay, how did you get like one-on-one access to Harold in those days 'cause his time was really (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I don't even remember how we did that, I think I participated in the press gangbangs that use to happen once-a-month but I'm not, you know it doesn't, I don't recall how I actually got the situation where he, I think what happened was I was doing the overnight talk show and I just put in a request to have him on, and you know people had said to him that the talk show I did overnight was very important to the black community and lot of people listened and they did, and he came on and we determined that we could do this once a month and call it a 'Chat with the Chief' [ph.] and we had a good rapport.
Speaker 1: It's been said and I find a lot of truth in this is that black radio really did a lot to (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, black radio was enormous.
Speaker 1: --the mayor elected and I mean to get Harold Washington elected.
Speaker 2: Yea.
Speaker 1: Of course he--Lu Palmer [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Lu Palmer and I think, I think at that point Derek Hill was doing BMX [WBMX Radio, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: The 'Sunday Morning Live' thing so all of that was very, very important.  We all feel like we played a very significant part in that and I'm very proud of that.
Speaker 1: It's interesting that he choose you as a person to do that one-on-one with every week.
Speaker 2: Say that again now?
Speaker 1: It's interesting he choose you as the person to do that one-on-one with.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause I know he couldn't do it with Lu Palmer 'cause they fell out around.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Around like politics but (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well they fell out and I did a long interview with Lu Palmer before he died and I asked Lu was he still angry, he said yes he was, because he didn't get, he wanted to get the seat that--
Speaker 1: Charlie Hayes [HistoryMaker Charles Hayes].
Speaker 2: --that Charlie Hayes got and Harold's people--Harold told him as a matter-of-fact, and Lu told me this.  He said they told 'em, "Whatever you want Lu," but we can't do that, but whatever--Lu said, "That, that there isn't any other thing I want, I want to do that.  I want to be a congressman, I think I can make a difference," but Harold wouldn't do it, and Lu was really upset because of all he gave up.  I mean he really gave up a lot, he got fired by Illinois Bell [Illinois Bell Telephone Company, Chicago, Illinois] as a sponsor and he gave up an awful lot and he never got over that.  He was you know--I thought maybe after some years had passed and I talked to him about a year before he died and he never got over that.
Story_ID: 304027
Speaker 1: One of the things that happened for me too that was pretty significant was that after Harold [Harold Washington] died, I got this phone call asking me if I'd emcee this unity rally at the Pavilion [UIC Pavilion, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] cause of Conrad Worrill [HistoryMaker Conrad Walter Worrill].  Dr. Worrill and I we're good friends and I said okay to the unity rally, okay so this was a period when they were trying to decide what they should do next, you know this whole thing about Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] or Tim Evans [Timothy Evans].
Speaker 2: Okay that's when, yeah Eugene Sawyer and I think.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Five other black aldermen switched sides, went over to the Vrdolyak [Edward Vrdolyak] side to have enough votes to make Sawyer the mayor, that was the plan right?
Speaker 1: But any way the unity rally was supposed to be, just sort of--so they had some children's choirs and they had a Hispanic band with a--I can't think of the guy that was a poet, they had a lot of different things but the bottom line to that was this was about this was about trying to support, I think at that point it was, it was about supporting Tim Evans but they didn't say that, so I'm the emcee, now the place is full.  Everybody is very emotional Clarence McClain, he's had a few too many and his wig is sitting this way, you know and (laughter) and [HistoryMaker] Gus Savage was, he was, he had a little bit too much to drink and; and everybody's really upset because you know Harold's dead and they don't know what to do.  I'll never forget Gus wanted to go up on stage, and I remember Danny Davis [HistoryMaker Danny K. Davis] holding him and saying, "Nah you can't go up on stage," and 'cause we're supposed to control who went up on stage and that was supposed to be kind of of my job too, to say who could come and who couldn't, and I remember Luis Gutierrez he just zipped by me and got up on stage before I got a chance to turn around, he was up there, oh it was just, it was.  I will never forget this night, and then to cap things off here comes Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson].  Jesse was running for president at that point, Jesse Jackson.  So he comes with about four secret service people--now the Pavilion is full, when he goes up on stage they're up--they recognize me as the emcee.  They say, "Well you know who's coming and going up on the stage?"  I said, "Well yeah all right so nobody's gonna come up now."  So Jesse goes up there and Jesse calls for, "We want a show of unity, we just wanna see all the aldermen that are here tonight."  Essentially everybody, the assumption was everybody that was there was for Tim Evans.  So when he called these people to come up on stage the secret service people went nuts.  "Oh, God he's calling, oh no he's calling all these people."  So they got their hands on their Uzis or whatever they got and I'm like, "Oh man this is awful" (laughter) you know what I mean, but you know Jesse's very spontaneous.  He called these people to come up on stage so they did, and it was like, it was a pretty messy night and I'm the emcee.  I still got the program.
Speaker 2: I remember it was packed out front, I mean you couldn't get in it at a certain point, the place was packed (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was, yeah, I was the man in the middle on that one.
Speaker 2: Yeah that was a pretty traumatic weekend for the city.
Speaker 1: And the, the politics behind that were this, the city, because it was billed as a unity rally, the city was gonna pay for this, so somebody in the administration kept telling me, "We got to keep it nonpartisan or else when this comes up before city council as a bill, I mean as a bill due, they're not gonna pay for this if this is viewed as a rally for one candidate or the other, so I kept telling Conrad, 'cause Conrad was one of the organizers, and "Conrad we got to keep it" said "Yeah okay, okay."  So at some point it just got out of control and then it was clearly a rally for Tim Evans.  I said, "Conrad, you know Chuck Kelly [Charles Kelly] was just telling this is a problem because the city's not gonna pay for this." He said, so Conrad said, "Steele [HistoryMaker Richard Claude Steele], what can I tell you, the people have taken over (laughter), the people are in charge, I, I can't, nothing more I can do."  Oh man, what a night, what a night, I was in the middle of that.  You know when I think back on stuff like that I am grateful to have been involved.  I was not a bystander, I was in the middle of it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was quite an evening.
Story_ID: 304028
Speaker 1: Did you, well I'll just ask you.  Do you believe that Harold Washington had a heart attack?  I mean there was a lot of talk even now (unclear).
Speaker 2: Let me put it this way, I think that he probably did have a heart attack.  When I used to have him, we did the once-a-month thing at WBEZ [WBEZ Radio, Chicago, Illinois], we were on the 39th floor and then when you got to there you had to--there was one more elevator and then you had to come up these steps to get up to the studio, and I gotta tell you that the times that he would come up there, by the time he got up to our studio he was terribly out of breath, he was overweight and he was not in great physical shape.  I mean 'cause he would be, he'd really be huffing and puffing by the time he went to sit down, so I believe that, but having said that I also believe that there's always a possibility of a conspiracy.  I think if you look historically at things that have happened in politics in Chicago [Illinois] or anything, in the U.S. government, I don't think it's beyond--I think when people said, oh you know these are people that see a conspiracy behind every tree and it's ridiculous to talk like that.  No, I don't think it is ridiculous to talk like that.  I do believe though that it's a strong possibility that based on the kind of health situation that he had, he probably did really have a heart attack, but on the other hand it's not beyond the realm of possibility that he could have been murdered in some form or fashion, 'cause you gotta consider there is so much money involved in Chicago contracts and deals and here's a guy who as the mayor, he didn't have complete control because you know the city council he was still fighting with, but he had a lot of control and you know this city was, this is the city of deals and there were a lot of people who were like, "Well this is you know a fly in the ointment, you know we, how dare you come and stop all these, or put a temporary halt on all these major deals that we have here by trying to insert minorities and saying we wanna do it this way."  I'm sure there were a lot of people in business who had so much at stake that this would not be something outta the realm of possibility.  That's the way I look at it.
Story_ID: 304029
Speaker 1: Now you've been at WBEZ [WBEZ Radio, Chicago, Illinois] longer than any other place right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not--
Speaker 1: --I mean over a time, yeah.
Speaker 2: --full time over a period of years maybe about fifteen years off and on, yeah it's been a long time.  One of the things that allowed me to work at BEZ was BEZ is a public radio station, the NPR, National Public Radio affiliate in Chicago [Illinois].  They've always been known for their news reporting and for jazz and coverage of local issues and all of that.  As a disc jockey even back in the '70s [1970s] I always had an interest in a lot of different kinds of things whether it was the arts, culture, business, politics, science, you name it and I always liked what I did on the radio but I always, I mean outside of that I always did lots of other things that were connected to different things, so BEZ was always a good fit for me.  Most people who come out of commercial radio don't fit that well with public radio because public radio is a totally different animal, they do different things.  When I started with them I started--I was filling in for a woman who was doing a show at night called--I was working at VON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois] doing talk and I was work--I'd forgotten how I met the program director, Ken Davis who is the one who believed in me and believed that I could make that transition and again I had a connection to Harold [Harold Washington] and that was good too, but there was a woman who was doing a show called 'Prime Time' and her name was Carolyn Grisko and she was on, she was taking maternity leave and Ken Davis said, "Would your station allow you to do as well as your VON job doing talk in the day, do you think they'd allow you to come in, in the evenings and do the show for Carolyn?"  And I said, "I think so," and I checked and they did and that's how I initially got started with them and then they found out that I also did jazz.  I forgot to mention that when I was at JPC [WJPC Radio, Chicago, Illinois] Daddy-O Daylie [HistoryMaker Holmes "Daddy-O" Daylie] was still working there and Daddy-O did a jazz show on Sunday.  One time Daddy-O had a contract dispute with his station.  I use to fill in for Daddy-O when he was out of town or something. I was the only person that ever filled in for Daddy-O doing jazz on Sunday 'cause he, he and I talked, he found out beforehand, he found out about my love for the music and he let me his do his show and which I felt was a real honor and privilege.  So it used to be called 'Jazz on a Sunday Afternoon' [ph.], and I did that show.  Then when he had a contract dispute with JPC he was out for six months to a year or something, and they said to me, "Would you do that show on Sunday because we're we haven't signed Daddy-O."  I went to Daddy-O and said, "They've asked me to do this in addition to my regular duties but I won't do it if it's not okay with you because this is your show and I respect you," and he told me, "It's okay you can do it because I don't want them to bring somebody else in who doesn't know what they're doing," and blah, blah and he and I, we maintained a very close friendship, and so I, I had done jazz and so when I was doing this fill-in on the talk show at BEZ, the topic came up about whether or not I could fill in also doing jazz?  I said, "Yeah I use to do jazz you know when I was working at JPC," and that's how that started.  So my relationship with them, I worked there full time when I left VON talk for a couple of years and then I went to V103 [WVAZ Radio, Oak Park, Illinois], but in the meantime while I was working at BEZ and when I wasn't working at BEZ, I always worked for about fifteen years on the Jazz Fest [Chicago Jazz Festival] broadcast which was a national broadcast over satellite to about a hundred radio stations.  That is the commentary and all that goes with that, so I did that no matter where I was working, I came and freelanced to do that at BEZ, and also to fill in jazz when somebody was out.  So I, over the years I just kept establishing this relationship, then I worked for them full time, then I left to come back to music radio and then I was gone, but I wasn't gone permanently I was always filling in over those years, over those whole fifteen years, and then three years ago, almost four years ago I came back full time to work for them.  So yes I have been connected to them I guess for a good fifteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Also I don't know if I should mention this or not I have been connected to WTTW [WTTW-TV, Chicago, Illinois] to Channel 11 for almost fifteen years as a pledge host and also as a contributing reporter to 'Artbeat Chicago' for a while.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Story_ID: 304030
Speaker 1: There are so few black people in public radio or television even in Chicago [Illinois], that--do you have, is there a--do you have a 'cause I've often thought about this when I go to other cities, go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I mean to [Washington] D.C. and it's Howard University Radio [WHUR Radio], seems like they have like a great variety of programming you know going on at Howard University Radio, it's all black but it's public interest stuff you know they had jazz, they had like political shows and so forth, do you have an ideal scenario on what you would like to see on public radio if you could you know do whatever you wanted to do here in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I like the model that [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley had in terms of what he was doing.  He talked to people ranging from the highest level of politics to entertainment to science.  I've heard some amazing stories on that show while he was doing it.  He had access to a lot of people that I think other African Americans really should have heard and should hear and I thought that was just--there was a lot of controversy when he first came to public radio.  We had some adverse reaction from listeners here in Chicago who are white who (laughter), oh it was ugly, we got emails and comments on our website that--the, I mean the people were--you'd think that you know Chicago's a major city, cosmopolitan people are more sophisticated.  He was surprised, he told me that he thought when they, when he, 'cause they were on a lot of stations across the country and he thought when he was on he when he got an Iowa station, he thought he'd get response like that but he didn't.  He was surprised when he got it here in Chicago, but I'd like to, I like, I'd like to do a show that had all those aspects to it, I mean it was a you know, it was, it was political, it was--he had a comedy segment on, once a week he had recording artists, he had conservatives and liberals.  I thought it was a great set up.  I think a show like that I'd like to have that--you'd have more time.  He had an hour so he squeezed all that into an hour so sometimes I thought the interviews were too short.  I'd to do, I like interviewing people and I like talking to people and actually having a one-on-one dialogue and a conversation and with that limited amount of time you can't do that.  That's the only thing I thought was a drawback and would, that would be a drawback for me in that I like to have an exchange where you actually have a dialogue with someone so people that are listening actually get to hear what that person really is all about not just stats about where they work and when it was and all of that, but you actually get to hear a little bit about how they got to that point and so I liked that concept, I liked the concept of that show.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that would be your ideal--
Speaker 2: That would be, that would be my ideal yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) situation okay.
Story_ID: 304031
Speaker 1: Any thoughts about public television in terms of--?
Speaker 2: Well I haven't, I mean I've done, the only, I mean I've done public television as a, as a fund raising project I mean in terms of being a pledge host for almost this whole fifteen years and I've done some projects for public television as in 'Artbeat Chicago' reporting some stories so I don't have any thoughts in terms of what I'd like to see as a program for me to do.  I think, I generally tend to think more in terms of radio because television is a producer's medium.  Radio you do have much more as a, as a host or talent you have much more input than television.  Television is really a producer's medium and they make the decisions really about what you wanna do or where you're gonna take it, with rare exception like Tavis [HistoryMaker Tavis Smiley] is now on PBS [Public Broadcasting Service], but Tavis came with a lot of clout and he makes a lot of, most of his own decisions, but for the most part you don't in television, so I don't know that.  I mean I always thought I wanted to do a television talk show.  I thought that would be great.  I did, I worked, I mean look I did some--I was at Channel 26 [WCIU-TV, Chicago, Illinois] for about a good ten, fifteen years.  I had a show called 'Chicago Today' and it started off a half hour and then it got reduced to fifteen minutes, and then a ten minute show, but over the course of that period I talked to people like Della Reese [HistoryMaker Della Reese-Lett], I talked to the comedian, Dick [HistoryMaker Dick Gregory].
Speaker 1: Richard Pryor, no Dick some?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Oh God right on the tip of my tongue.
Speaker 1: Not Chris Rock?
Speaker 2: Humorist, Dick Gregory.
Speaker 1: Dick Gregory, okay.
Speaker 2: I had Dick Gregory, Tony Brown, I had lots of different people on over the course of that show, [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones early on, had him on many, many years ago back in the days of PUSH Expo [Black Business Exposition], so I liked, I liked television and I liked being able to sit down and talk with people on television too, but radio I always found to be, radio was a lot more comfortable for me, but I like television and I you know like--what happened with me was I think it got to a point where I got beyond the break point.  Television is a young person's game and I did a couple of specials for, for the Academy Award [Oscar] season a few years ago, Deborah Crable and I did something called 'An African American Salute to the Academy Awards' for an independent producer.  We did like three years in a row and every time we'd go the people would say, "Well we like the hosts and we like their interaction but that guy has to do something with that gray hair," so they sent me to a hair colorist to dye my hair, mustache and everything so it would be black.  I thought I looked ridiculous but that's, if I wanted to get the job and get paid that's what they wanted me to do.
Speaker 1: Now that's, yeah that's--
Speaker 2: Public television's not like that but this was commercial television and it was an independent project and they said, "Dye your hair," so that's what I did.  I think, I think I would have gravitated, I'm fairly comfortable with a television camera and I think I might have had a career in television had I--if I had gone on to school and had a degree in something it didn't matter what it sort of opens the door, but I didn't have a degree in anything and it was kind of, I guess as it relates to television I was sort of undereducated even though I thought I, you know could do the job fairly well I--here's an interesting story that goes back to when [HistoryMaker] Merri Dee got hired at WGN [WGN-TV, Chicago, Illinois].  Merri Dee use to do jazz radio at WBEE [WBEE Radio, Harvey, Illinois].  Well when they sent out these, this audition call for an announcer at GN, I was one of the people, I still have the letter from WGN Continental Broadcasting [WGN Continental Broadcasting Company, Chicago, Illinois] where I was one of the finalists (laughter) for this position and when I went over there, there were about five or six of us who were finalists for this position and somebody I know who works there told me, said, "You know this and it's great that you came this far, but they are gonna hire a black woman I know that," and they certainly couldn't of had a better choice than Merri Dee, but that's, that's when she got hired so.  Still have the letter which says at least I was one of the finalists for that position.
Story_ID: 304032
Speaker 1: What's interesting you, you didn't have very much formal training but you seemed to have, I mean you, you seem to fit the profile of someone in at the high end of the intellectual you know, I guess scale in terms of being on the air (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think with some people it has to do with--I consider myself to be fairly well read and my mother [Sylvia Gibbons Slaughter] was one of these kinds of people, she'll do it now at eighty-six, if I'm on television and I misspeak and it's not intentional to fool around if I, if she thinks I genuinely made a mistake about something, she will make a little note and when I come over she'll tell me about something I said that it was grammatically incorrect to the degree--my mother, my mother was serious about that to the degree that when I was in the [U.S. military] service, I'm write, and I'd write home, if I made grammatical errors or punctuation errors in the letter when she wrote back she'd send it back with the corrections and point out where I had made some grammatical errors and I think that had a lot do with you know being very conscious about how I speak and how I write and I write fairly well for somebody--I really, I'm not a bad writer and--something in have in common with [HistoryMaker] Herb Kent is that he told me his mother was the same way about speech and grammar.  That you had to be able to speak properly or at least know what the right and wrong of it is or she would correct you and my mother was very, very big on that.
Speaker 1: Reverberation of Barbados I would think you know the West Indian training, they all had like a--
Speaker 2: Well I mean the big thing about that is they were very big on education and so my mother, my mother's position was the same position that many people from that era, from that generation had who were black.  You'll hear it today, but you don't hear it as much and that was always, "You must be better than somebody who's white who's competition for the same position or you won't get hired.  You can't be as good, you need to be better," so I use to hear that over and over again.  My mother's greatest disappointment is that I did not go to college, I took some college courses but I never graduated from anywhere.  And that was my mother's probably greatest disappointment in that I did not--I was supposed to have some, I was supposed to be someone with this intellect that was supposed to be able to utilize that to become whatever and I think for her that was a major disappointment.  It took her a long time to accept the fact that I do this for a living, and that I was fairly successful at it because my brother [Charles L. Slaughter] has a, my brother's just a short bit away from a Ph.D., he's a principal of a grammar school, my mother has a degree and so you know her feeling was that you have (laughter) all the basics and why didn't you do this you know, and now she has accepted the fact that there are people who given whatever their natural abilities are, are able to parlay that, that doesn't happen very often and certainly I wouldn't recommend that to anybody, and you certainly couldn't do that today.  You need a formal education, there's no question about it.  But there are rare exceptions and, but I just think about how much further I might have gone had I done that, and every now and then it's somebody like Peter Jennings who didn't go to college either, but his father was brilliant and had all these brilliant people use to visit his house and people who were Ph.Ds and Nobel Prize winners and all of that and he early on conversed with all of these people, he was a very bright kid but he conversed with all these incredibly intelligent people and he was always in an academic setting but he did not go to college.  Somebody like James Spader, the actor, his parents are educators. He didn't like school so he didn't go, but he's a very smart guy, but I, that doesn't happen.  My father [Charles Slaughter] use to worry about, "If you're in radio, okay I'll accept that you do that but what are you gonna do when you're forty or fifty?"  Until he died he use to worry, he use to ask my mother, "What is he gonna do at a later point?"  Nobody thought and I never really gave it much thought.  I was not a planner, I'm not somebody who said, "Well I'm gonna be in this business until I you know retirement time," never even thought about it.  I just kept working and now I'm sixty-three so (laughter).
Speaker 1: But you have made a transition from disc jockey to radio personality which is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did, I actually did and that was because I had an interest in lots of different kinds of things and I wasn't locked into just The Temptations or Earth Wind and Fire.  I'm not knocking that but I had, my interests were a lot broader than that, and so that allowed me to transition into some other things to be able to work in public radio, and be respected.  There are people in public radio who are interns with master's degrees and you know and so you know sometimes in that setting I feel like a little inadequate here 'cause these are very smart people but they all respect me and I think it's because I'm older and have managed to survive and they don't know what my academic qualifications are or are not so they, I think they pretty much assume that I have some kind of academic background and I really don't.
Speaker 1: Most of us would assume so, (laughter).
Speaker 2: But I've been very fortunate and I'm doing something I actually love to do and I have vast interests in lots of things and that has served me well.
Story_ID: 304033
Speaker 1: What are you planning to do next?  Do you have any big projects coming up or ideas?
Speaker 2: Not really, I don't really have anything that--I think if I had an opportunity to just do anything I wanted to do and have the finances to do it, I'd like to travel to every jazz festival in this country and in any other county and write it about it or do reports on it for either a publication or a broadcast facility because I love jazz and at this at point I'd love to do something like that.  I love the interaction with people so I mean I would hope that at some point realistically for me to do television talk is not a realistic thought at age sixty-three, but I really, I love this the interaction that you get with sitting down talking with somebody one on one.
Speaker 1: Well look at Larry King, he's--
Speaker 2: Well Larry King's been--I interviewed Larry King.  I interviewed him when I was working at Channel 26 [WCIU-TV, Chicago, Illinois], he's one I forgot to mention.  I've interviewed a lot of people that I've even forgotten about over the years, but yeah I'd like to do, I'd like to be able to do something like that.  I mean I'd really like to be able to have one or two really great producers. There's a lady I use to work with at BEZ [WBEZ Radio, Chicago, Illinois] who works, who went out to work on [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley's show.  She is fantastic, and I'd like if I had my druthers, she and I worked with some very good people over the years as producers, smart of thinkers, they know how to compartmentalize stuff and they're critical thinkers and I'd like to be able to work with those people and do something like that and put something on the air you know.  That would be ideal.  That's not gonna happen at this point in time (laughter); although Capricorns are supposed to be late bloomers and that certainly has happened for me.  The stuff that's happened for me in the last ten years and the kind of response that I get from people and the respect I get for what I do seems to have grown with you know usually you're in your heyday back then and I was in a certain kind of heyday, but people always ask me now, "Well how have you managed go be around continue to do what you do," and blah, blah and I you know certainly I think luck has a lot to do with it.  I'm not a religious person, but I am a spiritual person and I, I've tried to treat others as I want to be treated and I think that may have something to do with it although there are lot of people who have done the right thing and who are very talented who are not working.  So I, sometimes I wonder, I do ask myself what is it, why is it that I've been so blessed to be still around, doing something I really love because I love working public radio [WBEZ Radio, Chicago, Illinois].  I do jazz at one end of the station and I do interviews for the talk show at another end, and I, you know I wonder sometimes it's that kind of waiting for the other foot to fall.  Why, but now I'm sixty-three so it doesn't, I mean I've made the most of it at this point, but I've been really truly blessed. You know there's a point in which I had to get over, I'm not gonna be Tom Joyner or [HistoryMaker] Doug Banks in terms of the income.  Now there was a point in which I made a pretty fair salary, six figure money but still not the Tom Joyner and Doug Banks money and my wife has pointed out to me on a number of occasions, "But look at what you have.  You've got this incredible respect, you have a job that does afford you a pretty decent living," and I do a lot of other things that help the income.  People call me for lots of different kinds of things, to emcee things they thing I bring some credibility to their affair or function or whatever, and that sometimes I forget what a blessing and benefit that is you know, you still take it for granted and I have to remember that people don't take that for granted with me, they think something of that.  So I have to remember that (laughter), I need to think something of that too.  You know I'm not gonna be, I'm not gonna make the kind of money that those guys made, but I haven't done badly.  I put my children through college, both my children.  My son is an attorney, my daughter has a degree in fashion merchandising and marketing and I've got two grandchildren, each of them has a three-year old daughter, two girls that I love dearly.  So when you add up all those things and in terms of being radio for thirty-six years doing something I love to do, making a living it enough to be able to pay bills and take care of my responsibilities and still doing it, and for the moment in fairly decent health, that's amazing.
Story_ID: 304034
Speaker 1: Tell me this, we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: One of the things I think is really essential is that we have to--we have to start taking responsibility for our own actions.  You know it's, sometimes it's a little bit disturbing when I hear people who call into WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois] and I think that, I mean a VON is absolutely necessary for people to be able to get information, to be able to say what's on their minds, but sometimes I think when people call in and defend some actions that African Americans have taken, because that person or those persons are black and say you know the system is against them.  Certainly the system is an issue, but if Mel Reynolds is having a relationship with a sixteen year old, and people call in and say, "Well you know sixteen year olds today, they're fast, she knew what she was doing," blah, blah, and it's not her, it's not her responsibility.  People calling in, "Well she was hoochie mama," and blah, blah.  It's not about that it's about, it's about Mel Reynolds as an adult, it's his responsibility to know and this is not like you go into a bar and a woman you know you thought was younger but she looked older and--this is when you go cruising around a high school in a limo looking for young girls, that's a problem so how can you defend that and it upsets me when I think we're not taking responsibility.  I mean if you're [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry, nothing against these people personally but you know it is what it is, and you're caught on tape smoking crack [crack cocaine], well when you call in VON and you say, "Well you know he was set up and you know a black man who's trying to make it just 'cause he had a lot of influence and a lot of, and you know he had a lot to say and they were trying to get him."  Of course, that's probably the case but if you have a problem with drugs, with crack and you're in a high-profile position, at some point the two things will probably clash unless you do something about your problem, but to blame somebody else for that and then call in and say that you know it's all about you R. Kelly's just 'cause he's successful and you know he's the biggest thing since Marvin Gaye, and so the system just trying to knock him down.  Well he's got--his track record is that he paid off Aaliyah because he married her when she was under, no that marriage got annulled, but paid off that other young girl, paid off her family.  I mean there's a track record of that kind of behavior which is wrong, so and I mean this is not me, I'm not God, can't stand a judgment on R. Kelly or anybody but there's a reality about you know what side of the law you're on when you do stuff like, and I think it's, I just think it's sad when we call in and defend that kind of behavior and say you know just they're get him cause he's black.  I have a real problem with that.  I've had some serious discussions in the barbershop about that--about Mike Tyson, and my problem I got practically run out of the barbershop because I said, "No matter if the woman went up to his room or what, if she said no the man, his history is that you know he's out of control."  "Well she knew what she was doing when she went up there," blah, blah.  Well I gotta tell you, one time I saw her father on an interview show and her father talked about how she changed after that incident.  He said this was his baby girl and you know and he said she wouldn't even hug him she was so, she was so changed that he was in tears, and I--so that made a big impression on me and the fact that people would call into the radio station and say, "Oh she should've--she knew what she was doing when she went up there, she was just trying to get next to, yeah she--like you know, I'm sure she made that up about homeboy attacked her and took some sex you know," that's kind of sad to me.  So I hope that we develop a sense of responsibility which is a lot greater than I see, and that's not all people, and people who call in radio stations are different, and I understand that too but when I'm having these conversations out in a bar and the barbershop I hear the same thing, or women who've even said about the Mike Tyson thing, "She was up there you know, that's what she had coming," you know that saddens me.  With the R. Kelly thing because my daughter was the same age when that was going on and my daughter used to see him cruising around the school trying to hit on a friend of hers, and so I'm saying to people if this is your daughter, would that be okay with you?  You know, you accept that?
Story_ID: 304035
Speaker 1: Is there anything, you already said you'd probably go finish school or maybe not, I don't know.  Is there anything that you would, major that you would do differently if you had it to do again, had it to do again rather you know?
Speaker 2: You know that's a hard question because as it turns out this has worked out (laughter) so, I mean I use to think, what if I'd gotten that first job in Atlanta [Georgia] on the radio when I got severely disappointed, but I don't know how that would've--would I have been back in Chicago [Illinois] having done radio for thirty-six years and being you know be this person that gets the respect from Chicago's black community and some of Chicago's white community and for my peers.  I don't know so, I mean I'd like to think that, again I'd like to think that if I had completed my education that I might have been maybe as good as Ed Bradley on '60 Minutes' or something, but you know I'll never know.  I mean I think that, I think that I have or had a talent for television in terms of being comfortable with the camera and even with the little forays in the televisions that I've done with public television, and when I used to work for Channel 26 [WCIU-TV, Chicago, Illinois] and all of that stuff.  Television seemed to work for me at the lower levels and I wonder whether or not had I given myself you know all the tools that were necessary could I have possibly been as successful as somebody like Ed Bradley or, or I don't know somebody's who very successful in television.
Story_ID: 304036
Speaker 1: What do you think, this is just a question that popped into my head as you were saying this.  What do you think it is about you and maybe other personalities on the television and radio that allow you to you know be a public voice and not to be nervous about or not to be self-conscious about what you're doing?   You seem to have always been able to do this in life you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: As you describe yourself as a kid?
Speaker 2: I know I think of myself very much as a people person you know [HistoryMaker] Herb Kent and I talked about this on several occasions.  We, I love being able to communicate with other people to, to dialog with people to just, to kind of understand what they're about and, and more than that I actually love to talk which is part of what we do.  But my mother [Sylvia Gibbons Slaughter] use to say that when I was very small, my answers to things would be always very long as they probably are now, but my mother would say if I had been to camp that summer and some adult in the family would say, "Well how was summer camp?" instead of me just saying, "Oh I had a lot of fun," it would be, "I had a lot of fun and here's what we did," you know and I would give a whole dialogue about what we did, what we did each day, and the people I met and they'd go, gee, I didn't know, I didn't ask all that, I just wanted to know how it was.  So my mother said I was always very willing to talk and I, as a youngster even though back in the day you know they didn't encourage you dialoging with adults 'cause you know back I, the old days, it was children seen and not heard and you just don't--when adults are talking, you are quiet, but I use to always engage adults in conversation about things that we could talk about and I always found that fascinating to talk to adults, grown folks about things.  So I think for me it's just this whole love of being around and talking to other people.  Hearing what they have to say, exchange and ideas and conversation.  There's nothing to me like a great conversation with somebody who has something interesting to say.
Story_ID: 304037
Speaker 1: What would you consider at this point to be your legacy, 'cause you're nearing the end of your career I guess so, in a sense I guess (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Legacy, (laughter), I don't know.  If there's any legacy at all, it--I think it's for someone who wants to do this for a living and hopefully they'll be very well educated but for them to, because you can be very well educated and still sort of have tunnel vision about the things you like or where you want go.  If you're a political person it's kind of like, I only see politics, and maybe for you that's great.  Maybe for an individual focusing in on the one thing that they really love and are good at pursuing in terms of the media, maybe that's a good thing, but I think for me my legacy is that, I, I just--I think people, I hope that people recognize that how, how much room you can give yourself if you have interests in all kinds of things.  I, you know for somebody to say you know Richard Steele [HistoryMaker Richard Claude Steele] interviewed, at one time he interviewed someone who starred in a porno movie, which I did, I interviewed Marilyn Chambers years ago and but I've also interviewed people at the other end, whether it's Tony Bennett or Larry King or Wynton Marsalis or any number of elected officials and I'd like that to be the legacy to understand that broadening your horizons is probably greatest thing you can do for yourself in terms of this business, just be interested in everything there is to do, and if I haven't done anything else or made any other major successes in this business, I covered a lot of territory and I think I've done it fairly well, and I'd like that to be the thing that people would latch onto.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there anything we haven't asked you that you probably, that you think should be touched upon before we ask our last question.
Speaker 2: Probably not, I can't think of anything, nah I think we pretty much covered it all.
Story_ID: 304038
Speaker 1: You talked about your children and your parents [Sylvia Gibbons Slaughter and Charles Slaughter] and grandchildren.  The last question is similar to legacy, it's a little different, sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well probably as somebody who was as much as possible fair to other people and considerate of someone else's feelings.  I think that it's, it's--to me it seems to me it's so easy to be to treat people as you want to be treated.  We say that with and kind of cavalierly like well anybody can do that but people really don't.  If you--I mean I'd like to be remembered as somebody who always tried to be fair, who was giving and who tried to share whatever knowledge I have.  I've always been open to trying to help somebody. There's never been a time when somebody has been trying to get in this business that I've ever felt I can't help them or that I wouldn't help them or that I felt, oh God they may take my job someday so I don't wanna do that, and I know people who are like that, but I'd like to be remembered as somebody whose door was always open if and whatever it is--one of the things that I think I've had the ability to do and that's just a blessing is that people have needed to be connected to a person or an entity, a business, a connection and increasingly over the years, I seem to have been in a position based on the people that I know and the things that I've been involved in that I can hook one person up with the other one who needs, who really need to know that person for, to advance their career or to advance their business or for whatever it is they need to do.  You know they'll come to me and say, "Well do you know, can you help me?"  No, but I know somebody, if I know something about them and that they're credible people I will try to hook them up with the right people and lot of times I've able to do that and that really makes me feel really, really good.  I think that is certainly something that I'd like to be remembered for if I--if you ask me about something I knew the right people, and it worked for you, that makes me smile.
