Story_ID: 485476
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Philip Simmons, P-H-I-L-I-P, S-I-M-M-O-N-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, Mr. Philips [sic.], what's your date of birth?
Speaker 2: I born June the 9th, 1912.
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: Daniel's Island [Daniel Island].
Speaker 1: And that's in South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Charleston. Daniel's Island, South Carolina
Speaker 1: Okay.  And before you retired, what was your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation was a farmer.  I farmed.  I started farming when I got about eight years old, and I worked for my daddy and my granddaddy [Simmons' maternal grandfather, William Simmons], at least my granddaddy, 'cause my granddaddy raised me.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Then you became what?
Speaker 2: I became a farmer, plant; and my occupation was farming, hunting, and fishing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And before you retired, you retired from doing what?
Speaker 2: I retired from doing artwork.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And tell me the location of this interview.
Speaker 2: In Charleston--Island.
Speaker 1: No; right now, where we are right now.
Speaker 2: In--
Speaker 1: This is your home?
Speaker 2: This my home.  I was born on Daniel's Island, which is about sev- eight miles from Charleston.  I came to Charleston at the age of eight.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But right now we're--right now we're doing this interview at your house in Charleston, South Carolina, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And today's date is--do you know today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Today's date is the--
Speaker 1: It's February.
Speaker 2: February.
Speaker 1: First.
Speaker 2: February the 1st is it, isn't it?
Speaker 1: Yes, this is 2007.
Speaker 2: Two thousand and seven [2007].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 485477
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you some simple questions, and the first one is can you tell me, do you have a favorite color?  What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Now you're talking about cloth, painting or people or what--okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Just your favorite color.  What do you like?  Do you have a favorite color that you like to wear or that you like to see?  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I don't have a special favorite color, not to wear.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I should, too, but I don't have a--sometime I wears off-colors.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Was there just one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Like, like, like a hat or part of my clothes, I like favorite color pa- if I'm painting, maybe I would want a favorite color, and that would be Charleston green.
Speaker 1: Charleston green?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I born in Charleston [South Carolina], I was just fond.
Speaker 1: What do you like to eat?  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food--my favorite food, okra soup.
Speaker 1: Okra soup?  Okay.  And do you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Rutabaga, turnip.  That's one of my favorite food (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Favorite?  Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, spring of the year.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year, because I just love mild weather.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't like it too cold, I don't like it too hot, most of the time I'm around and going around, going different places, I would like to go a certain time of year, and that's my--most of the time if I'm traveling, going on a vacation, I would go in the spring of the year.
Speaker 1: Where do you like to vacation?
Speaker 2: I love different cities, like Savannah [Georgia] maybe, Atlanta [Georgia], Augusta [Georgia], and I like to vacate in those places, and I like--sometime I like exciting places to go, like--baseball and sports I like.  I like baseball, football, basketball, and I like to travel those times of year, 'cause I like to visit those places during that time of year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm a lover of sports.
Speaker 1: Sports lover, okay.  Do you have a favorite saying or a favorite phrase that you say or that you like or maybe even a bible verse?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite one?
Speaker 2: Yes, I--my favorite verse in the Bible, "Let not your heart be troubled.  Ye believe in God, believe also in me" [John 14:1].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: "In my father's house there are many mansions.  If it was not so, I would have told you" [John 14:2].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 485478
Speaker 1: Now, Mr. Simmons [HistoryMaker Philip Simmons] we're going to start talking about your family, and we're gonna start with your mother.  Can you tell me your mother's name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Rosa. My mother's name is Rosa Simmons.  I'm adopted boy in that family, in the Simmons family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Rosa Simmons adopted you?
Speaker 2: William Simmons adopted me, and Sarah Simmons [Sarah Buncum Simmons].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was your grand--was that your grandparents?
Speaker 2: My grandparents.  I was born in my grandparents' house, and they raised me until I came to Charleston [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I was large enough to (unclear).
Speaker 1: What was--what was your, your grandmother's maiden name; do you remember?
Speaker 2: Sarah Buncum Simmons.
Speaker 1: Buncum.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How do you--
Speaker 2: B-U-N-C-U-M.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And William was your grandfather, okay.  Now, tell me about your grandmother and grandfather and life on Daniel Island [South Carolina] with them.
Speaker 2: On Daniel's Island, I was raised in Williams Simmons' house and Sarah Simmons.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I stayed with them until I got about old enough to start studying, that's coming to Charleston, and I was forced to leave them, be hired by a blacksmith by the name of Peter Simmons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But let's--before you go to Charleston, let's talk about you growing up between the ages of when you were born until eight years old when you come to Charleston.  You were helping your grandfather on the farm.  What kind of--tell me about helping your grandfather on the farm in Daniel's Island.
Speaker 2: I--my, my grandfather, and kids then, you got to start working at a early years, most of the kids then, they could work on the farm at the age of eight, and I had to do little thing then, work or do the things that is available to me at that age, and that age was eight years old.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: When I got thirteen years old, I went in the blacksmith shop.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was apprentice to Peter Simmons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So let me ask you, what happened to Rosa Simmons, your mother?  Where was she?
Speaker 2: My mother was working here in Charleston doing domestic work, and I was on a farm in the country with my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you like to go fishing and hunting with your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Fishing, hunting.  I didn't like farming too much with him, but that was a must that I had to work to earn my food, do all things, have to earn a dollar.
Story_ID: 485479
Speaker 1: Were you able to go to school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I start school when I was about seven years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: On Daniel's Island [Daniel Island, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Was it, was it in a prayer house (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--yes, on the, on the prayer house.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of it?
Speaker 2: St. Luke's Reformed Episcopal Church [Charleston, South Carolina].  I start off in the church.  Most of the schools then was using churches, and that's how come I came to Charleston [South Carolina], 'cause better schools was in Charleston than we had over there on the island, so my [maternal] grandparents [Sarah Buncum Simmons and William Simmons] sent me here to Charleston.
Story_ID: 485480
Speaker 1: Did you have any brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a brother, a sister.
Speaker 1: What was your brother's name?
Speaker 2: My brother's name was Edgar Simmons.
Speaker 1: Edgar?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Edgar Simmons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That was the only brother you had?
Speaker 2: I had a other brother, but we weren't whole brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you--
Speaker 2: His name was Dean.
Speaker 1: Gene?
Speaker 2: Yeah, his name was Dean Haywood [ph.], 'cause we were raised with two different family, parents.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Gene Haywood?
Speaker 2: Um-hm [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me who Rosalie [Rosalie Simmons] and Estelle [Estelle Simmons] were.
Speaker 2: Estelle was my sister, Rosalie was one of my sisters, we raised by different parts of the family.  Rosalie raised with my uncle, and Estelle, she raised with my grand uncle, and I raised by my [maternal] grandfather [William Simmons].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we were split up in the family 'cause doing farming, we would work different places for a living.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about Mary [Mary Simmons] and Martha [Martha Simmons]?  Were they twins?
Speaker 2: They twins.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Those were your sisters, too?
Speaker 2: They were my sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 485481
Speaker 1: So what were some of the things you did on a farm besides working?
Speaker 2: Only go on the farm to work, not to play.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  Where did you play then?  Did you play games when you were little?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I played games when I was little.
Speaker 1: Where did you play?
Speaker 2: We played all kind of game like baseball, football.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. So you never had a chance to really get close to your mother, did you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I had close to get to my mother [Rosa Simmons] at times.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember anything about any of the times that you spent with her?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me a story about a time you spent with your mother.
Speaker 2: My mother working in Charleston [South Carolina], come stay on the boat every weekend, 'cause that's the way we traveled back then in the '20s [1920s], '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s].  We traveled by boats with no bridges then, no cars then, I came here on the boat.  That was the way of traveling.
Speaker 1: Right.  So your mother would come home on the weekends?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And she'd spend time with you.  Do you remember anything about a time you spent with her?
Speaker 2: No.  She would come on the weekend and gather, we would gather away the table and then come back to Charleston, and most time he would--she would gather with (unclear) and bring it back to Charleston.  That was a way of transporting food, different types of food.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Okay. All right, so when you're eight years old, you come to Charleston.
Speaker 2: That's right, on the ferry boat.
Speaker 1: On the ferry boat.  Who did you live with when you came to Charleston?
Speaker 2: I lived with my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you lived with your mother then.
Speaker 2: Then, that's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 485482
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about your father.  Do you know your father?
Speaker 2: I--I don't know too much about my father.
Speaker 1: Do you know his name?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: His name is Haywood [ph.].
Speaker 1: Do you remember his--is that his first or last name?
Speaker 2: That's the last name.
Speaker 1: Do you remember his first name?
Speaker 2: Yes, I may know his name.  In the late part of my life, by being adopted by my [maternal] grandfather [William Simmons], I know a little about my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's fine.  All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: All righty (laughter).
Speaker 2: Because we didn't have too much--
Speaker 1: Dealings.
Speaker 2: --dealing together (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 485483
Speaker 1: You come over to Charleston [South Carolina] and live with your mother [Rosa Simmons] at eight years old.  What do you do?  Do you enter school because you wanted to find a better school here?
Speaker 2: At, at a school here, had better school, so I had a school here.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school that you went to?
Speaker 2: Buist School [Buist Academy for Advanced Studies, Charleston, South Carolina] is about six blocks from here.
Speaker 1: Buist?
Speaker 2: It's right down there by the garden [Philip Simmons Garden, Charleston, South Carolina], yeah.  Buist School is right down there by the garden.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Philip Simmons, I think you say you stopped at that garden.
Speaker 1: Yes, we did.  So Buist is spelled B-U-I-S-T?
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So tell me about Buist School.  How did you like it?  Was there a teacher that you remember when you were going to school?
Speaker 2: Yes, in elementary school I remember most of the teachers.
Speaker 1: Who are some of the teachers (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't remember all of them.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me who you remember.
Speaker 2: Miss Perring [ph.].  Miss Perry [ph.], Miss Pinkney [ph.], Miss Turner [ph.], Mr. Hill [ph.], the principal.  That's one school.  That's the elementary school.  And the high school I went to, I remember Mr. Bowens [ph.], I remember Mr. Perrino [ph.].  There were--most teachers then were female preach--I mean teachers, then (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Teachers, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: The only male preacher--teacher we had was the principal.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Buist School, Buist elementary.
Speaker 1: The high school?  Oh.  What about the high school?
Speaker 2: Burke High School [Burke Industrial School; Burke High School, Charleston, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Burke?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Burke High School, and the elementary school I just told you was Buist (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you told me it was--
Story_ID: 485484
Speaker 1: So tell me, what were some of the things that you did in school?  Did, did you get a chance to do a lot of reading?
Speaker 2: A lot of chance to do--I have done a lot of reading.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. What else did you like to do?
Speaker 2: Well, spelling.  That time we go by the name of the books then, like arithmetic, spelling, hygiene, geography.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Those were the name of the book I--we identified by the name of the book.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Math, math and those names we learned by (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you a good student?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Were you a good student?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I was told that by the teachers.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 485485
Speaker 1: What kind of child were you?  Were you very mannerable?  Were you mischievous?
Speaker 2: Well, let me give a tale, like I was a boy always in school, if I'm in school, I'm trying to do some drawing, teacher got to take my drawing from me and then I can do some other thing.  I think that's how come I done a lot of sketching and drawing now while I'm in the blacksmith shop, 'cause I always like drawing, and today I turned out in the art and craft.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when did you start to sketch and draw, when you were in elementary school [Buist School; Buist Academy for Advanced Studies, Charleston, South Carolina] or high school [Burke Industrial School; Burke High School, Charleston, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: While I was in part elementary and after I get older, then I take up the art and craft.  I like just to draw anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I like to be tinkling on something, trying to make something, and I think that's what helped me today.  I done a lot of creating on my own in the art and crafts shop.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So what was--when was the first time that you created something?  How did--what materials did you use to--to create some art piece?
Speaker 2: Metal.
Speaker 1: Metal?
Speaker 2: By entering the blacksmith shop, that tell me that you got to creates different things.  I start creating different things.  I make molt wagons and make little carts and stuff, things I can identify when I--when I make them.
Story_ID: 485486
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Burke Industrial School; Burke High School, Charleston, South Carolina], what grade did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to seventh grade.  I quit in the seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you--that's when you went to the local blacksmith, right?  Tell me about that.  You went to ask for a job?
Speaker 2: I went--after I got about eight years old, or when I came into Charleston [South Carolina], I was eight years old, I wanted to go in the blacksmith shop then.  I was excited about the blacksmith shop, because the blacksmith shop, up until today I like excitement, I like sport and all that kind of stuff, and up until today I got--when I first came here to Charleston, I got excited about the blacksmith shop, 'cause what was going on in the blacksmith shop made me excited.  The horses, you have to help shoe the horses, you have to make the fire up, like some of the pictures you will see I got around here, and I had to keep the fire burning, and I learned--first thing I learned how to make up the fire and how to keep it going, and from there on, I started taking up smaller thing in the blacksmith shop.  And finally I'd go on to the bigger thing (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But before-
Speaker 2: --like building the wagons for the horse, shoeing--
Speaker 1: Build--you were building the wagons for the horse?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was building the wagon for--or repair, and also building, too, 'cause I had to work with the old man [Peter Simmons] until I was able to do it on my own, 'til I learned to create things on my own, and that's the time I really went into the creative stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But tell me, before you got hired at the blacksmith shop, you didn't get hired the very first time you went there.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.
Speaker 1: What happened?  What did he tell you?
Speaker 2: He told me I was too young at eight years old (laughter).
Speaker 1: When did he tell you to come back?
Speaker 2: And I--and I was at this kind of shop, because I wanted to go in that blacksmith shop, because a lot of excitement, like I foresaid, a lot of excitement was going on in the blacksmith shop.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But I was told the old man had to be safe, had to use safety precaution, so he wouldn't hire me at the age of eight.  But I keep insist on I wanted to go in that shop.  That shop was exciting, honey, at my first time in that blacksmith shop.
Story_ID: 485487
Speaker 1: So since he didn't hire you, what did you decide to do?
Speaker 2: Shine shoes, sell newspaper (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You shined shoes?
Speaker 2: Carried dinner, people working, and I found something to do, because I like money, I like money in my pocket.  So I start shining shoe, selling paper, carrying lunch to the powerhouses, carrying lunch to people who was working, until I got old enough to take up and do things around the blacksmith shop.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you did that until you were twelve or thirteen?
Speaker 2: Thirteen.
Speaker 1: Thirteen.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I can remember that well when I was thirteen years old, and I came home from school that day, and I told Peter Simmons, the man who I recall, I said, "Mr. Peter, I'm thirteen years old today, you said you would hire me when I get thirteen."  He said, "Well, it late now, you come in, you come from school tomorrow, you come to the blacksmith shop."  When I came from school [Burke Industrial School; Burke High School, Charleston, South Carolina] that day, I went to the blacksmith shop, and I left old Peter Simmons, he was about seventy-five years old, and I said to him, I said, "Mr. Peter, I'm thirteen today, you said you would hire me when I get thirteen years old."  He said, "Well, come tomorrow," so that was the next day.  And that next day up until I came out the other day.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So you--
Speaker 2: I was--when I retired the other day I was--I was thirty-nine years old [sic.].
Speaker 1: Thirty-nine?
Speaker 2: Hm.
Speaker 1: You mean seventy-nine?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  The other day when I retired--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --I was eighty-eight years old.
Speaker 1: Eighty-eight.  Okay.
Speaker 2: When I retired the other day I was eighty-eight years old.
Speaker 1: So you were in the blacksmith shop, in that same blacksmith shop for, like, seventy or eighty years; is that right?
Speaker 2: Almost eighty years, seventy-seven years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Almost eighty years.  Seventy-seven years.
Speaker 2: When I retired (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so you started in 1925?  Was it 1925?
Speaker 2: Nineteen twenty-five [1925].
Story_ID: 485488
Speaker 1: So you really loved working at the blacksmith.  So go ahead and tell me some more of the things that you did while at the blacksmith shop [in Charleston, South Carolina].  You shoed horses?
Speaker 2: I helped the old man [Peter Simmons] shoe horses at the age of twenty.  At the age of thirty-five.  And he wouldn't let me come around the horse all at that age, thirteen--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And after--and when I got thirteen years old, I would only hold a horse, make up the fire.  Those were the things I would do at that age.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: When I got to age of twenty-five, then I started doing small things, like creating little things on my own.
Story_ID: 485489
Speaker 1: Okay, so what were some of the--the little creations that you would make with iron?  You were telling me about creating things, little small pieces.
Speaker 2: After I got thirteen years old, and treated myself and could--and got confidence in myself, then I started launching into bigger things, and most creative things.  And when I got started making those things, like the wagons, the carts, the plows, and create things on my own, and I start looking then for different things that I could make, and trust myself to launch out and make bigger things, then I start making, like, wagons, wagon wheels, plows, and the old man, Peter Simmons, he start--he got--as he get confidence in me, he let me do bigger things and more expensive thing and creative things I had never made before.
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: Like wagon and the wheels (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, wagons.
Speaker 2: Wagons and the wheels, and I didn't start making the other things like art and stuff until I took up the art trade, like gates around here, fences, carts.
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you--
Speaker 2: And I went into the artwork forcibly then. People start giving me the responsible jobs then, like the gates you see around here, the fences and stuff you would see around Charleston [South Carolina] and elsewhere.
Story_ID: 485490
Speaker 1: Was Peter Simmons related to you?
Speaker 2: No relative.  We only had the same name rather.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Not the same name, but the initial, Peter Simmons and my name is [HistoryMaker] Philip Simmons.  But we become very close.  People (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now-
Speaker 2: --so many times people will ask me, "You kin to Peter Simmons, you all got the same name?"  And, no, we got the same initial but not the same name.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But he was a real good teacher, and I had a lot of confidence in him as we worked together.  I learned a lot from Peter Simmons.
Story_ID: 485491
Speaker 1: Now, when you first started working at the blacksmith shop [in Charleston, South Carolina], people were using horses for transportation, right?
Speaker 2: Horses, mules, and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: So as cars started to come out, what happened to the--the business of the blacksmith business?
Speaker 2: In, in the blacksmith business I would hear this so many times, people would remind me that, "Philip [HistoryMaker Philip Simmons], what you gonna do now, the horses are lagging, becoming a lost art and you don't know nothing about cars, and the horses now, the horses are going out of existence, no more horses, no wagon, what you gonna do?"  That question was asked of me so many times, 'cause cars are now coming in, what you gonna do?  So the old man [Peter Simmons] heard them, heard the guys come by the shop and told me, and these are things lived with me through the years, he told me right then--he heard them talking to me, and he said, "Boy, listen, I got something I want you to understand very clear.  At all--those guys telling you about blacksmith becoming a lost art (background noise), blacksmith becoming a lost art, if you would let it come a lost art, there always will be something for the blacksmith to do."  And I heard that when I was about thirteen, fourteen years old.
Story_ID: 485492
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you were telling me that people kept telling you that the blacksmith's business was gonna go away and--
Speaker 2: Becoming a lost art.
Speaker 1: Right.  And who was it who told you that?  There was something else that you could do?
Speaker 2: Same man that was teaching me, Peter Simmons (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, Peter Simmons, okay.  So tell me what else he was telling you?
Speaker 2: He told me, called me one day, and he let me know, 'cause I was kind of taking it serious, I was thirteen then, and he let me know that the blacksmith--there always will be something for the blacksmith to do.  I hadn't ran into the artwork yet, I was still doing general, general blacksmith.  So then that, I got satisfied at--'cause I loved the blacksmith trade, I loved that shop [in Charleston, South Carolina], I love all that excitement, and it be coming a time that I have to give it up, I felt pretty bad about it.  But you can see the Lord has blessed me, and I could change according to the time.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I changed from trailer--I made trailers, when horse and wagon ran out, I started making trailers to pull--you know what a trailer is?
Speaker 1: What is, what are trailers?
Speaker 2: Trailers are those things you pull behind the car.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I start making those, and then later, I start making--after trailer I start making other, other thing like--like, well, other thing, like, I was--well, I would really--what I create, that put me into the creative mind. I make things I just see.
Story_ID: 485493
Speaker 1: You know may make (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did you learn to use different tools?  Did you have to learn how to use different tools?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I had to learn that--that's the first thing I learned the tool, I learned the tool and the name of the tool, the equipment I'm using, all things like that.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  What type of equipment did you use?
Speaker 1: We, we used the fords, turn the fords to make the fire, we use sledgehammers, different type of hammers, the big one, small one, the medium one, I had to learn the name of those hammers and everything, and as I--as I work in the shop [in Charleston, South Carolina], I learned the different tool and the name of them and the purpose of the different tool.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 485494
Speaker 1: Did you ever work on automobiles?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: I made trailers and hook it up--hook it up to the automobiles.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  That's when--that was one of the job I'd done in the shop while I--when I really start taking on later responsibility.  I learned how to make trailers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when did you start working on the ironwork in houses, in houses?
Speaker 2: You mean the wrought iron work, like--like the gates and fence, balconies, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What--
Speaker 2: --different things and start creating different things on my own on, like, like window grills and stuff like that?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: When I take on more responsibility, that's the time I start looking for things then to create on my own, and I start making gates back then in 19-- 1944.  That's when I start making the art--doing the art part of my work, and I was forced to go into that type of work, the artwork, because the horses had gone out of business, the cars and no more trailers, I didn't make no more trailers, so I definitely was forced to go into the wrought iron decorative pieces like what I'm doing now: gates, fence, balconies, indoor and outdoor furniture like you see in there.  I had--I couldn't pick it out, I had to take it as it come (laughter), there's a demand, big demand for wrought iron fences and gates and all type of artwork, a big demand for it now.
Story_ID: 485495
Speaker 1: So who was your first client that you made a decorative piece for?
Speaker 2: Jack Krawcheck, got it right in the office now.  I made--the first gate I made, I made it for him, and the gate is in Charleston [South Carolina] today, which I'm proud of that, because people ask that question so many times, "Why you start making gates?  Who taught you how to make gates," and all kind of question be asked about that art part of my work what I'm doing now.  But I was excited when I start doing the artwork, 'cause, see, that's leading me away from these complicated thing like the horse and wagon and all like that that I could see the thing I'm doing, I could get on them, take a pencil or sketch and get, get to the desk and sketch what I want to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did people come to your shop and request that you come out and make a gate for them?
Speaker 2: That's right, come out and get all--most time I would like for the customer to--I like to put it on paper, make my own sketches, where they could see it with their eyes, so we won't be no mistake.  Most of the people I work for, especially the artistic part of it, I would make different sketches and let them see what it looked like, then I go into the shop and put it into action.
Speaker 1: Wow.  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's very important for you to make sketches for your customer.
Story_ID: 485496
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever get married?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And who, who was your wife?
Speaker 2: My wife was Eartha Lee Porchie [Eartha Lee Porchie Simmons].  I married a Porchie.
Speaker 1: Can you spell her name for me?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Can you spell her name for me?
Speaker 2: P-O-R-C-H-E-Y.  But she spelled it Porchie, P-O-R-C-H-I-E.  We had to change it when I--when we got married.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And her first name was--
Speaker 2: Eartha Lee Porchie.
Speaker 1: Eartha Lee?
Speaker 2: Porchie.  That's her maiden name, Eartha Lee Porchie.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you have children?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How many children did you have?
Speaker 2: Three.
Speaker 1: What are their names?
Speaker 2: Lillian Simmons Gilliam, Keith Simmons [ph.], and--
Speaker 1: So Lillian--
Speaker 2: Philip
Speaker 1: Okay.  Philip---
Speaker 2: Philip, Gilliam, Philip (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Philip, Jr.?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Philip, Jr, Philip Simmons, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay, Lillian, and the other son is Gilliam?
Speaker 2: No, that's my son-in-law.  Philip Simmons, Jr.--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That's his name, Philip Simmons, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Lillian Simmons is your daughter.
Speaker 2: Lillian Simmons Gilliam, she's married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She married.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Ted Gilliam [ph.].
Speaker 1: And what's the third child's name?
Speaker 2: Francis Simmons [ph.], Francis Simmons.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got to take it, to take it in uniform.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Francis Simmons.  Yeah, that's right, Francis Simmons.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Junior.  Simmons, Jr.
Story_ID: 485497
Speaker 1: Can you tell me more information about the shop that you worked in?  How long had the shop been there [Charleston, South Carolina]?  Was it passed down to Peter Simmons from his relatives?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he passed--from what I learned, it passed from four generations.  Guy Simmons, who was Peter Simmons' father, Guy Simmons, then Peter Simmons, and then [HistoryMaker] Philip Simmons, that's me, passed to me, and my nephew and my cousin, it passed to them, so it passed today--it passed four generations today, 'cause my niece, neph- my cousin [Joseph "Ronnie" Pringle] is back there now working back there, and my cousin, my nephew [Carlton Simmons] helping him, and that's still in the family, the four generations.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And are they still working with wrought iron, doing decorative pieces?
Speaker 2: Decorative pieces.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So the shop was probably maybe 170 years old?
Speaker 2: A hundred around fifty, from what we could gather from it, it's about 150 years old, Guy Simmons, Peter Simmons, Philip Simmons, Joseph Pringle, passed four generations working that shop.  That's what, that's what I know was told to me.  Now, who it was passed from to Guy Simmons, I don't know how old the business is (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 485498
Speaker 1: Now, in 1930, after you're married and have your kids, what, what happens?
Speaker 2: My wife [Eartha Lee Porchie Simmons] died in nineteen--
Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty [1930]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me, what year was it?
Speaker 2: My wife died in 1960--'64 [1964] I guess [sic.]?  Yes.  I'm trying--I'm trying--I'm trying, I'm trying just to, just to think now.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think.  I'll have to go back now--my wife died in 1930, '29 [1929]--my memory's playing tricks with me at my age.
Speaker 1: How, how old were your children when your wife died?
Speaker 2: One, three, and four.  I could remember that.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  So they were very young.
Speaker 2: And they--when my children, when my wife died was one, three, five.  I had to had that--I used that so many times--one, three, four; two years apart.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So what happened?  How did your wife die?
Speaker 2: She had a setback in pneumonia.  She had pneumonia, contracted pneumonia after--after her birth, she died shortly after her birth.  She took sick.  And what we, what we can--and she died in the hospital shortly after she contact pneumonia, what we could remember, pretty close.
Story_ID: 485499
Speaker 1: So, now, you were running the business, 'cause this is in the 1930s, somewhere in the 1930s.  So who helped you raise your children?
Speaker 2: My sister--everybody was grown then, grown then.  My sister helped me raise my children, and the, and the neighbors helped me to raise them-
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: --and one them--one them kids was adopted.  One--some of the other ones, some one again adopt the other ones, somebody again adopt the other one--
Speaker 1: Oh, so each--your relatives--
Speaker 2: My different--my parents and--
Speaker 1: And relatives.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're saying that your relatives adopt each one of your children?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: To help raise them?
Speaker 2: Help raised them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One of them will be here directly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two of them living [Lillian Simmons Gilliam and Philip Simmons, Jr.] and one died.  The oldest one died.
Story_ID: 485500
Speaker 1: So now your work is in demand, you know, for the gates and fences and balconies.  So now the city--the city asked you to do some things, right?  What are some of the pieces that you designed for the City of Charleston [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I made a lot of pieces for the City of Charleston.  I can name some of the thing now was given to me, job--different jobs were given to me by the city, and most of those jobs was given to me were for a purpose, they had a purpose to give it to me, like the gate, like the welcome gate to Charleston, the waterfront gate now in the waterfront, the gate--the egret on the, on the--in the statehouse and the gate--and the national museum, like the Smithsonian institute [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.], all of those things were given to me for a purpose.  One for the airport [Charleston International Airport, North Charleston, South Carolina] when people come in the airport and want to see what Charleston look like after not coming in Charleston and to tour Charleston, they would see something in the airport, Waterfront Park [Charleston, South Carolina], people coming by water, like to come here by water, and they will see the gate there.  Welcome people by water, welcome people by land, welcome people by plane, and I like that.  I got--I got what you call a good kick out of that, because all that time I was making these pieces for the city and private homes through business they had, I was learning.  I didn't know everything when I start.  Because I made that first gate for Krawcheck [Jack Krawcheck], a merchant here in Charleston, that was the first gate I made.
Speaker 1: You say it's Krawcheck?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How--how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Do--how do you spell Krawcheck?
Speaker 2: K-R-E-W-C-H-E-C-K [sic.].  K-R-E-W-C-H-E-C-K, that's a merchant here, clothing store.  First gate I made for him.  But, now, gates was here before now, because a lot of those gates and pieces--different pieces came from Europe, came here from elsewhere.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  But yours were very unique.
Story_ID: 485501
Speaker 1: I--those I made, I made it because I learned to make some pieces by hand and some of the--again was made by machine.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Well--
Speaker 1: And first gate--the first--well, the first--fifteen, twenty gate I made by hand, no machine, no arc weld or nothing, but now I make it by arc weld, I make--I buy--it's much easy and cheaper now to make it by machine, so I got the electric weld and other thing to perform my service.
Story_ID: 485502
Speaker 1: So the shop--it moved from different locations?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Where was the first shop?  What part of town?
Speaker 2: I--first place I live when I came here from the island [Daniel Island, South Carolina], the street is still here, that's Vernon Street, move off of Vernon Street on Washington Street, two places on Washington Street, and then I moved next on--on Alexander Street, and from Alexander Street I move on Nassau Street, and from Nassau Street I moved two places on this street, across the street and here.  This is the last place I moved, 30 1/2 Blake Street, and I'm living here now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I really--in Charleston [South Carolina], I really lived seven places.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: East--
Speaker 1: Hm?
Speaker 2: The east place I moved on the common ground, they--improvement for the city, you know, certain people there like to give up one--give up their house something for improvement, like repairs and rebuilding, like that.  I guess that's being done in a lot of cities around this country.
Story_ID: 485503
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, you talked about some of the gates were already here that came from other places, came from--came from other areas, other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Part of the country?
Speaker 1: --country.
Speaker 2: Foreign country, like--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Well, some of them needed to be repaired. Is that how you started working in that, by first repairing something for someone?
Speaker 2: That's right, I first start working on gates, not making the gates, but start repairing the gate.
Story_ID: 485504
Speaker 1: Okay, you were telling me that you didn't begin by making gates but repairing them.  Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: When I started working on the artwork, I start repairing gates before I start making gates, and I--by repairing some of those gates because it deteriorate--Charleston [South Carolina] have a heavy salt air, and things deteriorate very fast in Charleston.  I guess you heard about that, but things deteriorate pretty fast, and I had a--I done a lot of repair work on gates and fence and balcony, and other things with metal, too, other metal things too, I done, it deteriorate, and I had to repair them, like gate, fence, balcony, window grill, indoor, outdoor furniture and stuff like that.  I done a lot of that, and at the same time I guess I started making gates.  So then, you see, I had to repair and rebuild.
Speaker 1: So did--when--in the repairs, did you start to do some decorative things when you did the repair?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Some of those same things started to deteriorate and I had to repair them, like gates and fence, window grills.
Story_ID: 485505
Speaker 1: What other metal did you use besides--
Speaker 2: I used, I used to use wrought iron, but wrought iron got scarce and expensive, so I start using mild steel or mild iron, mild steel or mild iron, but wrought iron, I start out with wrought iron, but wrought iron here in the later days now is very scarce.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You just don't pick it up fast.  You can get wrought iron now, I pretty sure, I think that's a getting scarce now, different (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How many pieces--
Speaker 2: --different than wrought iron and mild steel.
Speaker 1: What's the difference?
Speaker 2: One is more flexible than the other one.  Cast iron is flexible.  I don't work with cast.  Sometime I have to repair it, but I don't work with cast.  Cast is flexible.  It breaks easy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, when you have to use the fire, you talked about keeping the fire hot when you're working.  How hot does it have to be?
Speaker 2: About two thousand--250,000 degree [sic.] hot.
Speaker 1: Wow.  That's very hot (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's good hot, that's good and hot.
Story_ID: 485506
Speaker 1: So what else do you want to tell me about your work?  How many pieces have you made, do you think?
Speaker 2: I think--I think from what we can gather, 'cause we doing duck mandolin [ph.] on some of the things, we going around at times, I think, I think I made about gates and fence maybe (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Did you--how many?
Speaker 2: About a hundred and--about two hundred and some pieces.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: That's, that's wrought iron and other pieces, like indoor furniture, outdoor furniture.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What else do you want to tell me about--about your work?
Speaker 2: My work I had--after going to that blacksmith shop [in Charleston, South Carolina] and working that blacksmith shop a while and start learning and start creating stuff, and I think I'm always showing that shop, people have learned a lot about my work.  Every time I make a fence or a gate, especially in the art field now like I'm doing now, every piece I make--most every pieces I make now, I learn something about it.  I--a customer comes to me and asks me to make them a piece or ask me to create anything, and I finish that, most time I learn something from that piece I made, so you can see my customer taught me a lot about my work.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I just didn't pull it out the blue sky or look at a tree in the woods and I got leaves, you can see pieces like some of these things I made from different things like are nature, like the moon, the star, the fish, and different things, I create it on my own from the customer, by work, by making these pieces for the customer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All the food I put on my table come from the customer.  If the customer didn't bring the job in the shop, I wouldn't have no food.  'Cause you can see the customer plays a big part in that shop in those days, and those--
Speaker 1: Eighty-eight years (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) However many--and those many years I was in the shop, the customer played a big part in my life.
Speaker 1: Tell me, who were some of your customers?  I mean, were they everyday people or influential people or--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: I said who were your customers?  Were they influential people, just everyday people?  Who were your customers?
Speaker 2: Well, you can call it everyday customer, 'cause they come--when I was in the shop, let, let me say I don't remember being out of a job in those days.  I had to do a job every day, and even if I stay at home or rest up a while, but I had work every day, and, and those people that giving these--having these type of services, like the wagon, the horse, the cart, the trailers, and the tractors, and you name 'em.  There were a lot of people put my food on the table.  I always let the people--I go around to the school and talk to the kids, that's the first thing I tell them, "Treat your customer like they are human beings, try to satisfy the customers." Those are some of my mottos.
Story_ID: 485507
Speaker 1: Now, you mention going to the school.  You were involved with children a lot during your career; is that right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me some of the organizations that you work with, with the children.
Speaker 2: Now, the organization, let me tell ya, I go to the school and talk to the kids now--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --about my work, and most of the time I go to school, I talk about my work--
Speaker 1: What, what do you tell them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) how I do certain things.
Speaker 1: What do you tell them?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What do you tell them?  What do you tell them when you go to the schools?
Speaker 2: I tell--I be sure to let them know how I make certain things, like the fence, the gates, the iron, and let them know how it be done, because after I finish talking to kids about my work, then I got to tell them how it being done today and how I am doing the thing today and why you do things a certain way.
Speaker 1: Well, why don't you tell us, tell me how--tell me, like I'm one of the students--
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: --tell me how you did it and how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm telling ya--
Speaker 1: --it's done today, tell me how it's done like you tell the children.
Speaker 2: I'm telling you now exactly before I close, I let them know certain key things in my work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, but they don't ask you questions, and that's the way I survive on questions, after I tell them how I make the gate, how I cut the iron, how I heat the iron, and tell them ev- tell them everything about how I done certain things, and then I'm gonna tell them about the safety, what, how safety, safety advice they should knew--they should use, in working in the shop or working around horses or working around fire or something like that, you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Well, that's what I want you to tell me, because I don't know how, how you worked.  How did you cut the iron, how did you cut the pieces?  How was that done (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Okay.  That's a question then.  I cut the pieces with--today I cut them with a border and tool today with heating and cutters, electric cutters and cutters, there's so many way to work in that blacksmith shop, so many way to do things, so many way you have to go to the book or so many way you got to create things on your mind--on your own how to do things so that you can survive in that shop.  Now, like--like a lot of time I stop and have to think things that are complicated to me, become complicated you may bring a job to me to make, I got to think how to do it, then I got to go the drawing board, something like that.  Many times I got to go to the drawing board.  Many time I got to stop and think.  Many time I got to stop and think how to do certain thing, and that's what--that shop, that's what that blacksmith is all about, thinking.  Got to do a lot of thinking.  Like the bird, first time I made a bird, first time I made leaves, I had to go to the drawing board, or the first time I made a fish, or different pieces or things I create sometime, I got to go to the drawing board or sometime I got to stop and think.  Things don't come right to ya, honey.  You got to stop and think how to do certain things.  And now those are the questions being asked.  In my class, I go to the class sometimes, the art class, 'cause I'm doing artwork now, so I wanna talk about art.  I go to the art class, and some of my students, sixty-five or seventy years old, and some is young people, I have questions coming from seven or six years old kid ask questions, and the question makes sense, too.  And during some of those questions, some of those questions, kids actually do like to stop and think, too, you know, wait a while, let me think.
Story_ID: 485508
Speaker 1: Tell me--besides the school, you were in--you are involved with some other children's organizations, right?  Is that right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, like I am a member of the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America], a member of the Christian Endeavor League [Allen Christian Endeavor League], I am a member of the Y--a member of the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  I am a member of different organizations at my church [St. John's Reformed Episcopal Church, Charleston, South Carolina], and I work with the groups, too, with kids.
Speaker 1: Tell me about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Things (unclear) and I go to class or you ask me to come to talk to your kids, you got a group of kids that you want me to come and talk to, what do you want me to tell them?  I would ask the question, you know, anything, just like you tell--you asking now, those are some of the things people ask, kids ask.
Story_ID: 485509
Speaker 1: Tell me about the garden that we just passed.
Speaker 2: That--that's a garden, we're building a garden downtown now on Anson Street, and that garden is called the Philip Simmons Garden [Charleston, South Carolina], it's named after [HistoryMaker] Philip Simmons, that organized foundation, Philip Simmons, and that foundation [Philip Simmons Foundation, Inc., Charleston, South Carolina] consists of seven people.  It's a nonprofit organization.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we selecting funds to do the garden.  We got a nonprofit out-of-state license to solicit one and that's the way that garden will be sponsored, finished, I got sponsor 75 percent finished now, that garden.  And what we trying to do now is sell bricks.  That's one of the projects we use and to select money.
Speaker 1: So you how many pieces (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And we have donors now, we got donors now that--
Speaker 1: Have you created--you created the pieces that are there, the gates and the statues that are there?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Well what, what statues are in there?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: What pieces are in there?
Speaker 2: What statue I'm using?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Yeah.  What--is there--I saw a statue there.  What was that statue of?
Speaker 2: Oh.  We got several statues, like the one down here in the garden and the one to the park and several statues, all those statues I selected from knowledge, 'cause nobody brings a statue or a piece of--piece of statue that I familiar with.  Now, like I use the word sometime like I--like you asking the question, and other kids or other people or other students ask the question, where do I get all my ideas from, and what you, what you, what you  wanna find out some of the statue is, some of the statue is same people that walk on the street or walk through the country and look at and come to me and tell me, I want you to make such and such a thing I never seen before.  Those are some of the statues that come this one I selected this from seeing different things or just selecting different things from my own thoughts and my--those things come from my thoughts and I--my own mind.
Story_ID: 485510
Speaker 1: You have made a number of pieces (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, you know--
Speaker 1: Do you mark your pieces so that you know, do you put your trademark on --
Speaker 2: I start--I start put that on now, not the early, not the early--the early part of my life in that shop I didn't mark it.  Just about twenty years ago I started marking it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I understand that you drive around the city [Charleston, South Carolina] every week to point out your pieces on different buildings?
Speaker 2: Well, I go around with my grandson and some of them if he wants to see some of them, I drive them around the street.  Then sometime I just like to see my work (laughter).  I love them just that much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I get in the car and drive around, and I just want to see some piece--then many time people want me to drive them, some people want me to make them something, I say, I don't know what it looks like, you got such-and-such a piece, where I can see some of your work, I get in the car or get in their car and drive around and show it.  Sometimes they get a lot of ideas from seeing things and select them and select things I seen them, and get me permission--commission to make certain things for them of that by ride around and see it with their own eyes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Seeing is believing, honey.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yes, sir.
Story_ID: 485511
Speaker 1: You made a piece for the Olympics, the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta [Georgia], didn't you?
Speaker 2: Yes, I got--I got a picture in the office right there, and I got some other pictures in the office there.
Speaker 1: Well, well, what--what did you make for the Olympics?
Speaker 2: I make--make it, make it for the gallery, people would go--that were in the Olympic that work at the gallery, and they want something, and they got something odd or maybe something that people didn't see, so then I have to go and--that's one time I have to go to the thinking table (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause they didn't tell me what they want, so many time people don't tell you what they want but they just want something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Don't tell you what they want. Do you remember (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) just to say,  "Make something, Mr. Simmons [HistoryMaker Philip Simmons]," to welcome people to Charleston [South Carolina] or make something people can see when they come into Charleston or make something people haven't seen, make anything that you think people gonna cherish.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 485512
Speaker 1: Do you remember what you made for the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I got it right in the office, the picture, that I made the gate--I made it--that's what I tell ya, creation come from--from the Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.  And do you know, man don't make fish, man don't make the star and the moon and these thing, I call unto you, like the gazebo I made in the airport [Charleston International Airport, North Charleston, South Carolina], that come from thinking, and Waterfront Park [Charleston, South Carolina], the birds I made for the Waterfront Park, the leaves on the tree, and a lot of different things I made from creation, from my own mind.
Story_ID: 485513
Speaker 1: Mr. Simmons [HistoryMaker Philip Simmons], when you first got here, can you talk to me about Charleston [South Carolina], since you came here as a very young boy, eight years old, and now you're how old now?
Speaker 2: Ninety-four.
Speaker 1: Ninety-four. Tell--
Speaker 2: That's a long time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it is a long time.  Can you tell me about the difference--the changes in Charleston since you've been here since you were a little boy to today's time?  Tell me some of the changes.  There's been lots of them, but tell me what you--what you think are the most important changes in Charleston's history.
Speaker 2: The most important thing I observed since I came here is just people and the changes were made by people, and people today as people, and so many people are so much different from different--
Speaker 1: Um-hm. What about the times (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And changes--huh?
Speaker 1: What about the times? The different things that have changed since you came here?  We know that people--the people have changed.
Speaker 2: Definitely.  People have changed.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Tell me about the time, say, when it was the world war.  Do you remember that time?
Speaker 2: One I remember when I was six years old--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --during World War I [WWI], and I can remember a lot of things that happening during the war.
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: Like people would respect people as a whole, people have and willing to give--people, people would do things now, took people that haven't been doing earlier, people with more lending back then, in the--let me name sometime in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Was it rough for you, say, during the Depression [Great Depression] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And maybe--hm?
Speaker 1: During the Depression time, was it, was it rough for you then?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't rough for me, but it was rough for some people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I was a boy during the Depression, I was shining shoe, and I didn't know nothing about hard times.
Speaker 1: Okay. How come you went (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And back--and back then, in different community, I traveled from different state, different country, and the people had a little different--right in Charleston, changes, and whites and colored then, and Charleston was looking different from somebody, other whites and black in other part of the country, and I experienced all those things, you know.
Story_ID: 485514
Speaker 1: What did you think about segregation?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: What did you think about segregation?
Speaker 2: What I think about it?
Speaker 1: What did you think about it?
Speaker 2: I didn't never have a chance to suffer from it, like some people would tell you, older than me, older people than me, how we used to do--how people used to been different--do things, would do things to you and you would do things to them, and times when I didn't got too much experience, white and colored live together, eat together, and that's something a lot of people seen, have seen--and I didn't see, well, maybe 'cause I wasn't old enough to have sense enough, maybe.
Story_ID: 485515
Speaker 1: How is it that you never went into the service?
Speaker 2: That's a question I was asked just about last week one day people were looking in the office.  I got some pictures in the office, and they talk about things in the office that brought that same question, you just brought up just now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, about the service.  You never went into the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: --with the service, when I went to be registered to be inducted into service, my question, "How old are you?" And I would say, and then the last thing, they ask me, say, "What is your occupation?"  You know why they want to know that?
Speaker 1: No.  Tell me.
Speaker 2: They want smart people like me, I call myself smart or they call me smart to go in the service, that's what the service is for.  Smart people can make different thing, can make different thing, and I think that's what kept me out of the service, I could make different things.  I believe that now, now that don't have to be so, but I got some pieces in there now I made for the ship.  The ship was transferring cargo back and forth from foreign countries, even other country, closest country, but I was making cotton hooks and cargo hooks that load the ship, and that question come to me, say, "What is your occupation?"  I said, "I make ship, I make cotton hooks," rather.  "What is cotton hook?"  I say, "Things that unload the ship" 'cause they already told me by talking to me they--the man told me, the clerk, "We're taking you out.  You the person we need in the Army.  Work with iron?"  I say, "Yes, I work with iron."  "What you make with iron?"  I have to explain everything I make, cotton hooks and cargo hooks and all like that, sling to unload the ship to carry the stuff on the ship and bring them back, unload, some of the ship come to be load and some come to be unload, and I guess ask me that questions, anybody else ask me those questions, what, what, what do a blacksmith does.
Story_ID: 485516
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was gonna ask you about civil rights.
Speaker 2: Civil rights.
Speaker 1: Go ahead, tell me. You were saying the most exciting time was when you went to Washington [D.C.]?
Speaker 2: I had a good--I had a--I was thinking and kind of excited on the Civil Rights Movement, and it come to me like a great teaching, and today I take it as a good teaching.  I marched Washington, D.C. with the movement.  We left from the station here in Charleston [South Carolina] here on the train, other people went otherwise and from driving their own car and some of them had cars, and when my great experience listening to that speech about--from Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and today I could remember sometime in my teaching, kids, all grown-up kids, about the Civil Rights Movement, and I'll always remember Civil Rights Movement, for this reason and sometime you see the movement of King and people in school and class, and I ask myself the question why Martin Luther King didn't say that, he didn't told us that.  I don't think that run across me--you ask the questions now what about some of the things, these are the sorts of things, some of the things I could remember, and I ask myself the question why it happened, Martin Luther King did, people say before Martin Luther King we had--we had some movement too, and that run across my mind, and I make a comparison or compare with what I heard before Martin Luther King.
Speaker 1: What were some of the things you heard before Martin Luther King?
Speaker 2: Like--like the--like the--like the, like the movement--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Negro movement.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And all like that, we been hanging that way before Martin Luther King.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: We were all one, all but six years old, (laughter) right?  I (unclear) pick a permanent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Negro history.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: We just start calling it black history later, but people, when they are leaders, too, call it Negro history.
Story_ID: 485517
Speaker 1: So you said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When--when, when, when, when Marcus Garvey came in--you heard of a man by the name of Marcus Garvey?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: When Marcus Garvey came, we had to carry the black back to Africa.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I know what that (laughter)--and I could remember some of them, some of those things during Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] time, and today I always try to repeat it or try to let somebody know that I know, and like the question you ask, so many questions you ask, you know, about some of these people and why didn't I join this organization or why I didn't join the other organization, why I didn't join--why didn't the Black Star Line--you heard about the Black Star Line?
Speaker 1: The black what?
Speaker 2: Black Star Line.
Speaker 1: No.  Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Well, well, he brought a lot to--
Speaker 1: Hm?
Speaker 2: Take me all day to go through that story.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, just tell what it is.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What is it?
Speaker 2: Well, you know Marcus Garvey was here, you know he had a ship, you know he had a ship, he had--Marcus Garvey had a lot of money.  Well, you ask this, and this may take a little longer, but he came here to carry the Negro back-- the Negro done back to Africa or to Africa.  You didn't heard about that?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, I know his movement is about, but I want you to tell me what, what you know.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: You know what the movement is all about?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, well that's all, then.
Speaker 1: But tell me, tell me the story you were beginning to tell.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Tell me the story you were beginning to tell.
Speaker 2: Well, the organization was moving in Charleston [South Carolina].  One group was moving in Charleston.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] been moving in Charleston.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: At the same time (laughter).
Speaker 1: And you didn't join either organization.
Speaker 2: I joined the NAACP.
Speaker 1: Oh, you did.  Why did you choose the NAACP?  Do you remember the type of work that you did for them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let me, let me tell ya.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The NAACP was making it in teaching.  NAACP had a big outlook from other organizations.  I was other organization had a lot NAACP and Marcus Garvey, the Black Star Line and all these things, there was a lot of them, but this was the organization that had good foothold and influenced the people that joined these two organizations, the NAACP and the Black Star Line.
Speaker 1: Do you know any people that joined the Garvey--
Speaker 2: I know people that joined both of them.
Speaker 1: Oh.  Who do you know that joined the Garvey group?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, I called the (unclear) you would know how, but I can give the names of a lot of people, but had about 10 percent, about 20 percent joined the Marcus Garvey movement, and about 80 percent joined the NAACP, so that's make a big difference.  But it was growing, it was, it was--both of the organizations was growing.
Story_ID: 485518
Speaker 1: What else can you remember about the, the March on Washington?  You said you took the train.  What was that like to take the train to go to Washington [D.C.]?
Speaker 2: That same dif- that same distance from here to Washington.  I couldn't find a seat on a step, on the [U.S.] Capitol step [Washington, D.C.], on the step, but I could find some grass and lay down, 'cause it was summer, it was summer air, 'cause I could find a place to lay down, and I heard some things there by King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] that I resent now.
Speaker 1: That you resent?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What, what are some of those things you resent now?
Speaker 2: That he--that he had influenced a lot of people and some he didn't.  Didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: And by--and by organization and people on the street and the difference that they did, and you ask me the question what are some of the changes, and I said, some of the changes comes in those question things I witnessed that day that I resent and some I accept.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Some of the changes that you resent are what?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: What are some of the changes that you resent?
Speaker 2: Golly.  Some of them he told us how to treat people, accept people how--who they are, what they are and what they stand for, and then the other thing I--told us how to make a dollar.  He told us about the books that are different from the--some of the books are different from the white school, and it was, and still anything that he told us that today we need those thing.  Other things he told us, and these are the changes and other thing that like I first start telling you how I disagree, and so many people disagree from others, and some had paint, had paint such a beautiful picture I believe is Martin Luther King, come to truth things he have said, Martin Luther King, today, believe those things today, hear him said.
Speaker 1: Tell me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That march to Washington, I Had a Dream, [sic. I Have a Dream] and it just open up, open up a lot of things and somehow my-and, and we treating it so unconcerned now, that's one thing I--you know.
Story_ID: 485519
Speaker 1: You talk to students a lot, and this interview is gonna be used for the future generations, what would you like to say to the future generations?  What, what message do you want to send to children today or other future generations?  What wisdom would you want to give them?
Speaker 2: Some of the wisdom I can pass on, and some wisdom I can take. Can you do a little more reading?  I see they're giving scholarship now, and I just talked to some of my family, other family now, and some, some of the things I would tell them comes right in the question, answer to your question, do more reading.  I notice people who get those scholarship have to do a lot of reading, and I would, I would tell them--I would have them try to do as much reading and gather as much information as you can.
Speaker 1: Mr. Simmons [HistoryMaker Philip Simmons], how, how do you wanna be remembered?
Speaker 2: I noticed a scholarship appeared upon on how much reading you were doing.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And I would, you know, I sat through the radio the other night and them coming up the old blacksmith shop back there, and so many things that I could give it to them in the form of an old blacksmith shop, you know?  Like people, like people with brains they are born at a certain time and they decided that they gonna get what's available for them.  And if I had my life to live over, I wouldn't change at all.  I'd do the same thing I'm doing now.  So much loophole today that people get--that they get no sooner that I wouldn't accept those, I don't know why, why--people will bring work to me and tell me when will you have it for me, and I said give it some time, and if I can't have it for them, I will call them and tell them.  Look at the people now, I got some boys, I training, they're doing all right, but I'm not satisfied, but they're doing it, satisfying the customer.
Story_ID: 485520
Speaker 1: But that's what I would tell them, be punctual, so much (unclear) I told a girl Saturday and they, they been on the phone talking, and the customer come in the place, and they look at the customer and keep on talking, I think, boy, you know, at least you could tell the customer, "Just a minute, I on the phone."  So much thing I got to tell them, so much thing I tell them now, too, I'm glad I have a chance to tell them now when I go to the school, and these--a lot of seven year old kids, six years old, and then there's a lot of sixty years old. Each (laughter).
Speaker 2: How do you wanna be remembered, Mr. Simmons [HistoryMaker Philip Simmons] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That don't appreciate--that, you know, don't appreciate the public, and--
Speaker 2: So your message really is good customer service?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Is that right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 485521
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you in years to come?
Speaker 2: He was a good old fella?  No.  He used to help the kids at school sometimes?  No.  That he would go around looking for things to do for people?  No.  But I want them to say about me, yeah, but you know, he had a vision, you know.  He died down in there and he never had a care, but a vision.  I would like them to say that about me.
Speaker 1: Say that again?  That what?
Speaker 2: He had a vision.
Speaker 1: A vision?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just hear about the mayor of Charleston [South Carolina], I said he [Joseph P. Riley, Jr.], he gonna run this year again for mayor, and he still got a vision.  I would like them to say that about me, he had a vision.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Is there anything that you would like to talk about that we didn't talk about?
Speaker 2: No.  I'll be right back.
Story_ID: 485522
Speaker 1: We were talking about how you want to be remembered.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay (pause).
Speaker 1: You said you wanted to be remembered as a man of vision.  What else do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Where did I stop?
Speaker 1: You were saying you wanted to be known as a man that had a vision.
Speaker 2: I still got a vision, and you could always remember me by, I hope, by saying that what I just said, you know.  I try to study people, and I love people.  And I wouldn't sit here and tell you that if I didn't, you know.  I'm in contact--I want to remember, like I said, people have taught me a lot in that old blacksmith shop, and I think I've been there about seventy-seven years, almost eighty years, eighty years in that shop, and I--I'm telling you when I wanna be remembered by that if I had--if I would live--if I would live another eighty years in that blacksmith shop, I don't see nothing in that shop, and that's a lot to see, that I didn't--wouldn't want to repeat.  If I have to do the same thing over and over and over again, what would I change?  I don't see nothing that I would want to change.  That's a lot to see, money.  I didn't had it, I wouldn't sit down here and wish for things I hadn't got and wanted, I would like to have, I would like to have it, but I would rather be remembered a fella that, if Philip [HistoryMaker Philip Simmons] had to be Philip over, Philip would be satisfied.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, Mr. Simmons, I want to thank you for taking time to give us your interview, and we really do appreciate it, and thank you from The HistoryMakers.
Story_ID: 485523
Speaker 1: This is the picture of Sarah Simmons, me and Sarah Buncum Simmons.
Speaker 2: That's your mother, right?
Speaker 1: Mother and [maternal] grandmother.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Your grandmother?
Speaker 1: Grandmother.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Okay.  Thank you. Video.  Okay.  I'm sorry.  Once again, who are we looking at?
Speaker 1: This is Peter Simmons. We have the same initial but not the same name.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Okay.  Okay.  Who's that?
Speaker 1: This picture you're looking at now is Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]. I was asked to come up to Washington [D.C.] to meet him  and have lunch, I had an invitation, and I took advantage of that invitation and went up to Washington and had lunch with him, and the purpose of going up there he didn't come up to my--during the time I was presented the award, he wasn't there.  And after that he came home back to Washington, he said I wanna see that man, and I would have been there, but I--he had an engagement to go to play golf, and he loved golf.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) (Simultaneous) What was the award? What was the award?
Speaker 1: The award was a trophy, and I think through him, it was a beautiful lunch.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Okay.  Tell us about this picture.
Speaker 1: In Charleston [South Carolina] I have a lot of friends, and all different nationality, all different people, all different walks of people, and we from time to time we have fell in love with--they visit the shop.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) So, who is that?
Speaker 1: Who is in the picture?
Speaker 2: That's a friend.  His name is Rusty Colmanay [ph.].  He is a friend of Charleston, Philip Simmons Foundation [Philip Simmons Foundation, Inc., Charleston, South Carolina], and I got plenty of friends like him, they visit the foundation often, they visit me often and they calls me often, and be a very close friends of Philip [HistoryMaker Philip Simmons] and the foundation.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) What's his name?
Speaker 2: Herman Clayton [ph.]--I try to remember the name. Clayton--let me see--I'm trying to get the name.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Sorry.  One more time?
Speaker 2: His name is Clayton Thompson [ph.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Okay, okay.  What's this?
Speaker 2: That's a friend to Philip Simmons. We are so close until he is--that's me (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Go ahead and tell us what we're looking at.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir, this is Jack Simmons [sic. Jack Krawcheck], and he is a --that's a job.  He commissioned me to do this job for him, and I made this gate and put up at his house, and he lived at--on Church Street [Charleston, South Carolina].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Okay. Looks like a balcony, too?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Okay. So tell us about this.
Speaker 1: That's another man, too.  His name is Philip Simmons (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Okay.  Tell us about this one.
Speaker 1: That's the blacksmith.  He was in business almost eighty years in this same old blacksmith shop, and it's been--it's almost eighty year--seventy-seven years I spent in this shop here.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Okay.  Tell us about this portrait, please.
Speaker 1: I asked so many time about this picture from--Peter--we are thinking--I'm gonna tell you the same thing, they ask Peter, "How could you work and talk to people?"  He say, "I work with my hand, I don't work with my mouth, I talk with my mouth."  So I learn that slogan.  That's Philip Simmons, and that's me.
