Story_ID: 244984
Speaker 1: By saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton and I am the interviewer, and I normally don't sound like this.  And, Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  And, observing today is Eve Sandler.  Today's date is Wednesday, February 2nd--
Speaker 2: 2nd.
Speaker 1: Two thousand five [2005].  And, this interview is taking place in New York City [New York, New York].  Now, if you would please, for the record, tell us your full name, including your middle name, and spell it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Okay.  Joan Delores Sandler.  My maiden name is Alexander.  And, Delores is as usual D-E-L-O-R-E-S.  And, Alexander is Alexander the Great.  That's my maiden name.  And, my married name is Sandler.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, would you please tell us your occupation?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's hard (laughter).  I'm a, a gambler in the art world (laughter).  I've--I work with artists in many disciplines, institutions in many disciplines.  I've worked for a long time with the National Endowment for the Arts [NEA].  And, I would spend from, off and on for many years a consulting at New York State Council on the Arts [New York, New York].  I most recently worked with the Romare Bearden Foundation [New York, New York].  I have a history, of what, thirty some years in the field.  I worked at The Metropolitan Museum [of Art, New York, New York] for a number of years.  And, I've worked also in the [New York City] Department of Cultural Affairs.  And, then a number of art projects.  I also did some international work at international area had been of strong interest to me, both in Africa, the Caribbean, and Europe.  And, my latest thing, I guess, has had evolved as I mentioned to you earlier, is really understanding and researching, and with groups of people in Europe looking at the black presence going way, way, back.  And, you know, it would start back as the Italian, before the Italian Renaissance actually, if you look at the Greek and Roman periods.  And, hopefully, my next sojourn to one of these places will be the, the Moors in Spain and Southern Spain.  That has been a very great interested to me, yeah.
Speaker 1: Would you please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I was born in Harlem [New York, New York] on 100th--West 116th Street on October 2, 1934.
Story_ID: 244985
Speaker 1: Would you share, please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, God (laughter).  Well, I like different kinds of foods rather than a specific food.  I enjoy soul cooked food.  And, I enjoy French food, and aspects of Italian and West Indian food.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I was gonna say red but, I think it isn't.  I think it's more in the turquoise family, yeah.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I think its autumn.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation designation?
Speaker 2: Oh, dear.  I think its Southern Europe.  And, then after that the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: And, South America.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase or saying?  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: No.  I would have to think about that.  I have to think about that one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We may have to come back to that.
Speaker 1: If it comes to you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'll--
Speaker 1: Please let me know.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yell it out.
Speaker 1: That sounds good.
Story_ID: 244986
Speaker 1: Let's begin talking about your mother.  Starting with your mother's name and where your mother was born and where she grew up as a girl.
Speaker 2: Mary, and they, down South call her Selacoy [ph.] her Mary Luddie (laughter).  Mary Wade.  She was born in Rocky Mountain, North Carolina [sic. Rocky Mount, North Carolina].  And, was next to the eldest of, it must have been about eight brothers and sisters.  Eight or nine brothers and sisters, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, did she ever share any stories with you about what life was like for her growing up as a girl?
Speaker 2: Oh, very much so.  Very much so.  Very much--family stories.  Some stories that had a historical context.  Her life in school there.  And, when she got a little older, they sent her to a boarding school up in--that was for nice colored girls up in--outside of Baltimore [Maryland].  And, and her, her love for the South but definitely she became a New York [New York] woman.  She would never relocate back to the South.  But, we were taken there with her, every summer.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, how is it that she migrated to New York?  Did she come here looking for better opportunities?
Speaker 2: No.  She came here and followed her man here, my father.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Otis Alexander [Sr.].  And, they got married in Brooklyn [New York, New York].  They actually got married yeah, in New York, in Brooklyn and then they found a place and moved to Harlem [New York, New York].  And, and they both wanted New York.  They had--both had New York in their bones.
Speaker 1: And, what kinds of things did she tell you about her life as a girl?  Like, Rocky Mountain, at that particular time, was it more of farming community?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, it's still a large farming community.  Lots of cotton and tobacco and peanuts.  And, and it was more or less the folk lore of our family, you know, tales about the family.  Tales about different children out of wedlock.  Tales about cousins who are really, cousins through various means and relatives, and her days at school.  She went to, God, I'm trying to remember the name of the boarding school in North Carolina.  But, it was a local school.  But, also she went there and boarded.  Her sisters were closer to her in age than her brothers.  And, and I guess just like lots of local, local stories.  And, then the local lore, the food, the--things that grew in the ground.  Things, those things were very--she'd walk alone with us in the fields and say, "Oh, we, you know, we have this" and she'd pick up something and start eating it (laughter), you know, things like that.  And, she never left the farm.  Even though she became a New Yorker.  That was very, very clear.  She embraced that life and her family.  And, and that was won--it was kind of wonderful, to have both things.  Because she wanted more for us coming here.
Speaker 1: And, how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: She was very beautiful.  She looked like Lena Horne.  She was very warm and giving and very relaxed person even though she raised nine children, all ten of us altogether.  And, we grew up for a long time on welfare under very poor conditions.  But, you never, if you saw my mother, you would never know that.  You would never know that.  She had to do many things to make a living.  She was nurse's aide.  She was a housekeep, house cleaner.  She was occasionally a chef and a cook with other people, for other people.  What I loved about her is that whenever she would come upon a new recipe of anything, she would come home and she would make it.  Even if that was our last welfare check, she would make it.  So, I grew up when this international diet--I mean, she just loved all those things.  She embraced all of those things so beautifully.  She also was a wonderful seamstress.  And, she made my, my clothes and she did that partly for a living as well.  And, but, she didn't take no nonsense.  But, she was very liberal in her thinking.  And, when I was sort of running around in the village and listening to street corner speakers who were radical and so forth, she loved all of that, about the things that I was doing at the time.
Story_ID: 244987
Speaker 1: Let's talk now a little bit about your father, starting with his name and where he grew up as a boy.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Otis Alexander [Sr.], the son of Arthur Alexander.  A very noble, elegant, tall man.  My mother [Mary Wade Alexander] was fair, with what they call in those days, good hair.  And, he was dark with nice hair, you know, wavy; very classical, almost aquiline features which you sometimes find in black people.  They have these very European features but, they're jet black, you know.  And, his father was quite interesting, Arthur Wade [sic.].  He owned the first Model T Ford car in that port of North--part of North Carolina.  Now, they still had to pick cotton and the children didn't always have enough to eat.  But, that his dad was had that--all that style.  Grandma Ella [Alexander], who was his mother, was a very devoted mother, very much a churchgoing mother, churchgoing lady.  His--in fact she taught me--she would sing when we would--I'd sit in her room, she'd said, "Come here Joan [HistoryMaker Joan Sandler].  Come and sit down."  And, she would teach me all these hymns like '[Take My Hand] Precious Lord' and so forth.  And, but he was quite the player; my father's father.  My father was a man of great elegance and unfulfilled in many ways.  He was an elevator operator but he had great dreams.  And, they didn't work out, and he became a very angry, and it made it impossible for him and my mother to stay together.
Speaker 1: What were some of his dreams that he had hoped?
Speaker 2: Well, I think he had hope, he would come to New York [New York] and make money.  Whatever the stories were how you made money.  Whether or not you made money on the street or you got a good job and you made money.  Or, you were, you know, you just worked your way up the ladder.  I don't think--not that he didn't see college.  My mother saw college to a degree but she married before she would go to college and she--so she never did.  But, a lot of, you know, her cousins did; younger cousins especially.  And, he tried menial jobs but he always had a nobility about him.  But, we know there a lot of black men like that.  And, in those days, they were really many, many more.  And, but he became increasing disappointed and angry and impatient.  And, then very difficult for my mother.
Story_ID: 244988
Speaker 1: And, how old were you when your parents [Otis Alexander, Sr. and Mary Wade Alexander] separated?
Speaker 2: I was about nine or ten.  My mother just moved out.  My mother was very beautiful and had a suitor [Willis Hunter] and he helped her with the move.  And, we moved about five blocks away.  And, when my father came home to an empty house with--you know, here she was already with four children, it was like shocking (laughter).  And, it took a while before he found out where she really was.  That's was I think also my mother's courage and her sense of self was also, I think, in part of that.  And, I remember the arguments in the house.  And, I remember I would run and wanna hold onto my mother and mother says, "It's okay, you can just--no, no, don't come back here.  I'll take care of it."  You know like, I'm not gonna let him do certain things and I think it--yeah, and then the next thing we know, we had just moved.  And, then like she sent us south so she could make the adjustment.  And, she was already pregnant with the baby of the new man.  And, and South was a, was a support system and a refuge.  As it had been for a long time with families in Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And how long were you all down south before you came back to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Oh, we were there, I think, one wint- one fall I was there through part of school.  So, I may have been there for four or five months.  I remember going to this one room school house (laughter).
Speaker 1: Which I'm sure was very different from the experiences here in New York.
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, sure, sure.  But, you're always family in those situations.  And, then of course, those situations where all the teachers were always black.  And, here even if you're at school in Harlem, you didn't see many black teachers in those years, though they were few that were memorable to me and I'll talk about one or two of them later--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --who really changed my life.
Speaker 1: And, did you still get to see your father a lot after your parents divorced?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, he would come by and sometimes get bold and vicious and my mother would have to send him out the house or something.  And, then she arranged through the courts where he had certain visitation right, but they were very strict.  And, we saw him on a regular basis.  He was by that time very hurt 'cause he knew that my mother left for another man also.  And, he knew that, he knew that she was continuing to have children for this man.  So he was very angry.
Story_ID: 244989
Speaker 1: You told us a little bit about your paternal grandparents [Ella Alexander and Arthur Alexander].  Did you know your maternal grandparents at all?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  My mother's [Mary Wade Alexander] family, Arthur, Gatsy [Wade] and Arthur Wade (laughter).  Gatsy was this wonderful little, tiny little lady.  She was African and American Indian [Native American], and maybe a little Irish.  And, she had this incredible energy.  And, she would just--I mean, she ran the house.  And, my grandfather, her husband, Arthur, was very quiet and gentle.  And, he knew who he was and everything and didn't take any stuff.  But, my grandmother really ran the house.  And, and he would talk very quietly.  "Well Gatsy, I, I think we should do so and so."  And, Gatsy would be, "Now get outta here" (laughter).  She could cook, cook her behind off--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And just would make all these things.  Like things I'd never had before.  Like tomato pudding, and things, you know, she'd just make all these wonderful dishes, you know, on this old coal wood stove, it wasn't even coal, it was wood.  And, she could sew and she could run those boys she, she had after--'cause the two, the three girls all left and got married and the boys were still home.  And, they were sometimes mounting up to not very much good.  And, but, she would just keep them going, you know.  She ran the household.  It was a very interesting pair; those two.
Story_ID: 244990
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestry?  Do you know, if you came from free people or slaves?  How far back?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Mary Wade Alexander] would talk with me about it and I think we did try to do some research.  And, I'm looking at my daughter 'cause I think she did some of that too.  That we went back to, I think, almost as--back to the time of slavery.  But, also, where the families came from, my mother's side and my father's [Otis Alexander, Sr.] side.  My father's side moved from Virginia to Rocky Mountain, North Carolina [sic. Rocky Mount, North Carolina] because there was work in the trades for the men.  So they, instead of going north, went south.  My grandfather's side, Grandpa Arthur [Alexander], there was a, I think, there was a white family that was a very dominate part of the, white part of the background.  And, I can't remember their last name.  But, and, they would claim their different slave children about going back before my--
Speaker 1: They would claim the off--
Speaker 2: They would own up to it to a degree.  There was not very much the wives could do.  But, they would--my mother knew some of that history and shared it with us.  But, actually, I think it was my children who really did some research in that.  And, I just have to remember, yeah, my daughter Eve [Sandler] (laughter).  She going, "Yeah, right."  Because it's become a subject of a lot of their artwork.  This whole area, both my daughter, Eve's paintings as well as my daughter Kathe's [Kathe Sandler] film, filmmaking.  'A Questions of Color' is one of her films, yeah; where she looks at color.
Story_ID: 244991
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?  What's one of the earliest things--
Speaker 2: Being a--third birthday, it was the first [New York] World's Fair in New York [New York] and everybody, my family was celebrating my turning three.  And, I had my brother, Milton [Alexander], who was probably one.  He was a cutie pie.  And, my brother, [Otis Alexander] Jr. had probably passed away then.  But, I remember one Saturday, all these people were coming to the house and the excuse for the party was that I had--the daughter had turned three years old.  And, I was busy running to the door and entertaining everybody.  And then, and I think, people had just, some people had just come from the World's Fair that weekend or that kind of thing.  And, I remember this house with lots of laughter and people, and wonderful people from, they were all recently from the South, living in New York but having this wonderful bon vivant.  And, they weren't what you call upper class black people.  They didn't come from those kind, kinds of families.  But, they quickly became that period of 'Harlem Nights' in the '30s [1930s].  And, it was a wonderful period and I remember those times.  I remember going to the [Kress] Five and Ten.  And, I remember my Aunt Geneva [ph.] who was my father's [Otis Alexander, Sr.] sisters who came up here.  Because at the time, they were giving scholarships to people from the South to go to Columbia University [New York, New York].  And, I just talked to Aunt Geneva the other day and I said, "Aunt Geneva, was it Columbia you went to?"  And, I remember she's this tall, very black woman with these wonderful long legs.  And, I remember her huge knees and she would just be very southern but very bright.  And, she's my daughter Kathe's [Kathe Sandler]--they love each other, Kathe and Aunt Geneva.  I talked to her just the other day.
Story_ID: 244992
Speaker 1: Can you please give us your siblings' names, and their birth order, including yourself?
Speaker 2: Well, I have a lot of that written down.  But, let's start with [Otis Alexander] Jr., who did pass.  He passed down south.  In fact, when we go, used to go down, we don't do this often now, to bury family.  That would be Jr.'s grave, tombstone.  He ate something.  In those years, and if you got dysentery, you know, and if you're a black child, it was even worst 'cause there were really no hospital or doctors that you could really go to.  If grandma's tonic didn't work, that was the end.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, there was Jr. and then there was me, [HistoryMaker] Joan [Sandler].  So, I've always been the eldest because I remember 'cause my brother was so young when he died.  My brother, Milton [Alexander], and I don't wanna, wanna start with ages 'cause I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Yeah, no, that's fine, you can give us their--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My brother Milton, my brother Bobby [Robert Alexander], my brother Karl [Alexander], my brother Donald [Alexander], my brother Peter, my sister Susan [Alexander], my sister Rene [Alexander].  That should be nine in that bunch and ten with my brother, Jr., with the oldest one.  My mother [Mary Wade Alexander] had a lot of children.
Story_ID: 244993
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about, you told us about a birthday party.  But, like what were other holidays like in your house?  Were they very festive occasions, like Christmas, and Thanksgiving, and Easter?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I remember Christmas when I'm a little older more than any other time.  But, I remember that there was--my father [Otis Alexander, Sr.] had a sort of sporting lifestyle, so there were parties.  And, there were no less noisy or busy than Christmas was.  I remember one Sunday morning, I got up and I saw all these glasses sitting around.  I went around and drank the bottoms of all 'em; got desperately sick.  (Laughter) So, that was my first introduction, at four years old or something to, oh, that's what they do.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, but, there was a, there was a kind of a, a style.  My father's brother--'cause see all of his brothers would come here. It was the brothers who came north.  My father's [Otis Alexander, Sr.] sisters stayed south.  Except for Aunt Geneva [ph.] who came up to go to school and to get her final education so she could teach.  Her oldest sister, Aunt Pauline [ph.], didn't do that poll and she, she did all the things that a good farm lady did, you know, in the house there.  I remember her.  But, it turns out that the, I was talking, was I talking about my family who came north?
Speaker 1: Yes.  And, we were just talking about what holidays were like in the house.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, in the house, right.  Well, they were always quite wonderful.  What I don't remember is the difference between Christmas and birthdays, and dinner parties and food, and just people sitting in the house.  Uncle Mack [ph.] lived up the stairs with his wife, Martha [ph.], who was a tough lady.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, God.  And, he would come down.  And, then there would be another uncle, I think.  My mother's [Mary Wade Alexander] brothers or any of that part of her family wasn't up here then.  And, then I remember later on, when we would have visit--more than Christmas, we would have visits from family from the South and there would be a gaiety.  And, there would be a family gathering.  And, there would be--people would come and embrace each other.  I remember that even more than Christmas.  Then, my Aunt Bird [ph.] and Uncle Nick [ph.] who lived with us for a while.  That's another Uncle Nick.  And, there were an interesting couple.  That was my mother's middle sister.  Her youngest sister, Helen [ph.], lived in Baltimore [Maryland].  And, there would be all kinds of things with having them in the house and there would be people passing by.  But, I don't remember just Christmas, I just remember there was always a flow of people, lot of food, stuff in the oven, and enough to eat.  You know, enough, there was always enough to eat.  Even though we were poor and hard working.  There was another sense of what poverty at that time meant.  It wasn't the kind that I would begin to see later.  And, it had something to do with, I think, the southern style didn't permit a certain type of poverty, which is very interesting, emotionally and culturally.  But, I remember the house was always full of people and, and there was always food on the table.  And, there was somehow enough for people, if they drank wine, they drank sweet wine.  There was enough for scotch or whiskey or something like that.  Or, when people would bring stuff, homemade stuff from down south (laughter), yeah.
Story_ID: 244994
Speaker 1: What was the name of the street that you grew up on?
Speaker 2: The first street I lived on and the street I was born on was 116th Street between Lenox [Avenue] and 7th Avenue [New York, New York].  The building is still there.  It houses a lot of Senegalese families at the time.  It's not--right next to the restaurant called [Le] Baobab [Restaurant, New York, New York].  But, we also lived across the street from the Graham Court [New York, New York].  And, my mother [Mary Wade Alexander] and her sister, and that would be Bird [ph.], were very often noticed.  They were very beautiful women.  And, every now and then some of the gentlemen, who lived in that building, would say, "Oh, we're having friends over.  We'd like it if you and your sister could come."  And, my mother and her sister would get dressed and snick out of the house and say they were going to a church meeting or something.  And, my mother would tell me about these events in the Graham Court and it would be a group of West Indian doctors who lived there at the time.  It was still mostly white.  And, whites were just beginning to move out of Harlem [New York, New York].  But, they would--these were very elegant people because they would have, in the foyer of the apartment, they would have a little band playing, a live band.  I mean, you talk about style.  And, so they just enjoyed being invited out.  They were two pretty sisters, honey, and the men would just look at them.  And, they would smile, you know, and flirt a little bit.  And, when they could get around, they got around; those two sisters.  They never did anything though, they always came home.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But, they really enjoyed being, you know, picked, picked out (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: And, can you describe your block a little bit more for us?
Speaker 2: 116th Street.  At the time, 116th Street was, it was still at that time, that part of 116th between 7th and Lenox was, still had a number of white people living in there.  And, there was also a couple who owned a dress shop downstairs, called Pearl and Morris [ph.].  I can't believe I remember their name.  But, we would go there and talk.  I think one of my aunts worked for them a little bit.  And, it was a busy street.  Woolworths was on the corner, and I would see that.  And, and I guess, I wasn't really, 'cause I was still a little girl not allowed out of the house unless I was taken out.  Eventually, we left there and we moved to 2--100--212 St. Nicholas Avenue.
Speaker 1: And, this is when your parents divorced?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  And, that's where I went to my first grade of school [at P.S. 10, New York, New York].  And, my mother's sister, Bird and Nick [ph.] lived above us.  And, they were interesting because Bird was very fair of the three sisters.  And, her husband was very fair and passed for white.  He had a job as a waiter downtown.  And, then he would come back uptown and be colored.  But, that, you know--so, I grew up knowing a little bit of how do you cross those lines, and what do you do, and how do you act.  And, but a, a doctor at Harlem Hospital [Center, New York, New York] and his nephew is an old friend of mine, Dr. Theobald [ph.] was madly in love with my mother's sister.  And, when she was very fragile and she died on the operation table at Harlem Hospital.  And, he came, he was her surgeon then, to give us the news and sat on my mother's couch, this what my mother tells me.  I remember when he came.  I remember all that confusion and tension in the house and he sat in the chair and cried like a baby, this doctor.  I tell--he (unclear) about his uncle.  He was very much in love with my mother's sister.  Even though my mother's sister was married.  My mother's sister's husband, Uncle Nick, after he went into the [U.S.] Navy some years later, eventually just went on and passed for white and married a white lady.  But, he'd always bring her to Harlem to take her to visit the family, which I thought was interesting.  Those, those different--
Speaker 1: Did she know he was passing or did she think he was white?
Speaker 2: No.  She had to know.  Because he would intro--he--we were introduced as family.  He, he had to do that.  Something would make him want to do that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, he would still come to Harlem to drink.
Story_ID: 244995
Speaker 1: What other memories do you have of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, being taken and walked to school for the first grade.  And, going to a school called P.S. 10 [New York, New York] and then moving to Morningside Avenue while my parents [Mary Wade Alexander and Otis Alexander, Sr.] were still together.  In those years, those were the World War II  [WWII] years too.  So, families moved all the time.  You always moved.  And, sometimes apartments were so available in lots of the, lots of the city, parts of the city, but especially Harlem [New York, New York], 'cause you would get the first two months free.  And, then people would move out three months, with owing three month's rent.  So, it was a very different time.  So, at some point we moved up to 121st Street.  I did this walking toward my daughters [Eve Sandler and Kathe Sandler] last year on video, by the way, looking at every house I lived in in Harlem and it was such a pleasure.  And, and into a really, what was a lovely building at the time.  And, and my mother would wanna send me to the store and I always would walk down the stairs, even though I think there was an elevator in the building.  There was elevator in the first building I was born in.  I would walk down the stairs and I thought I heard lions on the first floor.  And, I would get scared and run back upstairs, "Mamma, there, there lions, there lions," and I was kind of not that young anymore.  But, I had this crazy imagination.  So, I would not--I would say, "You have to walk downstairs with me."  Then eventually we moved to 20 Morningside Avenue and that's, we stayed there for a number of years.  And, my father's brothers kept coming north and we lost Aunt Bird [ph.].  Aunt Helen [ph.] was still in Baltimore [Maryland].  She would come and visit with her husband, Spooner [ph.]; total mad man, handsome mad man.  And, but, my father's brothers came one by one by one and each worked, they would get one a job in the factory.  One in a job running an elevator.  It was a very clear line of what had to happen and I admired that.  So, as in my later years.  And, so then we were at 20 Morningside Avenue and that was the time of the breakup of my mother's marriage.  I remember the fierce arguments and so forth and--
Speaker 1: And, do you remember what impact it had on you, the divorce?
Speaker 2: Their breaking up?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I think, there was something my mother was able to do that allowed us to continue to be friendly with my father and see him regularly.  But, we also know he had a wild card in him.  And, we also understood why my mother couldn't take that any longer.  We also understood, I didn't come to understand this until much later, that also being a very beautiful woman, they're people who would come to her and say, "Why are you still with this man?"  And, then there would be tons of admirers, tons of admirers.  But, my mother was always very easy going and not with a huge ego.  I mean, she knew she was beautiful but that didn't rule her life.  And, and she was always interested in new things and she would share that with us regularly.  And then, and finally this man [Willis Hunter] in her life would stay with her for a number of years, yeah.
Story_ID: 244996
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, going back a little bit.  Tell me a little bit about Luke [ph.] and Luddie [ph.].
Speaker 2: Well, they were my mother's [Mary Wade Alexander] grandparents is my memory of it; and, from what I've been told.  And, the, the whites in the family, 'cause one of the, those ancestors was, was usually Irish and Welsh.  My mother, when I asked her, "What was the rest of the family like; the non-African?"  She would say they were Welsh and Irish.  And, and that would be Luddie.  And, Luke would be--that name appears in the family.  But, I don't have the whole story together.  I'm gonna have to probably take a moment out when we do this reel and, and get the whole story together.  For some reason, even though my daughters [Eve Sandler and Kathe Sandler] have done the research on it and written it up, I just didn't find the material.  But--
Speaker 1: That's fine.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because we had that combination of African, Irish, Welsh, and American Indian [Native American] in our family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Lumbee Indians were a part of the other part of the family, my grandma Gatsy's [Gatsy Wade] part.
Story_ID: 244997
Speaker 1: --When I had asked you about other memories of growing up, after we changed the tape, you remembered about some of the rent parties that your mother [Mary Wade Alexander] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  And, those happened after we--my mother and father [Otis Alexander, Sr.] broke up.  That's when we moved to 6 Morningside Avenue [New York, New York] and the--was my father's-stepfather [Willis Hunter], my mother's second husband had a lot of elegance sporting life friends.  And, when we moved to 113th Street, and I have to talk a little bit about my 6 Morningside years 'cause a part of that was spent in the South.  But, it was 113th Street that the rent parties really went on.  And, they--and the poker parties, and the good-looking men that would walk into the house.  In fact, one of them was, I wanna say Sampa [ph.]; that was not his name.  But, one of them was a man that we used to buy, always buy clothes from 'cause he sold the hot clothes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, he would be sort of the star of the party 'cause he would spend a lot of money and put a lot of money on that table.  And, the music would be there.  And, then here's a house full of children, my mother, and she would somehow get all of that food cooked, feed us so that we got, you know, into our pajamas and into the bed.  Then, we'd listen to everything we would hear of course.  Then we'd say, "Who are all those people coming?  Who are those people?" and so forth.  So we, we would never be present at the parties except when I got a little older, then I would--we--I--we could stay up a little longer and see.  But, there would be just tons of food.  And, all the men, each man came in with a bottle.  You know, they had to have their bottle.  And, there was some women, there were some women who were just pretty to sit around.  And, then there was women who really played poker--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, serious.  And, then it was that house and the house before we lived in that my godmother, Annie Belle Butler [ph.], she was quite a lady, would get me involved with--and she played poker.  She would have poker parties at--in her apartment at the other building, the older building we lived in.  So, I have been around poker parties.  Hers were more the ladies who came to play poker.  And, they all had their hair straighten and they were all coiffed and so forth.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: It was different kind of poker party.  It was quieter.  And, the other kind was a little more, there would be the music on and so forth and the guys getting very high and so forth.  I could feel all of this energy when I was still in bed, you know.  Sometimes, you'd sneak up and we'd peak through the peek hole and see what was going on.  But, that was the rent.  That was the rent.  And, there was a moment there when they were almost every week; almost every Saturday night.  And, the--and it was a way of life.  And, I didn't think of it being not the way of life, you know.  This is, this is what you did.  But, they were the Annie Belle Butler poker parties that were very prim and trim (laughter).
Story_ID: 244998
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up and remind you of your childhood [in Harlem, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Baking pies in the oven; neck bones cooking, greens and I guess greens and neck bones and bacon fat cooking.  Pineapple upside down cake.  And, I guess a few other things.
Speaker 1: What sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Honking horns and buses passing through, and noise on the street.  The party noise, people noise, bars emptying out, and rushes of people going to the building to a party.  You know, walking upstairs and talking a lot.  And, then sometime in the middle of the night, you'd hear a lot of talk.  And, then--and people getting hurt, hit, cut, screaming, women getting beaten.
Speaker 1: Wow!
Speaker 2: They were all there.  All of 'em, soup to nuts, from joy to tragedy, they were all there, you know.
Story_ID: 244999
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about the Christmas with no ornaments.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That was the building, yeah, before we moved to 113th Street [New York, New York].  And, I guess I was ten years old around that time, maybe a little older.  And, we knew it was Christmas and we knew there was not a gift in the house.  And, no special foods 'cause normally there would be that.  There was just a very poor Christmas.  And, my mother [Mary Wade Alexander] had a boyfriend at that time and either he was still with his family and coming back and forth, or he just wasn't present.  And, we had nothing.  And, my mother said--and, I guess we were just sort of walking around, you know, just looking sad but not complaining loud, but my mother saw that.  And, she just took all these magazines and pieces of paper and she made all these wonderful things by hand.  And, she got us involved in making it.  And, my brothers tell the same story.  They were smaller than me at the time.  And, she just had this incredible spirit and magic about her that she could pull us from the dust bin really, and make, make Christmas.  And, all--so these decoration were handmade.  My mother was very good with her hands.  She was a great seamstress, and she was a great cook, and she, she just had this creative spirit.  And, it's a Christmas--and we had just about enough food in the house at that time.  And, it's a Christmas I and my brothers, when we get together, we talked about it.  But, now my older brothers have passed away, but they remembered it very well.  And, they remember her spirit.
Story_ID: 245000
Speaker 1: What was the name of the elementary school you attended?
Speaker 2: After P.S. 10 [New York, New York] which is the younger grades.  I went to school, where we were living I still had to go to P.S. 10 'cause it was on 116th Street and we were living on 114th Street.  But, I had heard about this other school called P.S. 113 [New York, New York] and it was a new school.  And, it was on 113th Street and I lived on 116th Street, and I wanted to go there.  So, we found a way that I could register there and eventually we moved to that street.  So, I went to P.S. 113.  And, it was a wonderful school experience because we had a great teacher in that school called Miss Fairplow [ph.].  And, she was a very race conscious black lady and she would bring people to the school like Pearl Primus to talk to us.  Paul Robeson--
Speaker 1: Wow!
Speaker 2: Marian Anderson.  Actresses who had acted all these wonderful things in [William] Shakespeare.  But, then these were all black incredible people.  And, it just turned out to be--Miss Fairplow became a legend among us, especially that cluster of black teachers from the '50s [1950s].  And, I was just so lucky to have that, to have that exposure and that, it was just wonderful.  And, it was an interesting school.  It had a very positive, strong, parent's associate--parent--PTA [Parent Teacher Association].  And, I remember my mother [Mary Wade Alexander] would go to the PTA meetings, you know, despite her long days and trying to keep us all together.  'Cause by that time there was about eight of us, if not more (laughter).  And, and she would go to PTA meetings as well.  And, I had some very good teachers in that school.
Speaker 1: Did any of 'em have a particular influence on you?  Any of those teachers?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Mrs. Fairplow, of course she did.  I was kind of regarded by some of my teachers as fairly bright and somewhat talented.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: I--the other teachers later in junior high school, I went to [Julia Ward Howe] Junior High [School] 81 [New York, New York], which was a tough school.  And, there was an English teacher that I really liked a lot and she really introduced the world of literature.  But, I would say my elementary school experience Miss Fairplow and the things she introduced to us to in the school.
Speaker 1: And, during the elementary school years, did you have dreams and aspirations?  Like, what did you wanna be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: I thought somebody that--it would, it bent towards the artistic side.  I was reading a lot and my best friend was Loretta [ph.] on the block.  And, she'd got to the library.  We'd go--we lived in the library at 115th Street [Library, New York, New York], between 7th [Avenue] and 8th Avenue.  And, she would always walk out with--I don't know how she did it, eight books, every week.  And, read every one of them.  But, then we became very close because we shared the whole reading experience.  And, I think the thing that interested me for a while--well, there was a part of me that Jimmy [ph.], my father's [Otis Alexander, Sr.] friend who was a real ultimate street man who knew everything, how to hustle anything.  He always sold the hot clothes that I could wear to school.  And, there were the clothes right out of Calling All Girls and Seventeen magazine.  So, I would say, "I saw that in a magazine.  Can I, can, momma can you buy me that suit (laughter)?"   So, that, that was very important to me in addition to the fact that my mother was a wonderful seamstress, and she would see things, she say, "I can make that.  I'll make that for you."  So, I always felt I had these special things that could happen.  And, I was still the only girl for a long time.  My sisters came much later towards the end of the family circle.  And, I became very interested, in addition to reading, I became interested in art.  And, probably 'cause my friend Loretta also had become, was also interested.  And, I was in, I was guess probably considered the talented art student when I was at Junior High School 81.  I had a wonderful teacher who--I had several wonderful teachers at 81 actually.  One black teacher and one white teacher.  And, one other black teacher whose uncle owned one of the three black bookstores in Harlem [New York, New York], Mr. Turner [ph.].
Story_ID: 245001
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Joan] Sandler, I wanna ask you about your experience when you left New York [New York] to go back to Rocky Mount [North Carolina] for a few month while your mother [Mary Wade Alexander]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Took care of things in New York.  What was that experience like for you?
Speaker 2: Well, we went every summer to Rocky Mount.
Speaker 1: But, you didn't go to school though.  But--
Speaker 2: I went only one summer, I went to the school there.  And, it was, it was very interesting.  I went with, I think at that fall, I moved into Aunt Celie's [ph.] house, which was a very interesting house.  They put all their daughters through college.  Not the boys, but the girls.  All the girls were put through, 'cause I think they felt girls would have it easier if they became professional and the men would have a hard time.  And, I lived in that house with my cousin Teal [ph.], and two other cousins, and very quiet and proper little ladies.  And, I went to the local school, a little farm house.  One room, I think, and one teacher who kind of teaches two classes or something like that.  And, but, there was an earnestness about her and about there, everyone being there, they were there to learn.  And, it seems to me that there were all girls in the classes.  That they might have divided, in those years, boys in one set of classes and girls in another set of classes.  And, I must have, it must've been first grade or second grade that I started there.  Then I eventually came home.
Speaker 1: Were you anxious to get back to New York?
Speaker 2: I was kind of Miss New York a little bit, yeah.  I, I thought--but, I had so much fun with my cousins.  But, I did miss my brothers and my mother and, you know, and the New York thing.  But, we had a lot of fun in the South.  You know, we ate well, we ate a lot.  I had so many cousins, I mean it was like having the whole world--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, they were, they say, "Did you meet this cousin?"  You know, this is cousin so and so.  This is that, you know.  So, that part of life I enjoyed.  Then, I kinda had enough.  It was time to come back home.  And, my mother was trying to pull her life together.  When I came back that fall, she--my mother had another child.  That was Peter.  And, I said, "Mamma, mamma, where did that baby come from?"
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: 'Cause I--she never looked like she was pregnant.  But, she kept me there so she could put things together while she go have this baby.  So, I was down south with probably my, I think my brother Bobby [Robert Alexander] not Milton [Alexander].  But, you know, families have ways and then maybe one child was put over here to with, you know, a cousin's house and another one there.  And, my mother had to make some space and place in her life so she could bring this other child into the world.
Story_ID: 245002
Speaker 1: And, what kind of relationship did you have with your stepfather [Willis Hunter]?
Speaker 2: It was a mixed relationship.  It was one of, one is that with him came many wonderful things in the house.  And, there was sometimes very eloquent parties and interesting people.  There was extra money.  There was every weekend, and this is when I was a little older, we would go to Harry's Ice Cream Parlor [ph.].  There was a real ice cream parlor in Harlem [New York, New York] on 8th Avenue and 116th Street called Harry's Ice Cream Parlor.  Owned by a bunch of white guys.  And, and with a large white and black staff where you could have food and you could have ice cream sodas.  And, I would take my father [Otis Alexander, Sr.] when he'd come visit.  "I, I want a banana split."  I mean, how many color girls were eating banana splits at that time.  But I, I saw what they look like.  But, every Saturday with my stepfather, he would go and buy the kind of, quart of ice cream that they hand packed.  They--you didn't get it already made.  And, they would hand packed this and then by the time they got through finished, it was a quart and a half of ice cream in there.  And, he would bring it home and that was my mother's [Mary Wade Alexander] treat.  And, then we would all have some ice cream.  But, that was what he did for my mother every Saturday night.  It was almost like a gesture of, you know, affection and, and support.  He was still married; had a daughter from that marriage.  And, my mother had kept very quiet about it.  And, he was unfaithful to a degree, you know.  There were complaints about him from other women and so forth, very quietly.  He was a very fair-skinned, very interesting man who came to New York [New York] to go to dental school; actually, the Columbia University [New York, New York].  But, somehow he ended up working the railroad with the sleeping car porters and never came back and went to school.  And, which was interesting.
Speaker 1: Did he live with you all in the house?
Speaker 2: He lived with us part-time.  He was in and out.  He'd come in late at night and leave early in the morning.
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.  Right.
Speaker 2: Then, he eventually moved in.
Story_ID: 245003
Speaker 1: During your junior high school [Julia Ward Howe Junior High School 81, New York, New York] years, who was influencing you?  Who were you most influenced by during that period in your life?
Speaker 2: Well, my homeroom teacher who was very encouraging about my doing art.  My English teacher who taught us English grammar but somehow gave us, taught in such a way that you had a love for language.  Not just, did you get the verbs right, and you know, and the various tenses right.  But, who really almost taught us the magic of language.  That language came through a very particular process and procedure.  And, and she encouraged me to write also.  She would, did a lot with writing and had us pretend we were reporters and things like that.  And, that was about seventh or eighth grade.  And, the other pe--person was Mr. Turner [ph.], who, I told you whose uncle owned the black bookstore in Harlem [New York, New York].  Upstairs there was that group of nine (unclear) but two or three other black nationalist, cultured, intelligent men, there all men.  And, they all had bookstores in Harlem.  In fact, one of them was--sold my mother [Mary Wade Alexander] all her pharmaceutical products.  He did that to make his living but he had a bookstore too that, that he kept opened.  But, the--people, that was part of my junior high influence as well.  But, it was the teachers who influenced me and encouraged me to take the music and art test 'cause I was very interested in drawing.  But, love for literature came from my English teacher, Mrs., I think it was Miss Cohen [ph.] was her name.  I'm not sure.  But, somehow, what was a difficult school, it wasn't the most difficult all-girls school in Harlem.  It was the one where they would beat you up and cut you.  They didn't do too much of that at 81.  But, there were, you know, we would--tales would be in the streets.  Don't come to [Harriet Beecher Stowe Intermediate School] 136 [New York, New York] honey.  Do you know they cut a girl's head off?  You know, those wonderful stories, you know, that weren't quite true.  But--
Speaker 1: What type of art did you enjoy?  Did you--was it painting?  Is that what you enjoyed most?
Speaker 2: Well, at the time, it was only drawing and colored pencils.  But, there were two very talented, there were several talented people on 113th Street.  And, two of them was, was Wilma [ph.] and her two sisters who were very sophisticated.  Wonderful draftsman and, and I would see their work and then influenced Wilma and I became very interested.  And, then my neighbor Loretta [ph.] became very interested in art and she and I would go--she's the one I went to the library with, regularly.  And, then, there must have been, I don't remember a particular artwork that I saw because at the time if they took you to museums it usually was the [American] Museum of Natural History [New York, New York] or something like that.  It wasn't the art museums.  But, then discovering art, looking at books in libraries and things like that.  And, then Loretta who became my best friend who tested for The High School of Music and Art [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] and didn't make it.  I didn't make it from P.S., from Junior High School 81.  I tell my mother, I wanna go to Joan of Arc Junior High School [New York, New York] because I wanna get into Music and Art.  And, that's what I did in junior--Joan of Arc was the school down the street.  He made her give a false address.  See, 98th [Street] and 99th Streets in those years were we are right in this building, between Central Park and Columbus [Avenue] they were totally two 100 percent black family's block in the middle of a neighborhood that was Irish and somewhat Jewish.  You had two solidly all black blocks.  Here where we're standing now, were old walk up tenements, and 98th [Street] and 99th Streets.  And, Miss Summerville [ph.] who was a friend of the family's who took me to church on Sundays, you know, one of those churches where you could jump up and shout.  And, we had all of the--and my mother's roomer, Miss Betsy [ph.] also went to one of those churches.  And, we used Miss Summerville's address so I could go to junior high school, Joan of Arc.  And, it was at Joan of Arc that there was a very progressive, it was almost like a private school.  I was very--I didn't know how wonderful it would be.  But, we talked about literature.  My Spanish classes, when I was exceedingly well in Spanish at the time, I could work out algebraic formulas.  I don't know how I did all that stuff.  But, at that school, I just glowed.  And, and my art teacher was a black woman, Mrs. Dodson [ph.], who did everything.  She'd--we would paint paintings to Mazurkas music.  So, I had this incredible exposure like a private school but it was public school for one year.  And, I still have very good friends who is still one of them is my old friend Delores, she--Delores Morris [ph.].  She went there, a couple of us.  And, we all would get on the bus, sneak on the bus 'cause we didn't let people know that we didn't live in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: And, what type of young lady were you starting to become during the junior high school years?
Speaker 2: I think I became interested in culture and street politics to a degree.  When Pearl Primus was at our elementary school [P.S. 113, New York, New York], I saw her dance for the first time.  I heard an actress for the first time, who did the role of Harriet Tubman.  This was all in elementary school.  Those were the people that attracted me and I was becoming more and more of that kind of person.  And, my elementary school years were much richer from that cultural exposure because of Miss Fairplow [ph.].  She's a legend in the business.  I mean, the old--mu--older women who are not here anymore who remembered what she did.  And, what she did was so important.
Story_ID: 245004
Speaker 1: And, did you get into the Music and Art [The High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, it was--it's called the Music and Art?
Speaker 2: Now, it's LaGuardia High School for the Visual and Performing Arts [sic.].  It mixed--it merged with Performing Arts High School [sic. The High School of Performing Arts, New York, New York].  And, I think, Industrial Arts High School [sic. School of Industrial Art; The High School of Art and Design, New York, New York] and Music, and Music and Art.  And, so it's a merger.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was it called when you attended it though?
Speaker 2: The High School of Music and Art right next to [The] City College [of New York, New York, New York] on 135th Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what were you experience like there?  Were you involved in any clubs or activities?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In fact, a couple of people I went to [Joan of Arc] Junior High School [New York, New York] with, these were white students, we made music and art at the same time as art majors.  And, I became politically radical.  I became--I spent a lot of time in museums, I had a free pass to the Museum of Modern Art [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: What were you doing that was considered radical?
Speaker 2: Oh, I--oh, by that time, I was listening to every street corner speaker in Harlem [New York, New York].  And, with them, you had this--the super nationalist, you had like [Edward] "Pork Chop" Davis and people like that, the classic figures.  And, then you had very high left-wing people.  People like Vito Marcantonio who was an Italian radical.  That was very, very popular in black Harlem as well as Little Italy, which is--and my mother [Mary Wade Alexander] would sometimes--we'd go over to Little Italy because we used to shop at Park Avenue under the bridge where you could get meats and things like that.  We used to all go every Friday, we went under the bridge to shop for the weekend.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Got live chickens and things like that.  And, then you walk a little further, you were in Little Italy.  And, Vito Marcantonio, who's quite a dynamic man, was from there.  And, he was a radical doing something called the American Labor Party [ALP].
Speaker 1: Who was your favorite?
Speaker 2: You mean, among all these people?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: There was man named Archie [ph.] who owned a bookstore at 119th Street.  And, I remember walking to 116th Street one evening, it was spring evening, and, and whenever there's a street corner speaker, I always stopped and listened.  'Cause I always that they were the orators and the people who brought knowledge to the community in another way, in a very special way.  And, there also was an electricity in the crowd because those were the days the nationalists were coming up.  Malcolm X hadn't even become Malcolm then, but he was on the street.  It was a very great excitement.  And, Mr., I just mentioned his name to you a minute ago, sit on the street corner at 116th Street and I remember stopping and he told the story of Dorian Gray ['The Picture of Dorian Gray'] by Oscar Wilde.  And, he told that story to talk about the man who was a good man who did evil and who would change into the monster.  And, the monster was in the painting.  Well, after his beautiful portrait was painted.  It was a very classic story.  And, he took that symbolism and likened the two what was going to be a good society that ended up being crippling and maiming people.  And, it was, I mean I had never forgotten that.  I fell in love with that man.  I just couldn't get over it.  I think by that time I was maybe junior high going into high school.  And, every time I'd see him, I was so in love with him because here he is, he had that great intellect; that love for literature and that very strong feeling of radical belief and nationalist belief.  And, all those things come--that was who I was at the time.  I loved looking at painting and seeing [Vincent] Van Gogh and everything.  But, I also loved aspects of street life and I loved militants in Harlem.
Story_ID: 245005
Speaker 1: What were some of your thoughts about college when you were in high school [The High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well, I was so, it's so interesting.  I kept feeling I had to go to college and I kept putting it off, and I should go to college.  And, teachers kept saying, "Well, Joan [HistoryMaker Joan Sandler], you know, you're just the perfect scholarship material."  And, I applied for some of them.  I wasn't that interested.  By that time, I was running around barefoot in the village with castanets and I was becoming a street bohemian and a radical.  And, I had these two lives.  I had Greenwich Village [New York, New York] and the loft parties and the jazz musicians and so forth and, you know, all the great musicians who were hanging out and people who influenced me a lot.  And, then I had the political side of Harlem [New York, New York] at the time for me was radical thinking and intellectuals who were mavericks.  So, I just kept putting college off.  And, I just found that I was interested in living this life that took me all over the city and somehow college was not in picture for me.  But, I mean, plays and parties that Charlie Bird was at, parties where Charlie [Yardbird] Parker was at, things like that.  Lofts that were forever.  Guys that was interested in, couple of well-known photographers.  Oh, that guy, all kinds of people would stop me and want me to model.  And, I made my little extra babysitting money; so, the babysitting, I was a model and--for artists and that kind of photographers and I was hit on a lot.  It was all very exciting to me, very exciting.  And, I was a naughty girl sometimes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, what were you thinking you were gonna do with your life?  Did you think you could somehow make a living, living this way?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I thought I could.  And, I thought I wanted to travel.  I wanted to very much to go to Europe.  At that time, I fell in love with the man I knew from high school who was living in Mexico.  And, and I--now it seems like there were so many things going on at the time.  I was very interested in fashion design, and, and sketching.  I was still reading a lot.  And, then, in the--soon after high school, Crystal Field [ph.] and I took an apartment together right down the street here.
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: Fifty-two [1952].  And, about '54 [1954] we took this garden apartment that we shared with actors.  Kathy Lee's [ph.] son was one of the people who was part of this acting company, and Crystal was at the time in [The] Juilliard [School, New York, New York].  I was just working a nine to five job but having a lot of fun.  I wasn't--
Speaker 1: What kind of job?
Speaker 2: I was working for an insurance company.  And, it was a curious insurance company.  I met a lot of interesting people there.  And, this acting company shared our apartment and paid a third of the rent and I paid a third and Crystal paid a third.  We had a garden.  Right here on 87th Street near Columbus Avenue.  And, and there were always parties going on and people would come to my house and I would see them a month later.  "Oh, I was at party at your house."  It was like somehow, we never ever had to worry about money, we never had to spend money.  It was just, it would just show up.  You know, the, the wine would show up.  The food would show up.  It's just was a way of life.  So, I thought, how wonderful (laughter).  Then, my roommate, the acting company fell apart and couldn't make it.  And, actually, it was, yeah, it was Kathy Lee's son who was part of that at the time who was going with a very--woman who became a very important photographer.  And, so, they kinda disappeared and disintegrated.  Then Crystal ran out of money.  She was going to Juilliard, majoring in dance and she had to go back home to live.  And, then Audre Lorde who was somebody I got to know during those years, a wonderful poet.  She came in and we shared the apartment for a while and then we couldn't pay the rent after a while.  And, so, I--and at the time I was courted by my, the man who would be my husband, Al Sandler [Alvin Sandler].  And, one of the wonderful things I remember about the apartment though, it had a garden and it had a fireplace.  And, and everybody in my family was saying, "Why is that girl down there paying all that rent?  What is the matter with her?  Blah, blah, blah," you know, that kind of thing.  I just didn't even think about it.  And, and then I moved in with Al Sandler and we got married.
Story_ID: 245006
Speaker 1: We ended with you talking about at this particular time, you starting dating who would then be your husband [Alvin Sandler].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, were you still working at the insurance company then?
Speaker 2: For a bit longer.  And, I don't remember exactly, yeah, I probably, another year longer.  And, then the company went out of business.  And, I'm trying to remember, there was a period there where I didn't have work and I was doing domestic work occasionally, and taking care of children.  I was doing things that, you know, I wasn't upset about it but, you know, I did whatever came along at the time.  I might have even taken a light factory job.  But, and, then I thought about school, I thought about school.  And, then, we were living, when I got married, we moved to a little apartment in Williamsburg [Brooklyn, New York, New York] because it was cheap and I married an artist who didn't have very much money.  But, was a very good, could do com--sign painting and then commercial art.  So, eventually we moved back to Manhattan [New York, New York] to small, very charming apartment on 85th Street, between Columbus [Avenue] and Amsterdam [Avenue] and lived there for a while.  And, there were, seems to me there were a lot of dinner parties there too.  A lot of people coming through.  But, it's so funny because they're faint in my head.  Accept that we were both politically radical.  So, there were a number of people who came through that shared a lot of beliefs and a number of artists.   And, then maybe some leftover friendships from the--we both with The Music and Art High School [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], of artists and writers.  In fact, I'm trying to think, who were some of my ex-husband's friends at that time?  But, it seem that we were in a circle of interesting people.
Speaker 1: So, you were still very much politically radical?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Very much so.  Yeah, very much so.  And, an activist, you know, of, of sorts.  And, then, I'm trying to remember--going to the theatre.  That was the whole culture world, was important, spending time in museums.  And, then at one point, I thought I would try to be a designer.  That would come in and out of my life.  And, then I got pregnant, with Eve [Sandler] and then we moved to a larger apartment uptown to Washington Heights [Manhattan, New York, New York], where we had breathing space.  And, at that point I became a, a sort of an active housewife, you know, with babysitting pools with other parents.  There were both, there were several interracial--this was an interracial marriage, and it was several of them in the neighborhood and they was--we were all friendly.  In fact, we were laughing some times said, "Is this the penguin club?"  And, we go, Oh, no.  And, then--
Speaker 1: How did that go with your family?
Speaker 2: My family was comfortable with it.  They, they liked my husband.  My mother [Mary Wade Alexander] was very supportive of it and she liked him also.  She felt that he was good for me.  And, his family had a lot of problems with the marriage and they rejected him.  Except for his brothers, they would, you know, he remained, and we remained closed to them.  Are so close to them today even though my ex and I are not together, we still are very friendly and close to that part of the family.
Story_ID: 245007
Speaker 1: I was politically very active, very radical, so--
Speaker 2: Like what kinds of things were you doing political?
Speaker 1: Politically, I was doing things like the peace petitions that were, you know, being circulated around various civil rights things.  And, these were things coming more or less from the left.  But, then there were other people who had enormous influence on me and there were, one of them was Louis [E.] Burnham who had the newspaper called Freedom.  And, I, I just was very, so enamored of him.  And, he had this newspaper for about two years.  And, I talked to someone about it because the Murphy, the man who co-owned and published with paper with him was Mr. [George] Murphy who comes from an old family who owned the--
Speaker 2: The [Baltimore] Afro-[American; Afro-American Newspapers].
Speaker 1: Afro-American, and yes, exactly.  The, and, so these two men have an enormous influence on my life.  And, Louis actually, Louis Burnham, at the time Lorraine Hansberry was still working for them with--wanted me to come work for the paper.  And, I was so shy, I said, "Oh, I don't know if I can," you know, I, you know, I was like, so unsure of myself.  And, which is so interesting because I think another time in my life I would have been less sur--less unsure of myself.  I think I would've grabbed the opportunity.  I don't know what was happening with me at that time.  I suspect it was something about the marriage that was making me feel less and less self-assured.  Whereas before, I was like, anything I could do.
Story_ID: 245008
Speaker 1: There was also Lorraine Hansberry and she was a big influence; she and her husband Bob [Robert Nemiroff].  And, I spent a lot of time, as did my ex and us together, at their place in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York]; a lot of time there.  Actually, before even the children were born, much before that.  And, Lorraine was a very big part of my life.  And, there were all kinds of people I knew, the range of people were very interesting to see.  And, then people were always around, like Sidney Poitier.  All of those people were a part of my life at that time.  My good friend Rosa Guy who I mentioned as someone you might wanna interview.  She's one has written like, twenty-five books or something.  She writes--
Speaker 2: So, how were they influencing you?  Were you thinking you perhaps wanted to pursue a career in journalism or how were they influencing you exactly?
Speaker 1: I think I became interested in journalism theatre.  I was interested in so many things.  I was interested, Lorraine became a--well, she had '[A] Raisin in the Sun.'  She became from a journalist to a playwright.  So, I became interested in the theatre.  And, she and I, I can't tell you how many hours we spent just sitting on her living room floor talking, talking, talking, talking, talking about everything.  And, 'til wa--the wee hours of the night.  And, then when Eve [Sandler] was born, that--we moved from 85th Street up to Washington Heights [Manhattan, New York, New York], I was pregnant with you at the time, the very beginning of the pregnancy, I saw less of Lorraine because the play was keeping her busy.  In fact, when I went to see 'Raisin in the Sun' on Broadway, I was pregnant with Eve.  That's what--I was trying to put the memory back, back together.  And, and then I got very involved as somewhat of an activist mother in the uptown neighborhood with a number of other, as I said, the penguin club, other interracial couples.  And, and it's just some people I got to know and I remained friends with for a number of years.
Story_ID: 245009
Speaker 1: And, then one day my former husband [Alvin Sandler] who was then an, an art director and a commercial artist, came home and said, "I lost my job."  And, I looked at him and I said, "We'll go to Mexico."  Just, I mean, I just like, how I put that together, and unemployed man with one child [Eve Sandler] here and one on the way, I said, "We'll just go to Mexico."  Well, it turned out, he got a job, another job and he saved money.  I didn't work.  And, 'cause I thought I was a nice Jewish girl (laughter).  He was Jewish.  I was saying, and I noticed that a lot of my Jewish friends, the women just didn't work, you know.  So, and we did, we saved enough money and we moved to Mexico.
Speaker 2: What year was that?
Speaker 1: That was when, the year just before Kathe [Sandler] was born.  That had to be 1955.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I was born in '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: Kathe was born in '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I was born in '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: Well in fifty--oh, wait, you were born in '50 [1950], excuse me '50 [1950], oh Eve [Sandler].  Is it '57 [1957]?  Kathe was '50 [1950], okay.  I don't know why I'm making it--yeah, because there was quite a while there before we came pregnant with Eve when I, right after I got married, yeah.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: I have the, I have the Eve's birth date, and Kathe's birth date.
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959].
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959].
Speaker 2: So, you moved to--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Mexico in 1959?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we moved to Mexi--
Speaker 2: One of the things I wanted to ask you about is--
Speaker 1: That's what her birth certificate said.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  In nin--she--but, you were pregnant when we moved there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, around 1959?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Fifty--yeah.
Speaker 2: What was the climate like for interracial couples during the mid to late '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 1: Well, I always felt very comfortable with it.  But, that's because we knew friends who were artist, who were politically to the left, other interracial couples, and some of the intellectuals of the time, black and white.  And, the Nationalist Movement hadn't become that strong.  That was something I would have to face when I came back to New York [New York] after Mexico.  So, it seemed like an easy going time.  The neighborhood we lived in, you know, we still had friends from that neighborhood, both black and white.  Other children who were part of interracial families; like the Joltys [ph.] and so forth that they grew up with.  And, then somebody said the penguin club (laughter).
Speaker 2: And, how long were you in Mexico?
Speaker 1: About two years.
Speaker 2: And, what did you all do in Mexico?
Speaker 1: Well, we saved enough money to live so my ex could paint.  And, I had a lot of household help.  We lived in wonderful places.  That's when I got to know [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett who became my oldest sister and told me what--the pediatrician to get and this one.  And, we knew also, it was a very interesting group of other--there weren't those many black people I met in Mexico at the time.  There were a couple of business people, white couples.  And, then there was the whole group of too--Elizabeth Catlett I got to know, of Hollywood writers, who are all blacklisted.  But, were very wealthy because they made their money under pseudonyms and they all lived in Mexico.  So we got to know them.
Speaker 2: So, they were blacklisted because of their political (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Because of their politics, yeah.  And, a bunch of them lived in Mexico.  And, then there were a bunch of ex-USA people.  And, one who had a very successful jewelry business.  And, we got--we had a very interesting set of friends.  But, not just politically left but all kinds of friends.  And, we had a kind of busy household.  I had full-time help as not just household help but a nana for the children, that kind of thing.  And, we lived near the beautiful park, Chapultepec Park [Bosque de Chapultepec, Mexico City, Mexico] and calle and parque, [Parque] Espana [Mexico City, Mexico], that's where Kathe's painting of her as a little baby was done by her father.  And, we lived a very pleasant life.  Then we began to run out of money and we moved to this little town called Quala [ph.] which was south of Cuernavaca [Mexico].  And, we lived very easily there with another couple that were also trying to make it.  A very interesting interracial couple.  And, we shared two houses on a property in Quala which were very, it was real old Indian town.  We were practically maybe one of ten Americans in the whole place.  And, they had mineral baths that we went swimming every morning in the mineral baths.  And, then the other couple, the husband was a great chef and he was gonna show me how to make oxtails stew.  So, we'd go to the market and talk to, my Spanish was a little better than his, and we talked to the butcher about wanting to make the ta--the oxtails, he say, "Oh, you want the tail of the ox, okay.  I'll have that tomorrow.  Come, come back tomorrow.  I'll have the tail tomorrow" (laughter).  And, and I learned how--a lot more about cooking there because of Harry [ph.] and because there was also time and help.  And, then you go and head to the local motel in the evening and have a glass of wine.  Or, more, more than likely tequila.  And, there would be somebody like these old Hollywood third class actors like Sonny Tufts and people like that, 'cause they had all made all the westerns in this little town.  So, and it was, and it was an interesting time.  And, then when we really ran out of money, it was time to come home.
Story_ID: 245010
Speaker 1: So you came home in 1961?
Speaker 2: About that time.
Speaker 1: And, you came back to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, it's the height of the Civil Rights Movement--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What was the climate like in New York and what was happening in New York?
Speaker 2: Let's see, when we came back to New York, we were, we moved initially up to, I left my old apartment.  My Uncle Ocey [ph.] and his wife were there and his family.  And, we moved into a small flat in Washington Heights [Manhattan, New York, New York].  And, then my ex [Alvin Sandler] and I broke up.  Just, like that.  We just broke up because it was one point on the--living in Mexico I came home with Kathe [Sandler] and Eve [Sandler] and visited with my family 'cause I thought I no longer wanted to live in Mexico.  But, then I got here and I realized I wanted to be here.  So, my good old brother Bobby [Robert Alexander] took me and the children to the airport.  Here I am with one baby in the arms and Eve's on my--walking and the packages and stuff and the stroller which--I, yeah, I guess I had a stroller in Mexico we'd sent for Eve's strollers and for Kathe when she needed it and went back to Mexico.  When we came back to New York, I took a larger apartment after a while and my ex-husband and I got back together for about, let's see, a couple of years after that.
Speaker 1: And, what was the political climate like here in New York when you came back?
Speaker 2: It was still much an activist climate but it was the Civil Rights Movement and the beginning and the strengthening of the Nationalist Movement, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, did you become involved in either one of those--
Speaker 2: I became involved in all of them.  I became, I got to be a big fan of Malcolm X.  I became involved with Mr. [Lewis H.] Michaux's bookstore [National Memorial African Bookstore, New York, New York] and all the rallies in front of there.  They were very exciting.  And, and I didn't become a nationalist but I was very interested in what they were doing and saying.  And, I would attend a lot of these events, street events and became very interested in becoming part of that.  And, at the time there was this, the beginning, oh, see by that time I was very close to people and what--they was called the Committee for [the] Negro in the Arts, the CNA.  And, they produced a lot of very important black writers, like John [Oliver] Killens and people like that, and they became part of our circle of friends.  My ex and I had broken up around that time and shortly after.  And, we were both very active in what was the peace movement at the time because the war in, I think the Korean War was over and we hadn't gone to Vietnam, but there was a very strong peace movement.  And, I was very interested in life in Harlem [New York, New York] and spent a lot of time listening to people on street corners and going to meetings.  And, just following the politics of the Nationalist Movement as well.  And, and the pro afro-centric movement as well.  I think at one point, I can't remember when I got my afro, but I had my own afro (laughter).
Story_ID: 245011
Speaker 1: And then, just things happening all over Harlem [New York, New York].  At some point, I became involved with a very interesting man.  I won't talk a lot about him because that I was the outside lady in his life.  But, though him I got to know a whole group of very important black intellectuals, spent time with--
Speaker 2: Like who?
Speaker 1: Ken Clark [Dr. Kenneth Clark], what's his name who just passed away in that other building around here?  He was a very important sociologist.  It was mostly academic people, Bob, oh God, I can't remember Bob's name on the economist who was just wonderful.  He just, I think he just passed recently.  But, these were some of the off, off to, to the left but very important scholars and collegian people and they had a big influence on me.  Lorraine [Hansberry] had already passed, yeah, she had already died during this period.  She was such an important friend at one part of my life.  And--
Speaker 2: So, how did the opportunity at the [New York City] Department of Cultural Affairs come about?
Speaker 1: What happened is that I put--set up for Dr. Ken Clark and whole record of the emerging Blacks Arts Movement and interviewed everybody; did a whole document on that.  And, and looked at that whole area as in a comprehensive way and 'cause it was--he, Dr. Ken Clark has something called the Metropolitan Applied Research Center [MARC], and I was there as an consultant.  And, when the department of cultural affairs had heard about this document they came and they asked me if I'd come work for them.  So, that was the beginning of my entree into the art world.
Speaker 2: And, was that where you wanted to be?  Were you--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Satisfied?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I was very--I didn't even, I wasn't even planning on it.  It just happened.  And, it was like, and I worked for a wonderful woman, Doris Freedman who since has passed on.  But, she's the one, all this public art you see and murals and sculptures and pla--she started it.  And, that was a very exciting period.  And we, I mean, just--we booked artists from all over the country to do things.  And, public art and that kind of thing.  And, they were--they hired me because they were al--they were having problems when they built this stadium.  Richard Rodgers, the composer built the stadium in Harlem because he grew up in Mount Morris Park [Manhattan, New York, New York].  And, the neighborhood say, "You can't come" to him (laughter).  You can build it but you can't come up here and tell us what to do.  So, I would--did a lot of the troubleshooting on that 'til things, until things kinda calmed down.  Then, I did a lot of work.  I did a lot of the public artwork.  A lot of stuff with Joe Papp [Joseph Papp], a lot--just all over that place.
Speaker 2: And, what--was there a lot of exposure for African American artists in the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 1: It was beginning to happen.  There were several wonderful galleries that were during this for quite a while like the ACA Gallery [American Contemporary Art Gallery, New York, New York] and it still does.  There was a couple of indigenous art movements that got to be known nationally like the Niumba Yesenia [ph.] artist.  And, I got to know some of those guys very well.  They were guys not women.  There were some women artists, and that got to be well-known.  Then there was the opening of the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York] and that made all the difference in the world.  And, there was my friend later on in later years who was at the, what was, became the Billie Holiday Theatre [New York, New York], who had a gallery there at Bed-Stuy Arts [ph.].  And, these, these were movements that were just growing up all over the place.
Speaker 2: Were they growing up--
Speaker 1: They were a few white art galleries that showed these artist but not many.  But, Charles White and people like that were well-known.
Speaker 2: Were they just growing up in New York [New York] and other metropolitan cities or were you seeing it starting to happen all over the country?
Speaker 1: Well, I--see for example, you had something like Free Southern Theater happening in Atlanta [Georgia], I think it was during the Civil Rights Movement.  Eventually, the man who had it had moved to New Orleans [Louisiana].  And, you had, you had that kind of energy going very often art came along with it.  New York was still the capital for black artist for the most part.  There were some people like [HistoryMaker] Richard Hunt in Chicago [Illinois] who had started out a long time ago.  And, Richard was somebody we commissioned to do something here in Harlem.  But, you had a, you had a sort of stronger visual arts presence in Chicago; black visual arts presence.  I think, because Chicago was also an activist town.  My friend over there who lives there might remember some of these things.  But, New York kind of was the, the lead boat I think in the, in the parade.
Story_ID: 245012
Speaker 1: And, what did you do with the Black Theatre Alliance [(BTA), New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I sort of was very involved in nurturing them in their early years and getting them a grant from the [New York City] Department of Cultural Affairs and giving them a lot of technical assistance and so forth.  And, I was asked if I would come and become the director.  And, I thought about it.  And, I said, "Yeah, that's my next move" (laughter).  That's where I belong, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, were you yourself an artist at this time?
Speaker 2: No.  I was a, I was an administrator, a fundraiser, and a--
Speaker 1: But, were you doing art on the side?
Speaker 2: No.  I had stopped doing art.  I'd stopped doing art.  I was, at the time, I was studying theatre and became an actress for a short time and did a television show and a couple of plays here and there; became very interested in the theatre.
Speaker 1: What years was that?
Speaker 2: The New Lafayette Theatre [New York, New York]--
Speaker 1: When you were studying?
Speaker 2: I began in the early '60s [1960s] when I came back from Mexico after my ex [Alvin Sandler] and I broke up.  Negro Ensemble Company [(NEC), New York, New York], I took workshops at.  And, I was working at the same time.  And, I was very involved when--at the Black Theatre Alliance in helping get Frank Silvera Writers' Workshop [New York, New York] get started.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the television show that you did.
Speaker 2: Oh, I did, I was asked--it was 'Black Girl,' Jennie Franklin who wrote it, J.E. Franklin that I should play the mother in that.  And, so, I said, "That's wonderful."  We're shooting up in Boston [Massachusetts] up--but, WA--WGBH.  So, I packed up my two children [Eve Sandler and Kathe Sandler], took them out of school for those two weeks and said, "They gotta have this experience with mamma.  I'm not gonna leave 'em home."  And, we went up there and I did this TV show.
Speaker 1: And, what was the name of the show?
Speaker 2: It was, it was a series of black, wonderfully, a wonderful man from California who, I forget his name, he's no longer with us, who was the producer of the series and Stan Latham [sic. HistoryMaker Stan Lathan] was one of the photographers on it, filmma--film people on it.  And, and I--so I did that.  And, the girls would sit in the studio everyday with me and watch (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, what kind of show was it?  What kind of show was it?
Speaker 2: It was a drama called 'Black Girl' by J.E. Franklin and it was about a mother and daughter in conflict.  And, the daughter really wanting to do many more things in her life than the mother could bear who was much more traditional.  And, I played the mama.  And, in fact Jennie mentioned that there's a, not that it's coming out again but it's been reprinted or something like that.
Story_ID: 245013
Speaker 1: So from the Black Theatre Alliance [(BTA), New York, New York] you went to Fundraising in the Public Interest.
Speaker 2: It seems to me I went someplace else before that.  Seems to me there was a period where I was freelancing.  I don't know what my resume says.  Is that the order?
Speaker 1: Yes.  That's the order on your resume.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah, it seems to me there was someplace else I went.  I think I was freelancing and Fundraising in the Public Interest I was asked to go there because the client that we was using them as a fundraising firm wanted me to be their fundraiser and that was [HistoryMaker] Elma Lewis from Boston [Massachusetts].  One of the great figures I respected in the black arts world and she said, you know, "I'll put my account there if you'll come and be the fundraiser."  So, I went there for a couple of years and, and helped with that account and then, several others, not just all the black ones.  And, I learned a lot about the ins and outs of cultivation and important people, how to get the money.  How to ask (laughter).  And, I--
Speaker 1: What was some of the--
Speaker 2: Stayed on until I think another offer came and I forget which one that was.
Speaker 1: What was some of the changes you were noticing in terms of exposure for African American artists and just acceptance from the general public of African American artists?  Were you noticing any changes?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was just remembering something about the Black Theatre Alliance and I--because from there I went to Fundraising in the Public Interest.  But, what I also want to bring to--up at the Black Theatre Alliance, if I may go back, is that I thought one of the important--there were several things that I was able to work on.  One is to provide a loan program for black theatres; nobody would lend them money.  A technical assistance program, where somebody could come in and actually work with the company and do training, especially in theatre technology.  There were several resources and regular announcement in the black press every week like clockwork, of all the black dance theatre, black theatre and dance events happening in the city [New York, New York], every week like clockwork.  But, making resources available to these theatres and also bringing in the dance companies and off Arthur Mitchell joined, and the Negro Ensemble Company [(NEC), New York, New York] didn't.  Had a lot to do, not so much with the NEC so much as one person there.  But, it became a bigger and bigger organization.  Then, we also began to work to a degree, nationally.  That was very important to me because I felt, you know, that that was a very important part of what I would eventually do in the arts and that is in some way creating central resources and networking.  And, it did begin to happen a lot with the Black Theatre Alliance, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, just, what was some of the changes you were starting to see in terms of exposure and acceptance of black art?  This is so, this is probably like around the '80s [1980s] so from the '60s [1960s] to the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Even before that.  Yeah, before the '80s [1980s] because I--one of the things is that more black people were buying black art.  And, that was very important.  So, if you go to an artist studio or gallery in Harlem [New York, New York], and as well as some of the downtown galleries, you would see more black people coming in and buying.  So, you would rel--there was a cultural consciousness that was growing in that.  Whereas before the black upper middle class and the black middle class was interested in the house they were gonna buy, the clothes they were gonna wear and, you know, and maybe their summers up in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  And, so suddenly you had the broadening of this interest and enthusiasm that was out there and that, that was very helpful to the artist.  And, then you had, you know, well, along with the Negro Ensemble Company and the Alvin Ailey and Arthur Mitchell people, more black people going to cultural events then there were ever before.  And, then you had that slew of black writers, you know, and then suddenly everybody was publishing, you know.  And, we spent a lot of time with writers in my home and I went to a lot of writer's events.  I co-sponsored a lot of writers' events and that kind of thing.  It's a very exciting period.  The luster of that is not the same today, in the same way.  But, it's a--
Speaker 1: Why not?  Why do you say that?
Speaker 2: There was an excitement because in, when you're beginning something that's the excitement.  It's not that the enthusiasm and the audiences aren't there.  They're there.  But, there was a kind of an excitement when something is getting going.  And, it was almost--it would like triple itself and then triple itself again, and then turn around and do some more.  So, that was a very exciting period, very exciting period, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, so, do you think it's just kind of passe now?
Speaker 2: No, it's not passe.  I think, I think, I think the movement is probably in some ways bigger than what's showing up on the charts.  And, I think that's why the thing of like, I think, of more international black festivals are important.  I think that dialog between artist and writers be--from Africa, London [England], here, I say London because London has a very strong black cultural population there.  And, unfortunately things are not so great in Africa, but that exchange was important so when they did FESTAC [Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, Lagos, Nigeria] in 1977 that was a very important period that we could have.  Before that, it was a Dakar [Senegal] festival [First World Festival of Negro Arts (FESMAN)] under [President] Leopold Senghor.  I don't think we have a figure like Senghor in the Africa continent today and I think someone of that caliber is missed and very much needed.  So, it has to be a way to bring us together more affectively internationally, that's needed.  And, but, I think films, not just the black Hollywood actors but for the fact that you're doing films, that's very important.  We didn't have that years ago.
Story_ID: 245014
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Joan] Sandler.  And, let's talk a little bit about your political activism.  Like what was your involvement or the involvement of your friends in the communist/socialist movement, that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was, I always felt that I was socialist and communist.  I had problems with the Communist Party as such because I found them very rigid on a lot of levels.  And, I think because of my also great love and embracement of the cultural world that I found that there was a tightness among what I call a real bona fide communist.  So, I, whereas I like the radicals like Lorraine Hansberry was a radical.  In fact, she and I discussed long before she died that, you know, she was having problems with the tight structure of what was the official communist movement.  And, I think she and I both did.  I did later on.  She, Lorraine passed on.  And, but I was always politically interested and I was trying to find a way where a Malcolm X, who at the time, you know, when I first would listen to him, hated white folks.  But, here I was married to a white guy [Alvin Sandler], how would those--and to live and see him change and him go to Mecca.  And, to also see the friends who, like my friend Rosa Guy who I mentioned, that some of these black national intellectuals and artist would end up getting a Malcolm X and the people close to him on our side.  Actually, the man who was very close to him, who was with him when he was shot at the Audubon Ballroom [New York, New York], was somebody I grew up with.  His name I can't remember now.  He was a very interesting, fascinating intellectual.  He was probably one of the brightest guys on 113th [Street], from 110th [Street] to 116th Street [New York, New York].  Jimmy Sha--not Jimmy Shabazz [James Shabazz] but there were, there were all of these influences that were there and it was the left, it was the nationalist, it was the independent thinkers and intellectuals.  And, then there was a quality of the street people that was all, you know, these were all major influences on me.  And, and always ultimately the artist, you know, some, some, some part of that.  So, that's when I would spend some summers in Provincetown [Massachusetts] with my daughters [Eve Sandler and Kathe Sandler], initially with my husband.  And, then when we broke up, I would still continually go.  So, even hanging out with crazy people like Norman Mailer (laughter), and you know, Richie Havens and people like that.
Speaker 1: What was Norman Mailer like?
Speaker 2: Norman's a wild guy.  He's interesting man, tough, tough, tough guy.  I always admired him because he was such a maverick and he was very close to, I think Jose Torres, the boxer, and they would always be together.  But, having, you know, drifting into all these different worlds form the official left to bohemians to, you know, in some cases, would-be celebrities and, and being part of that dialogue.  All those dialogues they were very, they had a big influence on me.  And--
Speaker 1: Was it having a particular influence or impact on your family?
Speaker 2: Well, the thing is, is that I took, I--at one point my ex and I broke up and so that no longer--'cause I knew for me to be free to fly, I couldn't stay in the marriage any longer.  And, as I said, certain things stop happening to me shortly after the marriage.  And, I realized this was a person who really had a sort of very tight view of how one who function in the world.  And, I was exploring the world and finding a lot of doors opening.  So, it was from everybody to everybody from the formal left to the mavericks, you know, who were free thinkers and the intellectual and the artist.  And, at the same time, there were still things that were interesting to me.  Like I like nice furniture and I like nice clothes and I like to, you know, do even the fashion shows and what have you.  And, and, and my parties at home tended to be a mixture of all these kinds of people, you know.  And, I think that I was very fortunate that I didn't have just one ideal, one set of friends so to speak.  And, that ultimately, I think, my work life which, you know, lead me to the [New York City] Department of Cultural Affairs, to the Black Theatre Alliance [(BTA), New York, New York], and then to, let's see did I leave the Black--
Speaker 1: We had just actually--
Speaker 2: --Theatre Alliance and go to The Met [Metropolitan] Museum [of Art, New York, New York], if not I have to remember the order.
Story_ID: 245015
Speaker 1: We had actually just started talking about the emergence of black films.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right, right, and what hap--
Speaker 1: When did that start to happen?
Speaker 2: Well, two things happened.  One, is I worked for the co--a group called Chamba [Educational Film Services] with Pearl Bowser who where we show all the old black race films, you know, back from the '40s [1940s] and so forth.  And, I used to showcase them in different places around New York [New York].  The--I think, we--one museum was the Jewish Museum [New York, New York], Mount Morris Park in Harlem [Manhattan, New York, New York], different places, Bed-Stuy Theatre in Brooklyn [New York, New York].  And, Pearl Bowser, who's a wonderful black film historian goes way back to all the theatres.  And, then with Schomburg [Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] contemporary black films became a possibility.  And, St. Clair Bourne who was part of that, who was also part of that movement.  And, so, at some point I don't know how many contemporary black films I was showing or experimental black films.  But, I, you know, black film became a reality.  I think that's no (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, this was around the '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  Actually, the Schomburg film series, the old black race films, I think I did those in the '70s [1970s].  You know, that was when I was at the [New York City] Department of Cultural Affairs.  Then, at the Black Theatre Alliance [(BTA), New York, New York] became somehow interested involved with film but not as much.  And, there was somehow when the Frank Silvera Writers' Workshop started, which sort of was birth, born in my office, I sneaked them their first grant for two thousand dollars, 'cause they had extra money in the, in the treasure.  Filmmakers came in and out of that organization.  And, a lot of people who were doing plays were also beginning to do film scripts and that kind of thing.  And, I mean if I go down the list of very famous black actors and writers now, a lot of them went through the ranks of Frank Silvera Writers' Workshop.  I feel very good about them getting it started.
Speaker 1: Are there any that come to mind?
Speaker 2: I have to, not Denzel Washington, but--
Speaker 1: Samuel L. Jackson?
Speaker 2: No, Sam Jackson was--the list was a little even before his time, was big though.  Sam Jackson was around in the black theatre scene.  The names are just not coming to me--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right now.
Speaker 1: That's all right.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: And, now we didn't talk about you, you did actually pose for a lot of artist.
Speaker 2: Charles White and Romare Bearden.  Not the Rockfield [ph.] and not the Soyer brothers [Raphael Soyer, Moses Soyer, and Isaac Soyer].  And, and then different drawing classes at the Arts Students--naw, that--did I do the Art, I may have done the Arts Students League [Art Students League of New York, New York, New York] and a few other places, yeah.  But, yeah, that was my, that was money that I was making before I took a regular job.  I started to do the posing or in between jobs and that kind of thing.  But, that was when I was still--see, my mother [Mary Wade Alexander] was wonderful 'cause she knew I was also posing nude for some of these artist.  And, they said, "You let you daughter do that?"  She said, "I trust my daughter."  She was very special, my mother.  Because that wouldn't be a (unclear) you can't do that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you feel uncomfortable about posing nude?  How did you feel about that?
Speaker 2: No.  Because I had already gone to a lot cla--I was an art major.  So, I'd gone to a lot of classes where I knew that a lot of artist, female and male models were also artists and important thinkers.  And, you know, they weren't just about taking off their clothes.  They were--this is how they made their extra money.  I made more money doing that than babysitting--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: When I was in high school [The High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York].  Yeah, I didn't feel, you know, I got past the shyness a little bit and I just felt--I was so involved with the artist and the work that I didn't even allow myself to think about that, you know.
Story_ID: 245016
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your work at the Metropolitan Museum of Art [(The Met), New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was trying to remember where I was just before I went to The Met.  Let me get this story straight, now (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were at Fundraising in the Public Interest.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Fundraising--I guess I did go straight to The Met from there.  In fact, the position that was created before I went there, my dear friend Herb Scott-Gibson [Herbert Scott-Gibson] was working for them.  And, it were called [Department of] Community Education.  There was a whole education department that was devoted to non--all the stuff The Met had not done for years.  It was making the museum accessible for people in wheelchairs.  It was bringing in community groups if you live--coming to the gallery; was working with senior citizens.  I had about, it was in that department about four or five places for people.  Also, doing bilingual lecturers and that kind of thing.  I think I mentioned that.  But, my friend Herb Scott-Gibson who had that job for about two years passed away.  And, he was a good friend of mine.  He passed away and, and it was rather shocking.  And, then I--someone from The Met called me and said, you know, "They're looking for someone, would you come in and interview for it?"  I must have known at least a dozen people from around the country--no, didn't know who they were, in some cases I knew them; who interviewed for it.  And, I, you know, I was interested in the job certainly but it was always fascinating to me that when Philippe de Montebello said, "She's the one" (laughter).  So, I said, "Okay, not bad, not bad."  I was told that much later by people who sat in on the interview.  So, I was there for I guess close to four years with a very exciting department.  A couple of snakes in the grass who tried to, you know, bite my ankles off and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, but we did a lot of wonderful things and as a result I was able to also bring musicians into the museum, like Randy Weston and people like that; have an afternoon talk between Romare Bearden and [HistoryMaker] Richard Long, have those ki- that caliber of people there.  The head of the Museo [de Arte de Puerto Rico] in [Santurce] Puerto Rico, the head of the culture institutions there would come.  And, we'd do whole wonderful talks in Spanish.  And, I asked to Philippe to introduce them, 'cause Philippe spoke Spanish even though he's, he's French, he spoke wonderful Spanish.  And, he would, you know, some of the scholars he knew.  So, I was able to just move into a lot of different directions with enormous resources.  And, then, then things got a little tight there and a little funny 'cause I was also very much a favorite, not just by Philippe but also by the president of the museum, Bill Macomber [William B. Macomber Jr.].  And, and then the last thing I did there working with my neighbor who has a Ph.D. from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I did a study on the needs and the patterns of professionals of color and art museums in America.  And, I had mostly--focusing actually on the northeast and maybe the mid, mid-Atlantic states, yeah, down passed Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: What did you discover in your study (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I discovered that art museums are the hardest places to work in, in that you're--the, being accepted and considered on the par as your white counterpart, even if you might come in with all the degrees and everything, that never happened.  Art museums adjusted poorly and slowly to what was the changing population on many levels.  Not just in the program area but in the hiring practices and that kind of thing.  We found that museums that weren't, even though they weren't a part of the study that were like science museum, natural history museum, historical societies were a little more open to, to diversity.  And, to diversity among professionals and encouraging that.  It was, it was an interesting study.  It was used for a long time in a lot of situations, and it was, it was known all over the country.  And, I was active in the museum professional associations, and that kind of thing.  And, then that was the last thing I did and that was my last year at The Met.
Story_ID: 245017
Speaker 1: So, what was happening around this time?  So, this would have been around the late--
Speaker 2: Seven.
Speaker 1: Eighties [1980s].
Speaker 2: Was that the last '80s [1980s]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: According to my--
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-seven [1987].
Speaker 2: Oh, that, okay.
Speaker 1: What was happening in the world, black art despite these disappointing results that you were find within museums?  What was happening on the outside in terms of exposure for black artist?
Speaker 2: Well, several things.  One is that they were--black people entering the gallery market and creating galleries.  So, you, you had people who were starting out with small galleries that they had in their homes or studios.  I mean, the work of a Bank Austin [ph.] or a June Kelly was extremely important, June has a gallery [June Kelly Gallery] down in SoHo [Manhattan, New York, New York], was very important.  And, it also, I think it also helped to enable some of the black artists to get to some of the major white galleries.  They only did one at a time.  The major ones, maybe two, and that's it.  But, you also had more black people moving towards the art museum world because they saw it as a, as a feasible future where they could function and do some good in.  You also--
Speaker 1: When you say moving toward that world, you mean?
Speaker 2: Of art museums and beginning to take degrees in art history, and, beginning to, you know, cultivate an expertise in that area, beginning to write more in the art publications.  And, and do a lot of, initiate a lot of new studies and scholarship in the field.  And also, it helped with bringing the, some of the turn of the century black American artists to the forefront.  I mean, a person like a Lowery [Stokes] Sims was very important, who was at The Met [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York], who now runs the Studio Museum [in Harlem, New York, New York].  People of that caliber developing an African American museum [National Museum of African American History and Culture] on the Mall in Washington [D.C.] was very important.  At the same time, there were some good people in Chicago [Illinois] who were pulling that together, and some good people in Atlanta [Georgia].  And, also it helped the large major museums to really look at their boards that were always all white and all over sixty, you know.  And, not only to bring, to integrate them, it also helped with bringing something like a [El] Museo de[l] Barrio [New York, New York] onto the scene.  And, and looking at the whole Latin American art scene.  I remember working very closely with a group of people from outside--the Dominican Republic and going down there and being part of a group of people that would really talk about ways of getting the art onto a more international scale and that kind of thing, and working in Puerto Rico.  And, and then more and more as there were international festivals, getting to know the black artists who lived in London [England], for example, was very important, the whole black theatre movement there.  So, also moving towards international linkages became very important--
Story_ID: 245018
Speaker 1: So from The Met [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York] you went to the National Endowment for the Arts [NEA]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, what were your responsibilities there?
Speaker 2: I was regional director, regional, I was regional, I wasn't rep--
Speaker 1: Representative.
Speaker 2: Representative not director.  But, I yeah, so I had all the states of New England and the South down through Washington [D.C.] and Puerto Rico, and the [U.S.] Virgin Islands.  So, I looked at everything that I possibility could look at for the endowment and brought hands-on information back to the endowment, back to the staff there, the panelist.  I also created possible ties where there weren't any.  So, if you went to a small little town in New Hampshire and you discovered, you know, these wonderful crafts people working there, you could help them open the door.  That kind of thing.  So, it was facilitation as well as making the endowment, of course, much more aware of things that were, that they just knew very, very little about.  But, also giving people a sense of the endowment wasn't that far away.  You could make contact.  I was the contact person and I could make those ties directly to the endowment.  I went there, oh God, after Nancy Hanks had left, 'cause I got to know Nancy Hanks who was a major chairman of the endowment.  And, she would come and visit me at the, when I was at Metropolitan Museum.  But, that was a very exciting job and I, I stayed until the endowment changed, I think it was a Republican office and they started whittling down the endowment.
Speaker 1: And, what were artists' impression of the endowment?  Was it this big hands-off kind of place to many of the artist you met?
Speaker 2: Well, the thing is, is that my being a representative, you had access and they had access to you.  So, I could come and listen, I could sit-in on workshops and listen to needs and have an impression of a region and so forth, 'cause it was a regional relationship.  Yeah, especially when you got to smaller towns.  I mean, you had Boston [Massachusetts], New York [New York], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you know, you--that was a whole different story.  But, when you go to these small little towns spread out all over the place, especially New England.  And, I happen to be a big fan of New England.  I always, I--when I was young I went and stayed with a family in New England through a church program, a [Presbyterian] Church of the Masters.  They--I stayed with, I think they were lumberjacks.  But, really nice young chicken potpie suppers--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And things like that.  So, I always had this wonderful great affection for New England and that's where I would spend part of my summers with my children [Eve Sandler and Kathe Sandler] and my ex-husband [Alvin Sandler] there on Cape Cod [Massachusetts].  I don't go as often now.  I find it a little bland but I had my fill of it.  It was good.  But, I enjoyed New England very much.  And, then, and then fascinating things, I would meet a black man who was a boat building who built beautiful sailing ships, you know.  You just never know where people are.  And, it allowed me to work across all the disciplines and sometimes bring writers and painters together and that was always very exciting.  I always believed that, that we needed to have those crossover dialogues.  So, then, and I had an opportunity to do that kind of thing as well.
Story_ID: 245019
Speaker 1: And, what did you do as a consultant in advisory services to the arts foundations arenas?  What were you responsibilities there?
Speaker 2: Well, very often I would take on a look at a possible series of organizations for these foundations.  Or, I would do a study of some sort about an aspect of the field.  I was sort of, I guess between, between the National Endowment for the Arts [NEA] and all the other things, I kinda, and that being a fundraiser too, people would say, "She's the one," you know (laughter).  "Talk to her.  She knows everybody."  And, I was good. I formed great relationships with people that spoke openly and, and you know.  So, when I wasn't working, I had quite a bit of freelance work, when I wouldn't have a job-job.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, from there you went to the Museum of American Folk Art [American Folk Art Museum, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I hadn't expected to that but I thought I was gonna go in and do a consultancy, 'cause I was consulting at the time and the director said, "No.  We want you.  Would you come in?"  And, and there was an as--I guess is when their whole education department that whole, yeah, and share that department.  And, one of my interns is now the head of that department, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, were you still having the opportunity to give black artists exposure and that kind of thing?  Was that still happening?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Every place I went, I did that.  I always--sometimes they were artists and sometimes they were composers, sometimes they were, you know, I worked through many of the art forms; writers, you know.  I think the most exciting thing is sometimes crossing over and bring two and three disciplines together was, was very important.  But, I, I found that the black dance world was really growing by leaps and bounds and that was very exciting to me.  Unfortunately, we've lost a lot of our theaters and that has made me very sad.
Speaker 1: Why do you think that's happened?  You think it's a lack of interest from the public?
Speaker 2: No.  No, because they would go and see, you know, how many people turned out for the show Phylicia Rashad is in and so forth.  I think there's something in the managerial style and focus on blacks managing the business.  Because the actress are there, the playwrights and there, the directors are there.  And, the potential for crossover because you have dance companies that are very close, like Urban Bush Women, are very close to the theatre.  I worked, [HistoryMaker] Bill T. Jones was my dancer in residence when I was at The Met [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York].  You have Bill T. who's able to work in the theatre world.  So, that potential is there.  There's something about the management style and the black theatres as compared to the black dance companies which have all survived for the most part.  And, I--at some point I-[HistoryMaker] Woodie King [Jr.] is someone I respect so much 'cause Woodie is still out there.  And, I love him and he's still producing.  And, at some point, Woodie and I tried to talk about it a couple of times.  He always said it was because black theatre had content whereas the dance companies don't have in your face clear content.  I never believed that.  I think that's--I--Woodie and I have some conversations we still need to have and maybe we need to really sit down with about three or four people around the table and really look at--'cause I am very disturbed by that.  I am very disturbed.  'Cause the playwrights are there, the actors are there, the directors, why haven't some of these theatres survived?
Speaker 1: But, why do you think it's important to have black theatres?  Why not just have the productions at white theatres?
Speaker 2: Well, I think first of all, you don't create a body of work and you have people working in isolation.  Whereas like, for example, if you have a--several black dance companies and the choreographers are having a dialogue and they're working here and they're working there, and you're watching the growth of black dance in America which is incredible, you know.  With all the problems Arthur Mitchell is having, Arthur is still very important.  And, a dialogue among choreographers is very important.  I think you have to have your own before you could really grow a culture, that's a formal culture, you know.  And, unless I--even composers, I worked for an organization years ago called Society of Black Composers, which is namely a composer from Chicago [Illinois] who just passed away.  He was the man in Rosalyn Cash's [sic. Rosalind Cash] life years ago.  It's very important to have that because they could get their work done and they could critique each other.  And, I worked for an interracial symphony orchestra, the orchestra for the Symphony of the New World [New York, New York], years ago.  When I told 'em at the [New York City] Department of Cultural Affairs, they want me to come and help.  But, I, I'm, may I do that and still keep my job?  And, they said, "Yes, you can."  I became their fundraiser years ago.  So, you had all these black people who could play cello and viola and so forth, you know, and maybe symphony orchestras in a city would take one.  And, where Symphony of the New World you could hear them all and they--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --were wonderful.  So, in fact, we need an orchestra like that now.  But, we definitely need the theatres.
Story_ID: 245020
Speaker 1: Where do you think the greatest growth has occurred?  In black films, music, theatres, dance, art, where do you think the greatest growth has occurred?
Speaker 2: Boy, I think, I look at filmmaking on two levels.  The documentary people and the independents; the indies.  And, then I look at the commercial people or well-known Hollywood people.  And, not necessarily commercial, like a Denzel Washington, people like that who are committed to content but will work on the big screen and in the commercial realm.  And, I think, there has been a great growth in black film, filmmaking and cinema.  I think the dance world has really stabilized itself.  I think there's been growth all over the place; literature, black literature.  I think what we need are more black publishers.  Blacks who are influencing the publishing field because that field not, you're--not just in terms of black writers but even when a lot of talented white writers are left out the, the genre of work.  But, I think the growth has, there was a period where growth, there was great growth excelling in literature.  And, now I think it's kind of evened out and, and calmed down.  I think music will go on because you have jazz forever, and you have new musicians.  When I was up at Wynton Marsalis, the new place he has in Lincoln Center [Jazz at Lincoln Center, Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York], it was so interesting being there the afternoons.  Saturday afternoons he does--you have all these brilliant young black musicians who are very often classically trained as well, and they're doing new things that are so exciting.  And, Wynton knows that.  And, that's why he brings them and he has a special thing that goes on, on Saturday afternoons in the Dizzy Gillespie room [Dizzy's Club Coca-Cola] there in the cabaret before doing the night time stuff.  But, in the afternoon it's wonderful from one o'clock to about four o'clock.  And, you're hearing new sounds, new music, new ideas.  I think Wynton is making a big difference in the field.  I really do.
Speaker 1: Is there an area where you think there hasn't been enough growth?
Speaker 2: Theatre, black theatre.  And, the plays are there, and the theater, the theatres are there, but I think where the growth hasn't happened is creating a, a presence and a service to the field and the ability to produce non-commercially.  'Cause I think that's where the real creative work comes out of.  And, I think the, maybe I think theatre has, has hurt the most.  I think--what I would like to see are--is critical, more critical thinking from the black community on all of these issues.  I mean, for ev--critical thinking from people who are very cable of really, you know, who know their field up and down and know the field up and down.  And, I think an outlet for critical thinking and leadership is very important and we don't seem to have that in place right now.
Story_ID: 245021
Speaker 1: Let's talk about Romare Bearden when you went to work for the [Romare Bearden] Foundation [New York, New York].  We'll start talking about that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yes.  It was like an old friend had come back in my life (laughter).  The whole situation with artist based foundations is very interesting because there's about forty of them out there, you know, Jackson Pollock, this one, that one.
Speaker 1: What is an artist base foundation?
Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's taking the legacy and the estate of the artist.  And, instead of just selling it on the market or the son and the daughter, and the mother and the father just taking the work and owning it, they create a body of work that is valued at a certain amount.  And, that really is the--becomes the financial basis for a foundations that could go out and do other things in the art world at selling the works carefully, you know.  Just several at a time will create an endowment to fund a foundation.  And, a foundation can support other emerging artists.  It can support artistic projects.  It can support advocacy in the field.  It can support scholarly publications and so forth.  There's a lot that can be done.  At the Bearden Foundation, it's also the Jacob Lawrence Foundation [Jacob and Gwendolyn Knight Lawrence Foundation] that his wife [Nanette Rohan Bearden] is very involved with.  And, there's also, I think, a couple of other African American artist foundations.  I forget the others.
Story_ID: 245022
Speaker 1: So, we were talking about the Romare Bearden Foundation [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, we talked a little bit about what artist foundations are.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They're very, very important and it's a way keeping a legacy and of the artist and his or her works alive.  As well as planning a way to help other artist and all of these foundations are committed to helping other artists by grants and fellowships and exposure, that kind of thing, and that's very important.  At the Bearden Foundation there were a number of things we're doing.  One is keeping his name alive.  But, the other thing was to find a way we would fund black visual arts institutions as well as individual artists.  Even though there were--being advocates for artists and that kind of thing.  There is now, of course, a wonderful time because the foun--because of the work that's being done in this exhibition which is traveling around the country.  I wish it could travel internationally.  This is also a very good time to keep the name alive.  But, I think it's also important to really focus in on that whole body of work of African American artists as well as publications.  And, more and more publications on black artist of high caliber.  Publications are coming out in the last, I'd say, five to ten years.  And, the Jacob Lawrence Foundation [Jacob and Gwendolyn Knight Lawrence Foundation] isn't quite as active.  There's been some changes there in the foundation.  I haven't kept up with what their up to at this point.  And, there should be a way that maybe the Bearden Foundation could sit down with the four or five African American artist foundation and take a look at that entire landscape.  And, to figure out a point of advocacy it could have in the field as well, and what's needed and what needs to be done mostly.  I think supporting young emerging artists is a very important part of the picture, and knowing who they are.  And, I think, having a number of young black art historians and institutions like the Studio Museum [in Harlem, New York, New York], you know, is also helpful in that process as well.  And, I really have to really give some more thought to the field as well, because you also have, and this is a project that I've become very interested in.  For example, you have African--black artists working in London [England] that--who are very, very important and doing a range of work that varies from most avant-garde to the most traditional.  Then you have black artists who are working in many enclaves and different parts of Europe as well as African contemporary African artist.  You have a man like Ousmane Sow, whose work is so important.  He does these giant sculptures.  They had them on the Seine [River] about two years ago.  His work is unbelievable.  I mean, it's just incredible.  I've become personally interested in doing a project of looking at any maybe bringing together the work of the African American artists who lived in Scandinavia.  There's about more than a dozen important significant artists who just decided they would live there.  And, they did, they all went through Paris [France], and Amsterdam [the Netherlands] and so forth.  How they, why they chose Sweden, and Denmark for the most part, and some of the other places is very interesting to me.  Also, a number of prominent opera singers like [HistoryMaker] Anne Brown and so forth who, I think one is still alive in Norway somewhere (laughter).  So, it's just interesting blacks moving around the world and black artists being the, really the point people for getting people to do that.  And, then many cases, of course, black musicians definitely, who decided not to come home (laughter), you know.
Story_ID: 245023
Speaker 1: And, what do you think the opportunities are like today for African American artists?
Speaker 2: I think the opportunities are growing but I think the market, the power in the market is still not in our, we're not part of that power scene in the market.  We are becoming, and that will help grow that possible strength is because more and more black people are buying significant black art.  And, because our institutions are commissioning artists, like our colleges and so forth to come in, do murals and that kind of thing, and major installations.  And, the growth of the African American museums, art museums in this country is very, very important.  Though I think that growth is hand and hand with the growth of African American historical museums as well.  We need to work together at this point because we're not that strong, so to speak.  And, I--unfortunately I can't think of any publications that are coming out regularly that African American artist publications.  They have been from time to time, a number of them that have come out, and have been very, very important.  But, circulating the information and the message that way is very important.  Identifying a major collective of African American art and they're there.  We know who they are, you know.  They do show up and they do buy.  There's a couple out of Washington, I can't believe them, they bought so much African American art.  The name is escaping me at the moment but, I feel they were a young couple with a lot of money, and they're committed.  And, they're, so, they're also, encourage some of the new young entrepreneurs who might be interested in buy Cadillacs and that kind of thing and big houses, I think they're also influencing that group of people as they come along as young millionaires.  So, that's, that's very, very important.  I would like to find more sophisticated ways of getting the word out.
Speaker 1: Do you have to be wealthy or affluent to begin--
Speaker 2: No.  I know--
Speaker 1: --buying art?
Speaker 2: A lot of people who just buy art because they love it and they don't have any money.  They buy it on time.  I know people like that.  Then, and some of our, you know, smaller but continuing galleries, they sell to a lot of people like that.  They--they're people who get that bug and they wanna buy, they wanna own, and they might be buying graphic prints, you know, original prints I mean not, not reproduced.  And, and also because I think the art field keeps redefining itself.  Whether or not it's small objects and very special pieces of jewelry as well as the paintings on canvas and sculpture.  And, and of course, typography and those arts forms are very, very important as well.  It's a growing field and it's very exciting, it's very exciting, yeah.
Story_ID: 245024
Speaker 1: Tell me about your daughters.  Both of them are artists.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, God, yes, I know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh they're wonderful.  They just need money (laughter).  They do great art.  My oldest daughter who you just met, Eve [Sandler], I think she also watched her father [Alvin Sandler] in the studio for a long time and that was part of the inspiration I think.  But, I think I didn't raise them to be lawyers and doctors.  I thought I was supposed to do that, but I thought maybe, you know, because they were exposed that maybe they'd do that, but they became artists instead.  So, I always worry about their financial situation being so risky.  But, I admire what they do.  And, I admire the mind that comes with that, you know.  Their intellectual process, their friends, their--the new generation of thinking among young black creative people.  It's just a hard life and I sometimes worry about them.  Though my older daughter Eve has managed to make a living part of the time because she's a wonderful design artist.  And, she does a certain amount of that kind of work, so it pays the rent.  Whereas it takes a longer time to sell a painting.  But, anyhow, she's shaking her head no, I don't know why.  But, my other daughter Kathe [Sandler], who's a filmmaker, an independent, an indie (laughter), you know what those are.  That's, that's not an easy life, but she had produced some wonderful things and have worked with some marvelous film people.  And, one of the people I think she feels very close to in the field is St. Claire Bourne who does a lot of work in the field.  She hasn't gravitated towards the commercial and I don't think she should.  I think, you know, it's--that's a whole other field.  I just want them to have--I wish I could have a foundation.  I could support them.  Or, go call up a friend with a foundation and say, "Would you fund this one for (laughter)."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Though they both have had their share of grants in their work, they have been recognized by their work.  They have both been, you know, one was a Guggenheim recipient.  The other was, yeah, through various grants of that kind have come into both their lives.  And, that's important; is the recognition as well as the money to do the wherewithal.  And, to maintain a place where they can work and the tools that they need to work with are important.  I'm very proud of their work, as you can see (laughter).
Story_ID: 245025
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you and why?
Speaker 2: I think it was being able to function on a wide spectrum of the creative world.  And, to be, to also--when I say the creative world to be moved in white circles as well as black circles of both those worlds.  And, to bring I think the strongest of both into what becomes a lifestyle for me and an appreciation to move on.  I still feel there's a lot of work to be done.  There's a lot of discovery that I wanna do.  There's a lot of broadening the information I have and maybe in some way documenting it.  My friends are all saying, "When you gonna write a book?"  And, it's so interesting, I mean people I respect.  Not just, you know, people who think, "Oh, it's cute, yeah, she's had a cute little life."  But, people who I really have very high esteem.  My case to do a book, but, so I think of, okay the little girl from 113th Street [New York, New York].  Oldest child on the welfare family with a wonderful mother [Mary Wade Alexander], you know, and some wonderful people that influenced my growth.  And, I'd never forget the man who did the portrait of Dorian Gray, that kind of, you know, person.  Those words, those--learn that learning process being so important.  I just wish in a way I'd did more I did more traditional things like completed college.  Now, I've taught college.  I'm always invited to be on the faculty of different colleges and so forth.  And, I--you think, "But you know I only have a high school degree.  I have some college."  They said, "We know.  That's not what we called you about" (laughter), "we want you."  Because--so, there might be some things I feel I didn't do as well as I should have.  But, I guess it will be okay.  And, I have to really look at what my next encounter will be.  That's not--there's something growing in my head at this point.  I'm not sure what it is.  I'm not sure.
Story_ID: 245026
Speaker 1: And, why do you think history is important?  Why do you think it's important for us to preserve history?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's very important because we didn't always, unlike the other populations, the white population, the European populations, never got to know what the picture is so that we can draw upon that for strength.  So, we can pass that on to the next generations and documentation, and historical information, that's very, very important.  And, we've got to be able to share that with the next generation coming along.  And, you know, when I see the youngsters, the young black and Latino kids, you know, who really need that extra encouragement, to say, "This is who you are."  And, that's very important, yeah.
Story_ID: 245027
Speaker 1: And, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, God.  Oh, (laughter).  The girl from 113th Street [New York, New York] who was interested in everything.  And, wouldn't stop.  And, I did everything from, you know, as I say, walking barefoot on A Street [New York, New York] playing castanets to hanging out listening to street corner speakers.  And, to arguing for days, and talking for days when--'cause we had a lot of different contrast going on with people like a Lorraine Hansberry.  Or, spending time around a man like Paul Robeson, who was very, very important.
Story_ID: 245028
Speaker 1: --What are some of your memories of Paul Robeson?
Speaker 2: One, is--his wife was very interesting to me Eslanda Goode Robeson, and she was a peppy brilliant lady.  And, he was like so overwhelming that I would just sort of go crouch in a corner.  And, I was invited to a meeting by the head of Freedom, Freedom Newspaper, we talked about him earlier, George Murphy, and the editor [Louis Burnham], to a meeting that Paul Robeson would attend.  I said, "Oh, I couldn't come to that."  I felt so shy about it.  As it turned out, I had been in his company on several occasions.  I--my ex-husband and I were married by his brother, Reverend [Benjamin E.] Robeson.  Yeah, quite a wonderful man, with a church he led [Mother African Methodist Episcopal (A.M.E.) Zion Church] in Harlem [New York, New York] and we were married in his chambers.  Robeson's bigger than life.  I mean, bigger than life.  I don't know what to say.  And, Eslanda Robeson was no slouch.
Story_ID: 245029
Speaker 1: What was James Baldwin like?
Speaker 2: Lively, lots of fun.  There was a love of life and energy there.  And, his brothers, I was very fond of them.  He's lost two of them I've watch go.  David [Baldwin], who was very, very important.  And, his last brother who was married to my friend Helen Baldwin.  He just passed.  He was also--and Mama [Emma] Baldwin was very important in his life.  And, they took very good care of him.  They was--they were also a big family, the sisters, they were all, people (unclear) wonderful two floors in a building on West 80th Street [New York, New York] right off of Amsterdam [Avenue] and Broadway.  And, we spent--I spent a lot of time there.  Jimmy's last day that he sat in his garden, I was with him with three other friends.  We were in France and we drove over from Grasse [France], which is a wonderful city; the perfume town of France.  We drove over the hill to St. Paul de Vence [France] and spent the whole afternoon with him; David, David's lady, the wonderful man who took care of him, and lived in the gatehouse, who ultimately passed away and maybe two other people.  And, Jimmy told all these old stories, Paris [France] stories.  I mean, real, funky, funny, wonderful stories.  We spent the whole afternoon drinking wine and eating and laughing, and laughing, and laughing.  When he went into the house that evening, he never came out.  He became bedridden for a number of weeks before passing.  But, I have a wonderful picture of all of us on that day.  It was wonderful (laughter).
Story_ID: 245030
Speaker 1: Do you believe that your legacy will be all of the organizations and all of the people that you've helped and you've mentored, what do you like your legacy will be?
Speaker 2: I think I was, I've always been accessible.  I always felt I wanted to give something back.  Not that I had to but I would want to give something back.  And, and that we need more people to, to have done that.  On the other hand, I did people who have given so much so that if you have an Arthur Mitchell who says I'm going to have--create young ballet dancers of the best, and Alvin Ailey then I will do this and create the best.  I guess I'm drawing upon our dance people 'cause they've done so much that we have to do more and more of that kind of thing in the art world and the education world as well.  I think education is very important and skills; job skills, I think are important.  I think to really pass those skills along in a highly professional way so that our next generation, not just the middle class kids, 'cause they're gonna be all right.  But, I'm worried about the poor class, the poor people, the poor, the children of poor families who are incredibly talented is very important.  And, in fact, reading about the young black poor kids from South Africa who are now doing sailing.  There was a whole article in The [New York] Times makes me feels good and they're just becoming brilliant at it, you know.  Exposure, opening up the whole world and where it doesn't open, create a whole world for the next generation.
Speaker 1: And, what do you think you've contributed to the art world?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  I think, I've trained a lot of people who moved toward management part.  I think management is important.  The artists are very important but also having people who know how to fundraise, people who know how to manager, people who know who to keep institutions alive and help them grow is very important.  And, I think I've passed on some of that expertise.  Whenever I'm asked to speak to an organization that's putting its act together and, you know, and bringing to in a very logical clear way an understanding of what it takes to build an institution.  Institution building is very important to me.  And, institutions that last is very important to me.
Story_ID: 245031
Speaker 1: What are your hopes for the future of African American artists in all genre?
Speaker 2: In all genre, I think having institutions that will back them up is very important.  I think access to the functions of that world, exposure, cultivating black audiences and supporters and buyers.  But, white as well, who are interested in the area of work is important.  And, to have institutions and professionals in the field who will build those fences and that, that would be helpful.  And, to have a vision of that looks at twenty years from now, what do we do?  And, and as I said, I'm very concerned about the absence of black theatre building, that's gonna be very important.  We have to find out what went wrong.  I still don't know.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 245032
Speaker 1: I think we have to understand that we live in this very great big world that blacks are very much part of.  And, contribute to, to--but to understand that when you look at the black community and England, when you look what brought Paul Robeson to Wales, he loved the Welsh people and what is happening in that energy and dynamic scene and black Paris [France] and all over France.  And, going, you know, looking at what's going on in a lot of European countries for a long period of time.  And, going back to blacks in Ancient Rome that were not, you know, slaves.  Hannibal crossing the Alps is important.  All of that's important and to understand that this story and to feel part of it is very, very important.  And, that's why I think is the last thing I wanna do is probably be taking a group.  I've been on four trips already to Europe; four or five.  I wanna do Spain, the Moors in Spain and keep going back and looking at this.  And, meeting the most wonderful people that are Europeans, black Europeans, white Europeans, who really have a sense of that history and that's very important because we were a part of the Renaissance.  We were Alexander Dumas.  We were Hannibal crossing the Alps.  And, understanding that bit of history is very important.  And, I'm--and I have a lot of fun when I do this by the way; lot of fun.  And, I have usually, usually a person of color on the other side who coordinate this trips who're really a part of that life and come out of that tradition and heritage.  So, I wanna do a little more of that, 'cause I like to travel also.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Africa is becoming increasingly difficult to travel to.  But, I hope that things will calm down.  I'm just very angry that we're in Iraq and not helping the people in the Sudan.  That just makes me furious.  You have to keep that on tape (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 245033
Speaker 1: That's my daughter Eve [Sandler] and she was in residence at the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York].  One of the very gifted artists that year in residence.  And, that's her in one of her painted skins, we call them.  You can see them in the wall there.  This one is the one that I think is two stories high.
Speaker 2: And, about what year was this one taken?
Speaker 1: Eve, when were you in residence there?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  About 1990 or 1991.
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety [1990].
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety [1990].  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor just thought we would make a wonderful cover to show the range of black ladies (laughter), and, and had made a decision to do this cover.  Kathe [Sandler] and I had a lot of fun posing for it.
Speaker 2: So, tell us who's in it.
Speaker 1: And, that's me, mother [HistoryMaker] Joan Sandler, and my younger daughter Kathe Sandler.
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-seven [1977].
Speaker 1: In 1977, right.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's me in my living room around the same time I would think.  No.  I had, I still had an afro then.
Speaker 2: So, about what year was that one?
Speaker 1: Oh, God.  I wish I could remember.  Let's see, I think Bert An--I--maybe Bert Andrews took it.  No, what's his name, who took the family portraits took that.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  That's Coreen Simpson, took that.
Speaker 1: Coreen Simpson took this?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Your hair isn't actually--see that picture is in the-it's an '80s [1980s] shot.
Speaker 1: Eighty [1980], early '80s [1980s], I would say, early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Oh, my brother, dear brother, Robert [Alexander].  That was taken--
Speaker 1: It looks like 1969.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't have my glasses on but it was--it'll be 1969.  He was such a very special person.  Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That was taken of me by Hugh Bell.  I had gone--he was one of my favorite photographers, still is.  He's a wonderful photographer and I had gone to pose in his studio and--
Speaker 1: About what year was this one taken?
Speaker 2: I would say that was taken in maybe the late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Great.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That was--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, give us the corrected date for the previous photo first, please.
Speaker 1: Early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And, this one.
Speaker 2: This is my mother and me.  And, it was a wonderful photographer who's no longer with us, who I forget his name.  Eve do you remember it?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Lou Draper [Louis Draper].
Speaker 2: Lou Draper came and--
Speaker 1: And, about what year was this one taken?
Speaker 2: God, when it comes to dates, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Sometime in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Several years before my mother passed, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Mary [Wade] Alexander.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, I--was a picture of me in my pink topper on Easter and I even have a little hat on thought it's not clear in this picture, 'cause you always had to have a Easter hat.  And, I would say, that was taken in the mid-'40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Oh, Howard Youngblood [ph.], and I forget his name, the dancer we're with.  I would say that was taken in the late '60s [1960s].  And, I think it was taken here.  It was taken at my house.  It may have been the when we lived uptown [in New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I wish I could remember the man, the young man sitting next to me.  But, Howard Youngblood who was like my dearest friend and brother.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Arts administrator.
Speaker 1: And, arts administrator, also, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Which on is he?
Speaker 1: Howard Youngblood, the fellow on the right with the big bush of hair.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That was taken of me.  I was combing my hair as I was leaving, was it Hugh Bell's studio?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  It's Hugh Bell, again.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's Hugh Bell, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  You were seventeen.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, this was early '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 1: Early '50s [1950s].  I love that one.
Speaker 2: That was a dinner party I had--
Speaker 1: Hang on one second.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was a dinner party here that I had for Robert Van Lierop on the left because I'd taken his film with me to FESTAC [Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, Lagos, Nigeria] to be shown.  And, then on the way back somehow it had gotten lost and I had an evening here, a bit of a fundraiser to raise money so he could duplicate the film.
Speaker 1: Could you tell who everybody is?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's Robert Van Lierop on the left and there's Nanette Bearden and Romare Bearden, her husband.  And, Jimmy Baldwin [James Baldwin] and Verta Mae Grosvenor.  There all--it was a wonderful party.  Josephine Premice was here.  There were a whole bunch of wonderful people here, and they gave money to rebuild that film.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Great.
Speaker 2: They said, in fact, I think Josephine was the first donor.
Story_ID: 245034
Speaker 1: This was done, I would say, mid, late '50s [1950s] and it's a portrait of my family.  My brother Karl [Alexander], who's not with us any longer.  My sister, Susan, in Ohio.  Oh, my brother Donald [Alexander] and his lady Sonya [ph.] kissing.  My stepfather, Hunter [Willis], looking very elegant next to my mother, Mary [Wade] Alexander.  And, my brother, baby brother, Michael.  Uncle Ocey [ph.], my mother's brother.  And, my brother, Bobby [Robert Alexander].
Speaker 2: At the top right?
Speaker 1: At the top right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's aboard a wonderful ship that was a wonderful ten day cruise for a party for [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou.  I think when she turned sixty-five or seventy that Oprah [Winfrey] had for her.  And, there we were being greeted before the boat took off in Florida and we sailed all over the place.
Speaker 1: About what year was it taken?
Speaker 2: And, I would say about eight years ago.  This is 19--
Speaker 1: So, late '90s [1990s]?
Speaker 2: The late mid-'90s [1990s], maybe.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: Oh, I think this is wonderful.  This is a time when black folks with these little dinky jobs they would have, would just dress to kill, would put white folks with money to shame.  And, there was a dance.  And, there was the order from the bar, and there's my mother with her wonderful new man on the left.  She just hugging him.  And, there's that very elegant tall man I remember.  He always he looked like he was a publisher or something.  But, he probably maybe had a job that was slightly better than an elevator operator.  And, all those pretty people at the dance.  And, I--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What year?
Speaker 2: I would say that was taken in the early '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Kathe [Sandler], [HistoryMaker] Joan [Sandler], and Eve [Sandler].  And, I'm trying to remember where we were at this one.  I would say this was taken about six years ago.  That would put us back into '56 [1956] or so.
Speaker 1: Ninety-six [1996].
Speaker 2: Ninety [1990]. I mean, excuse me, '56 [1956], '96 [1996] excuse me; got my arithmetic wrong.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, I love this picture.  I was maybe all of six, seven years old.  And, that me with my father and my brother who was probably five years old.  So--
Speaker 1: Your brother's name.
Speaker 2: Milton [Alexander].  And, my father, Otis [Alexander, Sr.].  And, my brother Karl, excuse me, he's to the left of me.  Karl was four years old.  So, it was Karl--the one that's missing is Bobby.  He didn't like to take pictures.  That was taken a long time ago.
Speaker 1: What years was that one taken?
Speaker 2: That was taken, I would say, 1940.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Joan Sandler--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's a portrait of me.  I believe Hugh Bell took this one.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  That's an (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bert Andrews.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  That's an out check from the Essence shoot; another Essence shoot.
Speaker 2: But, that's okay.  About what year was it taken?  Nineteen seventy-seven [1977], the Essence shoot?
Speaker 1: No.  I think this is a different--I think it would be more like 1980.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  This is an (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In '82 [1982], yeah.
Speaker 2: Early '80s [1980s], okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: That's okay.
Speaker 1: Can I look at who's next to Jimmy [James Baldwin] on this?  I don't know if this is--oh, it's about Jimmy's last day in the garden and telling all these wonderful tales.  And, I would say, it was the year Jimmy died and it would've been a few months before that.  So, I would say, may--I don't know if I'd say '70 [1970], I might be totally wrong.
Speaker 2: You wanna say, early '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 1: Early '70s [1970s] I would think.  I just don't remember his date.
Speaker 2: Oh, Eve Sandler and her mother sitting in the park.
Speaker 1: About what year do you think that one was taken?
Speaker 2: Eve, you were born in which year?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Fifty-seven [1957].
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957], so this would be, '58 [1958], '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I think that's Mexico.
Speaker 1: That is Mexico.  You're right.  You're absolutely right in Chapultepec Park [Mexico City, Mexico].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  That's right--
Speaker 1: A wonderful park, yeah, that we lived right near.  It was one of the, is one of the great parks in Mexico.
Speaker 2: That's a portrait that Lou Draper took with my mother, me, Kathe, and Eve.  And, Lou Draper ones we had a date for 'cause we had an earlier Lou Draper of my mother.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) do you remember the date?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: It was early to mid-'70s [1970s], then.
Speaker 2: Oh, the ladies who lunch.  My dearest friend.  If I could just see everybody on the portrait.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: These ladies are having lunch at Butler Hall at Columbia University [New York, New York].  And, it's Iris [ph.]--it's, its wait (unclear)--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Marjorie [ph.].
Speaker 2: Marjorie, Iris, Edna [ph.], Joan and Jean [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-seven [1967].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Thank God, it's on the back of the portrait (laughter).
