Story_ID: 260729
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe; I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Jeff Griffin.  Observing are Edith McCauley and Scott Stearns of our staff.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Julian [Marvin] Swain, capital J-U-L-I-A-N, capital S-U-W--no; I don't even know how to spell my own name.
Speaker 1: S-U-W (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Capital S-W-A-I-N.
Speaker 1: Now is that your full name, your full given name?
Speaker 2: My middle name is Marvin.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: M-A-R-V-I-N.
Speaker 1: But you usually don't use that right?
Speaker 2: Occasionally I use the M.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, do you have any nicknames or anything that?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I just had my eightieth birthday; 12/8/24 [December 8, 1924] is my birthday.
Speaker 1: Okay and where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Chicago, Illinois at the Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay now, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I don't have an occupation at present--yes, I would say I do.  I still perform occasionally, but not like I used to.  I can be selective and choice-y about what I do, like I really am pleased to be a part of this project and feel very honored.
Speaker 1: Okay now, thank you, and but we all know that, that you are a dancer and a dance instructor and have had your own dance company [Julian Swain Inner City Dance Theatre], but for the sake of the history, I want you to say that (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, you just said it and said it all.  I started dancing--I would say I started dancing in grammar school [Stephen A. Douglas School, Chicago, Illinois]; I had a wonderful teacher.
Speaker 1: Now I don't want you to tell the whole story now, but just confirm that that's what your occupation is that you are?
Speaker 2: My occupation was a dancer, and along the way I developed my skills as a singer, so I became a choreographer-singer-actor-dancer.
Speaker 1: All right, and you had your own company too that's right.
Speaker 2: Right, and I had my own dance company for many years.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: What is what?
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is March 23rd, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at--in a studio at [The] HistoryMakers [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 260730
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, sir, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I like food in general; I am diabetic now, and I have a heart condition so I have to be very careful about my diet.  I can't always eat what I would like to eat.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like the spring and the fall.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really, not a favorite.
Speaker 1: And the last one in this set is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not really, not a favorite.
Story_ID: 260731
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Sarah Elizabeth [Sarah Davis Swain], her maiden name was Davis, and of course her married name was Swain.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born July the 4th, in 1989--I mean, in 1889.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was seventy, I mean, eighty years old when she died, and she died in 1970.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She claims she was born in Los Angeles, California, but I'm not sure about that.
Speaker 1: Well, do you have any other possibilities in mind?
Speaker 2: Not really, I could only--I was an only child.  I literally have no other family.  I have no living relatives at present, so my mother was the kind of mother that really never discussed her age, and I really didn't find out how old she was until she was very close to passing, because she was the kind of person that kept her age very secretive, as many women do.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about that--your ancestors on your mother's side of the family?  I mean, how far back you trace those ancestors?
Speaker 2: You know, it would be very stressful for me to try to go back to tell you anything about my ancestors, because basically I know literally nothing meaningful about them other than bits of information that my mother gave me at different times.  She was not a very talkative woman, and so I wound up knowing very little about my background.  I know that there is Indian [Native American], Caucasian and black mixture in my family.
Speaker 1: Okay, and is your family--does your family have roots in California on that side or do--are there roots in other southern states, or are they all in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: You'll have to respect what I just told you, there is very little information that I can give you about my ancestors, because at present I have no family, and I know very little about my ancestral background.
Speaker 1: Well, did your mother--do you know if your mother grew up in Los Angeles or Chicago or?
Speaker 2: My mother grew up in Springfield, Illinois, and her youth was spent in Springfield, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she talk very much about growing up, you know, about her parents, or?
Speaker 2: She, really from what she described, grew up on a farm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so is the farm right outside of Springfield or in Springfield?
Speaker 2: I really can't honestly tell you about that, because as I told you she was not a person that talked a lot about where she was from, what she did, her background or anything, so that kind of information I have very little knowledge of.
Speaker 1: Okay, I understand that, but since this is a historical interview, I still want to ask for whatever you know, you know, so that's why I keep asking about it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And 'cause we spend a lot of time dealing with, you know, where we come from before we even get to childhood, and because it's important, and a lot of people don't know; you're not the only one, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, so whatever little, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I think the fact that I was an only child and was just--basically raised by a single mother and with no other relatives, there was no circuit for information to come, where it would have normally came from other relations, yeah, even if it wasn't coming from my mother.  Since there were no other relatives, there was no way for me to get any meaningful information other than that that she gave me, and as I had told you, she was a very private and secretive person and only talked about those kinds of things when she wanted to, and I always felt that there had been lots of very unpleasant things in her life that made her shut down--so much that had happened to her.
Story_ID: 260732
Speaker 1: Did she [Swain's mother, Sarah Davis Swain] talk at all about when she first came to Chicago [Illinois] or how she came to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a sense that she came to Chicago--well, you were born here so, yeah.
Speaker 2: I was born here.
Speaker 1: So, she was here by 1924, we know that.
Speaker 2: Yes, around--we know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but do you have any sense that she was here--did she go to school in Springfield [Illinois], or did she go to school in Chicago, or?
Speaker 2: She never discussed any of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you ever meet your grandparents, or?
Speaker 2: They were all dead.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that is what I was telling you is, I never knew any other relatives.  My father was even dead, and so I never actually knew him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now do you have, did your mother ever talk about how you and your, she and your father [Leonard Swain] met?
Speaker 2: Her--my mother's experience with my father was of, obviously, a very unpleasant experience, because the relationship between she and my father left her so that afterwards, from my knowledge, I never knew of her keeping company with another man.
Story_ID: 260733
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name was Leonard Swain.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: And from the knowledge that I have, he had originally gone to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], he sang in the Fisk choir, and his occupation when she was with him, he was a Pullman porter on the road, on the railroad.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, do you know where your, do you know where your father was born, was he?
Speaker 2: I think he was born in Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you know the year?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you ever meet any of your father's relatives at all?
Speaker 2: I never have met any relatives of mine, the only relative that I am aware of is I had a single mother [Sarah Davis Swain], and I was raised by a single mother with no knowledge, never having the opportunity to meet any other relative in my family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was always just my mother and myself.
Story_ID: 260734
Speaker 1: So, she [Swain's mother, Sarah Davis Swain] had no relatives in Chicago [Illinois] at all?
Speaker 2: None whatsoever.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And whatever relatives she had, she made a very conscious effort to sever whatever relationship that she had with them, so there was never any discussion, there was never any talk about any other the relatives.
Speaker 1: Now what, what kind of a personality did your mother have, and what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: She was in her early years, from what I understood, she was a helper in a beauty salon, and then she became a domestic, as most black women were at that time, and she did that for many years, and after that she went into a factory for a long time and worked in a factory, and then from there she went into, in her later years, she went into the hospital and became a nutritionist at the Michael Reese Hospital [and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] and up until she retired that is what she was doing during her later years was working at Michael Reese Hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she steadily sort of rose in terms of the different jobs she--I guess (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, she did the best she could.
Story_ID: 260735
Speaker 1: You were raised on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: I was raised in what is called the Gap [Bronzeville, Chicago, Illinois], [East] 31st [Street] and [South] Calumet [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, tell us about growing up.  Do you have an earliest childhood memory, an earliest one, the first one that you--the first thing that you can remember?
Speaker 2: I have lots of childhood memories. You know, I went to [Stephen A.] Douglas School [Chicago, Illinois].  The building that I lived in was a tenement building, but it was a gorgeous building that had been a single-family residence for a very wealthy family.  The building had been built by Louis Sullivan who built the Auditorium [Building, Chicago, Illinois] downtown.  I knew that, and I went to Douglas grammar school, and across from Douglas there were a row of four houses that were Frank Lloyd Wright houses that at that particular time were tenements, and I wasn't even aware who Frank Lloyd Wright was, who Louis Sullivan was.  I didn't find that out until much later in life.
Speaker 1: Okay, but do you have a first childhood memory?  What's the first thing that you remember from childhood or do you have one, a first memory?  Some people do.
Speaker 2: Nothing but that I was very fortunate, because I didn't have an extended family, but I had a mother [Sarah Davis Swain] who was very caring, very loving and loved me very much, and if I never have any love in my life, I had enough from her; she really worshiped me.
Story_ID: 260736
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, as I told you, I lived in what is now called the Gap [Bronzeville, Chicago, Illinois].  Everybody was very poor, but since everybody was poor it didn't make any difference.  We were all poor together; the only thing is my mother [Sarah Davis Swain] did day's work, and there were a lot of people around me that had to be, like, on public aid, but she was a very proud woman, and we were never on public aid.  She scuffled by any means necessary as a domestic and managed to take care of herself and her child.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you live in a building where there--people were rooming and using the same kitchen and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: We lived in this family--one family residence that had been built by a wealthy family.  It was a gorgeous building, but it had been chopped up into kitchenette apartments, and there were thirty-two human beings living in this one family dwelling--thirty-two.
Speaker 1: Okay, and surprising, not surprising, I mean, surprising, just a few years ago, I mean, a lot of those townhouses along in the Gap area that had been rehabbed, or (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, so many of 'em have been rehabbed now, like where I was living as I told you it was built by Louis Sullivan family, so Louis Sullivan architect and a wealthy lawyer bought this building and has rehabbed it.  I've often wanted to go and knock on the door and ask him, could I look around and see what he's done to that building, but the shell was there when we were living there.  You could tell that it had been lived in by very wealthy people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think when people come to Chicago [Illinois], or at least ten or fifteen years ago, if you came to Chicago and you rode down [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Drive or over in that area you'd see the big greystones and the--you'd say, "Well, people in this neighborhood aren't living too bad," until you find out there are like thirty-something people in each greystone.
Speaker 2: That is correct and this one, in this one, in this one building you know.
Story_ID: 260737
Speaker 1: Are you familiar with Melvin King?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: You know, the artist (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The artist, right.
Speaker 1: Well, he's very well known.  Well, he lived on the third floor, and I used to babysit him as a child, and his parents [Mae King and Thomas Jefferson King] were like my extended family, because they had seven children, and I was an only child living there in the building with my mother [Sarah Davis Swain], so his mother was kind of like my second mother, and so the living situation there was very much like an African village.  All the mothers kind of looked after the children of the mothers that were working every day.
Speaker 2: 'Cause your mother had to work and didn't have any relatives or anything to--
Speaker 1: Right, she worked every day, and Mrs. King was like a baby sitter, not paid (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, Melvin King is one of the best artists in Chicago [Illinois], a celebrated artist, right?
Speaker 1: Right, well, I used to babysit him when he was a baby, because occasionally his mother would work, and if she worked, she would leave him in my care, and I babysat Melvin when he--when she would go to work.
Story_ID: 260738
Speaker 1: Now, you grew up basically during the [Great] Depression when you were, you know--
Speaker 2: The very--the heart of the Depression.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any stories about those times that you can share with us?
Speaker 2: Well, one occasion that I really remember when I was going to grammar school is, number one, Maudelle B. Bousfield was the first black principal in the City of Chicago [Illinois] and she was my principal at [Stephen A.] Douglas School [Chicago, Illinois], and when I graduated and went on to Wendell Phillips [High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago Illinois], she came to Wendell Phillips and was the first black high school principal in the City of Chicago, but during my eight years in grammar school at Douglas School, I remember having the pleasure of the first time I was exposed to poetry, Langston Hughes came to Douglas and read some of his poetry to us, and that was my first time hearing poetry, so I didn't know who, and how important Langston Hughes was until later on in life, and then I found out really how privileged I was that I had that artistic input so early in life.
Speaker 1: Now about how old were you when Langston Hughes was there, do you remember?
Speaker 2: I would say I would have to be seven, eight years old--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when he came to our school.
Speaker 1: Now any other stories about, about that period of time?
Speaker 2: Well, I was very fortunate at that time.  I had a gym teacher who was very dance orientated, and she exposed me knowledgeably to dance at a very early age.  She discussed people like Martha Graham, who was a pioneer in modern dance, and people like Marian Anderson, and then I was very fortunate in my exposure with her to have my first theatrical experiences in some of the productions that she would put on in grammar school that they called spring festivals.
Speaker 1: Now what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name later was Katherine Flowers, but her name at that time--we referred to her as Mrs. Wade, but later on in life, she became Katherine Flowers, and she was also one of the original members of the Katherine Dunham Company when it was formed in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay so you did, you were fortunate in that respect to be exposed to it.
Speaker 2: Right, and then later on, she, when I went to Wendell Phillips, she transferred to Wendell Phillips and became the gym teacher at Wendell Phillips and that is when her name became Katherine Flowers, and that is when I found out that her daughter, whose name was Posie Flowers, was in a touring production that was very famous at the time called, 'Carmen Jones,' the first musical production of 'Carmen Jones,' Posie Flowers was in it.
Speaker 1: What a name, Posie Flowers, that's--
Speaker 2: Posie Flowers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, later on in life, Katherine Flowers became a dance instructor in New York [New York] for the United Nations [UN], and she was in the process of trying to write a book, and my dancing partner, Peter Green, who lived in New York took care of her during her later years and wound up with all of her papers, and I never knew what happened to them, but the book was never completed or written or published.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it may still--you just don't know where it is now (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I have no idea, and my dancing partner, Peter Green, is dead, he must have died about five years ago.
Story_ID: 260739
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little boy?  What kind of a little fellow were you, and what were you interested in, and what did you like?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I always had a flair for the arts.  My mother [Sarah Davis Swain] was the kind of mother that, at night time, she would--we would be laying in the bed, and she would read to me, or we would sing and harmonize, so I felt that my first singing experiences were with my mother, and then later on, I began to sing in school and sing with the choruses and a capellas and things like that, but I managed to get a lot of experiences within my school and schools that I attended, but my actual first beginnings of some kind of formal training was at the South Side Community Art Center [Chicago, Illinois].  Have you ever been there?  Okay, well, when I was a child--
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about it though, even though, you know, 'cause this is for history, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I was a child, the South Side Community Art Center was the place for the development of young talent, and somehow I was led there, and I was very fortunate in finding that place, because all of the art-orientated [ph.] people that began to emerge in my life came out of my connection with the South Side Community Art Center.  That was the first time that I met [HistoryMaker] Margaret Burroughs.  She was a young artist at that time, and her name was Margaret Goss, and she was a young artist, and I had the pleasure of meeting her at a very young age, and I met Lester Goodman there.  He was the first black man that I had ever met that had any academic training in ballet, and I was very affected and very influenced by that.  At the South Side Community Arts Center, I met Carmencita Romero, who I danced with a long time.  I met Jimmy Payne [Sr.] that I danced with a long time.  I came in contact with [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks, the wonderful photographer; that was my first meeting of Ethel Waters, because she used to come there often, in other (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, she was a star at that point right?  She was a star in those days, right?
Speaker 2: She was a star at that point; in fact I think that was doing the time she was in 'Cabin in the Sky' on Broadway.  I know she had star status, and she came to the South Side Community Center as a star to help fundraise and do things like that you know.
Speaker 1: The reason why I raised it like that is because some of the other people you mentioned hadn't really received the recognition they would--
Speaker 2: They hadn't emerged.
Speaker 1: They hadn't emerged yet (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: But Gordon Parks was just a--
Speaker 2: But she was one.
Speaker 1: --a photographer.
Speaker 2: Right, he was just a photographer then, but as I said, that was the one place, the hub for artists to gather and nurture their art.
Story_ID: 260740
Speaker 1: The South Side Community Art Center [Chicago, Illinois] gave one big annual ball at the Savoy Ballroom [Chicago, Illinois] once every year, and my going there made me have the experience of meeting people, like, I met Wilbur Bradley there.  I met my young dancing partner there; we had already known each other, but we were going there at the same time, Peter Green, and I met so many people; Tommy Gomez [Thomas W. Gomez], I met him during that period.
Speaker 2: Now is this before Tommy danced with [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham?
Speaker 1: This was before Tommy danced with Katherine Dunham.
Speaker 2: And Wilbur was--had he danced with Katherine Dunham, too?
Speaker 1: Wilbur was--this was before Wilbur had danced with Katherine Dunham.
Speaker 2: Okay, so everybody's--you're meeting these people as they were developing--
Speaker 1: We were all--we were all preteen at this period, this point in time in our lives.
Speaker 2: Okay, now was Charles [Wilbert] White associated with the South Side Community Art Center there?
Speaker 1: Charles White?
Speaker 2: The artist Charles White, the--he does the black and white sketches, and?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He could have been; I know I met William McBride [Jr.], he was kind of well-known during that time, but all of the major artists in all the art disciplines gathered there at the South Side Community Art Center, because literally, there was no other place.  Now there are lots of places, but all of the dance and everything that was related to the arts came out of the South Side Community Art Center.
Speaker 2: Now was it in the same building at [East] 38th [Street] and [South] Michigan [Avenue] as it is today?
Speaker 1: Same building, and it was like a tenement house, there was so much going in that building; it was like the building I lived in, with the thirty-two blacks (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now there was another, I know, there was one other venue where there was some activity, that was the Lincoln, the Abraham Lincoln Centre [Chicago, Illinois], I think.
Speaker 1: The Abraham Lincoln Centre, but that Abraham Lincoln Centre didn't come along until much, much later.  You know Lucille Ellis was over at the Abraham Lincoln Centre, and that was much, much, much later.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm talking about really early, and down in that particular area on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], there was no other place for black artists to gather other than the South Side Community Art Center.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So everybody that was art orientated somehow or other went there.
Speaker 2: Well, I've heard that Paul Robeson occasionally would come into town, did you?
Speaker 1: Everybody was there, anybody that came through that was art orientated [ph.], an actor or anything, they would come and do whatever they could to stimulate or nourish the South Side Community Art Center, because that was the only place for young blacks to be nourished.
Speaker 2: Now, do you remember meeting Paul Robeson at all, I mean when, when you were (unclear)?
Speaker 1: I didn't meet Paul Robeson, but I knew of him coming through there.
Story_ID: 260741
Speaker 1: What about [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, did you ever get a chance to meet her, too?
Speaker 2: Well, Carmencita Romero, who I studied with and was one of my first mentors, was out of Katherine Dunham's company [Negro Dance Group].  She left the company early and went into the musical that I was telling you about that Posie Flowers was in, 'Carmen Jones'?  She was in the Broadway version of 'Carmen Jones,' and I have a lot of pictures there that I brought of 'Carmen Jones.'
Speaker 1: Now, when you--
Speaker 2: I mean, of Carmencita Romero.
Speaker 1: So did, so when you were a young, a young man going to the South Side Community Art Center [Chicago, Illinois] did you, were any of the people that you met along the way in some of those movies of the era, like 'Cabin in the Sky' or 'Stormy Weather'? I know Katherine Dunham has a big scene in 'Stormy Weather,' in there.
Speaker 2: Well, Katherine Dunham was in 'Stormy Weather' and so was her company.  Tommy Gomez [Thomas W. Gomez] was in it, Wilbur Bradley was in it.  Katherine Dunham--that was one of the major movies that Katherine had the pleasure of making was 'Stormy Weather,' and she was also in 'Cabin in the Sky,' but I think 'Stormy Weather' was the best showcase that she had had in the movies.
Speaker 1: I know, I mentioned it 'cause that's the first time I became aware of her is when my mother, who's the same age as you--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was watching; we were watching television when I was a kid, and she said, "This is Katherine Dunham," you know, and I had never heard of Katherine Dunham.  I didn't know
Speaker 2: Well, Katherine Dunham, as I had told you my first gym teacher [Katherine Flowers] was in the beginnings of the company when Katherine Dunham first formed a company, it was formed outside of Chicago [Illinois] in one of those little black suburbs, and then it came into Chicago, because people became aware of who Katherine Dunham was, and she began to get what classical training she could get where that would help her develop her company, and from whites who would condescend to give her some classes in ballet, but--for many years it was very difficult for blacks to get academic training in dance, although we always danced, because dance was so much a part of our culture that we always danced and danced well, but there were many facets of life that we were deprived from going into, and that was things in the arts, in the sports.  It took many years for those to open up to where they would accept the talents that we have to offer.
Story_ID: 260742
Speaker 1: --Well, you said your first dance lessons, I guess, or first exposure came in gym class at [Stephen A.] Douglas [School, Chicago, Illinois] right?
Speaker 2: That was in grammar school from the Mrs. [Katherine] Flowers that I was telling you about, that first began to educate me and stimulate my interest, not only in dance, but in the arts period.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It also gave me an opportunity to discover other artistic talents that I had, because she provided a showcase in which for me to display myself.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you had--did you take lessons at the South Side Community Art Center [Chicago, Illinois] under Lester Goodman, is that?
Speaker 2: Well, as I told you I met Carmencita [Romero] there, I started studying with Carmencita, I met Jimmy Payne [Sr.] there.  I started studying with Jimmy Payne, my--I met Lester there; he choreographed.  I have program there, Artists and Models Ball, where Lester--there's a big picture in there of Lester--where Lester was one of the major choreographers for their spring festival, and they gave this every year, this was the big thing, big fundraiser that was given at the Savoy [Ballroom, Chicago, Illinois] once a year.  We called it the Artists and Models Ball, and they gave it for many, many years, and it was the major fundraiser that was done by the South Side Community Art Center, and they would use the talents of this tremendous pool of artists, this artist collective that they had under the South Side Community Art Center banner.
Speaker 1: Okay, now in Chicago [Illinois], from what I know, maybe talk about this, that it seems as though the arts were closely associated with the history and culture too, 'cause you got like [HistoryMaker] Margaret Burroughs there, she develops the DuSable Museum [of African American History, Chicago, Illinois], Jimmy Payne was a docent at the DuSable Museum later on, and I think in the same neighborhood was Hammurabi's [Frederic H. Hammurabi Robb] House of Knowledge [Chicago, Illinois], I think, so.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, all of the--you had so many artists living on the lower South Side [Chicago, Illinois], you had Nat [King] Cole, you had Louis Armstrong, you had Louis Jordan, so many people.  You had Dinah Washington, 'cause I went to school with Dinah, her name originally was Ruth Jones, and she changed it to Dinah Washington, but we were going to school at the same time, and one of the first jobs that I had with Carmencita was, there were--Al Capone had a nightclub on [South] State Street, across--it must've been about [East] 24th [Street] and State, because that hotel [Lexington Hotel, Chicago, Illinois] that Al Capone lived in was on [East] 22nd [Street] and [South] Michigan [Avenue], and there was supposedly an underground tunnel where Al Capone could go to his nightclub, which was the Colosimo's [Chicago, Illinois], underground, without coming out and being exposed.  He could go underground over to the nightclub and one of the first jobs that I had with Carmencita, Dinah Washington was the star of the show at the Coliseum, Colosimo's nightclub.
Speaker 1: Now, what year is; what year is this?
Speaker 2: I couldn't give you specifically?
Speaker 1: About how old were--were you still in high school [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] then, or had you graduated or?
Speaker 2: I would say that I had to be like sixteen, seventeen, somewhere like that age-wise, because during the period when I was with Carmencita, I was very young.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what did you do in the show?  Did you have, did you--?
Speaker 2: I was a dancer.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't sing at all?
Speaker 2: I danced--no, I wasn't singing then.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you part of like a chorus of dancers or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I was in Carmencita's dance company; Carmencita had a dance company.  She also had, eventually had dancing schools here in Chicago, where she taught dance and had a full staff of instructors.  So, I spent quite a few years under Carmencita; I spent quite a few years under Jimmy Payne; I spent quite a few years under Katherine Flowers.  My training up to that point was basically nourished by those people.
Story_ID: 260743
Speaker 1: And then by the time I got sixteen or seventeen, I went and auditioned at Club DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois] under Sammy Dyer.  Did you ever hear of him?
Speaker 2: Well, yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: But, tell us, I mean, this is for history, so you got to tell us, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, Sammy Dyer, he had a school, his school [Sammy Dyer School of Dance; Sammy Dyer School of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois] was located on [East] 35th [Street] and [South] Michigan [Avenue], [East] 34th [Street] and Michigan, right before you got to 35th Street, but for many years he was the choreographer at the Club DeLisa.  He also had a group that became very famous that I worked with a lot called the Dyerettes.  [HistoryMaker]  Muriel [W.] Foster has the school now.
Speaker 2: Yeah we interviewed her, Muriel Foster.
Speaker 1: Right, I know you interviewed her, but at any rate, we--later on I worked with her a lot, but by that time I was part of a trio called the Co-Ops [Co-Op Trio], but I went, and I auditioned for Sammy Dyer, and I was a little young; he thought I had great talent.  He told me, "Wait a year-so, and come back," and he would give me some work.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Which I did, and when I went back he started using me in some of the shows at the Club DeLisa.
Speaker 2: Okay, now what did your mother [Sarah Davis Swain] think about that?  Now you're just still a teenager, and?
Speaker 1: I have a picture there of my mother and I at Club DeLisa.  She finally would come and see me perform, because, like the South Side Community Arts Center [sic. South Side Community Art Center, Chicago, Illinois] was the training ground for young artists, the Club DeLisa and the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois], other than the little night spots around Chicago [Illinois] like Rhumboogie [Club, Chicago, Illinois] or the Beige Room in the Pershing Hotel [Chicago, Illinois] were the places where the artists nourished their talent, and you would see great people in those particular places, like I remember Ahmad Jamal as a pianist at the bar at the Pershing Ballroom [Pershing Lounge], I remember Earl ["Fatha"] Hines as the orchestra in the Beige Room, things like that you know.
Story_ID: 260744
Speaker 1: Tell us something about--I want to go back a minute to Carmencita Romero.  What was her background, was she Puerto Rican or what--did she have like a Spanish background or?
Speaker 2: Well, Carmencita's name--she wouldn't appreciate me saying this, but Carmencita was a black girl that was raised up in Chicago [Illinois], her maiden name was Lily Butler.  She didn't appreciate anybody knowing it, because when she took up the name Carmencita Romero--it was at the time when being anything other than black was an advantage, and there were many people that made all kinds of effort to escape their blackness, because it was long before the period when blacks became proud of being black.
Speaker 1: Okay, so all right, so how is--I'm glad I asked the question, 'cause I just wondered, you know, if she, you know, what her background was, but she was--
Speaker 2: Well, she was a Chicago girl, born in Chicago.  Her original name was Lily Butler.  It took us years to find that out; that was a secret, but-because, when she put that name down, she really put it down, in fact she buried Lily Butler.
Speaker 1: Could she roll the Rs with the Carmencita Romero, could she do that?
Speaker 2: She did everything.
Speaker 1: Rrr, like that (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Right, right, but Carmencita was for her time--I think she was a very talented woman.  For a lot of years, she had dance schools in Italy, because some of my dancers I sent over to her, and she helped them out, and they toured different places with Carmencita in Italy.  Carmencita had quite an extensive career, and I was very privileged to be nourished by her at a very young age.
Story_ID: 260745
Speaker 1: So you're performing while you're in high school [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]; did that affect your grades or how were--were you a good student in high school, or were you just kind of, you know, trying to get out and get into the entertainment world?
Speaker 2: I think I was above average, and it was always obvious that, academically, I could have been better than what I displayed.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you were drawn into entertainment?
Speaker 2: I was always fascinated by any kind of art.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was always very drawn to anything that was artistic.  I had--in school, I had won a scholarship to the [School of the] Art Institute [Chicago, Illinois], and I went there for several years, and when I was young, I was quite good at drawing, and by the time I got in high school, for some reason, that faded in the background.  I could always sketch a costume or anything or a backdrop or anything that I wanted to try to describe, I could sketch it out good enough, because of the art experiences I had had earlier.
Speaker 1: One of your neighbors being King--did Melvin King, as a little kid, display artistic ability?
Speaker 2: Melvin was one of the most talented young people that I knew.  I introduced him to dance; I took him to Katherine Flowers.  His artistic ability was very stifled, because his teachers told his mother [Mae King] that he should stop dancing, because that would make him a sissy.
Speaker 1: Really, is that what they--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what they told 'em, and he found a way to express himself, because his artistic ability had been so stifled, from his family as well as from his teachers, that art--painting--was what emerged to help him express his artistic expression.
Story_ID: 260746
Speaker 1: Now, how long did you stay in Chicago [Illinois], you know, dancing, before you actually you know left the city?  'Cause you--there' a story I know you have about going to New York [New York] with Carmencita [Romero], I think?
Speaker 2: I went--Carmencita, the first gig that we ever had--when I say gig, I mean the first major booking that we had outside of Chicago--we went to Montreal--Toronto, Canada to be in a carnival, and the carnival was a sideshow, and they used Carmencita's group, about three or four of her dancers as the wild men from Borneo, and we were in a sideshow--you know, where they have the fire eaters, and the sword eaters, and?
Speaker 1: And freaks, too?
Speaker 2: And freaks right, the man with the snakeskin, and the woman with the beard, and that kind of stuff, well.
Speaker 1: So everything that's supposed to be exotic, or is supposed to be some--?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't, it wasn't--they didn't have that, an exotic in this tent.  This was all different, strange, freakish presentations.
Speaker 1: Okay so you all had to pretend to be from Borneo?
Speaker 2: We were supposedly the wild men from Borneo.  They booked Carmencita's group, and she took us up there to be the wild men from Borneo.
Speaker 1: So, what did you--how did you feel about that at the time, you know, going up to be a wild man from Borneo?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you must remember the time, and the time was when blacks were very, very ostracized, and you did whatever you could do, by any means necessary.  You'd be a Stepin Fetchit [Lincoln Perry] if necessary, because that's what made Stepin Fetchit, Stepin Fetchit.  By the way, he used to live catty-corner across the street from me and Butterbeans and Susie's [Jodie Edwards and Susie Edwards] house, but he is someone who is a comedic pioneer in the business that is very much looked down on--but people do not think about the times, and how hard it was for black people at that time.  They even kind of look at Bill Robinson, Bill Bojangles Robinson, in that kind of way, because that was the only kind of work they could get, his Uncle Tom roles, and you did what you had to do in order to do what you wanted to do.
Story_ID: 260747
Speaker 1: Now you all were going to Toronto [Ontario, Canada] to be in a festival to play the wild men of Borneo, which got us into a discussion about some of the clowning and Uncle Tom-type roles that black folks had to play in those days, or did play in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In fact, you know then you had Mantan Moreland and you had, that's all you had were people that played those kinds of roles and that's what the average person was looking for, if they were looking for a black entertainer.  Like if they were looking for you to dance, you had to either be a buck dancer or a tap dancer.  It was a long time before they would accept any other form of dance from a black person.
Speaker 1: So the dynamic is like, if you were gonna perform out in the white world, you'd probably have to do something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If you were black that's what they looked for you to do, and you know what it really hasn't changed too much.  They still would like that you know, I call it putting you on a string and jostling it up and down, like a marionette of some kind, because there's still great hostility in regards to I'll say the classic arts.
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you, can I ask you about Lincoln Perry, Stepin Fetchit?  You say he was a neighbor of yours?  Did you get a chance to know him at all or meet him?
Speaker 2: Well, I used to live--when I later on as I got a little older, I lived on [East] 33rd [Street] and [South] Calumet [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], and have you ever heard of Butterbeans and Susie [Jodie Edwards and Susie Edwards]?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, they lived catty-corner across the street from me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were a great comedy team.
Speaker 2: They were a fabulous comedy team; they were the comedy team, but they did that kind of stuff you know that I was just talking about, and Stepin Fetchit lived with them for many years, and I think it was during his down years when he was not the star--kind of star that he had been, and his star had slipped.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was even--
Speaker 2: Because, you know, he made at that particular time a lot of money, which was considered a lot of money in the movies at that time, but he still wound up poverty-stricken as most blacks do, because they basically don't make enough, and for what they do make it is not managed properly.  They all wind up financially being haunted by the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] or having mismanagement, and someone mismanaging their money and--because all of the great artists go through that: Dinah Washington went through it, Redd Foxx went through it.  I knew him personally and had worked with him a lot, but they all wind up having those kinds of problems, you know.  Joe Louis had that problem.
Speaker 1: You know there's even a--we used to say in the theater that something is a, it's a script, you know, I mean, any time you write it, it's gonna be the same way (laughter), but.
Speaker 2: Well, the thing about it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The theater companies here in Chicago [Illinois], you know.
Speaker 2: We used to feel that, no--if there was a great person that got any meaningful kind of stature, that there was always a concerted effort from other factions to crash 'em--to demean 'em in some kind of way--and what better way could you be demeaned than to sic the IRS on you?
Story_ID: 260748
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Jackie Taylor's Black Ensemble [Theater] Company [Chicago, Illinois] does plays about black entertainers all the time, eta's [eta Creative Arts Foundation, Chicago, Illinois] done a few too now.  As I said, it's a script, they always have a black person arises from poverty, makes a lot money, their money is mismanaged, and they end up you know broke, or you know, worse, on dope or something, and that's the--then at the end there's some redemptive feature at the end of the play, but we'll always remember their music is the last or their--
Speaker 2: Have you been to Black Ensemble lately?  When is the last time you were there?
Speaker 1: It was a while, it was a while ago.
Speaker 2: It's been a while?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's been a while.
Speaker 2: Well it's been amazing and so wonderful watching the development of Jackie Taylor, you know, and I've seen her over the years because as a young artist I used to help her with choreography and stuff, I mean, for her individual performances and to see where she is now and has developed as playwright, because I saw her go through all kinds of stages of development, because she did classics; she played roles like Medea ['Medea']; she did--
Speaker 1: Right, but she's in a better position than a lot of the people that we write plays about now, that came out of the era that you were talking about.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Now, that's what I was referring to, the era and the stories about all the musicians and actors and performers.  They all seem--it seems to be a script, you know, I mean, it seems to be like the same thing happens to all of 'em, from Fats Waller to Stepin Fetchit [Lincoln Perry] to you name 'em.
Speaker 2: Well, she has developed so beautifully in the sense that, to me, she is the only playwright that I know that is beautifully writing about the black experience.  She finally found herself, she found a niche in which to write about, and ever since she has found that niche, every show that she has produced has been a smash hit and that has been writing about black people and their experiences, and there've been so many of us, and we've contributed so much, she finds she has so much to write about, because we do have a very rich history.
Story_ID: 260749
Speaker 1: When you were in those days yourself, did you, as you were a young man about to launch a career in show business, were you aware of the pitfalls ahead that some of the other black entertainers had, you know, had run into?  I mean, were you, were you thinking about that kind of thing then?
Speaker 2: Well, as a young man, one of the few people that I really, really looked up to as a human being and as a black man, one of the first men was Paul Robeson, but I was always aware of how his career had been killed, how great he had been, how talented he was, because you know he was an actor, he was a linguist, he was a singer, he was a lawyer, he had been a football player, he had so many talents and for him to come along when he came along when was indescribable, because you know he was in 'Shuffle Along' way back then you know, and it was hard back then, and it's still hard to get in, be in the arts, period.  It's hard--it's hard for white people in the arts, but it's doubly hard for black people.  You know, I would never encourage a black person to be in the arts.  They would have do that, because they had to do it, because getting in it for money, for the money--you may never make no money, but if you feel like this is something I've got to do then you need to get on that horse and ride it as long as you can ride it, but not because you want to become famous or rich or whatever the case may be.  You must do it because this is something that you have to do.
Story_ID: 260750
Speaker 1: I want to get us back in Toronto [Ontario, Canada].  Here, now, you all are doing the wild man of Borneo.  Is there--there's got to be a funny story or a couple of stories associated with that kind of gig, you know?
Speaker 2: That whole bit, that whole bit was funny, and then they had--something happened, they had Richard the Lion Man was one of the spots in this tent, and something happened with him and one of the customers, because after all this was a carnival, and, you know, people would come out and the barker would say, "Step right up, we got the lady with the beard," the this, the that, they called that the barker, and then you'd come in, and you had all these little stages around in the tent, and then the people would pay their dollar or dollar and half, come in the tent and go from stand to stand to watch the individual performances, and they might give a fifteen or twenty minute spot, and then you'd move on to the next thing.  Well, at any rate, one of the customers went off on Richard the Lion, whatever he was, and the last thing I know, he was running across the field with his clothes.  He had left the carnival and that left us kind of stranded up there, and then when we got ready to leave, the kids all wanted to go to New York [New York] with Carmencita [Romero], and since it was just my mother [Sarah Davis Swain] and I, I wanted to go back to Chicago [Illinois], so they basically kidnapped me without letting me go back to Chicago.  They put me on the train to go to New York and took me to New York.  So were stranded in New York for about six, seven months and during that period I didn't let my mother know where I was, so she was thinking I was still up in Canada and hadn't written, but I was in New York, sixteen year old, stranded, but that was an experience all within itself.
Speaker 1: Well what happened in New York when you were stranded?  I mean, how did you manage to live?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a very difficult time for me, but it's something that a whole lot of stupid young people do, be adventurous and to go up to New York; you know, you were telling me about the gentlemen that you knew that ran up there and got on the 'Major Bowes Amateur Hour.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Al Stiles [HistoryMaker Albert Stiles] right?
Speaker 2: There were loads of people that would feel like going to New York would be the thing, and you just jump up and go, so we went to New York and I remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is 1940, right?
Speaker 2: Say what?
Speaker 1: This is 1940, I guess?  You're sixteen?
Speaker 2: It was around that--it was around that time.
Story_ID: 260751
Speaker 1: Let's see, I must've been sixteen or seventeen, I was born in '24 [1924], '34 [1934] yeah, it was about '40 [1940], it was about '40 [1940], but at any rate, we got stranded there.  I remember us getting off, and Penn Station [Pennsylvania Station, New York, New York] is at [West] 34th Street, and we walked with our luggage in the blazing hot sun from 34th Street to 135th Street in New York City [New York, New York] on a blazing hot day.  I don't even know how we made it, but that whole experience you would have to be young and stupid to endure that (laughter).  It was not to be believed.
Speaker 2: So you went, so you basically walked from Penn Station to Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: Well, the heart of Harlem was 125th Street.  The hotel we wound up staying at was at 135th Street which was even ten blocks further than 125th Street but at any rate.
Speaker 2: Did you stay at a hotel?  Was it a hotel or?
Speaker 1: We got a room at a hotel, and all of us had to stay in that one room, and we'd have to sleep in batches, you know what I'm speaking of?  One, you know, two or three people would sleep, and then two or three more people would sleep.  It was that kind of situation, then the other people had to leave, you know, go out in the street, find something to do, and then come back and sleep.  It was mean; it was really mean.
Speaker 2: How many were there altogether in this one room?
Speaker 1: Let's see there must've been, let's see a couple of girls; it must've been about six of us, about seven with Carmencita [Romero].
Speaker 2: Okay, that, I think a couple of years ago, this just reminds me of an incident a couple of years ago where a group came from Senegal to Chicago [Illinois].  They stayed out in South Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Came from where?
Speaker 2: Senegal.
Speaker 1: Senegal, okay.
Speaker 2: And there was a woman named Madam, I can't think of her last name now, but she was in charge of this group of dancers and drummers from Senegal, and they came to Chicago and stayed out in South Chicago in a similar situation where they were all in the same place, apartment and they (laughter)--it wasn't quite as bad as what you're saying, but it was similar, you know, they didn't speak English, and, you know, they performed around town for a while.  I don't know what happened to 'em, but they--
Speaker 1: Well, like there was a West Indian group--they're still here now, but I know they came here under the sponsorship of Jimmy Payne [Sr.].  It was when Jimmy Payne had a school [Jimmy Payne School of Dance, Chicago, Illinois] and they had it real hard, you know, coming from the West Indies, and nothing to come to and on a sponsorship, you know, and Jimmy sponsored 'em and did what he could to help 'em for many years, but it had to be a horrible experience, but strangely enough they are still here.
Speaker 2: Is that the West Indian Folk Dance Company?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: With Fred?
Speaker 1: That's right, Fred Baker.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Well, when they first came here, Jimmy was their sponsor, and they managed to survive it, you know, but that's back to that adage that I had about, you just got to do it, you know.
Story_ID: 260752
Speaker 1: So did you find any work doing--in dance in New York [New York] when you were there for six months?
Speaker 2: I had some very interesting artistic experiences.  There was a famous drummer by the name of Cozy Cole, and we had the experience of doing some gigs that Carmencita [Romero] got with him, and then I also met Asadata Dafora and took some lessons from him, and Asadata Dafora was the first African [performer] to migrate to the United States.
Speaker 1: Can you spell his name for us, can you?
Speaker 2: A-S-S-A-D-A-T-A [sic.], the last name is D-A-F-O-R-A; Asadata Dafora.
Speaker 1: And where was he from?
Speaker 2: I think he was from Senegal [sic. Sierra Leone] and he--I have a book there that has a history of black dance.  It's a pamphlet, and he's highlighted in there, because he's the first to mount and concertize African dance in the United States and the name of the concert was called 'Kykongor' [sic. 'Kykunkor'].
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: K-Y-K-O-N-G-O-R [sic.].  Edith [McCauley], there is a book on black dance over there.  Could you--would you find it?
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah so.
Speaker 2: But at any rat--
Speaker 1: So that was the name of his program, 'Kykongor'?
Speaker 2: 'Kykongor' was the name of the concert, and he was the first black to produce a dance to concertize African dance.
Speaker 1: Asadata Dafora?
Speaker 2: Asadata Dafora, he was the first.  The second one that I had met that influenced me with that kind of dancing was Jimmy Payne [Sr.].
Speaker 1: Now, do you know where--
Speaker 2: Because Jimmy Payne had a dance company for quite a few years, and he was the first to concertize African dance in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Now do you know who influenced Jimmy Payne, or where he learned African dance?
Speaker 2: Well, I know Jimmy was originally from Panama; he was a Panamanian, and his dances kind of was, like, cross-cultural, because he would do African dances but he would also do Latin things like the limbo and samba and conga, things that came from down in the area from which he grew up around Panama.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so this is--
Speaker 2: So he didn't just do African dance, but that was primarily a big part of his dance presentation would be African dance.
Speaker 1: Now did Asadata Dafora have drummers with him too at that time?
Speaker 2: He had like a small village.  There was a great migration of African talent that came to New York.  He utilized them, plus he was very wise enough to train a lot of young, black talent in New York and utilize them, so it was kind of a mixture of the Africans and Americans that were trained by him.
Speaker 1: Okay all right.
Speaker 2: So I had the pleasure and the good fortune to run into him as a young teenager and had some meaningful artistic experiences with him during that period in my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So those were some beneficial things that I felt that happened to me during that period of bad experiences.
Speaker 1: Now, that's interesting that you, I mean, you went from Toronto [Ontario, Canada] where you all are doing this kind of bogus African dance you know as wild men from Borneo and stuff, and then you go to New York and you meet Asadata Dafora, and he's teaching you the real thing, so there's kind of a vindication there on some level.
Speaker 2: That it was, it was, and it also was very memorable and indelible impression on me as a young person to have the privilege of meeting him so early in my life, and so early in his career, because he lived for quite a long time.
Story_ID: 260753
Speaker 1: Did you ever hear of [Babatunde] Olatunji?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I used to take my dance company [Julian Swain Inner City Dance Theatre] to New York [New York] to study with Olatunji.
Speaker 2: Now, Olatunji is a--
Speaker 1: Olatunji was after Asadata [Dafora]; Asadata was like a forerunner of Olatunji, because Olatunji also set up a school, and was very well known and used to tour everywhere with his group, and he had a fantastic group of dancers.  In fact, they came here to Chicago [Illinois] quite a few times and performed.
Speaker 2: Right, Olatunji was in his heyday in the late '60s [1960s], I guess, to the '70s [1970s], but he performed all the way through, yeah.
Speaker 1: He was a fabulous drummer.
Speaker 2: He was a Nigerian or Yoruba.
Speaker 1: Yes, he was a Nigerian (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Basically, I know yeah.
Speaker 1: Because, you know, when I had my dance company, we went to Nigeria to represent the black people in the Midwestern part of the United States.
Speaker 2: Right, during FESTAC ['77; Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, Lagos, Nigeria]?
Speaker 1: For FESTAC (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 260754
Speaker 1: Let's get you back to when you're a young man; now, you're still sixteen and in New York [New York], and you're dancing, you're exposed to Asadata Dafora, and you're dancing with Cozy Cole's, I guess, ensemble?
Speaker 2: These were all people that I was fortunate enough to have some association with early in my life.
Speaker 1: Did they like kind of change your perspective on stuff when you finally came back to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't say they changed my perspective, I would say that they helped develop and nourish.  I was too young to have a perspective (laughter).  If I had a perspective, I wouldn't have been in New York in the first place, but I was young, adventurous and eager to learn, and it wound up being a very meaningful experience.  It was my first time away from home, I was my only--I was an only child.  I learned lots of survival skills while in was in New York.  It was difficult surviving, scrounging around, but we managed.
Speaker 1: Now did you, were you able to meet any of the members of the American Negro Theatre [New York, New York]?  They were, I think they were rehearsing down in the library [Harlem Library Little Theatre, New York, New York] there at [West] 135th [Street] and Lenox [Avenue]?
Speaker 2: No, not at that time, I did not meet any of those people.  I also didn't meet anyone in theater until much later in my life.  I was a--began to be aware and be--began to be mentally nourished by what was going on in theater because that was my first experience going to New York, and I went backwards and forth, many times in my youth for different reasons and stayed different lengths of time in New York, but no time do I feel was as hectic as that first time, 'cause the first time I was better informed.  I had more survival skills, I had usually, sense enough to go when I went back with some kind of work.
Speaker 1: So when--well, brought you back to Chicago?  How did you--how did the experience end?  How did you get back?
Speaker 2: How'd I get back to Chicago? I applied for compensation.  I had did factory work when I wasn't dancing.  I'd work in the factories and stuff, and I managed to get some compensation to get bus fare to get back home, and that is how I wound up getting back to Chicago--
Speaker 1: Well, I bet your mama [Sarah Davis Swain] was--
Speaker 2: --was from that compensation.
Speaker 1: I bet your mama was glad, was worried about you.
Speaker 2: She was thrilled, because she had no idea where I had been.  During the time when I had aspects of being able to come home is when I finally let her know where I was you know, but she never actually knew what a difficult period that had been for me, and with her as being as poor as she was, I never wrote home to beg her for money to send to me, 'cause she would've, if she was sending me any money, it would have been to come get a bus and come on home.
Story_ID: 260755
Speaker 1: Now, you're coming back, this is still 1940, I guess, right, or '41 [1941].  Yeah, well, what did you do when you got back to town; did you, now all the time you're sixteen, had you graduated from [Wendell Phillips] High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] yet?
Speaker 2: I obviously had graduated from high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't have to worry about going and finishing school?
Speaker 2: I didn't have to worry about going back to school, and I didn't go to college until I was an old man, by that I mean I had been in the business many years, and I didn't go to college until my mother [Sarah Davis Swain] passed, and when my mother passed, that freed me up to do whatever I wanted to with my life, and I decided that for me to go forward with it, would be best for me to go back to school.  So that's what started me at Malcolm X College [Chicago, Illinois], and at Malcolm X that's where I began to develop my dance company [Julian Swain Inner City Dance Theatre], and--
Speaker 1: Okay, I don't want to get you there you there yet, but let's go, I wanted to take you back to--we'll get to that part, but what did you do next when you got back from [sic. to] Chicago [Illinois], did you?
Speaker 2: When I got back--there's some gaps there.  Whatever it was, it was a period of nothingness.
Speaker 1: Did you still dance?
Speaker 2: There's nothing exciting for me to tell you.
Speaker 1: But did you still dance and perform?
Speaker 2: I probably went back to the factory or something like that, because intermittently, I would go get some kind of industrialized job.  I fluctuated between factories and offices. I went to school and studied typing; I worked in an office for a while as a clerk.  I did all kinds of things that I didn't like that were considered work, but I found 'em very uninteresting--worked at a lot of factories, but all of this was just a means to an end, and then I would begin to have another artistic period; something would happen to throw me back into the arts or doing something artistic again.
Speaker 1: Now, when we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Najwa [I], she said that she met you I think, you were teaching at Sammy Dyer's [Sammy Dyer School of Dance; Sammy Dyer School of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois] I think, I think, I believe unless I'm wrong.
Speaker 2: No, I met Najwa in Australia.
Speaker 1: Oh, you were already in Australia, okay.
Speaker 2: I was in Australia with Larry Steele, 'Smart Affairs,' and Larry Steele had taken his package to Australia, called the 'Harlem Blackbirds,' and we were there for two years and toured Australia and New Zealand, and we had one girl that quit and wanted to go home, and Larry Steele contacted Jimmy Payne [Sr.] and asked Jimmy, did he know of a girl that would be a replacement for the girl that was leaving the show, and Jimmy recommended and sent Arnell Pugh, who is Najwa, to Australia, and we were in Sydney [Australia] at the time, and Najwa came over, and she was just a young girl, just got out of school, she must've been eighteen, seventeen, eighteen, somewhere like that, but I met her in Australia, and we found out we only lived seven blocks from each other on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], but that is how I met Najwa.
Story_ID: 260756
Speaker 1: Between 1940, and at that time, that's about 1952 or so when she, when [HistoryMaker] Najwa [I] went to Australia, when you all were in Australia, right?  But, between that time, you said you were working different jobs and then you were--how did you?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I had up and--between there I had some other experiences with Larry Steele.
Speaker 1: Now, Larry Steele's a--he was an African American who ran the--
Speaker 2: Larry Steele was the major black touring show ['Smart Affairs'] in the United States, and I would have to say that was intercontinental, because he took his productions everywhere that people wanted a black show, and he managed to have a very glamorous production, but he had a problem because many of the bookers did not believe that his participants were black enough, and there really wasn't a black show to come along until Arthur Braggs began producing shows, because he began to hire black girls that Larry Steele would not have hired.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Larry Steele actually--
Speaker 2: 'Cause Larry Steele only hired mulattos.  You had to look a certain way, and many bookers would say, "Your show isn't black enough, because these girls look white as our girls."
Speaker 1: Now why do you suppose that he did that, you know, 'cause we hear that kind of thing--let me set it up like this, 'cause when you--they had a movie ['The Cotton Club'] a few years about the Cotton Club [New York, New York], and they were saying at the Cotton Club, they usually, they choose, because the clientele was mostly whites and lot of white men, they'd choose a lot of near-white looking girls for the show to appease that clientele, and then they'd maybe have like one dark girl clowning at the end or something like, but is that the reason why they used to do that in those days, or?
Speaker 2: But you see that used to be the expected fashion.  If you were gonna get up in front of an audience to perform, unless you're on the plantation out in the cotton field buck dancing, you would look more like the house person who was usually mulatto and the dark ones would be out in the field.
Speaker 1: And the ones who were mulatto were usually mulatto, because they're close to the house where the white people, the white man, lived.
Speaker 2: That is correct, and I needn't tell you why they were mulatto.
Speaker 1: No (laughter), we can guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you can guess that, but there really wasn't a black show that reveled in its blackness until Arthur Braggs, and Arthur Braggs' 'Idlewild Revue' made a wonderful contrast to Larry Steele's 'Smart Affairs' because Larry Steele only hired one type of girl, which meant they had to be very mulatto, very light complexion.  When it came down to the 'Idlewild Revue,' Larry--what prerequisite Larry Steele--Arthur Braggs required, especially his choreographers, was, not how you looked, but if you had talent.  They didn't care what you looked like.
Speaker 1: Okay, so talent was a criterion.
Speaker 2: Because with Braggs you might find some homely girls, but they'd be very talented.  The prerequisite wasn't that you be beautiful, unless you were a showgirl, and if you were a showgirl with Arthur Braggs, he enjoyed, he'd pick a mulatto, but he'd pick someone also dark to have a contrast between 'em, the persons, to show that you didn't have to be light to be attractive.
Speaker 1: Was Arthur Bragg himself dark or light?
Speaker 2: Arthur Braggs was black, very black.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you say he's no longer still, he's no longer alive?
Speaker 2: No, he's been dead a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he was outta Saginaw, Michigan?
Speaker 2: And he was out of Saginaw, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And one of his perfect girlfriends was [HistoryMaker] Della Reese[-Lett]; he loved him some Della Reese.
Story_ID: 260757
Speaker 1: When did you get involved with Larry Steele's show ['Smart Affairs']?
Speaker 2: When did I get involved with Larry Steele?  I kind of fluctuated continually backwards and forth between the two groups, because I worked some with Larry, I worked some with Arthur [Braggs].  I know that my experience with Arthur was--you were speaking about [HistoryMaker] Herman Roberts?
Speaker 1: Yeah Roberts show room?
Speaker 2: The Roberts [Show] Club [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Roberts' show room, right--
Speaker 2: Roberts' show lounge--
Speaker 1: Here in Chicago [Illinois], right.
Speaker 2: I had a long period when I was producing shows at Roberts' show lounge, and Arthur Braggs was a good friend of Herman Roberts, and he happened to come down and see one of the shows in which I had a chorus line and that made him ask me the next season would I bring a line of girls up to 'Idlewild [Revue'], which I did, and [HistoryMaker] Najwa [I] was one of the girls.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is to be in Arthur Braggs' show, in?
Speaker 2: Yes, this was to do a season with the 'Idlewild Revue,' and the 'Idlewild Revue' was similar to Larry Steele in the sense that each had a home base.  Club Harlem in Atlantic City [New Jersey] was Larry Steele's home base, the Paradise Club in Idlewild [Michigan] was Larry, was Arthur Braggs' home base and when I say their home base, each of these places had a summer season that began right after Memorial Day and lasted 'til Labor Day, and that is when they would have their big running season, and then each after the season which was Labor Day, the show would close, and you'd make an effort to take your show or package on the road and tour with it, and hopefully if you were lucky enough, you toured until it was time to go back into production again.
Story_ID: 260758
Speaker 1: So, we just skipped over something that we probably should go back and talk about it, and this is your emergence as a leader of the group, 'cause.
Speaker 2: My emergence as a leader of a group began very early, because--have you ever heard of Lon Fontaine or Bebo, is his name Lon Fontaine?  Well, he's a very famous, well known dancer, choreographer.  He came to the Beige Room at the Pershing Hotel [Chicago, Illinois] to do a show, and he did a wonderful show, and he had some very Larry Steele-looking girls.  He was in that genre where he hired very pretty mulatto girls, and he wanted some boys to go along with his girls, so he gave--called out an audition and Peter Green, myself, another guy named Kenneth [ph.] and another friend of ours named Bill Reid [ph.] went and auditioned for him.  Kenneth was a former Carmencita [Romero] dancer, and Bebo wound up hiring all four of us to go with his mulatto girls, and he put on a show, and the show only lasted for one run, which must've been six or eight weeks, and he got other work, and he had a dancing partner.  He had to leave and go to California, and so he wound up putting me in charge, which meant all of a sudden I had to begin to choreograph at least for the boys that was left, and I was the only one that had enough experience or choreographic skills to begin to assemble some dance routines, and so we began to form a dance group of males, and we called ourselves the Beige Beauts or Beige Beaus that matched the Beige Beauts that had been there for Lon Fontaine at the Beige Room and it was called the Beige Beauts and the Beige Beaus, because of it being the Beige Room, and then Larry Steele started using that terminology for his showgirls, dancing girls and dancing boys, but he took it from the Beige Room.
Speaker 1: Yeah, from Lon Fontaine's group, okay.
Speaker 2: From Lon Fontaine, but Lon Fontaine was Larry Steele's choreographer for many years.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what year was it that you all formed the Beige Beaus?
Speaker 2: I can't chronologically give you a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was--all I can say it was back there.
Speaker 1: Mid-'40s [1940s] maybe, mid-'40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: Now, what I did is chronologically, in the material that I bought to you, I took the pictures and put 'em in some kind of chronological order because they're pictures of the Beige Beaus, these boys and then as I graduated into the Co-Ops [Co-Op Trio], there's Co-Ops and that is how I chronologized those years, because I can't give you year-for-year when different things happened.
Story_ID: 260759
Speaker 1: I can say this, during the years when I was in Australia, that had to be like around '55 [1955]. In 1955, and that's when I met [HistoryMaker] Najwa [I].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Then, for many years, Najwa and I were together, because our relationship began to form, and she became one of my dancers, and then she became my dancing partner and from that time it kind of evolved from the Beige Beaus, then I had a period then, that I wasn't with Najwa, when I was a Co-Ops [Co-Op Trio], and that's when it was Peter Green, who was one of the Beige Beaus, Ann Henry, and myself and that's when we had that long period with Duke Ellington.
Speaker 2: Okay, so that was, so that was after you came back from Australia or that you were with Duke Ellington?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: That was--before?
Speaker 1: That was before.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 1: That was before.
Speaker 2: Now, how did that happen?  Now, this is a big deal, you know; Duke Ellington was a huge star, and I guess it would've been?
Speaker 1: You mean, how did what happen?
Speaker 2: How did you all, you know, I mean?
Speaker 1: Well, during the period when I was a Beige Beau, the Beige Beaus developed into the Co-Ops, and while, during a performance at the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois], Duke Ellington had an opportunity to see us and decided to take us on tour with him, and on that tour, we played every major opera house in the United States, and during that period he wrote a concerto for us called 'Monologue Duet and Threesome.'
Speaker 2: Okay, I mean, did you, people look back at that now, I mean, the average person, I guess that which I represent here (laughter), would say "Wow, Duke Ellington's orchestra!"  You all were--toured with Duke Ellington.  Was it as big a deal then, as it seems to be to me now, that you all were touring with Duke Ellington, or did you take it kinda of, "Oh well, it's another job?"
Speaker 1: Well, well the Co-Ops was like a pinnacle in my dance career because we became very visible and as famous as a young black group could become at that particular point in time.
Speaker 2: Okay, so that was, in terms of visibility and fame and all that, that's the biggest?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We had a very good period of visibility and acclaim.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we were very much acclaimed as a trio.
Speaker 2: Now, how did this--how did it, I mean how did that run end, and how did you know?
Speaker 1: I don't understand what you mean, "How'd that run end?"
Speaker 2: Well, how did that run with Duke Ellington end?  I mean, how, what made it come to an end, when were you all were touring with Duke Ellington?  What happened?
Speaker 1: The Co-Ops?  We split up like most groups do, like The Beatles do.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, that's what I--what's the story of that?
Speaker 1: I'm not gonna give you that story.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: It isn't a pleasant story, you know, it's like if you would've asked The Beatles, they would not give you specifics as to why they broke up, but they wound up broken up, breaking up, and the same with the Co-Ops.  We broke up, and it isn't a pleasant story, and it isn't something I wish to share out of respect to the other participants in the group because it wasn't a pleasant experience, and most break-ups aren't pleasant experiences, and I dare say no one will ever give you specifics as to why they break up.  All they will tell you is, "We broke up."
Story_ID: 260760
Speaker 1: It was after that, that you were in Larry Steele's show ['Smart Affairs'] in Australia right, in New Zealand, was that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, there were other things that happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: During the interim, the boy [Peter Green] and I stayed together for a long time and formed a duet act, and we were called Swain and Green, and we played a lot of places, the Apollo Theater [New York, New York], we did lots of things as a duet, but we never became as big as were as the Co-Ops [Co-Op Trio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The girl in the Co-Ops went on to replace [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt in 'New Faces [of 1952],' and then she became quite a stellar figure on her own much like the girl [Diana Ross] that came out of The Supremes.
Speaker 1: What was her name, the girl in the Co-Ops that?
Speaker 2: Ann Henry.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: The Co-Ops was Ann Henry, Peter Green and [HistoryMaker] Julian [Marvin] Swain.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right okay so you tour with Green, this Swain and Green?
Speaker 2: I toured with Swain and Green.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we worked together for quite a long time, and then we split up, and I'm not going through why we split up.
Speaker 1: I'm not gonna ask you (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so when--
Speaker 2: But by the time Swain and Green split up, that made me a single entity onto myself, which made me begin to function singularly and think singularly in regards to the development of self if I were going to continue in the business, and that is what I did, and that started me doing things like choreographing for [HistoryMaker] Herman Roberts, I began to have lines you know, lines of girls, formulating my own shows, and in my formulation of doing shows and having a line of girls, I would have experiences like doing shows with Count Basie at the Regal [Theater, Chicago, Illinois].  I know [HistoryMaker] Najwa [I] mentioned that to you, and going up to Idlewild [Michigan] and touring with the 'Idlewild Revue.'  I did lots of things with my line of girls.  I had a long period of where it was me and a line of girls, or a few boys.
Story_ID: 260761
Speaker 1: Now you performed with Josephine Baker at some point, where was that (unclear)?
Speaker 2: When I was with Josephine Baker--I have the program there--that was the Co-Ops [Co-Op Trio].  We were a fill-in act for her when she went back to St. Louis [Missouri].  She had been away for twenty-five years.  She had been born in St. Louis, and she decided to go back to St. Louis to shock 'em after her twenty-five years in Paris [France], and she had did quite a few stellar performances within the [United] States.  She played New York [New York], she played Chicago [Illinois]; I saw her and she got loads of PR [public relations], and she was fabulous.  She had a fabulous show, and she had couturiers in Paris, the best--she was like an ambassador, as far as dress was concerned, and she had a wardrobe to die for.  So we were her fill-in act when she went back to play St. Louis, because she went to do the Chase [Park Plaza] Hotel [St. Louis, Missouri] she was originally booked in, and they would not let any black people come to the performance.  She cancelled the engagement and took it to the Kiel Auditorium [St. Louis, Missouri] and got us as a fill-in, and we were the act that killed time for her to change costume.
Story_ID: 260762
Speaker 1: What are your personal reflections of Josephine Baker?  Do you have any?
Speaker 2: Well, it was such a special experience for me, because as I told you, for us to be selected to be the fill-in for her on her show that--her show, she did a two and half hour show, and as I said before she had couturiers from Paris [France] make her a wardrobe--there's never been a wardrobe like Josephine Baker's wardrobe--that traveled around the world with her, and she was such a very special person that, that was another highlight in my life was performing with her, because she was such a special, special person, and I performed with many of the greats and knew personally many of the greats, before and after they became great, but knowing Josephine's story, how she got to where she was, where she came from and all that was part of Josephine becoming Josephine Baker, made being with her a very, very special experience.
Speaker 1: She must've been, I would guess she was in her late forties, I guess, when she was--
Speaker 2: She was nearing the end of her career when she did those tours in the [United] States; she still gave the illusion of a very beautiful woman and she still--she always had wonderful legs, and she was like, well not Patti LaBelle, what's the woman that used to be, that's overseas now that was the great recording star?
Speaker 1: On?
Speaker 2: That's on 'Oprah' ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] so much, and she retired, she's married to a white guy.
Speaker 1: Oh, um?
Speaker 2: Tina Turner.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She had legs like Tina Turner, beautiful legs, and even when she became elderly, she still was able to wear high heels.  She had a Patti LaBelle look you know; she could wear high heels stylishly and have beautiful legs and there's nobody that's ever had the wardrobe that she had.
Speaker 1: Okay now what was her personality like, I mean from what people say--
Speaker 2: Well I cannot say one-on-one what her personal personality was like, because I did not have that kind of relationship with her.  I do know that, with her, performing with her she was very fond of us and what we lent to her show, you know, but that was, you know, one of the highlights in my life was performing with her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But to be able to say what she was like as a person--I did not spend that kind of time with her.  I do know that she wore the most memorable perfume of anyone or any woman that I'd ever been around.  She, wherever she went you could still smell that perfume.
Story_ID: 260763
Speaker 1: Now anybody else that you performed with that you, I mean, what were some of the other highlights of your life as a performer, in those days (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, it's kind of unfair to pick out and say that this one was the highlight or that one was the highlight, I've had so many experiences knowing people in their beginnings and seeing them develop, you know, and being in the company of so many like Sarah Vaughan or Carmen McRae, Dinah Washington, Nat [King] Cole, I worked with Nat Cole at the Regal [Theater, Chicago, Illinois]--and that is one of the people that you never heard an unpleasant word about.  He was obviously a very special kind of person, he went to Wendell Phillips [High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] where I graduated from, but he graduated from DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  He lived on [East] 44th [Street] and [South] Calumet [Avenue], and during his early years before he became a star, he used to play all around Chicago [Illinois] with his trio [King Cole Trio], and I had the pleasure of seeing him at the Ritz Lounge [Chicago, Illinois] on Oakwood Boulevard, and went there to see him many, many times, 'cause I always liked him, and this was during the period of his development.  Then when he became a star, I finally worked--did a show with him at the Regal Theater, and that is another highlight, but working with all of these wonderful performers were highlights whether it was Sarah, or Carmen or--Carmen used--started out as a pianist at the Archway Lounge [Chicago, Illinois] on 63rd [sic. 61st] Street, and she was originally married to a comedian by the name of George Kirby, and she used to come down to the Beige Room [Pershing Hotel, Chicago, Illinois] where we were the Beige Beaus and tinkle on the piano and began to sing, and we used to say, "Carmen, you need to sing girl, not play intermission piano," and we were very, felt very stimulating in her development and in her decision to not just be an intermission pianist and become a singer, and this was at her very, very beginning, and as she became well known, we still remained friends you know, because for a long time she and Sarah Vaughan were very, very good friends, but while working in Atlantic City [New Jersey] at Club Harlem, you know, you'd see all the stars.  You'd see Sammy Davis [Jr.]; his mother [Elvera Sanchez Davis] was a barmaid at Club Harlem, and he used to hang around.  He was still part of the Will Mastin Trio.  So I had the pleasure of, I won't say associating with, but I'll say being in the company of many of these wonderful performers during their development.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the other dancers around the world that you encountered, I mean did you, well Sammy Davis is one but, was Hines Brothers [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr. and Gregory Hines] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was Teddy Hale was one of the great tap dancers, and then there were of course were the Nicholas Brothers [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas and Harold Nicholas] and you know they, their training ground was also the Cotton Club [New York, New York].  They come out of the Cotton Club; Bill Bojangles Robinson from out of the Cotton Club.
Story_ID: 260764
Speaker 1: Did you pattern yourself after any particular dancer that you?
Speaker 2: No, I was always--I was never a tap, tap dancer.  I always aimed toward other forms of dance.  I'd tap some, I did rhythm, but that was not my shot.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how would you describe yourself as a performer in those days as, in terms of your strength, 'cause you started to sing at one point, too, and dancing as well right?
Speaker 2: Well, I started singing after my company [Julian Swain Inner City Dance Theatre], after my company disbanded, and it really didn't disband, it developed in the NAJWA Dance Corps.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's much later on, that's much later on the singing and--
Speaker 2: Well, now, what period are you speaking of, as far as my development is concerned?
Speaker 1: Well, I was talking about.--
Speaker 2: Because I still consider myself developing, I will be developing until the Lord takes me out.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  But I was referring I guess to the days when you were with, in those big shows and so forth, you know, what would you consider is your main strength as a performer, I guess, in those days?
Speaker 2: I would say that during my development, I decided to go back to school and study classic dance when it became possible for black people to study classic dance, because for many years you could not--black, they would not take blacks into a ballet school.  My ex-dancing partner, Peter Green, Jimmy Payne [Sr.] gave him his first ballet lessons, and when he went to take the lessons, he could only take the lessons after the school was closed, because they would not allow any blacks in a class with white children, and the only way they would give a black person a ballet class was as a special favor to someone who had stature like Jimmy Payne, and who Jimmy Payne brought and paid for the class, and the teacher's name was John Petrie [ph.], and he had a school on South Wabash [Avenue], but when he took Peter for the dance classes, it was always after the school was closed.
Speaker 1: It sounds incredible probably to a lot of people that are gonna hear this later on, that Chicago [Illinois] was ever like that, 'cause you're not talking about Mississippi or Alabama, you're talking about--
Speaker 2: No, we're talking about, we're talking about Chicago, but there are many people that speak about the differences in the prejudice in the South and the prejudice in Chicago.  How hypocritical that the prejudice in Chicago was, specifically, for so many years, because it was hidden in so many subtle kinds of ways.
Story_ID: 260765
Speaker 1: I finally went to Stone and Camryn [Stone-Camryn School of Ballet, Chicago, Illinois], and Stone and Camryn was a very high quality school of ballet, and I remained there for twenty years, and I provided many opportunities for other people coming to that school, because I brought [HistoryMaker] Najwa [I], I bought Thea Barnes who later went to the Dance Theatre of Harlem and to Martha Graham to Alvin Ailey and who is now the dance captain for 'The Lion King' in London [England], and her sister who I nourished is still with Najwa; her name is Cheryl [D.] Barnes, and I've took Carlton Smith to Stone and Camryn, Ife Butler [ph.], Robert Butler [ph.].  There's so many dancers that I provided scholarships for, and many times Stone and Camryn would ask me what I was going to do with the knowledge that I was gathering at Stone and Camryn, because they knew that I would never be able to teach it, because I taught at every major university from Barat College [Lake Forest, Illinois] to Columbia College [Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], to Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois], Truman [College, Chicago, Illinois], Malcolm X [College, Chicago, Illinois], any college that you could possibly think of, but never was ballet a subject that I was called on to teach, though I had many more years of training in ballet than I did in any other form of dance, but that was not the fashion, but my student, who is Cheryl Barnes and was with Najwa, is teaching at the Boitsov [Classical] Ballet School [Chicago, Illinois], so I feel like I provided her with an opportunity that I wouldn't, wasn't able to have when I was coming along as a teacher even in all the major places and meaningful places that I taught.  Ballet was not a subject that they would ask me to teach.
Story_ID: 260766
Speaker 1: Now, tell us how you started the dance company [Julian Swain Inner City Dance Theatre], now you started to tell us before, but this is?
Speaker 2: Well, during the interim of being with Larry Steele and Arthur Braggs, when I was no longer with them, I began to look around and all of the black dancers, male dancers that I had known no longer had a place in which to spotlight their talents, and I knew that there was no longer a developing ground for young black dancers, be they male or female, and by my going back to Malcolm X College [Chicago, Illinois] as a student and an adult, I had had experiences with [HistoryMaker] Phil Cohran.  Are you familiar with Phil?
Speaker 1: Yes, but.
Speaker 2: Have you did any interviews of him?
Speaker 1: We haven't interviewed him, but I'm very familiar with him, but tell us, tell us who Phil is so you'll, so that people will know him that watch this tape.
Speaker 2: Say that again?
Speaker 1: I want you to tell us who Phil is so people will know what you, what your, you know, your personal feelings.
Speaker 2: Well, Phil was the person that inspired me to develop a dance company, because Phil was the first black man that I had seen that could develop talent without money, which was a very unique experience to observe because Phil never really had any money, but he nurtured The Pharaohs, he had a theater he managed to get.
Speaker 1: The Afro-Arts Theater [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: The Afro-Arts Theater; he gave my company its first touring experiences; he showcased my company early in its development.  He is someone like Jimmy Payne [Sr.] that, I felt, that helped nourish my dream that I had at that time, and that was to develop a dance company, because there was nothing here in Chicago [Illinois] and there hadn't been since [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham had her beginnings here in Chicago.  There had been a long vacuum.  There had been some efforts, Carmencita [Romero] had made efforts, Jimmy Payne had made efforts, but there had been no major development of a dance company for a long time, and with the demise of the avenues in which black people developed--
Speaker 1: So, all those big clubs were kind of closing down.
Speaker 2: Yep, that is what I'm saying.
Speaker 1: The Regal [Theater, Chicago, Illinois], Club DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All those avenues for the development of talent were disappearing, and so--
Speaker 1: The music was changing, I mean, into the rock and roll and all that.
Speaker 2: There was a big change, and that is what gave me the idea of developing the company.
Story_ID: 260767
Speaker 1: I approached Arnell [Pugh], or [HistoryMaker] Najwa [I] as you call her, and told her what I envisioned, and she was very helpful and supportive in helping me to develop what my dream was at that time, and it was to develop a company, and so we really started kind of started from scratch, because we started over at Malcolm X College [Chicago, Illinois].  It was young teenagers, undisciplined; young teenagers with no sense of worth.  That, it was a very difficult process to inspire them to even want to dance and, in approaching them, especially the males, you could not approach them balletically [ph.], 'cause no black dancers was interested in no ballet.  They definitely wasn't putting on no tights, so you had to approach them with, first, something that highlighted their blackness and their maleness, and the only way you could do that was through some form of ethnic or African-oriented dance, and so that was my approach to the black male, because he would not have accepted anything classical that I would have offered him, and soon as they became and showed some kind of proficiency, it had a great influence on their personal development as far as self-evaluation is concerned and as far as their personal worth, because when we started dancing with these teenagers, it was like on the corner of alleys in the summer with [HistoryMaker] Phil Cohran on summer programs out of Malcolm X College, and they finally got good enough where they could get on the grass and dance, and then they finally progressed enough to where they could get on portable stages, and it took a long time before I could take them to a concert situation, and between that and taking them to Africa to represent the United States was a long period of development.
Speaker 2: Now you started the group [Julian Swain Inner City Dance Theatre] what about 1970, you said before, was it '70 [1970]?
Speaker 1: Well I started to, my mother [Sarah Davis Swain] died in '70 [1970], and I must've started at Malcolm around '71 [1971], and I must've been there '72 [1972], '73 [1973], somewhere like that, and that was the nucleus that provided me with the environment in which I could begin to think about developing a company, and it also gave me access to youth and provided me with the kind of seed money or subsistence where I could nourish this young talent.
Story_ID: 260768
Speaker 1: Now, you all [Julian Swain Inner City Dance Theatre] went to--along with a lot of Chicago [Illinois] dancers and performers--to FESTAC '77 [Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture] in Lagos, Nigeria in nineteen--yeah, so how was that experience, I mean?
Speaker 2: Well, that was another highlight, you know I've had many highlights in my life, but--starting from that embryo and getting to that point where we were able to go to FESTAC and represent the black people in the Midwestern part of the United States was a very, very meaningful experience and that was one of the experiences that I was given an award for, and because that was quite an accomplishment, and by the time we got to Africa, they were very accomplished, but these were, basically, these people that I had nurtured through this period of evolution.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story from that trip that stands out in your mind at all?
Speaker 2: A story from that trip?  The story from that trip is the story that led up to the trip.  The length of time that we were in Africa was only two weeks.  The entire FESTAC experience was a month.  On the first two weeks there were different groups there.  Kuumba [Theatre, Chicago, Illinois] was there the first two weeks, the last two weeks, we went over, because the United States afforded the passage, and on the plane that we were on to go to Lagos when we got there and landed, [HistoryMaker] Val [Gray Ward] got on the plane with Kuumba and flew back, because they had been there the first two weeks.  We were there the second two weeks, the last of the FESTAC festival, but it was a highlight and the experience and the time that we spent there and the humility of the people that we associated with, and we stayed in their first public housing complex, and it was called Festac Village [Festac Town, Lagos, Nigeria].  They built it specifically for FESTAC, and the housing of the people that were coming from the entire diaspora to participate in that festival, and that meant people from Cuba, from all over Africa from any of the places in the world where black people had migrated to as slaves and developed; Brazil.  There were people in the entire diaspora that participated in that festival and then that is what made it such a meaningful experience to come together with all these people that had been either taken from or migrated from Africa for different reasons to different parts of the world and that had gathered back in their homeland in different artistic disciplines to nourish and perform for each other.  It was a wonderful learning experience.
Story_ID: 260769
Speaker 1: Now after FESTAC ['77; Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, Lagos, Nigeria], now you were saying earlier that the--that your group, you made a transition to NAJWA after a while, after you, the group that was the Julian Swain [Inner City Dance Theatre] dancers became basically the NAJWA Dance Corps.
Speaker 2: Oh, well you know I had a school for a while in the Monadnock Building [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you know Monadnock is an architectural landmark.
Speaker 1: A historic--yeah, right.
Speaker 2: In the City [of Chicago, Illinois].  I had the penthouse for a long period of time, and it was during a period of time when I was very heavily funded by these government programs, and that plus the touring of my company afforded me opening this school.  So we had the penthouse in the Monadnock Building for a long time in which we had a school, and during that period when I had the school was the period in which [HistoryMaker] Najwa [I] began to formulate the NAJWA Dance Corps.  So, my having the school afforded her that beginning.  I also provided her with a space where she could rehearse, because the NAJWA Dance Corps is still comprised of a lot of former people that were in my company that are still in Najwa's company.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think Andrea [Vinson] and Brenda [Malika Moore] and some of those, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: I remember 'em, now, all the time--every time the Black Theater Alliance [African American Arts Alliance of Chicago] would have dance night--
Speaker 2: Cheryl [Lynn Bruce] was, definitely; in fact, Cheryl was one of those that went to Africa with me.
Speaker 1: Was Vela [ph.] with you, too?
Speaker 2: Vela, right; oh, so you know Vela?
Speaker 1: I know the whole group; I know them all, yes sir (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, all of them were originally from my company; Ife, Ife [ph.] and Nsilo [ph.], they went on that African trip with.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Morris Butler [ph.], I know.
Speaker 2: That's Ife.
Speaker 1: Right--
Speaker 2: Okay, right, so you know 'em all?  Okay, well that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) most of 'em anyway.
Speaker 2: Okay that is what is left of my company plus what Najwa's managed to develop during the interim.
Story_ID: 260770
Speaker 1: But you have continued to teach even in spite of--I don't think you've ever (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I am not--I am not teaching any longer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When did you stop?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the teaching sense.  What I'm doing is when I started making--I had an opportunity to do a musical show, it was called 'RSVP Broadway,' at the Theatre Building [Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and that started me in my transition to going back to my first love, which was singing, and finding a way to use my acting experiences.  So I went back to eta [Creative Arts Foundation, Chicago, Illinois] and did several meaningful shows which [HistoryMaker] Okoro [Harold Johnson] directed, but were my basic ideas that he formulated into a show.
Speaker 1: Okay 'The Regal Theater' is one right?
Speaker 2: No, not 'The Regal Theater.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Mood Indigo' was the first one.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry then, 'Mood Indigo.'
Speaker 2: And then I did,--what's the one I did with Matrice [Edge] that was about the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois]?  Can you think of the name, Edith [McCauley]?
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Stephen [Mack Jones], was it Stephen?
Speaker 2: No, I'm talking about the show I did with Okoro about [Club] DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois]?  At any rate Matrice Edge was in it, and it was a big hit.
Speaker 1: So that kind of revives some of the big show tunes and the numbers of the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], right?
Speaker 2: I can't hear you, Larry [Crowe].
Speaker 1: No, those shows revived sort of the routines from the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] that you would--that you'd?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's what I would say, because Okoro was most of the things that he wrote stories about were--had historical value and usually comprised the period from the Harlem Renaissance coming forward that really showcased the development of black artists.
Story_ID: 260771
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today, in general?
Speaker 2: What are my hopes and concerns for the African American community?  I hope they keep striving to become as educated as they can possibly can become and especially in regards to self, because I think that is very important in the development of self.  You know, there're many black people that refer to an educated fool?  Academics are of great value, but not if you're gonna try to be some something other than what you are, and I think that is what has been so important about [HistoryMaker] Jackie Taylor's development as a playwright; in my telling you that, to me, in watching her develop, she finally found herself, because she did everything, but when she finally began to center-ize herself on the development and experiences of black people is when she began, to me, emerge as a meaningful playwright, and she's got that down now to a science.  She's popping 'em out like (snapping), and we have so many wonderful experiences, and she's started with the theater in contributions of black artists, and that is what she has really showcased and focused on, and nobody else is writing about that, and she does such a good job, because she's lived that.
Story_ID: 260772
Speaker 1: When you look back on all the things that you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Is there any major thing that I would do differently?  I can't say that I--at this point in time in my life, I think everything I've done should've been done at that particular time, because every ending is a fresh beginning.  It is not an ending until your life ends.  You just go on to another aspect of your relationship to life, and your development as a human being, and that's what I said before is, I will continually develop until I die, I feel, and I will continually perform in some aspect of performing until the Lord takes me away, because that is what I enjoy, and that's why I brought you my CD and I'm hoping that in your, in the interview as you begin to edit it, that you might play some something from the CD, hopefully 'Here's to Life' and in that CD I pay tribute not to every great artist, but some that I felt were very meaningful like Fats Waller, Nat King Cole, Louis Armstrong, Duke Ellington, [HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown, Jr., Nina Simone, and Shirley Horn, and I close the CD with Shirley Horn's version of 'Here's to Life,' and I'm hoping that you might entwine that up in the interviews some kind of way.
Speaker 1: Well we don't really edit it but, edit it any, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, as I said I know you will edit--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, but those who are doing research, you know, using this--
Speaker 2: And you might be able to use some pictures, some music and that is one of the songs I think would be most fitting.
Story_ID: 260773
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done, like I said before, at this juncture, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I don't think my legacy is for me to say.  I think I will have to go, and other people will determine whatever that winds up being.  I know I have touched many, many people in my life, and I hope the majority of the time that I have touched people, that it has been in a very positive way and artistic.
Story_ID: 260774
Speaker 1: Your mother's [Sarah Davis Swain] your only family member.  Now did, how did she, what did, how did she react to your career in entertainment?  Did she expect you to do what you did, or?
Speaker 2: Well, the thing about it is--no, my mother was not a very inspirational person in the sense of encouraging me to do things.  She stimulated me very, very much in my youth, but she wasn't the kind to say, "You need to go to a dance class, I'll pay for a dance class."  She's never paid for a dance class.  She isn't the kind of black mother that would ever dream about that.  She was the kind of black mother to say, "You better get out here and get you a job," as most black mothers were about children that aspired to be artistic.  It was rare that they would be the kind of mother to encourage the child to go and take piano or voice or dance.  I was very surprised when I was hearing Abena's [HistoryMaker Abena Joan P. Brown] interview on the radio today.  She spoke about her mother encouraging her to go and take piano and that was very good, and I knew Abena's mother when she was living, and I never heard Abena say that, you know, so it's very interesting to say and hear that she had the kind of mother that would give her that encouragement to pay for her dance class or for piano lessons.
Speaker 1: Yes, that's--
Speaker 2: And there are a lot mothers that will do.
Speaker 1: That's Abena Joan Brown we're talking about?
Speaker 2: Right, we're talking Abena Joan Brown, and they're a lot of black mothers that would do that, but it's not ordinary, and it's very rare for a single mother that's taking care of a child to find it in their budget to afford them that kind of luxury.  You know it was all they could do to pay rent and put food on the table.
Story_ID: 260775
Speaker 1: Now is there anything that we haven't mentioned today that you think should be mentioned, before we ask our last question?
Speaker 2: I think you've done a very, very good job as an interviewer.  You have picked my brain, and I'm sorry about the questions that you have asked where I put my foot down and told you that, out of respect, that I couldn't say that or give you what you would've liked to have had at that point, because.
Speaker 1: Well, you still--this is your last chance if you want (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, this is my last chance, but again, I'd like to express how pleased I am that you finally got around to asking me to participate in your program of [The] HistoryMakers.  I feel quite honored and I'm glad you called me before I'm gone, and I'll be very pleased to get a copy of this DVD or video or whatever it is and as I said do think about including some of the pictures or a song from my CD.  I, that would please me very much, I also think it would help the total.
Speaker 1: Yes, well, we're gonna include the pictures at the end.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: We're gonna do those right after we finish.
Speaker 2: And whatever that you would like to have as far as those pictures are concerned, I would leave them with you and pick em' up later or whatever it is you would like to do?
Speaker 1: We shoot 'em at the end, but the last question we ask is similar to legacy, but it's a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I also think that, that's very similar to the question you just asked me in regard to my legacy.  I don't think I have any control over that.  I really think it has everything to do with how I've lived my life, through action and connection that I've had with others, because it has everything to do with not what I think it's about, what others think or have thought of me and my contribution to the arts, to them, to what have you, but I hope it's very positive, because you asked me earlier, what I thought about life, and I do feel that life is something that travels, and it's very similar to the ocean, that a human being has to get on the crest of the waves and go wherever the waves take them, and hopefully you ride those waves in as positive manner as possible.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you Sir.  Thank you for spending the time with us.
Speaker 2: Thank you
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: You've been a wonderful interviewer.
Speaker 1: Well, we've got a wonderful guest (laugher).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 260776
Speaker 1: The awards ceremonies.  The date was May 22nd, 2004, and I was given an award by Mayor Richard M. Daley, and that is his autographed picture that he presented me with.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Do we get a year?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 2004; May 22nd, 2004.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: All right, this is the next one.
Speaker 1: You blew that up real good.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead when you're ready sir.  Please give us a description [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Julian Marvin] Swain, tell us who's in this?
Speaker 1: That's my mother [Sarah Davis Swain] and myself at a performance at the Club DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois] when I was the Co-Op Trio, and she had come to see our performance.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Are you going to center-ize it?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Of course I will center-ize it.
Speaker 1: I would appreciate it.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Get that center-izing done (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  How's that?
Speaker 2: Right, that's during the period of my development when I was with Carmencita Romero who is a former [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham dancer.
Speaker 1: Did she live in the--?
Speaker 2: I can't give you a date.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):   No, can you even hit like the decade, like the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That was the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: That would have to be the early '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Great, now let's move right into this one now, tell us about this photo?
Speaker 1: This is a show that Lon Fontaine did at the Beige Room [Pershing Hotel, Chicago, Illinois] and that's me lying on the floor on the left, and that had to be, I would say, early '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Say that again for me?
Speaker 1: I say and that is the Beige Beaus and the Beige Beaus developed outta the picture that you just took.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good, next.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  We're starting to get in our groove now.
Speaker 1: That's another shot of the Beige Beaus, and I would say this was the period of my beginning as a dancer, and I must've been about nineteen years old, and that's me in the center.  I am the center dancer.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Magnificent, next.
INTERVIEWER: Okay, that's (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead Mr. Swain, we're ready.
Speaker 1: Can you enlarge that any?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well, enlarge it so his finger is out of it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You know what, if you start talking, I'll do that while you talk.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And then we'll get in the groove, and you'll be able to go through faster.
Speaker 1: Well, okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You watch, you start talking and watch and see.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, well that's a performance with Duke Ellington that we did at the Riviera nightclub [Club Riviera] in St. Louis [Missouri] with Duke Ellington.
Speaker 2: And you all were in the Co-Ops (unclear)?
Speaker 1: That's when I was with the Co-Ops, and the other name there is Olivette Miller, and her father [Flournoy Miller] was one of the playwrights of 'Shuffle Along' that was on Broadway.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Excellent.
Speaker 1: On the film, Edie [Edith McCauley].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead sir.
Speaker 2: And that is a shot of the Co-Ops while we were touring with Duke Ellington.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And give the names?
Speaker 2: That's Ann Henry, that's Peter Green and Julian Swain on the left.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, yep, center-ized and everything.
Speaker 2: Another shot of the Co-Ops.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Great, about what year was this?
Speaker 2: That same period.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Great, thanks everybody, and we're ready for the next one Mr. [Larry] Crowe.
Speaker 2: Okay, let's see okay, the Co-Ops too, this is a little better than that one over there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead Sir.
Speaker 2: That's another shot of the period when I was part of the trio called the Co-Ops, and we were touring with Duke Ellington.
Speaker 1: Those kinds of shots when you were at the Apollo Theater [New York, New York], and we were there with Duke Ellington.  That was the photographer that use tod do those kinds of shots for the different acts that performed at the Apollo Theater.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay all right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Is that you and Peter living in New York [New York]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, you tell us that.
Speaker 1: And that is Peter and I.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Living in New York.
Speaker 1: Right, living in New York.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  La vida loca, I'm just kidding (laughter) okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And that was in the later '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: I know what this is.
Speaker 1: That was the other one.
Speaker 2: You said, I'm not talking about the break up; that must be one of 'em.
Speaker 1: Now, don't you think I did that graciously?
Speaker 2: Right, well, it's graceful anyway (laughter).
Speaker 1: Grateful art, anyway, I thought it was--was it graceful (laughter)?
Speaker 2: The act that we did together and if you notice over in the corner there's a shot, a shadow of a girl and the entire act was about our relationship with this imaginary girl.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, I see that shadow; okay, next.
Speaker 2: Right, our reaction to that girl.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I can in this one your nose is really open in this one (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, my nose is really open.
Speaker 1: And we were at the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois], and we were performing with Count Basie and [HistoryMaker] Najwa [I] is one of the girls there.
Speaker 2: Which one is Najwa?
Speaker 1: Najwa is the one right there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What have we next?
Speaker 2: This candid shot.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And that's a picture with Larry Steele, and the famous actress who did the first 'Imitation of Life,' Louise Beavers, and the person above Louise Beavers was Jo Jo Adams, a very well know performer that performed at Club DeLisa, and of course that's me on the left.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.
Speaker 2: A nightclub where I had a line of girls of which Najwa is on my left and that was in Lakeside, Minnesota.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good then.
Speaker 2: We can tell who's the star on this one (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Moving right along.
Speaker 2: What a photographic effect there.
Speaker 1: And that is my line of girls that I had--that is my line of girls that I had with Count Basie at the Regal Theater.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, we are in a groove now, let's go.  How about this one?
Speaker 1: That's the same line of girls at the Regal Theater.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Now, that's a flyer from Australia.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  We're gonna make it--if you don't mind, go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's the cover of the program on the two years that I spent in Australia and New Zealand.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and this one?
Speaker 2: And that is the finale of that show that was in Australia, and that's Larry Steele front and center.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right down at the very, okay with the tux on and the mic in his hand, okay great, next.
Speaker 2: And that's when I was with--that's the program from the 'Harlem [in Havana] Revue' when I was with Leon Claxton's Royal American Shows.  That was the one famous carnival I was on.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and what about this one?
Speaker 2: That's from one of our dance performances.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Don't pull it yet Larry, give me one second here.
Speaker 2: That's the Julian Swain [Inner City] Dance Theatre.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: The program where I was with Josephine Baker in her homecoming program in St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Discussion.
Speaker 2: That one is me in 'RSVP Broadway' in the Theatre Building [Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Same time period?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That was--
Speaker 1: That was right after my company dissolved.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Like '79 [1979], '80 [1980]?
Speaker 1: About 1979.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Great, okay, '79 [1979] or '80 [1980], next?
Speaker 1: Right, that's another shot of the dance company Arnell [Pugh] and I, Najwa, doing the fire dance.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead, tell us about this one.
Speaker 1: And that's my shot that I use now.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Publicity photo?  Okay next.
Speaker 1: We're doing--
Speaker 2: That's Jalal [ph.] in the middle?
Speaker 1: Yeah--
