Story_ID: 467930
Speaker 1: --My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Tom Jefferson [Thomas Jefferson] and members of the Allstate [Allstate Corporation] staff.  Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Gale, G-A-L-E, Eugene Sayers, S as in Sam, S-A-Y-E-R-S [HistoryMaker Gale Sayers].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 30, 1943, Wichita, Kansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a CEO of a computer company, Sayers 40 [Sayers 40, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you have been a professional athlete?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: An All-Pro football player?
Speaker 2: A couple of times, yes.
Speaker 1: With the Chicago Bears.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  I just wanted to establish that.  And sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is 11/5/08 [November 5, 2008].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At--in the basement of Allstate Insurance Company.
Story_ID: 467931
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Fried chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Christmas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I do a lot of speaking, talking to some athletes.  And one of my favorite sayings is: as you prepare to play, you must prepare to quit.
Story_ID: 467932
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Roger W. Sayers] side of the family.  But we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Bernice, B-E-R-N-I-C-E [Bernice Ross Sayers].  Her maiden name was Ross, R-O-S-S, born in Gilmer, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know what year she was born?
Speaker 2: No, I do not.
Speaker 1: Is it Gilmore, M-O-R-E?
Speaker 2: G-I-L-M-O-R-E [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: G as in George, I-L.
Speaker 1: Texas, okay.  You say she was probably born in the '20s [1920s] or about that time, do you think?
Speaker 2: She--
Speaker 1: About how old was she when you were born?
Speaker 2: I'll just go in another direction.  In nineteen--she died in 1972 at sixty-one years of age.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you can figure that out.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I don't know a whole lot about my mother's side of the family.  I just know that she was born in Texas and moved to Wichita, Kansas.  My father and mother moved to Wichita to be with her sister and her husband.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, does her family have any stories of being from any other state?  Like, did they come to Texas from Tennessee or someplace else?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, but I'm pretty sure that my mother was born in Texas, and moved to Kansas and to Omaha, Nebraska.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was she raised in Gilmer?
Speaker 2: Yes.  When you say raised, are you saying from zero to fifteen, or zero to thirty?  I couldn't tell you that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, you know, she had three kids in Wichita, Kansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So she had already left Gilmer by time she had the children?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you know anything about your grandparents on her side?
Speaker 2: Very little.  She had a sister, like I said, in Wichita, Kansas, and had a niece there also.  But other than that, I don't know anything about them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did they--I mean did they do agricultural work for a living, or did they live in the city?
Speaker 2: No.  My dad worked at the Boeing [The Boeing Company] aircraft plant.
Speaker 1: Oh, I wasn't asking about your father yet.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: I'm still asking about your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: My mother, yeah, she did housework.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A maid.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And her people in Gilmer, were they doing, you know--?
Speaker 2: I do not know.  I have no idea of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she didn't talk a lot about growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, when we left there at eight years of age, she may have talked about it, but I cannot remember that, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  Well, did she have any stories from her side of the family that she passed down about what life was like when she was growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, as I said, you know, I do not remember, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But in Wichita, as I said, she was a maid, and she was a very good maid.  She did a very good job of--you know, she used to work at a hospital, and you know, cleaning rooms.  And that's really the only thing I can remember about her background.
Story_ID: 467933
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Roger Winfield Sayers [Roger W. Sayers], S-A-Y-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in Nicodemus, Kansas.  And he died at, he died at fifty-five.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he die before your mother [Bernice Ross Sayers]?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, Nicodemus, Kansas.  Now, that's an all-black town.
Speaker 2: All-black town, yes.
Speaker 1: It was founded by black people after the Civil War.  Did he have any stories about Nicodemus, and how his people got there?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we moved to Wichita [Kansas], and his dad got sick.  He was living in Speed, Kansas, and that was close to Nicodemus.  And his dad got sick and then we moved out to Speed, Kansas to be with him.  And so, we lived on the farm and went to a one-room schoolhouse, my brothers [Roger Sayers and Ron Sayers] and I.  And he died about two years after we moved out to be with him.  And then instead of going back to Wichita, Kansas, my dad had a brother in Omaha, Nebraska, and we decided to move to Omaha, Nebraska.  Because they had the packinghouses there, and that's where people were gravitating for jobs.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now is there--did your dad tell you any stories about growing up, or what it was like (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my dad--my dad's father, he was a lawyer out in Speed, Kansas and Nicodemus, in that area.
Speaker 1: What was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: I can get that information for you.
Speaker 1: That's okay, we can--you know.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, yeah, but I--
Speaker 1: That's important.  He was a lawyer?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, out in Speed, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, was he descended from some of the founders of Nicodemus?  Do you know at all?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: But it's a rarity to find a lawyer, you know, a black lawyer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know.
Speaker 1: --down in Kansas in those days.
Speaker 2: It was.  And he--
Speaker 1: Because a lot of places didn't have any.
Speaker 2: He was one of the first lawyers.  And I have some clips that he was a lawyer for Jesse James.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Because Kansas has a real complicated history during the Civil War.  With the fighting, John Brown (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Jesse James.
Speaker 2: Jayhawkers.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All those--Bloody Bill Anderson [William T. Anderson] and all that.  So, you do have some information.  You've got some--you said you've got some information at home about it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've got some stuff that I can send to you.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  But, so did your father grow up in Nicodemus?
Speaker 2: He grew in Nicodemus, yes.  He did until they--no, he--I'm sorry, no, he did not grow up in Nicodemus.  But he moved to Nebraska.  I mean--I'm sorry, he moved to Wichita--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --then, and worked as a car polisher, polishing cars and so forth.  And then when his dad got sick, we moved back.  We moved back, the family, to Nicodemus.  And when he died, we moved to Nebraska.
Story_ID: 467934
Speaker 1: Is there a story that your parents [Bernice Ross Sayers and Roger W. Sayers] tell about how they met?  Or do any of the relatives talk about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: No.  You know, I just think that when he left Nicodemus [Kansas] and moved to Wichita, Kansas, they met someplace, you know.  I don't know where they met.  I have no clue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, now when you think about--well, tell us something about your parents' personalities, and then tell us who you think you take after.  I mean, their personalities, their talents, their dispositions.
Speaker 2: Well, my daddy, he was a track man in high school.  And I think I take some of my speed after him.  But I was, I ran track and I was a long jumper in high school.  And I think my brother also takes his speed after him, because he was a world-class sprinter.  And we participated in all sports in grade school and high school, you know, ran track, football, basketball, and all those things.  And I think that's why we were pretty good athletes in collegiate football and in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you took some of the talent (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think so.
Speaker 1: --your father's talent.
Speaker 2: But I, you know, as far as personality, I probably take my mother's side of the family, you know.  And my other brothers would take my dad's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what kind of personality is that?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you know, she was very, very strict, you know.  And you know, when we got in trouble, you know, she was the one to take care of business.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  So you seem to be--now this is outside looking, you know, just looking in.  You seem to be a very disciplined kind of person.  I mean, is that something you take from your mother or your father?
Speaker 2: Well, probably from my dad, you know.  My dad, he was, like I said, a car polisher in Wichita, Kansas.  And you know, many times we would break something that he needed to use, and you know, he would get on us.  And he just, you know, "If it's not yours, you don't touch it," you know, and that type of attitude.  And that took us a long way when growing up.  Because a lot of times you see kids, you know, go through the house and pick up something and walk out the door, you know.  And we knew better.  Because if we did something like that, the person that we took it from would be on us, and when we got home we'd have another whipping to face.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now you've got one brother, we know.  But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two brothers.
Speaker 1: How many?  Okay, two brothers?
Speaker 2: Two brothers.
Speaker 1: What are their names?
Speaker 2: Roger [Roger Sayers] and Ronnie [Ron Sayers].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Roger is thirteen months older--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --than myself.  And Ronnie is five years younger than me.
Story_ID: 467935
Speaker 1: Can you tell us if you have an earliest childhood memory?  What's the first thing you remember, growing up in the family?
Speaker 2: I think I can remember us, you know, going to school in Wichita, Kansas and, you know, moving to Speed, Kansas for three years and my dad [Roger W. Sayers] taking care of his dad.  And my mother [Bernice Ross Sayers], after he died, my mother wanted to go back to Wichita.  And--
Speaker 1: No, I was just talking about as a little kid.  Is there any one thing that you remember first that you, that constitutes your first memory as a child?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember getting a whipping (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, you know, as I said, you know, we were, you know, two boys at the time.  My youngest brother [Ron Sayers] wasn't born at that time.  But we always did something that--you know--and my dad would come home and take an ironing cord or something and whip us.  But you know, it was a great lesson for us, you know.  And as I said, you know, there's things that you don't do, and we learned that very early in our life.  And you know, and even--we moved to Omaha, Nebraska, and I started playing football at eight years of age.  And so you know, that's where--you know, moving to Omaha, Nebraska, they had Pop Warner [Pop Warner Little Scholars, Inc.] football.  Wichita, Kansas did not have it.  So it really helped us, my brother [Roger Sayers] and I, I think become good athletes.
Story_ID: 467936
Speaker 1: You started school, though, in--?
Speaker 2: In grade school.
Speaker 1: In Speed?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In Speed, Kansas, or Wichita (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, in Wichita, Kansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And we moved to Speed.  And I want to say we went to the fourth grade in Speed, the fourth and fifth grade, and moved to Omaha, Nebraska after my dad [Roger W. Sayers] died.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: After his dad died.
Speaker 1: Can you remember your first school in Wichita?
Speaker 2: West Junior High [ph.], that's my--you know, not--you know, not an elementary school, it's a junior high school.  And that's where we went to school in Wichita.
Speaker 1: I mean you started like--in first grade you started?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  From out of the womb to five, I don't remember nothing about, you know, my--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, you started school when you were about five.  Did you go to kindergarten?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm asking what school did you start then?
Speaker 2: And again, I'll get all the information for you, because I don't know.
Speaker 1: That's okay if you don't remember.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't, I really don't.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember it.
Speaker 1: But you started in Wichita?
Speaker 2: Yes, we did.
Speaker 1: Then you went to Speed?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we went to--
Speaker 1: And you were about what?
Speaker 2: We--
Speaker 1: Six or--
Speaker 2: We moved to Omaha, Nebraska when I was eight years old.
Speaker 1: You were eight, yeah.
Speaker 2: And my brother [Roger Sayers] was a year older.  But, so we went to two years of school in Speed, Kansas.
Speaker 1: So you were like six and seven when you went to Speed (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And then you moved--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to--okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you like school when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I had no problem with that, you know.  I, you know, that's one thing we--my dad always taught us that you need to get an education.  And so, I didn't have a problem with school.  And I enjoyed sports more than school, but you know, I knew that I had to get me a good education.
Story_ID: 467937
Speaker 1: You were little, was religion important?  Or do you have any memories of church when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Church in Omaha, Nebraska, yes I do.  And it was very, very important, you know, to my family.  And you know, every Sunday, you know, we did go to church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, was it Baptist?
Speaker 2: Baptist.
Speaker 1: Baptist church, okay.  And do you know the name of the church?  Well, I keep asking the name of things.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's oral history.  I'm not trying to test you.
Speaker 2: No, I understand.  No, I know.  But we went to several churches in Omaha.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, I can see if I can get those names for you.  But I don't--I do not--my brother knows more than I do.  I do not remember the names of the church.
Speaker 1: Is it something that you all did every Sunday?
Speaker 2: Every Sunday, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, some people go every--two or three nights a week, and all that sort of thing.  But you didn't do that?
Speaker 2: No.  We didn't, we didn't do that.  But you know, church was very, very, important to, as I said, to my mom [Bernice Ross Sayers] and dad [Roger W. Sayers].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, well, what about--well, you say you started playing organized sports in Omaha?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now, we were in Omaha a couple of years ago.  And we just heard there are so many great black athletes in Omaha that came out around the time that you were--you know, or slightly--or afterwards.  But--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know.  So tell us about--what was the, what school did you go to in Omaha?  Was that--?
Speaker 2: I went to Howard Kennedy grade school [Howard Kennedy Elementary School] in Omaha.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Central High School [Omaha Central High School] in Omaha.
Speaker 1: Is that North Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska]?
Speaker 2: We lived in North Omaha.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Central High School was downtown Omaha.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was North Omaha like when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: It was ghetto.  It still is a ghetto.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, so that's where the blacks lived, on the north side of town at that time.  And it was a ghetto, but you know, people were poor, but we didn't know that we were poor because everybody else was in the same boat that we were in.  So, but, you know, we made it through.  And we learned how to play sports, and that helped us a great deal.
Story_ID: 467938
Speaker 1: What were some of the--now, we always ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, Cudahy Packing Company was in South Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska], but you could smell it in North Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska].  And that's where they cut up pigs and cows and different stuff, cut them up and skinned them, and shipped them out to other places around the country.  And this is why many African Americans, you know, migrated to Omaha [Nebraska], because they had a packinghouse there where they could get jobs.  And so, the smells of that.  There was a lot of smells of liquor.  Probably the worst thing that ever happened to my parents [Bernice Ross Sayers and Roger W. Sayers] is when they moved to Omaha, Nebraska.  It worked out good for the kids, because they had football, and that's where I learned how to play football.  But my father and mother, they moved to Omaha and couldn't find a job, and started drinking and things like that.  And it was some tough times.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So he didn't get, your father didn't get the kind of job in the packinghouse that he wanted?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  You know, he worked at the packinghouse, but you know, the money wasn't that great.  And he was always, you know, looking for other jobs to do.  Because it's cold in Lincoln [Nebraska] and in Omaha, Nebraska.  And so he needed coal for your fireplace and things like that, and then sometimes we didn't have that, but we made it through.
Story_ID: 467939
Speaker 1: So, you found an outlet in sports (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: You and your brothers [Roger Sayers and Ron Sayers] played a lot of sports?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, we did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think sports kept us, you know, it kept us going.  And we both played at Central High School [Omaha Central High School, Omaha, Nebraska].  And--
Speaker 1: I don't want to get you there yet.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Like, what did you, what was your favorite sport when you were a little kid?  Was it baseball or football, or--?
Speaker 2: I played them all, but football was my best, you know.  At eight years of age, I could do the things that I did at twenty-five years of age, you know.  And so, you know, I--every year I got better and better, yeah, in that game.  And I played basketball, I ran track, and things like that.  But my first love was football.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you find out about Pop Warner [Pop Warner Little Scholars, Inc.] football?  Did you--?
Speaker 2: Well, we lived--in North Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska] there was a, they had a Pop Warner league, and there was a team called Roberts Dairy, which was one of the teams in this Pop Warner league.  And the park was only about, you know, probably a mile from where we lived.  And one day my brother and I went by and saw them playing football.  And he said, you know, "We're Roberts Dairy, and we play Pop Warner."  And that's when we said, you know, "Can we play?"  And he said, "Yeah, you can play."  And that's where we got our start.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, how--you were eight then?
Speaker 2: Eight, yeah, seven or eight.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right.  How big were you when you were eight?
Speaker 2: The Pop--the Pop Warner weight limit was 110 pounds.  And so I was in that area, between 85 and 110 pounds.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And if you were over 110 pounds, you could not play in the league.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you play back, you know?
Speaker 2: I was a running back, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I've been a running back all my, most of my career.  And my brother, he was a running back, and he was faster than I was.  And, but, not any tougher, but he was faster.  And we took off from there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How did they choose you all?  Did they have you line up and race or something?  How did they determine who was going to be the running back, or who--?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, at the beginning of practice, you know, some of the coaches would be throwing balls to the players, and they asked you what did you want to be?  And I said, "I want to be a running back," you know.  And so they would throw basketballs to you, and they used to watch you run.  And, you know, you would line up with three or four more other kids and run thirty-five yards or forty yards down the field.  And they'd see what kind of speed you had, and things like that.  And so, that's the way we, that's the way they did it.  And you know, then we'd get--you know, they said, "Well, okay, we'll put you down as a running back."
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when we were coming in, you were talking about Jim Brown.  And at that time, were you aware of Jim Brown?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Well, he was out before--
Speaker 2: No, back then, he wasn't even--he wasn't even in Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York] at that time.
Speaker 1: Right.  We're talking about 19--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What?  Fifty--
Speaker 2: Yeah, '53 [1953].
Speaker 1: Fifty-three [1953]?
Speaker 2: Somewhere in there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Yeah, he wasn't in Syracuse.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: But, you know, so, but I didn't have any, you know, models to look at, you know.  I did my thing, and as I said, as I got bigger and stronger, I did it better.
Story_ID: 467940
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, that's a good point.  I mean there were no--were there any black athletes that you could look up to in football (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A lot of black athletes in Omaha, Nebraska.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, every year this is going--and this is in grade school also.  But we would always play the high school kids in a--we called it a turkey bowl, that was for Thanksgiving.  And we called--for Christmas we had a cold bowl.  And we would go out there, us, you know, at eleven, twelve, and thirteen, you know, playing high school kids.  And I think that's what made me a good athlete, and made the people that I played with good athletes.  Because we would always play kids, you know, three or four years older than we were.  And we would beat them, because we were that good.
Speaker 1: Who else was on your team?  Would we know any of the guys on your team?
Speaker 2: You probably wouldn't, no.  A couple people--my brother [Roger Sayers] was on the midget football team with me, and some people that, you know, you wouldn't know.  But you know, I know them, but you know, you wouldn't have any idea who they were.  And a lot of these people did not go on to play college football.
Speaker 1: Well, you can name some of them if you want to.  I mean, but--because this is seen by--
Speaker 2: Well, Vernon Brakefield, Ardell Gunn, you know, and [HistoryMaker] John Beasley played midget football with me also.  But, you know, they were black, but good, good, football players, you know, all the way through grade school and high school.  But Ardell Gunn and Vernon Brakefield, they made all-city teams, but didn't have the grades to go to college.  And so, it didn't happen for them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we were also talking before about how you had a Pop Warner [Pop Warner Little Scholars, Inc.] game where you scored seven touchdowns.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: I mean, that's a, you know, that's a lot of touchdowns for any kind of game.  I mean, tell us about that.  And how did people feel about it?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's--when I played midget football, we won--the years, the two years that I played on midget football, we won two state championships.  And my brother led us in the first championship, and then he went on to high school.  Then in the second championship, I led the team to a state championship.  And this one game that we played in, we were very, very good.  And this game I played in, I scored seven touchdowns.  But you know, I got a clipping of it at home.  And people, they knew of me.  And the Omaha World-Herald newspaper, they covered it very, very, well.  But, you know, after one week it's gone, you know.  And we beat them, one team, I think 46-10, or whatever it may be.  But you know, I didn't, I really didn't think anything of it.  I kept all my clippings, but I was trying to win football games, you know.  And I wasn't thinking about going to high school or going to college, or anything like that.  I just, I was out there doing what I did very, very, well.  And my brothers and I, we played very well.  We had a great team, midget football team, and it was fun.  And that just led to Central High School [Omaha Central High School, Omaha, Nebraska].
Story_ID: 467941
Speaker 1: When you were a kid playing football, midget football, were you actually thinking about how you were going to run the ball, and what you were going to do?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  You know, I had a God-given talent to play the game, you know.  And God, he blessed me with a talent.  And I never worked on a move, "Go up here and fake left, and go right, or spin," or whatever it may be.  I never worked on anything.  And I could see a player come up to me, and all I did was something like this, and I'm gone, you know.  And so, and the coach saw that, and he said, "This boy's going to be a pretty good football player, you know."  And, but I never worked on a move.  I got myself in shape, that's one thing I did.  I got myself in shape, I did a lot of running.  But as far as working on a move, or to get away from somebody, nothing at all.  My high school coach [Frank Smagacz], he said, "Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Sayers], you have enough talent that if you see one man, if you're facing one man, you should be able to beat him 100 percent of the time.  If you're facing two people, you should be able to beat them 75 percent of the time."  And he said that to me, and I believed him.  And unbeknownst to people or other tacklers coming to get me--that one person, he's dead.  You know, he didn't know it, but I knew it.  He had no chance, no chance to tackle me.  I'm looking over his shoulder with the other two people I'm trying to beat out, you know.  And that was in high school, you know.  And I could do a lot of things with the football in high school.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, Central High School [Omaha Central High School, Omaha, Nebraska], is that a high school for all of the--was that the only high school in Omaha [Nebraska]?
Speaker 2: No, no.  You had Central High School, you got South High School [Omaha South High School; Omaha South High Magnet School, Omaha, Nebraska], and you got Omaha Tech [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Central was a college preparatory school, and my brothers [Roger Sayers and Ron Sayers] and I went there.  And that's where I played football, there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were a pretty good student I guess then?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wasn't.  No, I was not a good student.  Because, you know, I thought about football and basketball and baseball and other things too much, you know.  But I did go to college [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas], and I got two degrees from college, but I was not a good student coming in.
Speaker 1: So you didn't spend a lot of time on schoolwork, and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you had to spend some time, because if I didn't, I wouldn't have been eligible to play.  So you had to spend some time, but I spent more time on, you know, getting in shape for football, or running track, and things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: No (laughter), not really.  I did just enough to get by, you know.  And that's, I hate to say that.  But I did just enough to get by.  And so, and then I just kept on rolling, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I've noticed this just since I've been here that you like to keep moving, and you don't like to be in one place too long.  I mean, you're probably ready to jump now and be someplace else.  But, so I'm--when you were in school, did you have a hard time sitting still?
Speaker 2: No, not--yeah, I knew that we had to go to school, and I knew that our classes were forty minutes long.  You know, so, you know, I, you know, I worked it out.  And, you know, my coach was, my high school coach, he was the math teacher.  And my wrestling coach was the history teacher.  And the wrestling coach was the backfield coach on the football team, he was a history teacher.  And so I did what I had to do, you know.  And did they give me some grades?  Probably did, you know.  But I was a football player, I was a track man, and that's what I wanted to do.  When I left Omaha Central, I made all-state in my junior year and all-state in my senior year.  And--
Speaker 1: How did the team do?
Speaker 2: We won both state championships, two years in a row.
Story_ID: 467942
Speaker 1: People wanted me to go to the University of Nebraska [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska], you know, and I decided not to go there.  I decided to go to the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas].
Speaker 2: Now when you were in high school--
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Was there any male who you would consider a mentor?  Who was your chief advisor?  Was it your father [Roger W. Sayers], or coach, or who (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, my dad has always been a great advisor for me.  Again, you know, my football coach [Frank Smagacz] at Central High School [Omaha Central High School, Omaha, Nebraska], he was saying "Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Sayers], you know, if you want to go to college, you need to get your grades better.  You know, you're going to have to do some things better, because you will not be able to get in."  And I kind of started studying a little bit harder to do that, but it was too late.  For the most part, it was too late.  And when I left Central High School, I was recruited by 125 schools, all the Big Ten [Big Ten Conference], all the Big Eight [Big Eight Conference].
Speaker 2: You were still in school when they were recruiting you, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah, I was still in school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All the Big Ten and all the Big Eight.  Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana], Southern Cal [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], a lot of people.  But I chose to go to Kansas.  And a lot of people, a lot of people say, "Gale, you know, you can't--."  A lot of people, because I wasn't going to Nebraska, they said "He's not going to make it at Kansas.  You know, he's not smart enough, you know."  And my dad, you know, he said four things to me--three things to me.  You know, he was sick at the time.  He said--you know, I told him, "I'm going to the University of Kansas."  And he said he knew that people were saying that I wasn't smart enough.  He said, "But," he said, "you are good enough."  You know, and that's all I needed, was somebody who had belief in me that I was good enough to go there and get my grades and play football.  I knew I could play football, but that I could go there and not flunk out.  And so that's all I needed was somebody to believe in me.  And I went to the University of Kansas, and everything else is history.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now before we get you to the University of Kansas, can you tell us about--can you remember your best game in high school?  Or is there any particular game that stands out?
Speaker 1: You know, it wasn't any particular game.  But we had some decent high schools in Omaha [Nebraska].  We killed people.  You know, and when I say that--you know, we had a--we had some people on our team that--I went to a Jewish high school.  It was more Jewish than African American.  But, you know, we hurt people.  I mean, we were that good.  You know, and they couldn't touch me, they couldn't touch my brother [Roger Sayers].  And so, you know, four years of playing ball there, you know, I was pretty good at it.
Speaker 2: Now, did you ever, were you ever hurt in high school?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Now, you're not the biggest person in the world.  You're--when we meet (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, when I was--
Speaker 2: --many athletes, sometimes they're big hulking people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they--you know--
Speaker 2: You're not a real big guy.  So--
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I left Central High School weighing 185 pounds, okay.  But again, I had great talent, I was blessed.  And I had no problem with playing high school football.
Speaker 2: So you never got injured?
Speaker 1: No, never had an injury.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Never got injured in college football.
Story_ID: 467943
Speaker 1: So you basically went to the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] because of the challenge of being able to keep up with the academics (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I, no.  I went to the University of Kansas for a couple of reasons.  Number one, they, the University of Nebraska [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska] didn't have fraternities.  Kappas [Kappa Alphi Psi Fraternity], Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity]--
Speaker 1: Oh, the black fraternities.
Speaker 2: The black fraternities, they didn't have any of those.  KU had that, okay.  You probably know the name Curtis McClinton.  He was there.  John Hadl was there.  They won the Big Eight [Big Eight Conference] championship in my junior year, so they had a decent football team, you know.  So, I felt going to Kansas would have been better than going to Nebraska, who had bad football teams at the time.  I could maybe get noticed a little faster than, say, going to a school that didn't win ballgames.  But, so that's why I went there.  And my freshman year at the university, the freshmen only played two ballgames.  And I scored six touchdowns in the two games.  And you know, then my sophomore year, I started as a sophomore, as a running back.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, in those days, they played the T, didn't they?
Speaker 2: Did what?
Speaker 1: Did you have the T formation?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you had the T formation.
Speaker 1: With two halfbacks and a fullback.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you had that.  And some people had me, one of my coaches had me split out, and I played a little wide receiver and things like that.  But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Called the flanker?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.  But, no, I played the whole field.  I ran punt returns and kickoff returns, and things like that, like I did in pro ball.  But, you know, we didn't have--the time that I was at Kansas, we did not have real good teams.  But, you know, I made an impact on my team, and I was a two-time All-American at the University of Kansas.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a consensus All-American.  Now, you ran back a lot of punts and kickoffs--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and touchdowns?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Right.  Did you set any kind of records with--?
Speaker 2: Well, I probably set some records with Kansas.  They didn't, we really didn't really keep the records.  But they probably got some things in there that I did.  I ran from scrimmage ninety-nine yards against Nebraska in my junior year, and that's still a record in college.  And, but in pro ball, you know, I got a lot of records for kickoffs and punt returns.
Story_ID: 467944
Speaker 1: How fast were you in those days?  How fast did you run the 100-yard dash?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  You know, I ran track and I was a long jumper.  But I didn't, you know, I don't, I don't believe in 40-yard dash times or 100-yard dash times, because you don't play football in a straight line.  You don't play football in a straight line, and so, you know, when somebody asks me, what did you do the forty in, I tell them 2.9 [seconds].  It doesn't make any difference what you do in the 40, because you're always cutting or doing something.  And so, you know, but anyway I had a good speed, I'll put it that way.  I had good speed in a uniform, and other things just took care of themselves.
Speaker 1: Well, we know that's true.  But do you think today there's too much emphasis at the combines they hold?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Based on how fast the guy runs the 40-yard dash?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do.  I really believe so.  Tell me this.  Why do you time a lineman weighing 300 or 280 or 290 or 210 [pounds]?  Why do you time him in a 40-yard dash time when his first step, he's hitting somebody?  His first step as a lineman off the, you know, off the play, he is hitting somebody.  So, why are you timing him for a 40-yard dash time?  I've never seen a lineman run forty yards down the field, never.  And they're timing him for a 40-yard dash?  I don't understand it.  That devious tackle, he's got to hit him; he's got to block him.  So, why be timing him in a 40-yard dash?  Why do you time a defensive back in a 40-yard dash when he's running backwards on all his plays?  He's running backwards.  He's not running forward, he's running backwards to cover a wide receiver.  So, I don't know.  I say what's, what is the use of a 40-yard dash time?  I haven't the slightest idea.  You know, I didn't run 40-yard dashes when I played.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't run it.  Because, again, I'm doing something.  I'm moving to the left, I'm cutting back to the right, you know.  I ran forty yards straight on a kickoff return, but when I see people saying, "Oh, this fellow's 380 and he ran a 4.5."  So what?  He's hitting somebody when he gets off the field, off the, you know, off the scrimmage line, you know.
Speaker 1: Now in those days, had they started using like weight machines in the training room and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: They had them for lineman, offense and defense.  The skilled players--the running backs, wide receivers, the quarterbacks, did not use them.  And that's probably why I hurt my knee.  Because the way I ran, my knees were very, very, loose, the way I ran.  I should have been lifting weights every day.  Every day, I should have been lifting weights.  But they said, "Hey, if you lift weights, you're going to build yourself up, and you can't run.  You won't be as fast."  Hey, well, it's been proven that weights can build speed.  They can build quickness.  But back then, hey, running backs, wide receivers, "Don't lift them weights.  You know, you're going to be getting all tied up, and you won't be able to play.  You'll lose your speed."  And I should have been lifting weights.  Because the way I ran, my knees were so loose.  And it hurt me.  I got hurt, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know they used to say that if you lift too many weights, you get muscle-bound (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: I think that was the term they used, muscle-bound.
Speaker 2: But it's been proven.  And they've got exercises that will build speed, build quickness, and build strength also.
Story_ID: 467945
Speaker 1: So, you were at Kansas [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Who else is in the backfield with you in Kansas?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: We had--(laughter) I don't want to say nobody.  (Laughter) But I was the running back.  I was the running back, and we had a fellow playing fullback.  Oh, boy--
Speaker 1: Would he primarily block for you?
Speaker 2: Block, right.  Yeah, primarily block for me, yes.  And, you know, I was the main man back there.  You know, I was running the football back then, you know.  A fellow named Ken Coleman was the fullback, and he would block for me, and he would get the ball a couple of times a game.  But for the most part, it was all me at the University of Kansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is 19--what, sixty--
Speaker 2: Nineteen--I went to school from '61 [1961] to '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961] to '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: The University of Kansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you said the team overall wasn't very good?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't real good, you know.  And I had good years with the team, no question about it, you know.  But it wasn't that good.  We never went to a championship game, we never went to a bowl game, you know.  And, but, you know, after my two years as a college All-American, you know, I went to the East-West Shrine Game, I went to a bowl game in New York, and different things like that.
Speaker 1: I remember a highlight reel before one of those all-star games where they showed you being, you were tackled low by somebody.  And you actually turned a flip, landed on your feet, and kept running.  Do you remember that?
Speaker 2: No, I don't (laughter).
Speaker 1: It was like, it was the craziest thing I've ever seen.  But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  But, no, but, you know, but when the draft came up, you know, I got drafted by the 49ers [San Francisco 49ers].  No, I got drafted by the Chicago Bears and by the Kansas City Chiefs with the old AFL [American Football League] as the number one draft choice.  So--
Speaker 1: Let me go back to school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --and ask some other kind of questions about the University of Kansas.  Now, when you were--I mean how were you treated as a student at the University of Kansas?
Speaker 2: Very good.  You know, the University of Kansas had probably 150 blacks at that time going to school there.  They had a young man there--an old--not a young man, an older fellow, older than I am, named Jesse Milan.  And he would take the black students under his arm and, you know, we'd work with him as far as schoolwork, and different things like that.  And so he was a great help for a lot of people, including me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you know, there's a movie out now about Ernie Davis' experiences at Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York].  And they touch a little bit about Jim Brown's experiences.  So the University of Kansas was basically, mostly a white campus?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: It's 145 students out of how many?  What, about four or five thousand?
Speaker 2: At that time, it was probably fifteen thousand.
Speaker 1: Fifteen thousand?
Speaker 2: Yeah, somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: So, you were really a minority?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, you were.  Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: On campus.
Speaker 2: But again, I didn't feel any racism on that campus, my senior year--my junior year.  And the only time I felt it--no, I won't put it that way.  But, I was running track.  We went to Abilene Christian College [Abilene Christian University, Abilene, Texas] for a track meet.  I got to Abilene, Texas, they wouldn't let us stay in the hotel.  We had to go out of town and stay in a hotel, an awful hotel.  And that was the first time, the first time ever that I, you know, felt racism in college, going to Abilene Christian College for a track meet, and we could not stay downtown in the hotel.  We had to go outside of town.  And so, you know, the coach took everybody out, and we ran our track meet and got out of there.
Speaker 1: Now, did you play any of the southern schools when you were at Kansas?
Speaker 2: We were in the Big Eight.  And the Big Eight Conference, you're talking about Nebraska [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska], Missouri [University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri], Colorado [University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado], Iowa State [Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa], Kansas--
Speaker 1: Kansas State [Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas], too?
Speaker 2: Kansas State, yeah.  And that was the Big Eight at that time.  Now it's the Big 12 [Big 12 Conference].  They got in, you know, Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], and Texas Tech [Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas], and people like that.  But, again, I didn't face any--I never heard anything from my freshman year on up.  Somebody called--one time at Oklahoma State [Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma] somebody used the N-word on me.  But other than that, I never heard anything else.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you never experienced any intentional dirty playing on the part of different players (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I don't think so, you know.  I really don't, you know.  Because again, the way I ran, you know, they may grab a leg, they may grab my jersey and pull me down and things like that, you know.  But there wasn't nothing, you know, real outrageous, it really wasn't.
Story_ID: 467946
Speaker 1: So by the time you were in college [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas], did you have like, had you like thought about how you were going to approach the situation when you'd run?  Or was it still just basically talent?
Speaker 2: Yes, God-given talent, you know.  I never thought about if somebody's coming here, or if somebody's coming here, or what I'm going to do.  I did it.  And you know, I'm going that way, and they're there back that way someplace laying down.  But--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I just--you know, again, I had a talent to play the game.  That's all I can tell you.  I had a great talent, and it was a gift.  And once you get into pro football, you know, I had the same gift.  But He took it away after sixty-eight ballgames.  That's only about four and a half years of playing time.  It's like, you're through.  And He took it away, and I had to leave.  I had to get out of the game.
Speaker 1: Now, when--okay, when you were drafted, you said you had like two teams (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Kansas City [Kansas City Chiefs] and the Chicago Bears.
Speaker 2: Right, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: The Chicago Bears was one of the oldest franchises--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in the NFL [National Football League].  The Kansas Chiefs were new, basically--
Speaker 2: The old AFL [American Football League].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But in Kansas, though.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Your home, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Your home state.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: The Bears were still coached by George Halas.
Speaker 2: Yes, Halas, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Papa Bear, who started the team.
Speaker 2: Yep, who started the league.
Speaker 1: He started the league, right.  So, how did you make your decision?  Was it based on--?
Speaker 2: Very simple, well, I say it wasn't real simple--it was--yeah, I think it was very simple.  Lamar Hunt and all those people from Kansas City, they--two leagues.  You know, I thought I was going to make a whole lot of money back then.  They had two leagues, and they'd only been in existence--the Kansas City Chiefs and all those, the Buffalo Bills and those people, about three years, you know.  Should I go there?  I don't know if the league is going to be good or what?  Or should I go over to an established league?  The Bears offered me $25,000 a year to play football.  Okay, good money, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, put that in perspective.
Speaker 2: You can't.
Speaker 1: I mean--
Speaker 2: You can't.
Speaker 1: In those days, an average guy making a salary is making about $4,000 a year.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Yeah, $25,000 was good, no question about it.  You know, but when you're talking about, you know, talking about the people of today's era--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Forget it.
Speaker 1: It doesn't compare, no.
Speaker 2: But anyway, they offered me $25,000 a year.  Lamar Hunt and his billions he had back then, billions of dollars, he offered me $27,500.  I said "Well, you--," and then I just, I saw that, and I said "Hey."  I felt at the time, that in order to better myself as a football player, I had to play against the best.  And I felt at that time the best football was being played in the National Football League.  If he would have offered me $50,000 a year, I probably would have been with them.  But he offered me $27,500, and the Bears offered me $25,000.  So, hey, it wasn't--when he didn't offer me more money than that, it was a done deal.  Because I wanted to play against the best people who played the game, and at that time it was being played in the NFL.  And the Green Bay Packers proved that the first two Super Bowls in 1966 and 1967.  They won.  They beat the Kansas City Chiefs and they beat the Oakland Raiders.  And so, they proved that we had the best football teams--the best football (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) League, yeah.
Speaker 2: --at that time in the league at that time, you know.  And so, I chose to go to the Chicago Bears.  I scored twenty-two touchdowns and set an NFL record (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now wait a minute, I want--
Story_ID: 467947
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't want to get you too far out.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: You're moving really fast, like you do on the field.  But, but, okay, Chicago Bears.  I'm just trying to put this in a historical perspective.  In 1963, they won the NFL [National Football League] championship (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, they did, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And you were cognizant of that, you knew about that, right?
Speaker 2: I was, but I didn't know the players or anything like that, you know.  I didn't know anything about it.  Because again, I wasn't really watching a whole lot of pro football.
Speaker 1: You didn't even watch football?
Speaker 2: Because I had a black and white TV, you know, and it was small, you know.  And so, I didn't watch a lot of that kind of stuff.  But you know, I'm glad I went to the Bears, mainly because of George Halas.  George Halas is one of the mentors that we're going to talk about (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, they were two years away from a championship--
Speaker 2: Yes, they were.
Speaker 1: --when you started?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And Willie Galimore, and you probably know the name, Willie Galimore.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Little Willie Galimore, right.
Speaker 2: He got killed in an automobile accident going back to training camp.
Speaker 1: He was an exciting player, a kickoff returner.
Speaker 2: That's, that's why they drafted me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, '65 [1965] you join the Bears.  They've got a big gap, because Galimore's not there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and John Farrington [Bo Farrington] wasn't there.
Speaker 1: A real exciting player.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And so, did they--now you were drafted number four I think, right?
Speaker 2: I was drafted number one.
Speaker 1: Number one?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Bears had, the Bears had three first-round draft choices.  When you say number four, yeah, San Francisco [San Francisco 49ers] drafted was before the Bears.  And the New York Giants?  Yeah, the New York Giants drafted second (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now you were a first round draft choice, of course, of the Bears?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but the Bears drafted me in the third position.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And they had three first-round draft choices.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they took Dick Butkus, and myself, and a fellow named Steve DeLong.
Speaker 1: Now, that was a pretty good draft.
Speaker 2: It was, uh-huh.  But Steve DeLong, he went to the San Diego Chargers.
Speaker 1: I think he was lineman of the year.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, something like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: And Butkus is a legend.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.
Speaker 1: And of course, you.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, well, well, tell us about George Halas.  What was your relationship with George Halas?
Speaker 2: Well, before I got drafted, not before I got drafted--but I was playing in the all-star game.  Back then you had an all-star game where the pro championship team would play an all-star college team.  And it was called the Armed Forces game [sic. Chicago Charities College All-Star Game].  And so--
Speaker 1: The college all-star game?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, uh-huh.  And so--
Speaker 1: Held at Soldier Field [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Soldier Field, right.
Speaker 1: Every--
Speaker 2: So, we played the Cleveland Browns that day.  And in practice that week, I hurt my knee a little bit.  It wasn't a real bad injury, not really, but I hurt it.  But I did hurt it, and I told Otto Graham who was the coach.  I said, "Coach, you know, I hurt my knee.  Could I take a couple of days off from practice?"  And he said, "You know, you don't look like you're hurt to me."  And he said, "Well, if you take a couple of days off, you can't play."  And so I didn't play in the game, okay.  I go, you know, after the game I go down to the training camp in Rensselaer, Indiana, and talked to coach.  And the coach said, "Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Sayers], you know, I know about your problems at the all-star game.  I'm going to judge you by what you do from today on.  That's all I need to do.  That's all."  I said, I'm happy.
Story_ID: 467948
Speaker 1: We were talking about George Halas, and your relationship with George Halas.
Speaker 2: Well, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right after the college all-star game [Chicago Charities College All-Star Game], you went to Rensselaer, Indiana--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --where they had--
Speaker 2: Yes, training camp.
Speaker 1: Training camp, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And then Mr. Halas said, "Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Sayers], I heard about your incident with Otto Graham."  And he said, "I'm going to judge you by what you do today from here on out."  And so, that's all I needed to know.  And some of them, when I went out to practice, some of the players, you know, they kind of backed off me a little bit.  But when they saw me run, they knew that they had something special too, you know.  And so my first exhibition game as a rookie, I ran back a kickoff return for ninety-six yards, I ran back a punt return for sixty-five yards, and I threw a fifty yard touchdown pass.  And so, they knew they had something special.  I mean the coach knew he had something special also.
Speaker 1: Now, how did they come across?  Now, this is the first time you revealed anything about throwing passes?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, is this something that you--?
Speaker 2: I did throw probably five in my career.  And I think I probably completed three for touchdowns.
Speaker 1: Now, is that a kind of a regular trick play that the Bears [Chicago Bears] used?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Because I remember Walter Payton used to throw passes, too.  And--
Speaker 2: No.  It was a good play, you know.  Usually when you, when a running back goes out to the left, you know, and the quarterback throws the ball to him, you know, he's a threat to throw a pass.  But you know, if you're going around to the left and you get a handoff from the quarterback, you know, most people say "Well, Gale, he's going to run the football."  And of all sudden that wide receiver, he makes a dip move here and cuts back to the goal line, and hey, he's open all the time.  But now you very seldom see that done anymore.  But they still do it a little bit, but we did it a lot back then.
Speaker 1: I think Kansas City [Kansas City Chiefs] did it last week, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: For a touchdown.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So was this something that came out of the Bears--I mean is this a regular feature the Bears offense had?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was.  No, it was, you know.  And I did some throwing in college [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas]; not a whole lot, but I could throw the football.  But you know, when I was playing my rookie year with the Bears, it was in New York.  And I went back and they threw a pitch to me, and I faked the pass, and everybody dropped back and I ran in for a touchdown.
Story_ID: 467949
Speaker 1: What was the team like?  I mean was it a friendly team?  Or was it an easy--I mean were the other players easy to get along with?
Speaker 2: It was, yeah.  We were there--again, we were there for one mission, to win a championship, simple as that.  You know, black, white, blue, yellow--I don't care who you are, you were there to win a championship.  And we just--we didn't have a lot of, you know, racism.  I never heard words spoke about racism on the Chicago Bears team.  But the year I came up, and Dick Butkus was on that same team.  We had a--our first year we went 9-5.  We lost our first two ballgames and won the next, you know, the next ten ballgames--but no, nine ballgames.  But the players we had at that time were old players.  They won the championship in 1963.  But these players were--I mean and when I say old, I mean old.  Doug Atkins, he probably was forty years old at the time.
Speaker 1: He was an all-star hall of famer (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, a hall of famer.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Bill George.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He was probably thirty-eight.  Petitbon was probably thirty-six.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Richie Petitbon.
Speaker 2: Ben McRae, thirty-six.  Roosevelt Taylor--all these people were old people, you know.  And the old man should have cut them all.  But if you were loyal to him, he would be loyal to you.  And so, he didn't cut them.  And so, we went 9-5 my first year playing with the Bears, and then came back with a--I want to say an 8-6 record or a nine--fourteen games.  We came up with eight and--I think we lost more games than we won that second year also.  But then he started getting rid of some of these players.
Speaker 1: Now, was Bill Wade still the quarterback?
Speaker 2: Bill Wade was still the quarterback.  And he had to be forty-two or forty-three, you know.  And so--
Speaker 1: Bill Wade, Ronnie Bull.
Speaker 2: Ronnie Bull was sitting back there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Rudy Bukich.
Speaker 2: Rudy Bukich was the quarterback.
Speaker 1: Rudy Bukich, oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But so, but then it just--we didn't have enough good players to be competitive.  We always put on a show, with Dick Butkus on defense and [HistoryMaker] Gale Sayers on offense, you know.  We always put a show on, and people liked to come and see us play at Wrigley Field [Chicago, Illinois].  But we never won a championship, it didn't happen (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you guys were the new guys on the team.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we were the new guys.
Speaker 1: You and Butkus.
Speaker 2: Right.  We were the first year, the first year on the team.
Speaker 1: His highlights on defense, him flying across the field--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --diving and grabbing somebody--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you scoring the touchdown.
Speaker 2: We never won a championship, and that was sad.  Because, you know, it was the first time in a history that a team drafted two hall of famers in the same round, the first time ever, Dick Butkus and Gale Sayers.  But, you know, again--
Speaker 1: What was he like?  What was Dick Butkus like?
Speaker 2: He was a player, he came to play.  And when I was coming out of college [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas], I met him at an all-star game up in New York, and I knew nothing about him.  They picked him number one, and picked me number one.  And I went up and talked to him, "Dick, how you doing?"  And you know, I said, "I think I'm going to sign up with the Bears."  And Dick said, "Well, I don't know what I'm going to do.  Buffalo [sic. Denver Broncos] drafted me also, as you know.  But I probably will sign with the Bears, but I just don't know right now."  And you know, I knew nothing about him.  But after that ballgame, I knew something about him.  Because, you know, he hit me as hard as anybody.  I mean, he came to play.  Now, he, I mean he was a player, you know.  And he has hit me as hard in practice as anybody in the game.  As anybody, you know.  And he never took a day off.  All--everyday he was there, and you'd better watch out.  So I knew when I was playing against him in scrimmages--hey, I knew I had to be full speed all the time because he was full speed all the time, and he would knock your tail off.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: But a great football player.
Speaker 1: That's something I've always wondered about.  In practices for these pro games, especially today, as hard as they hit today and stuff--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: You know, do people go full-tilt?
Speaker 2: If you can't do it during the week, you're not going to do it on a Sunday or on a Saturday.  You can't loaf in practice.  You got to go full speed in practice, or you're not going to on a Saturday or Sunday.  And hey, and I knew that, Dick knew it.  And a lot of players, a lot of, some of our players didn't go full speed in practice.  That's why probably we lost games.  But, you know, I knew that I had to go full speed.  Because if I didn't go full speed in practice--you know, running plays against, you know, our defense--then I couldn't have done it on the playing field on a Saturday or Sunday.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your major critique of the Bears in those days is that the players, a lot of players were just too old?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no question.  No question about it, yes.
Story_ID: 467950
Speaker 1: How was George Halas as a coach?  Here's a man who started the football league [National Football League].  Was he--were his ideas current at that time?  Or was (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.  No, he had good assistant coaches.  You know, Bill Dooley [sic. Jim Dooley] came up, and he was his coach.  Abe Gibron was assistant coach.  Abe became a head coach, and Bill Dooley became a head coach.  But, you know, he had good people on his staff.  Petitbon [Richie Petitbon] was on the staff, and then he went and took a job in Washington [Washington Redskins].  But it's just, we did not have enough good players.  When you look at the '85 [1985] Super Bowl team, they had great players on offense and defense.  We never had enough great players on offense and defense when I was there, we never had enough.  But that '85 [1985] team, they had, you know, on offense they had Walter Payton and Jim McMahon.  And on defense, Singletary [Mike Singletary] and a whole lot of good people on that team.  But the Bears [Chicago Bears], when I was playing they didn't have that.
Speaker 1: I think--I don't know if it was the first year or the second year.  Well, most of your real great years you caught like a lot of passes.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you know, I did.  I caught passes and, you know, ran back punt returns and kickoff returns.
Speaker 1: The first year, you scored like twenty-two touchdowns, right?
Speaker 2: Twenty-two, yep, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: That's a lot of touchdowns.
Speaker 2: Well, it's a league record, you know.  Jim Brown scored twenty-one a couple years before that time.  And then I came in and scored twenty-two, and I went to the Pro Bowl for four years, and was the most valuable player in the Pro Bowl for three of the four years I played in the Pro Bowl.
Story_ID: 467951
Speaker 1: Now, the Pro Bowl, that's also something you wonder if they're really playing full out.  Because the season is over, and here the guys are in the all-star game in Hawaii.  You know, what's the motivation to be--you know--?
Speaker 2: The motivation?  You know, a reporter asked me, "Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Sayers], what's the difference between today's players and when you played?"  Okay?  I single out the Pro Bowl, okay.  Usually, the people who pick the Pro Bowl teams, the east versus the west, they're picked--that's the week after the Super Bowl.  They picked probably six or seven players from the winning Super Bowl team and six or seven players from the losing team.  Because they're that good, you know, so they've picked those players.  Okay, but you'll see players saying, "Oh, I can't go, I hurt my wrist."  Or, "I can't go, my leg hurts."  Or, "My wife is sick."  Today, they get $25,000 a game, for the game.  The winning team gets $25,000 to go out there and play this game.  If he don't even play, you get $25,000.
Speaker 1: That's what you used to get for the year.
Speaker 2: You're right.  The losers get $20,000 to play in that game.  If you don't play, you still get $20,000.  You know what we got?  They go to Hawaii.  We went to L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  We got $1,000, that's the winning team.  The losing team got $500.  But, you know what?  We fought like dogs for that $500.  We fought like dogs.  And these idiots won't even play for $25,000.  It was the best game of the year.  I mean, seriously, we fought for $500.  I played in four Pro Bowl games, and I was the most valuable player in three of them.  But that's what, that's the difference between these players today, they're making all this money.  "Why do I need to play in this game?  I'm making $10 million, I'm making $20 million.  What do I need this game for?"  It's for the fans, but they won't play in it.  And it's very, very sad.  It's very, very sad.  I really think one of these days they're going to do away with it.  They're going to do away with that game.  And then they shouldn't do away with it, because that's a game for the fans.  You see the top players on the east and the top players on the west.  But these morons won't even play, and that's sad.  That's very, very sad.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I know pro basketball--the basketball all-star game is--I think the fans kind of--people suspect that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --they're not playing defense.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, right.
Speaker 1: But they're playing offense.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but they--
Speaker 1: They're playing offense and not much defense.
Speaker 2: They're there to dunk basketballs, and stuff like that.  They want to see people dunk and different things, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But, no, but we played.  We wanted to win because we wanted to prove that, hey, we're the best players out there.  And, but these fellows today, they really don't care if they play or not.
Speaker 1: Now, when you played--now you said Jim Brown was one of your idols when you played?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: But you play an entirely different game than Jim Brown.
Speaker 2: Oh, different.  He was much bigger.  He weighed about 225 [pounds], you know, and at the time I weighed about 195.  But he was, he was a great football player, and he proved it.  He led the league [National Football League] in rushing for six or seven years, you know, and he set the record for touchdowns for twenty-one, until I broke it.  But no, he was a great football player, and he's the person that I looked up to.  I wanted to be like him on the football field, you know, and that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you, it's been said by a lot of people that you're probably the most exciting player to watch play football.  And he was, they say he was the greatest player to play (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --because of his length of time and some of the things he did, but they'd rather watch you play (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have any sense of that when you were playing?
Speaker 2: I didn't worry about that.  You know, I don't care how exciting I was.  I didn't worry about, you know, the fans, you know.  When I got on the football field, very seldom did I hear the fans.  You know, they could be yelling and screaming.  I got so many things I had to do and think about, you know, running a play when the quarterback comes out of the huddle.  He calls an audible, and I'm going up for a pass.  He may call another audible, and I'm blocking the middle linebacker or I'm blocking the defensive end.  I ain't got time to worry about the fans; somebody yelling at me or hollering at me, you know.  And so, and that's the way the game is, you know.  So, no.  I just, I concentrated on what I had to do.  And if my concentration was good, then I'd get my job done.
Story_ID: 467952
Speaker 1: In terms of the Chicago [Chicago Bears] fans, how would you rate them in terms of the other fans you've had (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I would say that the Chicago fans--in this city we have five pro teams.  Football, hockey, basketball, baseball, and what else (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Two baseball teams.
Speaker 2: Two baseball teams, right.  But and it is a football town, I don't care what you say.  The Sox [Chicago White Sox] won the championship two years ago, and the Cubs [Chicago Cubs] had never won it, and the Blackhawks [Chicago Blackhawks] won it when I was playing, back when I was playing.  But it's a football town.  So it's a football town, and the people know that.  They know it, you know.  They got great teams here, but they know it's a football town.  And they're great fans, they really are.
Speaker 1: Now this is something that started, that I started to notice after moving to Chicago back in the late '70s [1970s].  It's that none of the black athletes lived in the black community when I got here in '77 [1977].  But those in the past told me that guys like [HistoryMaker] Ernie Banks lived on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], and other--you know, the big stars of the past always lived in the black community.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What happened to change that?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: Probably money, you know.  I lived on the South Side, you know, all of my playing career, you know.  And in the same neighborhood I was in was [HistoryMaker] Ramsey Lewis, Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], Ernie Banks--
Speaker 1: In South Shore [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the South Shore area, right.  And so, I--so we all lived on the South Shore.  But today, they're living in Lake Forest [Illinois] and Winnetka [Illinois] and, you know--
Speaker 1: Highland Park [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Highland Park, you know, and different places like that.  Because again, you're making $10 million a year, and you can afford to go out there and buy you a house.  And the practice area is probably three miles from your house.  And the Bears, they have a complex in Lake Forest.  And so, you know, a lot of people moved in that direction, even, including black players.  They moved in that direction so they could be closer to the practice facility.  So, but that's why that's happening.  But again, the money is so great that they can do what they want to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I want to revisit that later on--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in the interview, in a sense.  Because I know you're trying to do stuff in the community, too.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And I just wondered, you know, it's hard to do this when people are so far away from it, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, there's always going to be minority communities in Chicago [Illinois], or you know, Hispanic communities.  And we're going to have a diverse center for kids.  And what I'm doing will be done in the City of Chicago.
Story_ID: 467953
Speaker 1: --What would you consider to be the highlight of your career with the Chicago Bears?
Speaker 2: Again, my career was only sixty-eight ballgames, you know, and--
Speaker 1: It was about four and a half years or something?
Speaker 2: It was about four and a half years of playing time, you know.  And I think the highlight of my career would be making the Hall of Fame [Pro Football Hall of Fame, Canton, Ohio] and having George Halas introduce me to the Hall of Fame, induct me into the Hall of Fame.  Most players who are in the Hall of Fame, they played ten to twelve years.  I played sixty-eight ballgames in four and a half years.  And to be inducted with that group of people is something I never thought would happen, I really didn't.  I never thought it would happen.  I never even gave it a thought about being inducted into the Hall of Fame.  And one--back in 1977 I was in Phoenix [Arizona], and they called me and said "Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Sayers], I got some good news for you.  You are, you're in the Hall of Fame."  On the first time out, the first time out.  And I tell you, I was blown away.
Speaker 1: Do you have any idea as to why they--you made it?
Speaker 2: Because I was pretty damn good, that's why.  (Laughter) No, but no, you know--you know, I was decent.  You know, I played the game like it should be played.  And that's all I can say about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, well, let's talk about the bad part, I guess, when you--you said that at some point God seemed to have taken your talent away?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But I remember from the news I guess, and watching TV, that you hurt your knee real bad at one point, a couple of times.
Speaker 2: You know, I hurt it, right.  And--
Speaker 1: How many times did you hurt it?  And how did you hurt it?  And how many operations did you have to have on it?  And--
Speaker 2: Well, I hurt it going around the end.  And Kermit Alexander from the 49ers [San Francisco 49ers], he hit me and it tore all the ligaments in my knee.
Speaker 1: Did he hit you sideways or something?
Speaker 2: No, I was running around the left end, and he came across and hit me and tore all the ligaments.  And that's because, again, my knee was so loose.  I didn't lift weights, and it was so loose that it was gone, okay.  And that's, you know, that's why I said, you know, hey, He blessed me with sixty-eight ballgames.  And if I kept playing, I wouldn't be here with you talking about my career.  You know, I wouldn't be in the computer business probably.  You know, I wouldn't, you know, have a home in Indiana and a home here probably, you know.  It's just, you know, I was lucky.  I think I was blessed.  I was lucky that it happened.  Because no telling what may have happened to me if I had played ten years.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and the life of a running back--
Speaker 2: Right.  A lot of these players today are beat up, are really beat up.  And hey, I've had six knee operations, but you know, hey, I can play golf if I want to, and I can walk eighteen rounds, eighteen holes of golf.  But, you know, I feel good, and I like what I'm doing.  If somebody would have told me that being the number one pick in 1965, that I would only play in sixty-eight ballgames; be the first black athletic director in NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] football, the NCAA athletics; be a CEO of a computer company [Sayers 40, Inc.]; I would say you were crazy.  But that's what I've done.  And if I would have played another ten years, another five years, more than likely I wouldn't have done none of that.
Speaker 1: So now, when you hurt your knee initially, you know, most people try to come back.  I know you did.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You came back.
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: And you actually had some good games.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Hey, I came back and I was the only person in 1969 to rush for a thousand yards in leading the league [National Football League] in rushing.  I was the only person to do that.  Not one person ran a thousand yards but Gale Sayers with a bad knee.  And go to the Pro Bowl, I'm the most valuable player in the Pro Bowl.
Speaker 1: With that bad knee?
Speaker 2: The same thing, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, and so again, you know--
Speaker 1: So, what happened?  Did it eventually just--?
Speaker 2: No, what happened was the next year, in '71 [1971], in '70 [1970], I hurt the other knee.  I didn't tear anything; I didn't tear any ligaments or anything.  A ligament is three inches; I stretched it to maybe five inches, okay.  And so, they went back in and just kind of wrapped it back up to three inches.  But it never did work.  And this one here, I tore everything, all the ligaments that held the thing together.  And I came back and led the league in rushing, you know.  And this one here never worked again.  And that's why, that's when I decided to give it up.
Story_ID: 467954
Speaker 1: So, you didn't have the same kind of--?
Speaker 2: I couldn't run.
Speaker 1: You couldn't run?
Speaker 2: Every time I'd run, every time I'd fall, it'd hurt, yeah.  So, but you know, that's the way it goes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, do you think that if that had happened these days, they would have had the medical science to heal it?
Speaker 2: The first knee injury, if it had happened today, I could have been playing the next year also, you know.  And this one here, I could have been playing also.  But, you know, it's just, the technology wasn't great.  Arthroscopic surgery was fifteen years away, you know.  They went in and tied it up with catgut and different stuff, and said, "Hey, you know, you should pack your bags and get out of here," you know.  But I wanted to prove that you could come back in one year after a knee injury.  And I did that, you know.  But then the next year, I got hurt again.
Speaker 1: Football is really rough on running backs, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They don't play as long.
Speaker 2: You know, it is.  You know, it's tough, it's a tough game.  But, you know, you play it because you think you were meant to play it.  Some people were meant to play basketball.  Some people were meant to play baseball, or hit a tennis ball.  I was meant to play football.
Speaker 1: So you retired on your own?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You didn't have to have somebody say, "Hey, you--"?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, no.  I was in St. Louis [Missouri] and told Abe Gibron, "Hey, Abe, I'm going to try this today.  And if it doesn't work, I'm history."  I went out there and ran four plays, and came off the field and said, "Abe, I'm out of here."  And that was it.  I walked away and didn't look back, didn't look back at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, but that's unusual.  So many people don't want to seem to believe that they're finished in sports.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But as I said to you earlier, as you prepare to play, you must prepare to quit.  And I prepared to quit, I prepared to quit.  So, I didn't have to look back on it.
Speaker 1: Because you're--that's a major topic of your addresses to football players.  It must be something that's really important to you.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --being prepared to walk away from--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, it's very important.  Because today, the average life of a football player is three and a half years.  It's not fifteen, it's not ten.  You know, Brett Favre played sixteen or whatever.  It's three and a half years.  I don't think you can make enough money in three and a half years that will last you a lifetime.  You know, and they make a lot of money today, but, you know, that's that top three or four draft choices.  People that get drafted number sixteen, number seventeen, number twenty-three, they ain't making that kind of money.  And if you don't have your degree or have something to fall back on, you're in real trouble.
Story_ID: 467955
Speaker 1: Now, what was your degree in at Kansas [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I got my undergrad in physical education, and my master's [degree] in administration.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, yeah, we were discussing earlier, I think it was off-camera.  I asked you if you ever were a coach--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --ever wanted to be a coach?  Tell us what you said, because I don't think it was on camera.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, no, I didn't say--you know, I just--Tom Landry, as I said, you know, he called me after I retired and said, "Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Sayers], you know, my backfield job is open, and I would like to talk to you about would you want to be a coach."  And I told him, "Let me think about it."  And I thought about it.  And some of these players that I knew, I just didn't think they would do the things that I wanted them to do.  And I wouldn't ask them to do anything more than I did, but I don't think they would do the things that I did.  And it's been proven out, that they probably wouldn't have done the things that I asked them to do.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a school of thought that a lot of great athletes don't make great coaches.
Speaker 2: True.
Speaker 1: Because--
Speaker 2: Exactly right.
Speaker 1: --like a guy like Bill Russell or Frank Robinson, or--it's even been said of Michael Jordan--
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --who tried to coach younger players.  He wanted them to do stuff that they just weren't going to do.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  Yeah, but the thing I'm saying about it, you know, if I asked them to: "If the ball is on the fifty-yard line, I want you, when you--if they call your play in practice, I want you to take the--when they call your play, you take it and you run fifty yards down the field as far as you can and come back, okay."  You might be, your play may be called again.  You run fifty yards down as far as you can, as hard as you can.  They wouldn't do that, they wouldn't do that.  They would run five yards and come back.  They'd run, you know, ten yards over here and go out for a pass and come back.  But every day in practice, I don't care where the ball was on the field, I ran to the goal line.  And the old man [George Halas] got kind of POed at the team [Chicago Bears] one practice.  And he came out and said, you know, "If Gale Sayers can run to the goal line, you can run to the goal line.  So, I want to see you all run to the goal line."  And then they'd get POed with me, you know.  Hey, I'm sorry, but this is the way I have to work to make sure I'm ready for the game.
Story_ID: 467956
Speaker 1: We were talking about--it was the tail end of your career, basically.  And you talked about your injury to your knee, and how you just didn't think you had it anymore, and so just stopped playing.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: But one thing we didn't discuss was the relationship between you and Brian Piccolo that resulted, that was the source of the movie 'Brian's Song,' which I think was made later on in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So did you--when did you first meet Brian Piccolo?
Speaker 2: Well, I met Brian Piccolo at an all-star game.  I think it was in Buffalo, New York.  His senior year at Wake Forest University [Wake Forest College; Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], he led the nation in rushing and he led the nation in scoring.  And he was just a tremendous, a good football player, I'll put it that way.  And then I was at the all-star game with Dick Butkus, and he got drafted by the Bears [Chicago Bears], I got drafted by the Bears, and Brian Piccolo got drafted by the Bears.  And I came, when I came to the Chicago Bears camp, I played in the all-star game before that.  Brian was there but nobody drafted him, but the Bears took a chance.  Because they said he didn't have enough speed, he didn't enough size, and so, no one drafted him.  And so the Bears took him as a free agent, and he came to the Bears with me and became a pretty good football player, he really did.  He didn't have great speed, but he was a person that, you know, if you wanted to get three yards or four yards, he could do that.  He was that kind of a player, and he had a great career with Wake Forest University.  And so we played together in 1965, and after 1965, you know, we continued to play; he continued to be on the team.  And, you know, the only bad thing about the whole situation was that he played my position and he played behind me.  And so, he wasn't going to get a lot of playing time.  And so, but, you know, we played together and had a great time together.  And in 1968, George Halas made a decision.  "We're going to have our rooming list.  And we're going to have all the running backs room together, all the tight ends room together, all the quarterbacks room together, and all the tacklers room together."  And the reason he did that was because, you know, we could go be in the room at night before a game and talk about plays, and talk about what we were going to do and different things.  And it made sense, you know.  But people were saying well, he's trying to, you know, sort race relations or something like that, you know.  You know, he didn't care about that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--
Story_ID: 467957
Speaker 1: Before then, what you're saying--just to be clear, is that before that the room assignments were basically racial.  The black--
Speaker 2: For the--
Speaker 1: --players were together, and the white players--?
Speaker 2: For the most part, it was.  Because back then, all, many, 99 percent of the black players lived on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois].  The white players, the North Side of Chicago.  And we would ride in a car together to practice.  And so when they said, "Who do you want to room with?"  "Oh, I want to room with George Seals.  I ride to practice with him every day."  Or, "I want to room with Dick Gordon, or Jimmy Jones."  And so many of the black players, most of them, at that time most of them roomed together.  Because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, yeah.  So what we're also saying is that the demographics of the city, the segregation that already existed in the city, determined association in your neighborhood in a lot of ways.
Speaker 2: No question about it, yes, it did.  Because again, we, you know, we got the housing people and that's the way they shifted us, right to the South Side of Chicago.  And we didn't think anything of it.  Because, hey, you know, if you're a good football player or baseball player or basketball player, you know, the people in the neighborhood knew you, and they enjoyed, you know, what you did.  So, we didn't have a problem with that.  But when George Halas decided to room by position, you know, people thought that was, you know, a big deal.  But it wasn't a big deal to him, because he was trying to get the best out of his players [on the Chicago Bears] and making sure that, you know, "Do you know your assignments?" and things like that.  And it worked out well for us.  And when people saw that Brian [Brian Piccolo] and I were rooming together, "Why are y'all rooming together?  You know, this is the first time ever for this."  Is it?  I didn't know.  Brian didn't know.  You know, so it wasn't no big deal to us.  But a lot of people made a big deal of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So when you traveled on the road, you know, you all shared the same room?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: On the road and stuff?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: You didn't share the same room in town, though, did you?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no.  Because, you know, me and Brian--he lived southwest, and I lived south.  And a lot of the other players lived north.  And no, we would drive our cars down to Wrigley Field [Chicago, Illinois], and so it wasn't a problem.  Then when we'd go on a road trip, hey, we'd room together.
Story_ID: 467958
Speaker 1: This is something probably a lot of people wouldn't suspect.  Now, but you all played at Wrigley Field [Chicago, Illinois] in those days?
Speaker 2: I played in Wrigley Field my whole career.  And a lot of people think, well, I played at Soldier Field [Chicago, Illinois].  No, I did not.  I played one or two games at Soldier Field, because they had an Armed Forces game at Soldier Field where it was, they would bring in the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] and the [U.S.] Army people.  And we would play a game, and the money raised in that game would go to the [U.S.] Armed Forces.  And so, that was at Soldier Field.  But I never played a regular season game at Soldier Field.
Speaker 1: That seems, well, it seems odd now.  Because so many, all the Bears [Chicago Bears] games are played in Soldier Field now.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: But Soldier Field is a pretty old--it was just renovated.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But it's been around a long time.  What did they use Soldier Field for, if not football?  Because I know the baseball teams didn't play there.
Speaker 2: No.  Well, what they did, you know, it was an Olympic stadium a long time ago.  I forget--the 1935 Olympics or something was there [sic.], they had them there.  And the only people who used Soldier Field at that time was high schools.  They played all the championship series at Soldier Field, you know.  The Class A series would be there, and the Class B series would be there at Soldier Field.  And we never played--the only--again, we only played that one game, which was the Armed Forces game at the end of the season, the exhibition season.  And so, but in 19--I'm going to say '69 [1969], 1970, commissioner Pete Rozelle, he said that all NFL [National Football League] stadiums must be fifty thousand seats or more.  Wrigley Field was only about forty-eight thousand seats.  And so we had to sort of--we were looking for a field, you know, George Halas and the Bears.  We played in, played at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] for I think six or seven ballgames.
Speaker 1: At Dyche Stadium [Ryan Field, Evanston, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Dyche Stadium, yeah, yes we did.  And then we didn't like that very well, and then we decided to go to, they decided to go to Soldier Field.  And then they sort of renovated Soldier Field, and the sitting capacity went from forty-eight thousand at Wrigley Field to about sixty-eight thousand at Soldier Field.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know the only game that was regularly played, where the pros would play at Soldier Field, was the college all-star game [Chicago Charities College All-Star Game].
Speaker 2: That's right, that's correct.
Speaker 1: And it was broadcast nationwide.  But I never, I never understood why it just stayed--you know.  Well, you're explaining something to us now that we didn't know.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, you know, the commissioner, you know at that time--because football was getting big, a big, big, game.  And the commissioner, yeah, they needed more money for more players and more salaries, and things like that.  And he decided, you know, that every stadium must be fifty thousand seats or more.  And so we--well, I think the Bears was the only team that really had to find another stadium.  Because I think the rest of the National Football League, the stadiums were football stadiums, and they had fifty thousand seats.
Story_ID: 467959
Speaker 1: So you and Brian Piccolo were roommates on the road.  Now, he filled in for you when you hurt your knee, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And you know, and when I got tired, hey, I could tell him, "Hey, go in," and the coach would put Brian in there.  And, but, you know, again, I didn't get tired that much, you know.  (Laughter) So, but, so he really didn't play enough.  He was, again, he was a fine football player and just, he was playing behind me.  And--
Speaker 1: He came from a small program.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Wake Forest [Wake Forest College; Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] is not the biggest football program.
Speaker 2: It wasn't the biggest program, but he was a fine football player.  And you had a lot of football players come out of small programs, you know.  I look at Deacon Jones.  I look at, you know, Richard Dent who came out of, you know, Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], and things like that.  They're real small programs, but you know, still--but Wake Forest was a good program, and he did a good job for the Bears [Chicago Bears].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now at a certain point, he got terminally ill.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And in '69 [1969], he--everybody had colds during that time.  It was a very, very cold winter.  It was back in 1969, and '70 [1970], '71 [1971].  But everybody, you know, had colds.  And Brian had a cough that he couldn't, it wouldn't go away.  So, the doctors didn't know what it was.  And so he decided one day to go to a hospital and see what was the problem.  So he went to the hospital, and they said that he had a spot on his lungs.  And they said, well, you know, we're going to do some tests and take a look at it and see what's the problem.  And so, again, they did a whole lot of tests.  And they came back to him and said, "You know, you have cancer and it's malignant.  And we think we, you know, we can get rid of it.  But you won't be playing football this year."  And that really, that really hurt him to the core, because, you know, he was a good football player and he wanted to play.  And it just didn't, it didn't happen for him.  And they went in and, you know, did what they had to do, and they thought that they had it.  And the next spring, he was, we were working out and he got another cough.  And the doctor told him that, "We thought we got it all, but we didn't get it all."  And after that, it was kind of downhill from that, you know.  He always, he never thought that he would die from cancer.  He had that great attitude that he was going to beat this disease.  And every time you would visit him in the hospital, you know, we would come in with tears and stuff, and he was busy trying to cheer us up, you know.  "Hey, I'm going to beat this thing.  You know, I got three kids out there, and my wife.  And I'm going to tell you, Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Sayers], I'm going to beat this disease.  I know I can."   And that's the way he was up until he died.  He just, just had a tremendous attitude and, you know, somebody I will never forget about.
Speaker 1: Now, were your families very close?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, we were close, no question about it.  Joy Piccolo [Joy Murrath Piccolo], we used to go to hockey games.  And that's when Stan Mikita and Bobby Hull and a lot of those people played.  And you know, we went to basketball games together.  And but, you know, again, the second time around, you know, certain things he couldn't do all the time.  And a lot of times, you know, when he was--you know, we would go out to dinner together and things like that.  But, you know, he would say, you know, "I'm a little bit tired tonight.  Joy, let's go home," you know, and things like that.  So we knew that he was, you know, having a problem.  And, you know, we really thought again that, you know, he could beat it because he felt he could beat it.  But you know, you could see him going down.  And you know, one day he just, you know, the good man took him.
Story_ID: 467960
Speaker 1: In 1969, you won the Comeback Player of the Year award?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you turned the player over to--the award over to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --to Brian Piccolo?
Speaker 2: Yes I did.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: In 1969--I hurt my knee in 1968.  And after about a year of rehabilitation, you know, in the '69 [1969] season, I felt that I could do anything I wanted to do. Because you know, I worked out very hard and did--and Brian, you know, helped me lift weights and different stuff.  And I really felt at that time, you know, I could do anything I wanted to do.  And in '69 [1969], we had one of those seasons that you don't ever think will happen to you.  We won one ballgame, we were 1-13 in 1969.  We had our rookie quarterback, Bobby Douglass, out of the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas], my alma mater.  And you know, I felt good, I really felt good.  But to have a season like that, just to win one ballgame, it was very difficult for me.  I think my longest run was twenty-six yards.  And, but, you know, again, I still felt that I could do the things that I wanted to do, and I made it through the season.  I was the only running back to gain over a thousand yards in rushing that year.  And I was the Comeback Player of the Year, and I went to the Pro Bowl and I was the most valuable player in the Pro Bowl.  And, you know, things were fine, you know.  But it was a tough season, you know.  People say, "Well, Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Sayers], you know, he's not the Gale he was two years ago, or one year ago."  Hey, 1-13, that's a tough season.  And yes, I probably wasn't what I was a year ago.  But, you know, I was the only person to gain a thousand yards that season, you know, so I did something right.  And, but, it didn't happen.  So the next year I hurt my knee again, I hurt the other knee.  And so I, you know, rehabilitated and tried to come back, and it didn't happen.  And the thing about my, the other, the second knee injury, I got hurt on a kickoff return.  A fellow hit me, but it didn't tear anything.  My first knee injury, I tore the interior and posterior cruciate ligaments, and the medial collateral ligament.  So, I tore three of the four ligaments in my knee that holds the knee together.  And, but, you know, again as I said, I had no problem with that knee.  Even today, I don't have any problem with that knee.  But anyway, in '69 [1969] I hurt my knee in an exhibition game, and I stretched a ligament.  And see, a ligament is three inches long.  I stretched it to four.  That's the only thing that happened, I stretched it.  But my knee was loose, so they had to go back in and tighten it up.  So, they went back in and tightened it up.  So, they put it--got it back to three inches and, you know, fixed it up.  And I thought that I'd be good, I really did.  It never did work right.  I couldn't run on it.  It hurt all the time.  And I told Abe Gibron, who was the coach at the time [of the Chicago Bears], I said, "Abe--."  We were in St. Louis [Missouri].  I said, "Abe, hey, I'm going to play.  I want you to play me in this game, and I'm going to, I want you to keep me in there, and I will come out.  I know I can do this."  And Abe said, "Okay, I'll do this."  And so I went out there and played, and I played against the Cardinals [St. Louis Cardinals; Arizona Cardinals].  Every time I ran the ball, it hurt, you know.  When I fell, it hurt, you know.  And so at halftime I came out.  I said, "Abe, I'm through."  And that was the last time I played football.  And Abe, you know, at halftime he said, "Gale said he's giving it up."  And I said, "I can't do it anymore."  And I walked away and didn't look back.
Speaker 1: That's unusual.  A lot of athletes don't walk away.  They just hang around and hang around until they're just--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they're released and given an unconditional release, and all of that.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think as I said a little earlier, you know, as I prepared to play, I prepared to quit.  And back then, the money wasn't that great.  I made $25,000 a year.  So it wasn't a whole lot of money to be, you know, thrown around at that time.
Speaker 1: So when you quit playing football, that's how much you were making?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Twenty-five thousand dollars a year.  That's, it's good for those days.  But compared to now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, it was good for those days.  But you know, it's better than me, say, being a teacher or being an insurance agent, you know, or something like that.
Story_ID: 467961
Speaker 1: You know, you still had to go out and find a job.  And I was a buyer for Sears and Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] for a little while.  Then I became a stockbroker with Paine, Webber, Jackson and Curtis, you know, and I did that, you know.  And so I just, you know, like I said, I prepared to quit.  And so that day when I went and told Abe [Abe Gibron], "I can't do this anymore," you know, as I said, I didn't even look back.  I got my clothes and got back to Chicago [Illinois] and got in my car and was gone, you know.  And so, you know, and I started doing some other things, you know.  And, but I did some radio work and stuff like that.  But I didn't take a look at football anymore.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So you didn't think, well, maybe I'll come back next year and try it again?
Speaker 1: No.  I had no desire whatsoever, none whatsoever, you know.  Hey, God gave me a great gift, He really did.  I had a great gift to play the game.  But He took it away in sixty-eight ballgames.  And if I didn't--if He didn't take it away in sixty-eight ballgames, I wouldn't be here.  I wouldn't have been a director of athletics.  I wouldn't be running a business in Chicago, you know.  I'd probably be--I don't know what I'd be doing, but I probably wouldn't be doing the things I'm doing today.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, just something for comparison's sake.  In those days, I remember when I was about, I guess in 1962 or '63 [1963], the Reds [Cincinnati Reds] were paying Frank Robinson like $45,000 or $40,000 a year.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And, you know, so you're, but you're an all-star football player and only getting $25,000.  So, there's a difference in what they paid baseball players than football players.
Speaker 1: And there still is a difference in what they pay, you know, in baseball and basketball.  Because, you know, the thing about it, you know, football, they got fifty-three people, players.  And you see what they wear.  Helmets, you know, everything costs more than baseball, and everything costs more than in basketball, you know.  Baseball: twenty-five players, you know, skinny little uniforms, you know.  Basketball: I think there's seventeen people out there or, you know, fifteen people.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: About fifteen, I think about fifteen, yeah.
Speaker 1: And they have on shorts and tennis shoes.  You know, so I mean, football is so much more expensive than baseball and basketball.  But yet and still we only play, back when I played, twelve and fourteen games.  Today they play sixteen games, you know.  Basketball, they got, I don't know.  What is it?  How many games they got?  Baseball, they got a hundred and something games.  And so--
Speaker 2: They have seventy-something games in basketball, yeah.
Speaker 1: So again, it's just, you know, they play more games and, you know, they get good crowds and so forth.  And they pay them more money, you know.  And it would be great if we could get a pension plan like baseball has it, you know.  You know, then, you know, we wouldn't be fighting all these battles with the players association [National Football League Players Association] and owners of the National Football League [NFL] about helping players who have been hurt.  And these players helped make the game what it is today.
Speaker 2: Now, did you need any further medical assistance on your knees when you left the game?
Speaker 1: I got three more operations on my knees, but it was just to correct some things.  I was very, very bowlegged, very.  And so I--
Speaker 2: And so, when you played ball you were bowlegged?
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh yeah, I was very bowlegged.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, so after I retired I decided to go to a doctor, and he cut some bone out of my, out of both legs, and made my legs fairly straight.  And so, you know, I decided to do that and everything's fine now.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's, it's hard to think about somebody, you know, tampering with what nature had provided you in the first place--
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: --which was so successful, to, you know, come in and straighten them out.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well it was, you know, it--did that help me be a football player?  I don't think so.  You know, because, you know, many times, running and cutting, it hurt because I was bowlegged.  And if I cut to the left or to the right, a lot of times my leg hurt.  But--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the pressure on the knees--
Speaker 1: The pressure, right.
Speaker 2: --when you were running sideways.
Speaker 1: Exactly right.  You know, and so, but I decided I wanted to straighten my legs out a little bit.  And so I knew a doctor in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma], and he did it for me and everything worked out fine.
Speaker 2: Well, did the league help pay for any of that?
Speaker 1: Oh no, nothing.  None whatsoever.  I didn't ask them to help me pay for any of it neither.
Story_ID: 467962
Speaker 1: You went back to Kansas.
Speaker 2: Back to the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas].  I went back as an assistant athletic director.  And went back and I got my undergrad and my master's degree when I was there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Now what was your master's degree?
Speaker 2: In administration.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my undergrad is in physical education.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But--
Speaker 1: Business administration?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, got it.  And that's, you got that by 1976?
Speaker 2: I got that, yeah, I got that--I went back in 1973 and I got it in '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or '75 [1975], one or the two.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, you were assistant athletic director.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you like doing that?
Speaker 2: Well, when I left Chicago [Chicago Bears], I called Commissioner Pete Rozelle at the time, when he was still alive.  And I told him that, you know, "I'm going back to the University of Kansas, because I want to learn the business of athletic administration.  And, you know, when I get through with Kansas--."  You know, I wasn't even thinking about Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois] at the time.  "When I get through with Kansas, you know, I might want to call you and see what's available for me in athletic administration."  And so he knew what I was doing, you know.  And so, anyway I was there, and I was a fundraiser for the university, for the athletic department, and a recruiter for the athletic department.  And, you know, the reason I really went back and got my degree was because, you know, I've always said that, you know, education is key to life, you know.  And if you don't get your education, you know, you are almost through.  And when I went out to talk to prospective athletes and their families, you know, I could tell them that, "Hey, I got my degree.  If I didn't have my degree, I couldn't be at this university as assistant athletic director."  And it made a lot of sense, because a lot of kids think they can play the game of football, basketball, baseball, and--, "I'm going to be a pro player."  And very, very few ever get a chance to be a pro player in a sport.  And so, that's why they need to get their education, because education will last them a lifetime.  Pro athletics, the average life of a football player today is three and a half years.  Basketball, it could be five.  You know, baseball, it could be six.  Who knows?  But I know football is three and a half years.  And you can't make enough money in three and a half years to last you the rest of your life.  And so that's why, you know, I wanted to get my degree and go out and talk to these athletics when I'm recruiting them.  Because I'm telling the mothers and the fathers, "Hey, we're going to take care of your son.  And when he graduates, you know, he can have something to fall back onto."  And so, I did that.  And Southern Illinois, in 1976 they were looking for an athletic director, and I applied for the job and got the job.  And I was the first black athletic director in the United States.  And so I got the job, and I was there for five years.  And I had a good program, and I had a good time being a part of that program.
Story_ID: 467963
Speaker 1: Let me go back a minute--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to the movie--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you made in '71 [1971], 'Brian's Song,' which starred James Caan, and they had Billy Dee Williams playing you at the time.  Now, this is prior to all the women being in love with Billy Dee Williams, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, you're right.
Speaker 1: But, so, so, what did you think of Billy Dee playing you?  And how do you think he did?
Speaker 2: Well, when I first, you know, met Billy when they came to training camp back in Rensselaer, Indiana, he and James Caan, I thought he was too small, you know, to play me.  But, you know, they put some padding around his body and different things, and made him look pretty decent, you know.  But, and when I saw him run, you know, there were certain things that he did, the way he ran, that, you know, it wasn't normal for a running back to do, you know.  So, but anyway, he made it through, I'll put it that way, okay, you know.  And I think he did a fine job, he really did.  Because I was very, very shy when I came up from the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas].  And we talked about that, and in the movie, he made me very, very shy.  But I don't have no regrets about, you know, choosing him to be, to play me in the movie.  James Caan did an excellent, an excellent job playing Brian Piccolo.  You know, I--you know, he almost looked like him, you know.  He did a super, super, job of playing him.  And I think that made James Caan's career.  Because I think after that, he did another football movie, I believe.  And he did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Dallas--
Speaker 2: He did Dallas--
Speaker 1: It was 'North Dallas Forty' [sic.].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And then he did 'The Godfather.'  And then Billy Dee, he did 'Lady Sings the Blues,' with Diana Ross, you know.  So, that set them off as actors.  But I don't have any problem with Billy Dee Williams playing me, or James Caan playing Brian Piccolo.  They did a fine job.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The movie, I think was--when it came out, it became the top made for TV movie ever made, I think.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: More people watched it than any other.  They brought it back every year.  What do you think it is about the story of Brian Piccolo and yourself that resonates with people?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that in the beginning probably, people looked at us as being a black and white rooming together, and that's never been before in professional football.  And I just think that they felt that that was very unusual.  We didn't think anything of it, you know.  We were two football players playing the same position and rooming together, you know, talking about plays, you know, trying to win football games.  So, that's all that was, you know.  Yes, you know, back then the Civil Rights Movement was in force at the time.  And, but athletes, for the most part, didn't really figure into that.  You know, I heard the N-word one time when I was playing in Nashville [Tennessee], okay.  And, but, you know, we were all there trying to win ballgames, trying to win a championship.  You know, so, you know, if you could play, hey, we're going to play you.  And so I didn't, there wasn't very much of that with athletes.  But in the outside, race, yes, it was.  You heard the N-word and different things being said.  But as far as on the football field, I didn't hear it.
Story_ID: 467964
Speaker 1: I didn't ask you this question either.  But how did the fans of Chicago [Chicago Bears] respond to you?  I mean, how did--you know, what was your relationship like with the fans?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a good relationship with the fans.  I think they had to get to know me, you know.  People of Chicago [Illinois], it's two things they like: Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] and Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana], you know.  And so, [HistoryMaker] Gale Sayers from the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas]?  Who is this dude, you know?  They knew nothing about me; nothing, you know.  And then when I got in trouble at the all-star game, they knew less about me.  But anyway, my first exhibition game was in Nashville, Tennessee.  I ran a punt back, I ran a punt return back for sixty-seven yards.  I ran a kickoff back for ninety-three yards, and I threw a touchdown pass to Dick Gordon.  After that, I think they sort of respected me for what I could do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, but other than that, you know, again, they just--Willie Galimore was the great runner back at that time.  He and John Farrington [Bo Farrington] got killed in an automobile accident, so this is why they drafted me, I think.  And, but when they saw what I could do, whether it was running from the line of scrimmage or running kickoff returns back, or punt returns back, they said, "Well, hey, maybe this kid can do something."  And I took off.
Story_ID: 467965
Speaker 1: Fast forward then to 1976, Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you become the athletic director, the first black athletic director in the country?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  What was the program like at Southern Illinois University then?
Speaker 2: Well, the program was a decent program.  It didn't have stadiums.  The basketball arena was probably 9,500.  The football arena was probably 12,000, and they didn't, they didn't have a lot of facilities.  But, you know, it had a program that I felt that we could build on.  And when I got there, I put in some rules and regulations with some of the coaches and so forth, and it didn't go over real well.  But, hey, I was doing my job, you know.  And so, I'll just tell you one example.  The coach was a fellow named Rey Dempsey.  I had my first meeting when I first got to Southern Illinois, my first meeting, the first.  And everybody was there, but Rey Dempsey came in late.  He was the football coach, the head football coach.  And when he came in, I said, "Good morning, Coach.  Coach, tell me something.  If one of your players came to the game late, what would you do?"  And he said, "Oh, well, I'd probably tell him to get out of here, because you're not playing now, because you came in late, you know."  And I said, "Coach, you know, this is my first meeting, and you come late to my meeting."  You know, if it ever happens again, you know, he would be fired.  "I don't, I don't give a whole lot of meetings, Coach.  I'm here to help you.  I'm here to help the basketball coach, and the swimming--and everybody.  I'm here to help you get things right and help you recruit and do things.  And you come late to my meeting, our first meeting here.  You're not right."  And after that, I had no problem with anybody.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you set a tone.
Speaker 2: I set a tone, I set a tone.   And we had a great football--I think we went 9-2 in football.  In basketball, we had a fellow on our team named [HistoryMaker] Mike Glenn, and he played pro ball.
Speaker 1: Mike Glenn, the Stinger.
Speaker 2: Yes, Mike Glenn, yeah, and he played in, I think, Boston [sic.].  And a nice kid, a good basketball player.  But anyway we, my second year with Southern Illinois, we got beat by Marquette [Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], who won the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] tournament in 1977, I believe.  And they beat us out, they knocked us out of the tournament.
Speaker 1: That's when they had Bo Ellis.
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: He was with Marquette, right.
Speaker 2: And Al McGuire, yeah.
Speaker 1: Al McGuire was the coach.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were big.  But we always had good football, a good football team, and good basketball teams.  Larry Bird was at Indiana State [Indiana State University, Terre Haute, Indiana] at the time.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay, he played the same conference?
Speaker 2: He played the same conference, Missouri Valley [Missouri Valley Conference].  Yeah, he was at Indiana State.  But we had great swimming teams and wrestling teams, you know, women's basketball and things.  We had a good program.  And, you know, so, but you know, I stayed there five years.  And as I said, just--the movement wasn't good for me.  Being the first African American athletic director, I couldn't go out to Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] or someplace else and get a job.  I just felt just--I needed to do something else.
Story_ID: 467966
Speaker 1: And so I decided to leave Southern Illinois [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], and I moved back to Chicago [Illinois] in 1983 and started my business [Sayers Group LLC].  And I was looking for a field of the future.  And I took a look at a couple opportunities in insurance and automobile dealerships.  And my partner and I, we decided on computers.  So, we chose computers.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now the computer industry was just, especially the personal computer industry (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was just jumping off.
Speaker 1: Just now starting up, that's right.
Speaker 2: The Macintosh, and the SEs [Macintosh SE], and then--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] desk machines with the little green screens and stuff.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  IBM, Compaq [Compaq Computer Corporation], you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you know, as you said, they were just coming up.  And we started out in supplies--ribbons and diskettes and mag tape and computer paper, and things like that.  And as we grew our business, our customers would ask us, you know, "If you can sell us ribbons, why can't you sell us printers?  And if you can sell us diskettes, why can't you sell us computers?"  So, that's when we got into the hardware side of the business.  And when we would--we sold all the tier one manufacturers--IBM, Compaq, HP [Hewlett-Packard Company], Apple [Apple Inc.], Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.], and all those people.  Whenever we got a manufacturer, an IBM, they would come in and train a lot of people.  Compaq would come in and train a lot of people.  So that's when we got--we got to know about the computer.  And, you know, and so then after we got into the hardware side of it, somebody's got to fix them.  We got into the service side of it, you know, and so that's what we do today.  We do it all.  We fix them.  We--our niche is the Fortune 500 companies around the country.  That's who we sell our products to--Allstate Insurance [Allstate Corporation], Blue Cross Blue Shield [Blue Cross Blue Shield Association], people like that.  And we have offices in Chicago, Boston [Massachusetts], Florida, and a small office in Nashville, Tennessee.  And so, you know, things are going well.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Well, you say you started providing servicers at one time and then the networks, too, you know?
Speaker 1: Yes.  And all that has led, you know, to computers.  And you know, if a company wants to put together a network and things like that, we have people to come in and help them decide what type of network they want to go with.  We can do that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Do have a favorite computer between the Apple and the PC [personal computer]?
Speaker 1: Not, not really.  You know, Apple, they make good stuff, you know.  But I have a Hewlett-Packard laptop, you know, and I got a Hewlett-Packard machine at home at my desk, you know.  So, but they all are great machines, whether it's IBM, whether it's Compaq, whether it's, you know, Lenovo [Lenovo Group Ltd.]--whatever the, you know, whoever it may be. You know, they're all about the same right today.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So I can't get you in any trouble by (laughter)--
Speaker 1: No, no trouble.
Speaker 2: All right, okay.
Speaker 1: We sell them all (laughter).
Speaker 2: All right, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, now as you've been into sports retirement--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And as you're a success in the business world--I mean, are you still like pulled back into sports from time to time to make commentary and that sort of thing?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: So that's been like another, almost like another business, right, in some--?
Speaker 1: Well, it's, it has been maybe.  But, you know, computers is what I do most of the time, 95 percent of the time.  Yes, I do some speaking some engagements and things like that, but that's my business, what I do.  And on the sidelines, if somebody at the station wants me to talk about the Bears [Chicago Bears], or if they want me to go to a game and then commentate on the football, I will do things like that.  But that's very, very small, to what I do with my computer company.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Where do you see your company going in terms of growth in the next ten years?
Speaker 1: Oh, well, the next ten years, that's too far out to even talk about.  When you got an economy like we got today, we don't even, I don't even think about ten years from now.  I'm thinking about what's going to happen three months from now, or two years from now.  Because President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], he's going to have a tough, tough, road to travel, you know.  I think he could really be, he's going to do a great job, but some of the things that he promised people, it's going to be two years from now or three years from now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's gonna be hard to deliver to folks--
Speaker 1: To deliver them.  Because, you know, this economy, we have to do something too with this economy.  And if we don't get this right, you know, we're going to--we're in trouble, we're in real trouble.
Story_ID: 467967
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I hope that--my concerns is that we still have too many gangs out there, you know.  And I would hope that parents and schoolteachers and people like that would--even parents--would try to talk to some of these gang members, or talk to their own kids about being in gangs.  It only leads to death, that's all it leads to.  It doesn't lead to anything else, you know.  And so I just,  I just hope that, you know, even if President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]--you know, I would hope that our children--and we need to be talking to our children--I would hope that they can see that, hey, here's a black man that's now the president of the United States, you know.  I never thought that it would happen.  And my kids have seen this in their lifetime, you know.  If he can do it, why can't you do it?  And we need to be talking to our kids about, hey, here's a man that said, "Yes, I can.  Yes, we can."  And he did it.  And all you got to do is get an education and, you know, and go out there and put your best foot forward.  Because education is going to last you a lifetime, you know.  So, but, you know, that's what I hope for.
Story_ID: 467968
Speaker 1: When you look at today's athletes--and we were discussing before we started taping, some of the, I guess the antics that go on, on the football field today, you know, after people score touchdowns, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The extracurricular activities on the football field.  What are your thoughts about those?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think that if the public never saw an athlete do a flip in the end zone, or do silly stuff in the end zone, or run their back to the sidelines--if they never saw that, the game would be just as good.  You know, because that doesn't do anything to make you a better football player, or a basketball player, or a baseball player, or whatever it may be.  It's just, it's a lot of foolishness, that's all it is.  And when you do things like that on the pro level, they'll see it in college.  They will see it in high school and grade school, and they will do the same thing.  And hey, today, they have penalties for that.  I wish they would kick somebody out of the game for that, but they just have penalties for that, "Fifteen yards because of unsportsmanlike conduct," you know.  And that could hurt your team when you're playing.  But I don't like it.  And if they say I'm old-school, maybe I am.  But when I played, we did not, we didn't try to embarrass anybody.  The game's tough enough, you know.  We played the game, we scored a touchdown, and we threw the ball to the official.  That's all it was.  You celebrate after you win a game.  You celebrate after the game is over.  You see people celebrating today when they make a tackle.  And you look at the scoreboard and they're behind by thirty points.  Why are you celebrating?  Why are you celebrating because you made a tackle, and your team's behind by forty points?   I don't understand it, you know.  And if I was coaching a team, you would never celebrate anything if we were behind.  But these fellows, they--hey, you're behind by fifteen, twenty points, and they make a tackle, "Hey!"  But that's the way it is, and I don't like it.  And they'll probably never change.  But--
Speaker 1: Did you have a sense that--now you were always described as one of the most entertaining players to watch play football.  Did you have a sense that you were in entertainment when you were playing?
Speaker 2: Well, okay, entertainment?  My entertainment was scoring a touchdown, catching a pass for a touchdown, or whatever, or running back a kickoff return for a touchdown.  That's all the entertainment that I felt that I needed, you know, to go down the field and run ninety yards for a touchdown, or run seventy-five yards for a touchdown.  I'd hand the ball to the official and walk off.  People clapped, and that's all I cared about.  Nothing else, you know.  And when we won the game--if we didn't win the game, I'm down, I'm down.  But if we won the game, hey, fine.  We go to the locker room, the reporter would interview you, and you leave.  But you know, again, the players today, it's, they think that it goes farther than that.  And I don't.  But, you know, I'm just an old football player, you know.
Story_ID: 467969
Speaker 1: Well, when you look back on everything you've done over the years, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and do it again?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm quite sure there're probably a number of things that, you know, I would do differently.  But you know, it's, it's been a pretty good life, you know.  And I think that, you know, probably when my parents [Bernice Ross Sayers and Roger W. Sayers] moved from Wichita, Kansas to Omaha, Nebraska, it was great for the kids and really bad for them.  They couldn't find a job, started drinking and a lot of things.  But we--they didn't have Pop Warner [Pop Warner Little Scholars, Inc.] football here in Kansas, and they had Pop Warner football in Nebraska.  I started playing at eight years of age, that's where I got my start.  And so, they helped us a great deal by moving to Omaha, Nebraska.  And so, and then after they moved to Omaha, Nebraska, they decided to--my mother wanted to go out and see her niece in Denver, Colorado.  So, they decided to move to Denver, Colorado.  And my father was driving the car, and something happened to him.  And he ran into the back of a car on the road, and he died two days later.  And my mother, they found that she had cancer when she was in the hospital, and she died about six months later.  But so, you know, but they were good people, and I learned a lot from both of them, and I miss them a lot.  And, you know--
Speaker 1: Were you in the NFL [National Football League] at that time?
Speaker 2: I was in the NFL, and they saw me play one game, and we won the ballgame.  And they came to Chicago [Illinois], took me out to dinner.  And, you know, that was it.
Story_ID: 467970
Speaker 1: Just a little bit about your own family, too.  Now, you started a family about the same time that you started playing, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My first wife [Linda McNeil Sayers], we had three children.  And they are two boys and a girl.  And my daughter, she has two children now.  And my two sons have two children apiece.  And I have two step--four stepchildren by my second wife [Ardythe Bullard Sayers].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so--
Speaker 1: Did you meet your first wife in Nebraska?
Speaker 2: I met her in Nebraska.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I did, uh-huh, I met her in Nebraska, yeah.  And she still lives here in Chicago [Illinois], and is doing well.  And my son works for me in Boston [Massachusetts], and my daughter used to work for me, but she decided she wanted to be a mother, so she got pregnant and she doesn't work for me anymore.  And, but, that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  You've got a brother that--
Speaker 2: My brother, he was a, he's thirteen months older.  I got two brothers.  One is thirteen months older, and one is five years younger, and he was a world-class sprinter.  He's the only person who ever beat Bob Hayes in the 100-meter dash.  He was running at the NAIA [National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics] championships in Sioux City, South Dakota [sic. Sioux Falls, South Dakota], and he ran 9.2 [seconds] that day.  And--
Speaker 1: What's your brother's name?
Speaker 2: Roger [Roger Sayers].
Speaker 1: Roger?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And my younger brother's name is Ronnie [Ron Sayers].  And he was an All-American football player also in a small university, the University of Omaha [University of Nebraska Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska].  And one year he ran back a ninety-nine yard pass play for a touchdown.  He has an NAIA record in the same year I ran a ninety-nine yard touchdown run against the University of Nebraska [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska].  And that's the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] record.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But my younger brother, he played for the San Diego Chargers for three years.  And he hurt his Achilles tendon on one leg, and the next year he hurt the other one.  So, he decided to give it up.  But, so, you know, but they're all doing well.  My older brother, he's retired now, and my younger brother, he's in San Diego [California].
Story_ID: 467971
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we haven't asked you that we need to cover before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I don't think so (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  You might be able to make this.  We're almost at the end of this roll.  But our last question is similar to legacy.  But, sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: You know, I hope people remember me as, you know, as someone who tried to do his best in everything that he competed in, whether it's athletics or whether it's business.  You know, I just--I tried to be a role model.  And hopefully when I meet my maker, you know, that's what they will think of me as, someone who tried to do his best and be the best person he could be.
