Story_ID: 99451
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Sterns.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Is he released?
Speaker 1: Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Chuck Smith, C-H-U-C-K, S-M-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: Now, is that your full name?
Speaker 2: That's my, that's my stage name really.  My, my complete full name is Charles Norman Smith.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 7, 1938 is when I was born.  And, I was born in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what's your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a theater artist, artist.  I am currently employed at the Goodman Theatre here in Chicago and also at Columbia College Chicago.  At, at the Goodman I am the resident director and at Columbia College, I'm one of the artists in residence.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before we--oh, I'm sorry, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July 18, 19--2005.
Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: The office of The HistoryMakers on 19, 1900 South Michigan, Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 99452
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food and what is it?
Speaker 2: Catfish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Brown.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Canada.
Speaker 1: And, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "Cool."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I thought it might be line from a play or something.
Speaker 2: A line, naw.  Sorry, no line from a play.
Speaker 1: Okay.  "Cool" is cool.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 99453
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of family and your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Amanda, A-M-A-N-D-A, Booker [Smith].  That's her maiden name.
Speaker 1: B-O-O-K-E-R?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Mom was born September 9, 1917 in Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace 'em?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandparents, her parents, Abraham Booker, Sr., and Otis Harper Booker, they, they moved to Chicago [Illinois] when my mom was like about three.  And, settled in and then brought my mom up.  And, lived in Bronzeville, 32nd and Vernon, 3224 South Vernon and that's where my mother and my mother's siblings, two other daughters and three, three sons were raised.  And also, later on, one--after the break-up of my mother's--my mother and father [Charles Peterson Smith] broke up when I was like about five years old, I went to live with my grandmother during the week.  And so, I lived in the big house with all my uncles and aunts on 32nd and Vernon.  So, we're all like brothers and sisters really, you know.  Because the age differences not--wasn't that huge at the time.  But, I was always the baby, of course.  But, so yeah, I knew my grandfather was a--he worked at the stock yards.  One--my favorite story about my grandfather was that when he--when the depression--he knew--he got the inkling about the depression when the depression was coming, he was--he went out and got a job at the stockyard.  He said, "I'll do anything."  And, he was, you know, he was doing real dirty, some of the real dirty jobs in the stockyards.  But, even those dirty jobs allowed him to bring meat home.  So, my family never once missed a meal during the depression.  So, years later I was ask, when I was in grade school to submit a story about the hardships of the depression on my family.  And, when I, when I asked all my family, they said, "We didn't, didn't know anything about any hardships."  I mean, hardy-- I mean, it was, you know, it was as if we were black, you know.  But, we ate.  And, my grandmother was a seamstress, like my mother; she was also a seamstress.  So, they had clothes and they had food and they had shelter over their heads.  So they, it was, it was a very relaxed atmosphere all the time, at my grandmother's house.  And, my uncles took the place of my dad, when my dad--when my parents split up, my uncles became like my fathers and they made sure I walked the straight and narrow path.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do--are there any stories from Birmingham that they tell?
Speaker 2: No.  No stories from Birmingham.  I don't know any--other than every now and then, my--they talk about my grandfather's brother who was a, was sort of an outlaw.  And, he showed up in Chicago one time and the police showed up right behind him.  But, they didn't catch him.  But--and he showed up to drop off his two kids.  And, my aunt--my cousin Evelyn, now was of the kids, she lives two doors down from me, so.  And, we're--we're part--we're--it was just--of the survivors, it's just my cous--my aunt Willa, my cousin Evelyn, and myself from that group.  You know, with--
Speaker 1: That's was a lot of people.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  The rest of them are gone.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you know what your great uncle did to get in trouble?
Speaker 2: Naw.  He was black (laughter).  He was black and doing a lot of things that, you know, white people didn't want him do to and things--but, I don't think he, I don't think he was like a--I'm sure, I would say probably, he probably robbed some people.  But, I don't think he did---he didn't do anything like any murder or anything like that, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 99454
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Amanda Booker Smith] talk about growing up?
Speaker 2: No.  Other than the fact that whenever they talked, whenever they would get together, and we would always--we would get together on the holiday's like, like most families do.  All the stories were pleasant, happy stories.  Never sad stories about things that one couldn't do.  But, the great things that they did do, you know.  Of that group, none of that group--oh, yeah, yeah, my, my youngest uncle Bennie, he was the first one to graduate from college.  He graduated from Roosevelt [University in Chicago, Illinois].  And, he was the only one to get through college.  But, every--the rest of them did finish high school, which was the thing in those days.  And, [Wendell] Phillips High School [now Wendell Phillips Academy High School] was the--was where they went.  They went to Phillips.  My youngest Aunt Carol, she, she graduated from Dunbar [Dunbar Vocational High School in Chicago, Illinois].  But, it was all, it was just, it was, it was--everything was pleasant.  We lived on 32nd and Vernon, which is in the heart of Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois].  In the 40s [1940s], this is what I remember, you know, the 40s [1940s], and it was, it was truly a village.  When you hear, you know, the things about "it takes the village to raise a child."  Well, I know exactly what that meant, because I wasn't, I wasn't allowed to do too much bad stuff because there were always eyes on me, you know.  And, no matter if I said a bad word, it got back to my grandmother [Otis Harper Booker].  If I did something wrong, it always got back to my grandmother, you know.  Somehow, it would get back to my grandmother.  And so, you know, there were--you were always being watched.  Well, basically, you all--you were loved.  I think that's what the word should be, rather than watched; that you were loved.  And I, you know, I always felt cared for and knowing that, it does sorta pattern your behavior, you know, to do the right thing.  Whatever the right--that right thing is, you know.  But yeah, as a kid, I was a mischievous kid like anybody else was, you know.  And, get this, you know, doing a lot of things that you wasn't supposed to do.  But again, if I crossed--we'll I wasn't supposed to cross 33rd Street.  If I crossed 33rd Street, somebody knew about it.  And, when I got home, my grandmother, "What are you doing--where were you going crossing 33rd Street, you know?  And inevitably, you know, I'm thinking, "How does she know," you know?  But, she knew.  But, he was a village.  It was truly a village and it was--I remember those days quite well and, you know, with fondness, you know.  We played freely and we, you know, marbles, and stickball, skates on the--making skateboards and that kind of thing.  It was just, it was just a, it was a pleasant time.  A very pleasant time.  Couldn't sneak anywhere and smoke cigarette because, you know, you'd get caught, you know.  You knew you'd get caught, so why bother.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: My mother and father; my father's [Charles Peterson Smith] people moved on the same block.  They lived on 32nd and Vernon.  We lived 3224, they lived further, they lived further south which--towards the end of the block--
Story_ID: 99455
Speaker 1: I need to ask you your father's full name (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: My father's full name is Charles Peterson Smith, and he was born in Wilmington, Delaware, September 3rd, and I forget the year.  I knew he was maybe a few years older than my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he may have been born around 1910 or so?
Speaker 2: About--yeah, around 1910.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And, my dad, my dad--the stories they had about my dad in the days before he got married was that he was, he was a lady's man.  He was a playa.  And, met my mother, and--well, of course, they're all in the same block [Bronzeville, Chicago, Illinois] so they kinda knew each other.  But, you know, he fell for mom and they fell in love and they got married, moved to a small apartment on 33rd and South Park.  Naw, I'm sorry, 35th and South Park.  And, then from there, they were some of the original residents of Ida B. Wells Projects [Ida B. Wells Homes].  And, it was really nice over there, you know, when they first moved over there; green grass, flowers.  Madden Park [Homes] was gorgeous; the swimming pool.  Those were also good days.  I remember those days over there.
Speaker 1: They say it was managed by Robert Taylor himself, you know--
Speaker 2: I wouldn't, I wouldn't be surprised.  But, it was well-managed.  Once of the stories I like to tell is that the first time I saw my mother [Amanda Booker Smith] get into an argument with someone, you know, other than my father was, she was arguing with a neighbor about who was going to plant the garden that year in Ida B. Wells, you know.  I wasn't--I had occasion to go back over there a few years ago because I was conducting a youth program in Madden Park.  And, when I looked at where I used to live I, I couldn't help but cry, you know, it's just, you know, totally different.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It's pretty--it's devoid of grass and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's, it's--I wouldn't want anybody to live there, the way it is now, you know.  But, in those days, it was just, it was a joy to being there, in that area.
Speaker 1: I think that some people might think it odd that the projects were--as they were originally conceived actually were--
Speaker 2: Yes, they were originally conceived as a place where you come, get yourself together, and then move on to bigger and better things.  And, those--the individuals, most of the individuals from--are my mother's friends and a lot of the friends that I had in the projects that's exactly what happened.  They stayed there for like about six or seven years, ten at the most, and then, then you're outta there.  You go--
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember inspections and so forth?  I mean they--
Speaker 2: Naw.  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: I've heard that they would do that then?
Speaker 2: Naw, I don't remember inspections.  The only, the only person I remember stopping by on a regular basis was the insurance man.  There was a, there actually was a guy comes--stops around every so often and would, and collect the insurance, collect the insurance.
Speaker 1: Now, that's a feature of the past that's gone now.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, the insurance man with thick sole shoes walking up and down the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Getting a dime here, a quarter there.
Speaker 2: Whatever, you know.  It was a man--I mean, I didn't--he was the insurance man, you know.  So, you know, you didn't think anything of it.  But, now I look back at it and say, "Whoa. That's, that was something, you know."  And, he didn't--the ins--it was always a white guy, you know.  And so, it wasn't, you know, that was probably one of the only occasions that I had to see a white person in my neighborhood in those days, you know.  If you were an insurance man, or something like that, you know.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, I think that's true for a lot of communities really.
Speaker 2: And, and over on, and my grandmother's--over--where my grandmother lived on 32nd and Vernon, in the 40s [1940s], we still, I mean, there were still some horse and wagons being pulled, you know.  The ice man.  I remember the ice man, you know.  A cat with--had a big pad on his shoulder and a thing, you ask for--you tell 'em you want 25 pounds or 50 pounds, 15 pounds, he'd chip off the ice, dun, dun, dun, hit that, his little things on the end and boom, hook it on his shoulder and trudge on up the stairs and put it in--this block of ice in your, on the--where the freezer compartment is now, that's where the ice went.  And, that ice is what kept your food cold, in the ice box.  I mean, a real ice box, and then the refrigerators came out, of course, you know.  And then, so went the ice man, you know.
Story_ID: 99456
Speaker 1: So, your parents [Amanda Booker Smith and Charles Peterson Smith] split up--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  When I was about five or six years old, 'cause I went to, I went to grade school, I mean, I went to kindergarten at Ida B. Wells [Preparatory Elementary Academy] so that was when I was five years old.  And, then when I was around six that's when I had to go and live with my grandmother [Otis Harper Booker] during the week 'cause my mother had to go to work.  And so, yeah, they split up, you know, when I was about six years old, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, my dad sorta went to, he went to Flint, Michigan to work for the auto industry, you know.  And, I saw very little of him for like about three or four years, and when he came back to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: So, did he come back to see you when he came back?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, he didn't--I didn't get the feeling that he was coming back just for me.  But, my father and I, we were acquainted, acquainted with each other but never, never really close, never really close.
Speaker 1: So, did he live the balance of his life in Flint, basically?
Speaker 2: Naw.  He--when he came, when he came back to Chicago and he stayed in Chicago and he finished his life up.  He passed in the--my mother died in '92 [1992], my dad probably died about five--actually, my dad passed on in like about '85 [1985], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 99457
Speaker 1: Now, I know you didn't--you weren't around your father [Charles Peterson Smith] that much, but who do you think you take after?
Speaker 2: I--being raised by the Bookers, I consider myself a Booker.  But, I do know there's a lot--I realized there's a lot of things that I do instinctively that's not Booker.  So that, you know, I'm a strong mix of both.  But, I do know that there's a lot of Smith in me, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, some of the way I, some of the way I, some of the way I behave, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory is either a Thanksgiving or a Christmas dinner over at my grandmother's [Otis Harper Booker] with my entire family there.  I remember everyone being there and that my grandmother was so happy because everyone was there, you know.  That's the earliest I remember.  And, I think, I think it was, I think it had to be during the war [World War II] because not long after that, that happy moment was one--turned into a really sort of tragic moment, or potentially tragic.  Because my mother--my grandmother was totally in a wreck because my uncle Abe was a Merchant Marine and he had--his ship had been torpedoed and he was missing.  And, she was a total wreck.  She was--there was--she was just not functioning.  Fortunately, a couple of weeks later, he was found and he was okay.  But, I just remembered the--that happy moment and then maybe six months later, bam, it was so, so different, you know.  I'll never--that, those are the things--those are two things I'll never forget, you know.
Story_ID: 99458
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Growing up in Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] and Ida B. Wells [Homes], again, some of the, some of the sounds were, were the sales, was the guys on the street selling.  Everybody was, you know, they'd come--the wagons, the guys coming by, the vegetables, the--again, the ice man, the coal man, the ice cream truck.  The smells, I can't come up with any distinct smells because, you know, I don't--no real smells.  The only distinct smell I can remember is the--I specifically remember was in the, on the weekends when I was at my mom's [Amanda Booker Smith] at Ida B. Wells, I'd go swimming and then there was that smell of chlorine, you know, in the pool.  There's a specific smell.  So, I remember that.
Speaker 1: But, you couldn't smell the stockyards or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Naw.  Naw.  My grand--my grandfather [Abraham Booker, Sr.] made it very dis--he--whatever he had to do to get that smell off of 'em before he left that place, he did.  Because I remember whenever he would come, whenever I'd see him coming down the street, I go run to him, you know, and carry his lunch bag, his lunch pail.  And, I never once, did I ever smell anything.  But, he--my grandfather was a pretty meticulous guy when he got out of his work clothes, you know, he was clean, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sure.  We all--you had to go to church.  That was given.  You had to go to church.  We went to Pilgrim Baptist Church when I was, when I was a shorty, which was on 33rd and like, Indiana.  And, we'd go to what they call Sunday school.  And, then after Sunday school, we'd go to junior church.  And, then after junior church, my friend Lamont Thompson and myself, we would go across the street and have a soda.  That was a--and, then we'd walk home with some of the, some of the girls.
Speaker 1: That sound like it was nice.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was fun.  Sunday's were cool, yeah.  But, you'd always dress up.  You had Sunday clothes.  You had, you had Sunday clothes.  You had school clothes, and you had play clothes, you know.  And, Sunday clothes, you know--everybody liked to dress up in those days, you know.  Dressing up was, was, was, was, was cool.
Speaker 1: Now, those are--you grew up just as--well, radio was the biggest thing, and entertainment (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Radio, I saw--I was in on television when it came in, you know.  My mom [Amanda Booker Smith] was the first person I knew who got a television set.  And, that was at--in Ida B. Wells and so I was a pretty popular guy on Saturday afternoons; Saturday afternoons, Sunday afternoons.
Speaker 1: So, how old were you when your mother got the TV?
Speaker 2: I must have been about eight or nine, you know.  She got the small Admiral.  I guess--
Speaker 1: Is that the one with a round screen?
Speaker 2: Naw.  The round screens were the Zeniths.  Zeniths had the round screen.  Admirals had a, had a pretty, a rectangular screen.  It was quite, it wasn't a perfect square, but, but it was small.  It was black and white.  Naturally, it was black and white.  But, it made me a pretty popular guy.  I had tons of kids over there on--at my house on Saturday afternoons, and Sunday afternoons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a favorite, favorite shows?
Speaker 2: Hopalong Cassidy was the guy everybody watched.  And, he came--Hopalong Cassidy came on Saturday and Sundays.  There was the early Hopalong Cassidy movies came on Saturdays with his, his main side kick was a guy name Lucky, Lucky Jenkins.  And, then on Sundays, he'd come on and then you'd see him with [George] "Gabby" Hayes, you know.
Speaker 1: Gabby Hayes, he made a career as a sidekick.  Didn't he?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  As a sidekick, yeah.
Speaker 1: He was with everybody.
Speaker 2: Gabb--yeah, oh yeah, he was everybody's sidekick.  He turned out to be Roy Rogers' sidekick, you know, you know.  But yeah, those, those are the--I remember those shows.
Speaker 1: Those were the days when Westerns were real popular.
Speaker 2: Westerns were the thing.  And, what they did, what television did was, was take the place of going to the Park Theatre on, right between Oakland and 40th Street on South Park, King Drive, right underneath the viaduct.  There was a train that ran across there then.  But there, right there was a theatre called the Park.  And, you'd go to the Park on Saturday afternoons and you'd see, you'd see three Westerns, a Serial, and five colored cartoons, you know, for a nickel or something ridiculous (laughter).  But, it was a fun, it was fun way to spend a Saturday afternoon, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 99459
Speaker 1: Now, what about school?  Now, did you started at Ida B. Wells [Preparatory Elementary Academy] in kindergarten, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in kindergarten, and then when I went to stay with my grandma [Otis Harper Booker] during the week, I went to, went to [Stephen A.] Douglas [School].  Douglas is on 30--between 32nd and 33rd on like, what the street after, after King Drive going, going west.  Where ever it--
Speaker 1: Calumet?
Speaker 2: Calumet.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's it, yeah.  Calumet and Prairie, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's Douglas, yeah.  And, I stayed at Douglas, stayed at Douglas 'til, 'til the, 'til my grandparents [Abraham Booker, Sr., and Otis Harper Booker] moved from, from Bronzeville to Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], when I was in seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Were people calling that neighborhood Bronzeville then?
Speaker 2: Naw.  Naw, they wasn't calling it--I say Bronzeville now just so people could identify with what it was.  At the time, this was before--we had the, we had to move.  I mean, they didn't--it wasn't like we were dying to move out of that neighborhood.  They literally, you know, I don't know, I guess they--Lake Meadows [Apartments] and Prairie Shores [Apartments].  They were gonna build Lake Meadows and Prairie Shore, so they made people offers they couldn't refuse, you know.  That's, that's how we--so the grandparents sold that place and bought a place in Hyde Park.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, where did they live in Hyde Park?
Speaker 2: 5312 Maryland.  And, went to Kozminski [Community Academy].  I was in seventh grade at Kozminski.  And, I was at Kozminski, yeah, for like about a year and a half before I graduated from there in 1952.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was, it was to me it's the classic story of the "Raisin in the Sun" story about the family moving to the white neighborhood.  And, that was our story.  We moved to Hyde Park and--
Speaker 1: Was that neighborhood all white then?
Speaker 2: It was pretty--it was predominately white.  I was, I was the only black male in my class.  There were two other black females, but I was the only black male in my class, you know.  But, had no racial problems whatsoever, all the time I was there.  Not one.  Not one single incident.  And, never had trouble finding playmates.  Never once.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, was most of the--
Speaker 2: It was, yeah, it was predominately Jewish, predominately Jewish.  And, I don't know, they, they--I remember the first thing, they were surprise that I--they--when I went out, there were some kids playing outside, playing some baseball so I went out and asked if I could play with 'em.  Said, yeah (unclear) so we were playing baseball and everybody naturally after, after we finished playing they started talking about who's the favorite and la da da, everybody was--assumed that I was a Brooklyn Dodgers fan because of Jackie Robinson.  I said, "No, I'm a Cub [Chicago Cubs] fan."  My grandfather's a Cub, was a Cub fan, so I was a Cub fan.  And, that really shook (laughter) everybody up, that I was a Cub fan, you know.  But, you know, I remember the look on their faces when I told 'em I was a Cub fan.  And, I knew all the, I knew--and I could--we talked baseball, you know.  'Cause my grandfather and my uncle, we always talk baseball, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you play yourself?
Speaker 2: Naw.  I mean, I played at it.  I was, I was okay.  I was adequate.  I mean, I didn't embarrass--if I was picked, I could, you know, I could, I could do the--but, I wasn't able to make the team in high school, yeah.
Story_ID: 99293
Speaker 1: I think we sorta left off, I was saying that I went to Kozminski [Kozminski Community Academy in Chicago, Illinois].  I was only black kid in my class; only black male in my class and that I never had any, any problems involving race.  They were, you know, really good friends to have.  And, when we graduated in 1952, they gradu--they voted me as vice president of the class.  I made a speech at the graduation ceremony and all that stuff and, and then onward to Hyde Park High School.  And, at Hyde Park High School, things got a little dicey because of the flack--fact that there were--it was, it was much more integrated, you know, and there were a lot more black kids there.  And, at lunch I would always eat with my, my friends from Kozminski, these Jewish kids.  And, after about a month or two, the black kids would pull me aside and ask why I was eating lunch with these, with these white guys.  And, I says, "Well, I've been going to school with these white guys for quite some time now, you know, and I know 'em.  We're all good friends."  And, you know, we eat lunch and we touch bases, we--you know, I say--well, they say, "Well, you know, you're not supposed to eat with those guys.  You're supposed to eat with us.  You sit where the black kids are sitting."  And, I says, "Well, naw I don't think I have to eat with you."  I said, "Why don't you come over and eat with us?  It's okay, you know, and nobody's gonna say anything about it.  You come over and eat with us."  He said, "Naw, naw, we don't eat with those guys.  You have to come and eat with us," which I refused to do.  The next semester, I started getting into a lot of little scuffles, unnecessary scuffles.  People would bump into me in the hallway.  In the gym, people were knocking me down.  I was getting into fights with the black kids because they didn't like the idea of me having lunch with the white kids.  And, that's when I realized, I was in a no win situation and decided that I was gonna have to transfer and get outta there.  And, I decided to go and live with my mom [Amanda Booker Smith].  I told my mom.  My mom was still the single parent--she was still, you know, working during the day.  But, I promised that I would be, I would be cool.  I wouldn't get in any kinda trouble and all that, all that stuff, if I came to live with her.  And, she had moved into the Park Manor neighborhood [Chicago, Illinois] over on 71st and Vernon.
Speaker 2: That's a very organized neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  But, it too was going through a transition at the time.  This is in the, this is in the early '50s [1950s].  And so, mom says, "Ok."  You can--you know, if you promise that, you know, behave yourself.  So, that's what I did.  I went--I transferred to Parker High School [now Paul Robeson High School] and just merged in with the black community over there.  And, that was, you know, that's, that was the reason.  That was the only reason why I left Hyde Park was because I was having, having racial prob--problems involving race with the black kids, not, not with the white kids.
Speaker 2: I think that's one of the few stories we've heard where somebody had to really transfer of social reasons of this nature.  It's kinda like a--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  It was, it was really, I mean, I couldn't win.  I wasn't, I wasn't about to split just--I don't, I never have been one to abandon my friends.  And, I wasn't gonna just abandon these guys.  And, and I didn't, you know, I just, I just sorta, well maybe I did by transferring.  But, you know, I think, I think I did the right thing.  I, you know, I--there was, there was nothing else to do, nothing else to do.
Story_ID: 99294
Speaker 1: In high school [Parker High School, now Paul Robeson High School, in Chicago, Illinois], I wasn't a very motivated student, really.  The only thing I've ever really wanted, really wanted to do while I was in high school was to finish high school so I could join the [United States] Marine Corps.  That's all I ever really wanted to do.  I wanted to be a Marine, you know.
Speaker 2: Now, why a Marine?
Speaker 1: One of my friends, one of my old friends from, from Ida B. Wells [Homes], Jimmy McAbee [ph.], whenever I would go over Jimmy McAbee's house, Jimmy McAbee had this--all these catalogs, and newspapers, and magazines about Marines hitting the beach.  You know, Marines are big, you know--well, Marines' always been popular.  But, then, they were, you know, they were going from island, Iwo Jima, and Wake Island there, you know, going to beach.  And, McAbee was always fascinated by it, and somehow I became fascinated by, by the Marine Corps.  There was never any thought about joining the Army, or the Navy, or the Air Force.  It had to be the Marine Corps, you know.  And, in fact, somehow, that, that whole idea about being a Marine was kind of infectious in, in the Park Manor neighborhood [Chicago, Illinois].  Because you ask anybody from Park Manor, and who came out of high school in the '50s [1950s], you would get probably sixty percent of them joined the Marines.  And, I don't know what happened, among the black guys, I don't know what it was, but all of my friends, all of my close friends joined the Marines.  And, that's all we wanted to do.
Speaker 2: You think it's because of the war [World War II] being a--
Speaker 1: Well, yeah--
Speaker 2: Popular kind of war?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But, yeah, but then there was another, I mean, the--
Speaker 2: This is now the Korean War?
Speaker 1: The Korean War had--was, was flaring up.  And, but still the Marines was still popular even then, you know.  But you know, as a young guy, that's all we were thinking about was, and that's all I thought about was joining the Marine Corp.  My mother [Amanda Booker Smith] would--I graduated from high school at seventeen; my mother wouldn't sign for me.  So, she sorta made a deal with me.  She said, "Why don't you, why don't you, why don't you go to college for a year.  Just go to college for a year before you join."  And, I did.  I went to University of Illinois at Navy Pier [Chicago, Illinois].  It was at Navy Pier in those days, in the, in the '50s [1950s].  I got out of high school in '56 [1956], and went to Navy Pier for a year and joined, and then joined the Marines in 1957.  And, I was in the Marines for six and a half years.  I was going to be a lifer.
Speaker 2: Now, where were you mustered in the Service?
Speaker 1: Went, went to a boot camp at San Diego, California.  Went on to Camp Pendleton [Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton] in [San Diego County] California for my Infantry training and then on--straight overseas to Subic Bay in the Philippines.  And, from Subic Bay I went to Atsugi, Japan.  And, I was Atsugi--I was at Phillip--in the Philippines for a year.  I was at Atsugi for a year.  And, at Atsu--while at Atsugi, I, I fell in love, met a--my first real love outside of, you know, anything, you know, high school kinda.  Met a Japanese girl who was half black, you know, you could tell she, she had a lot of--she had African features in her and fell in love with her.  There was time that we'd come back to the States, I said, "I'll be back, I'll be back."  Two years later I actually did come back.  I came back to marry her, went back to marry her.  In 1961 I got back, in the fall of 1961 and when I, when I finally found her, I found her--she was outside.  She was working on the side of a base called Yokosuka [United States Fleet Activities Yokosuka].  I was, I went back to Atsugi and she was at Yokosuka which is like about a two hour drive away.  And unfortunately, she had gotten hooked on drugs, and three, four months later she passed on, you know, from a drug overdose.
Speaker 2: What a sad story.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it is.  What I did with--then, I went to--
Story_ID: 99295
Speaker 1: Now, let me backtrack a little bit.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, in grade school you, all you thought about was becoming a [U.S.] Marine.  Did you have any interest in theater at this point?
Speaker 2: Naw.  Naw.
Speaker 1: Had you ever been to a play at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I had been--my first play that I saw, I saw in grade school.  My grandmother [Otis Harper Booker] took me to see my aunt in a play at the Parkway Community House [now the Chicago Baptist Institute] which was down on 51st and South Park.  It was a play called, "The Monkey's Paw."  My aunt played the female lead and it was in a place, it was at Parkway Community House, again on 51st South Park in the upstairs loft.  And, this organization was called the Skyloft Players.  One of the found--one of those groups of black theatre history.  And, my aunt was a--she was an actress in that group; my Aunt Willa.  My mother's [Amanda Booker Smith]--my, the--my mother's middle sister, yeah.
Speaker 1: The Monkey's Paw's an eerie play, I think that Alfred Hitchcock did it on his show [The Alfred Hitchcock Hour].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was, it was weird watching it.  I mean, as a kid, I was like about ten years old.  And, it was weird watching it because there was my aunt.  I knew it was my aunt.  She was even wearing some of the clothes that my aunt wears around the house.  Especially, the robe.  I remember the robe.  But, wasn't my aunt, you know.  And, I always found that fascinating, you know.  Whenever I, whenever somebody talk about plays I say, "Yeah, my aunt was in a play.  But, man it was really strange, it was my aunt, but it wasn't my aunt," you know.
Story_ID: 99296
Speaker 1: Now, were there any teachers there that you admired or who helped you, you know, in your development at Parker [Parker High School, now Paul Robeson High School, in Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I think, Mr. [Eugene] Pence in high school who was my--I was an a cappella, when I went to Parker, I joined the a cappella.  And, I was in the a cappella for all three years in hi--there.  And, Mr. Pence taught us some of the things, some of the same things that I do today with, in terms of voice control and you know, diaphragm breathing; that whole bit, about, about singing.  So, I remember that, yeah, yeah.  But, that's the only thing.  I mean, there wasn't any like strong references to English, you know, and literature, reading plays that, that hooked me.  There was, there was really nothing, nothing there other than, other than the voice, you know, that I use today or that I relate to in terms today.  I still do some of the same vocal exercises that I did with Mr. Pence, you know.  Or, at least I teach 'em in my class at Columbia College [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did, so, you really didn't have any--
Speaker 2: No connection.
Speaker 1: Connection to theater whatsoever?
Speaker 2: Naw.
Speaker 1: And so-
Story_ID: 99297
Speaker 1: In 1961 when you returned to the United States--
Speaker 2: I turned--returned to Japan.  'Cause I (unclear).
Speaker 1: To Japan, okay, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I returned to Japan.  I--when Lai Chan [ph.], when she passed, I took a course at Camp Zama, a Japanese course, learned the language.  Or, you know, sort of the langu--you know, get the--you never really learn the language, you learn the basic things about--
Speaker 1: Conversational Japanese.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Conversational Japanese.  And, also how to, you know, read some of the street signs because I bought a car and I wanted to see the coun--see Japan.  I got--when I was--first time I was there, I spent a lot of time in, in--on the party set, you know, hanging out, drinking, and that kind of stuff.  And, then after Lai Chan, I just started going out experiencing the Japanese culture and that was really cool, you know, bought a car, bought me a half interest in a house, and--'cause I was, I was really intending to stay, you know.  I was gonna be a lifer.  I was gonna stay.  And, after like about a year and a half it was time to re-enlist.  And, the first sergeant ask if I wanted to--said "If I wanted to stay here and keep everything the way it was, the way it was then I was gonna have to re-enlist within like about three weeks."  And then, I said, "Oh, yeah, I'll talk to you later."  And, then something happened.  I have no idea what happened.  But, I got homesick.  I actually got homesick.  And, I've never, never felt that before.  And, I decided I'd go home.  I'll come back to the States and see what the deal was, was, going on here.  And, you know, when he ask, (unclear), first sergeant, I think, I think I'm gonna go home.  He said, "Well, you know you're gonna have to give all of this up," you know.  'Cause everybody knew that I had (laughter), you know, I had the car, I had the house, I had--everybody knew I had it made.  And, I had a real nice job, you know, so.  I said, "Naw, but I gotta, I gotta--I just wanted to get, I wanted to get back--somehow I wanted to get back to Chicago [Illinois].  And so, I was discharged in September, like September 3, 1963.  Not, a few days after [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] made his big speech on Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: The March on Washington.  That's September of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, '63 [1963].  I saw that--I was, I was in transit barracks in Treasure Island near San Francisco [California], right between San Francisco and Oakland.  And, I watched, I watched that whole thing on television.  I had, I hadn't--I hadn't been--I had been away--I had no idea what was going on, really.
Speaker 1: So, you hadn't really been following the [Civil Rights] Movement?
Speaker 2: Hadn't been following it, naw; hadn't really been following it, you know.  And, so it was all kinda--it was all fascinating, you know.  And, then a few--not long after that, I was discharged.
Story_ID: 99298
Speaker 1: I got out and immediately went to work for--what are the first--first thing I did, I worked for Spiegel's.  It was, it was close to the holiday season.  They were hiring people to unload trucks on the dock.  So, I worked for Spiegel's for a couple of months and then that--by the time that was over, I got--I had already applied for a job at the Steel Mills.  So, I went to work for the steel mills for like about three months and by that time, the gig I'd applied for at the Post Office came through.  So, I left the Steel Mills and went to the Post Office.  And, I was working for the Post Office when, when--and I was thinking, "You know this is all right, but I think I'm ready to go back to the [U.S.] Marines.  This is not--and, I figured if I got back in within a certain amount of time, I could still keep--get my rank back, you know.  And, I was just thinking, really thinking seriously about going back in the Marine Corp when I met some guys who were in a theatre group who needed an actor.  I met these guys in a bar call the South Shore Lounge, you know.  Every--as a mailman, you get out--you finish, you finish, you finish your work as a mailman pretty early like about three o'clock, you know, that's when you clock out.  And, then you go home and you get ready to come back the next day, 'cause you gotta clock in (laughter) about four o'clock, some strange hour in the morning to sort the mail out.  But, I met these guys and they were in this, they were in the group at Michael Reese Hospital [and Medical Center in Chicago, Illinois], called Dramatic Art Guild.  And, the Dramatic Art Guild was doing plays for the patients down there.  And, they were doing a play and one of the actors had dropped out and they asked if I would come and, you know, check it out to see if I can.  I told the guy, I thought they were, I thought--I told them, they must be crazy asking me, an ex-Marine to go down there and be in some play, you know.  I said, "I don't do that kind of stuff."  And, (laughter) one of 'em, says "Well," said, "Chuck I know," I mean, you know, we had been, we had been drinking buddies for like about a month, you know, so it's not like they were brand new to me, these guys.  But, they said, "You know, you're a single guy, Chuck, you know, it's a--be a lot of nice looking ladies down there," you know.  You outta just come down there and check it out.  I said, "Okay."  But, that was the hook.  So, I went over there and as soon as I walked in the room, as soon as I walked in the room, I was--it was all over.  I felt something, you know.  And, it's taken me a long, it took me a long time, like about twenty years to figure out what it was; what that thing was that really got me.  And, it wasn't because there was ladies around.  It's--when I walked in the room everybody was busy.  Wasn't nobody sitting around talking, lollygagging, no BS-ing.  Everybody was busy doing tasks.  Somebody was over in this corner.  Somebody was doing this.  They were running lines.  Somebody was over there hanging lights.  They were, they were in tech.  And, somebody was hanging lights.  Somebody was running wires.  There was--And, years later I figured out that that was about the closes thing that I had come to, to the Marine Corps.  'Cause in the Marine Corps nobody fools around.  Everybody's got a job to do.  You do your job, and you--the whole job completes the mission.  And, that's exactly what theatre is, believe it or not.
Speaker 2: Teamwork.
Speaker 1: Teamwork.  Everybody's working.  Everybody's working to accomplish the mission.  And, when I walked in that room, that's exactly--that was the first time I had seen that.  Where everybody--even on the job, somebody's always messing around, you know, BS-ing, la da da da da da da, you know.  "That cat don't never work, do he?"  La da da and that kind of stuff, you know.  But here, everybody was busy.  Didn't have time to--"This is Chuck."  "Hey, hey, hey Chuck," and back to what they're doing, you know.  No, no, no messing around.  And, that's what, I realized that's what got me, you know.
Story_ID: 99299
Speaker 1: So anyway, I learned, I learned, I learned the part, went on, and went on stage, had a performance, and they were laughing at me.  And I say, you know, I feel, feeling inside said, "This is not gonna work.  These people are laughing.  I'm really, really, bad," you know.  So, intermission, I said, "Yeah, this is not working.  I'll finish this, but this is the last time I'm gonna do this.  'Cause, you know, these people are laughing at me."  They says, "Naw Chuck, they're not laughing at you.  They're laughing at your character, you know.  I had, I mean, I didn't, I didn't get any of this stuff, you know.  I said, "Yeah, yeah, right.  Yeah, Okay."  So, the show was over and we go out for curtain call, everybody--they go out, take their little bows, then somebody else come they take the--but then, I went out there, didn't everybody--a huge roar, clap, clap, clap, clap, clap, clap, clap, clap, clap, clap, and then that was it.  I was, I was gone after that, you know, so.
Speaker 2: Hooked (simultaneously).
Speaker 1: It's all over.  Yeah, it was all over.
Speaker 2: That's what actors want.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Applause (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Yeah, see I've been--See, I didn't even realize that I was an actor, you know.  But, you know.
Speaker 2: So, what kinda role, what was it?
Speaker 1: It was a role of a wa--the play was called "McAdam and Eve."  And, I played the part of a wayward reverend.  A female skirt chasing reverend.
Speaker 2: Now, that's really a stretch to play a reverend like that, isn't it?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  (Laughter) You know, yeah.  And, this is the first time I had been on stage, and it worked, you know, it worked.  I did, I mean, I realized that it was just--and, over the course of the--I stayed with the Dramatic Art Guild for quite some time.  And, over those years I, you know, I realized I just had a natural thing for it, you know, you know.  I had never studied acting or anything like that.  Again, the closest thing--the voice, the voice thing I had was, you know, in high school [Parker High School in Chicago, Illinois] with Mr. [Eugene] Pence.  So, I was able to project.  When they talk about projecting your voice, I know exactly how to do that.  So, that helped.  But, everything else was natural ability.  And then, while at Dramatic Art Guild I said, "You know, this might be something, why don't you learn this.  Go to school and learn this stuff," you know.  And, so that's what I did.  I went and studied at Loop College [now Harold Washington College, City Colleges of Chicago, Illinois].  Studied drama, along with some other things that I was dealing with at the time, like Data Processing.  I was a computer programmer.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's a little bit--now, did you have any idea in those days, that you could earn a living as you--
Speaker 1: No.  Naw, naw, that was, that wasn't even on the radar screen, you know.
Speaker 2: So, it's avocational kinda thing?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  But, I just knew that there was more to it than what they were doing down there.  And, that if I wanted to move any, you know, go further, that I would have to learn more, you know.  And, so that's exactly what I did, you know.
Story_ID: 99300
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so you went to Loop College [now Harold Washington College, City Colleges of Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Loop College and then--I was at Loop for a long time because I was part-time.  All the time I was, you know--I had left the Post Office and started working for the Illinois Department of Public Aid [now the Illinois Department of Healthcare and Family Services] as a computer programmer.
Speaker 1: Now, when was this?  When did you start that?
Speaker 2: Well, that's another little cute little story.  When I was, when I was at the Post Office, I started at the Post Office in 1964.  And, then I was working in Rogers Park [Chicago, Illinois] and I was delivering these, these flyers talking about great opportunities for people who wanna learn computer programming, you know.  And, I had no idea what computer programming was, but it sound like, you know, the start of something, you know.  And, I said, "Oh," you know.  So, and we were deliv--we were putting these little, these flyers in every, just about in every mailbox.  I said, "Well, when I get home, I'll get mine," okay.  So, I got home, I didn't get mine.  There was no, there was no flyer in the boxes for me.  So, I waited a couple of, couple of days, and still no flyer.  So, I just grabbed one off the, from the junk mail pile, that was gonna be thrown away, and filled it out and got accepted into this little computer programming school.  Why they didn't send these things to the South Side, I don't know, you know.  And, so--and I'm not gonna say.  But, all I know is they got 'em on the North Side (laughter), but they didn't get 'em on the South Side, Okay.  But, I filled one out, and went to computer programming school on the G.I. Bill.  And, got a job as a computer programmer with the, with then the Cook County Department of Public Aid, which later merged into the Illinois Department of Public Aid.  And so, so I was, you know, I was, I was making a nice, you know, a nice little salary.  'Cause opportunity was--it was the ground floor of computers at those days, in those days, were bigger than this room.
Speaker 1: That was like COBOL or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  COBOL.  I was--I lean--I study on--I started off with Autocoder, you know.  And, I was really good at-- programmer.  And so, and I was, boom, I was getting promoted, promoted, promoted up the yin yang.  And, then the Cook County Department of Public Aid and the Illinois Department of Public Aid merged.  And, this was like in the late '60's [1960s], early '70's [1970s].  They were gonna move all the computers down to Springfield [Illinois].  And, that's when I had to make a big decision.  Did I wanna to go Springfield and continue my programming occupation or did I wanna stay in Chicago?  And, Chicago won out because, because of theater.  I was thinking, you know, I have to give up theater because there was nothing happening in Springfield along those lines, you know.
Speaker 1: So, how are you gonna make a living?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I, no, I stayed, stayed with the Department in another position.  They made--since I did have analyst, I had moved up to a data, data analyst and they used me in that capacity in another department.  But, I was frozen there.  There was no advancement, you know.  But, and that was okay.  I was still in Chicago and I was still able to do my little theatre on the side, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, what year does this put us in?
Speaker 2: Now, we're talking, we've moved on to like 1976.
Story_ID: 99301
Speaker 1: Now, in theatre during those, during that time what I had been doing from, from the Dramatic Art Guild--and, in the '60s [1960s] some of the kids in the Dramatic Art Guild joined another group down at [Jane Addams Hull House Association's] Parkway Community House on 69th and Eberhart [Chicago, Illinois] called X-BAG [Experimental Black Actors Guild].
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's Clarence Taylor.
Speaker 1: Clarence Taylor.  Clarence Taylor, Jean Davison, and Claudia McCormick, but mainly Clarence Taylor.  And, they joined this group called X-BAG and asked, they say, "Chuck you outta come over and check it out."  And, I did.  And, I kinda like Clarence Taylor, you know.  And, this was the first, my first experience of what we now call black theatre, you know.  Because, Dramatic Art Guild was an integrated group.  We did all kind of plays, we didn't do just--we did anything, you know; anything that we thought the audience would like.
Speaker 2: So, you weren't a part of the Black Arts--
Speaker 1: Black.  Naw.
Speaker 2: Movement?
Speaker 1: Naw.  Naw, naw.  No, no, no.  The first time I got involved in any of that, was with X-BAG with Clarence Taylor, and this is in 1972.  The first show I saw down there was with one of my friends from the Dramatic Art Guild, Richard Umber.  He directed [HM] Douglas Alan-Mann, and another friend of mine from Dramatic Art Guild, Lynn Logan [ph.] in Ron Milner's "Who's Got His Own."  And, I was blown away, you know.  Mainly, you know, by the power of the script, how it affected me as a black man, and I said, Yeah!  I gotta--this will be great, I'd love to work with these guys.  And so, the next--I tried out for the next play which was, "Day of Absence" [by HM Douglas Turner Ward] And, I was--I played the part of the announcer, which is a role for a white guy.  But, I did it in white face, you know, and it worked, you know.  And, that began my X-BAG career.  That was in 1972 and I stayed with X-BAG for like about, like about four or five years, you know.  I extensively pretty much with X-BAG, working under Clarence.  And, Clarence was what I call a "black theatre revolutionary."  He had tried to make it in the, in the "legitimate theatre" and was rejected because of his race and it really affected him, you know.
Speaker 2: Here in Chicago?
Speaker 1: Here in Chicago.  It really affected him.  He--and he say's "Okay.  (unclear) for you."  We'll do--"I'll do, I'll do it right down here and I'll do it my way," you know.  And, that's what he used to preach to Doug and I, you know.  We were his, like his disciples; Douglas Alan-Mann.  "This is where you gotta, this is where you gotta do your theatre, right here.  Right--they'll come if it's good enough.  Then, you just get it established right here, you know.  And, always start on time."  That was his thing.  Always start on time.  None of this, what do they call it?
Speaker 2: CP Time [Colored People's Time], yeah.
Speaker 1: CP Time, you know.  (Laughter) None of this CP Time, you know.  Always start on the dot, you know--
Story_ID: 99302
Speaker 1: Was Ted Ward [James Theodore Ward] around in those, I mean, he was alive and everything--
Speaker 2: That's--Ted was, Ted Ward's alive, and I'll tell you about Ted Ward, 'cause I, 'cause of after about-Clarence [Taylor] preached, preached the gospel to us about black theatre and what it meant to do, do it or not--do it in the community.  And then, and I was--we were buying it, you know.  And, I was, I was listening, I was hearing it, you know.  But, then a couple of years later Clarence introduced me to Ted Ward we were gonna do his play, "The Daubers" and they wanted me to direct it.  And, this was like about 1974.  And, Clare--Ted, my first marriage had broken up and I was living in South Commons [Chicago, Illinois] as a single guy, you know, in a--on my own.  And, Ted had a, had a lady friend who lived in the same building.  So, we were in communication almost consistently, you know.  Whenever I get--when I come home, pick up Ted, take him down to the theatre, and we rehearse the play; bring Ted back to, back to the apartment building and we'd talk all night.
Story_ID: 98976
Speaker 1: So, you were gonna tell me the story about [James] Theodore Ward in his early days.  What--When did you first meet him?
Speaker 2: Well again, I first met him must have been 1973 in the fall when it was decided that we were--Clarence Taylor wanted to do his play "The Daubers".  And, naturally Ted wanted, Ted Ward wanted to meet the director and Clarence wanted me to direct the piece, and--
Speaker 1: Was this your first piece that you directed?
Speaker 2: Actually, my first--I had co-produced--co-directed with Clarence a play by--[HM] Useni Eugene Perkins called "Professor J.B."
Speaker 1: I remember that.
Speaker 2: Which had a character in it called Uncle Ted, which was based on Ted Ward.  But, Ted didn't like that so they had to change that character to Uncle Ned, you know.  I remember that, you know.
Speaker 1: That's a character that drank quite a bit too.
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, now this was, this was my first directing assignment at X-BAG [Experimental Black Actors Guild] was "The Daubers."  And, like I said, Ted Ward had a friend who lived in the same building that I, that I lived in.  So, I'd get off from work at Public Aid [Illinois Department of Public Aid, now the Illinois Department of Healthcare and Family Services], wash up, pick Ted up, we'd go to the theater, rehearse, come back, and we'd talk about the play and then talk about theater in general.  And, Ted told me, well you know, Ted had an extensive theater background.  I mean, this brother's been--had done it all, and produced on Broadway with the new Federal Theater Project.  The whole--all of--he, you know, a vast history.  And, he agreed with pretty much everything that Clarence had been telling Doug [HM Douglas Alan-Mann] and I about doing theater in the neighborhood.  He says, "Yeah, you always gotta stay close with the black theater community."  He said, "But, never be afraid to venture outside of it."  He say, "Never be afraid to venture out."  And, that's what I needed to hear, you know.  And, that's the philosophy that I still operate on--from, you know.  I am black theater based, you know.  But, I do theater where ever, and I study theater where ever, and I wanna know as much about what everybody else is doing so that I can bring it back and incorporate it into, into what I do,  you know.  But, I am black theater based, but still--but I, know you, I'm out there.  I work with anybody.  I could care less who it is, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I--this is what I got from Ted Ward.  This is what I needed to hear, the things that Ted Ward was telling me, you know, about, you know, theater--it's a whole big world of theater out there and you can't just, you can't just stay inside, you can't just, you can't just do it at the [Jane Addams Hull House Association's] Parkway Community House [Chicago, Illinois].  You gotta get out there, you know.  Learn it then bring it back to the Parkway if you want, you know.  But, definitely get out, you know.
Story_ID: 98977
Speaker 1: During "The Daubers" you were saying, I think, just before we broke that you spent a lot of time with Ted Ward [James Theodore Ward] 'cause you'd drive him--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, from the play back to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: South Commons.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  South Commons.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 2901 South Michigan, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had just recently--my marriage of like about six years had broken up, and but I was always, you know, always doing theater on the side, you know.  And, I guess that's one of the--theater is a very demanding profession, you know.  If you're gonna do it, you gotta--everyone has to realize that it's unforgiving.  It demands you time.  If you're gonna do it, you gotta, you gotta be there.
Speaker 1: Right.  And, you had a full-time job, right?
Speaker 2: I had full-time job.
Speaker 1: You were computer programmer.
Speaker 2: And, I was doing theater at night.  And, I was also, believe it or not, I was, I was in, I was taking classes, you know, and--theater classes, and dat--pretty much not so much data processing classes in those days.  But, it was pretty much theater classes, you know.  So, I'm going to work and studying theater and doing theater, you know, at night.  So, I mean, it was, yeah, it was--I don't, I don't blame my ex-wife at all for saying, "Look you're gonna have to make your mind what 'cha gonna do.  You're be a husband?  You're gonna be a theater person?  What is it?  You're gonna be a computer programmer?  What is it?  What'd you gonna do," you know.
Speaker 1: So, she wasn't really interested in theater I guess, huh?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I met her in the theater.  She was, you know, she was--she had been an actress, but you know.  But, not as a--an actress, "I'm gonna be an actress and this is what I'm gonna do with my life," you know.
Speaker 1: It does take a lot of time.
Speaker 2: It takes a lot of time.
Speaker 1: You're talking about going to rehearsal.
Speaker 2: She was wonderful lady.  She was a devoted wife and I don't, you know, I don't have anything negative to say about her.  It was just that theater took me away, you know.
Story_ID: 98978
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what was it--well, I hate to ask you--probably it's not relevant but, what was "The Daubers" [by James Theodore Ward] about (laughter).
Speaker 2: "The Daubers," "The Daubers" is--was a play about Chicago [Illinois] politics; politics of the black community, you know.  Loosely based on one of the early black politicians in the Chicago area, you know.  More or less, you know, there's always, when you talk about Chicago politics, it's always some sort of corruption going on and it was, it was into that.
Speaker 1: Was it based on William L. Dawson's Con--
Speaker 2: I would--loosely based--
Speaker 1: Congressional and--okay.
Speaker 2: Loosely based on Dawson, you know.  But, not, you know, yeah, we--you couldn't look at it and say, "yeah, I know who they're talking about.  They're talking about Dawson," I mean, you can't--couldn't say that.  But, it was probably, it was loosely based on Dawson.  But, it's about politics and around--what--political downfall that it had on a specific family who was involved in politics, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and it's probably I don't--I think we're the only person who ever, the only--X-BAG [Experimental Black Actors Guild] is the only group that ever--to ever do that play, you know.  And, I was with X-BAG, I was at the time, I had sorta risen up to the rank as a resident stage manager.  When I was at X-BAG, I just--I stage managed just about everything that was there.  And we, you know, I think we started a touring, a little touring company when I--we were always getting calls about, "Can you come here, could you come there, could you come and do something."  So, I started a small little touring company out of X-BAG.  One was a poetry show called, that I called Poetry in Motion.  You know, just selected poems, African American poems that we did for like about an hour, hour and a half.  And then there was another play that I put together by Oscar Griffin called "Midnight Angel" that we did, you know.  It was a little bit more risque depend on, you know, who, who was asking for the, for the piece and if it was pretty much a church, church groups would take to Poetry in Motion piece.  If it was a little bit more risque, who could handle, you know, the language.
Speaker 1: Jaguar Social Club or something like that (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  We'd take 'em, we'd take 'em "Midnight Angle," you know.  I think the best--we did 'em both at Governors State University [in University Park, Illinois] where I had eventually started taking classes after Loop [College, now Harold Washington College, City Colleges of Chicago, Illinois].  And, was a big hit there.  Both hit, 'cause it was, you know, college, you know.  Everybody, everybody loved those--the two pieces that we did.
Speaker 1: Did they feature local writers for the most part, or a mixture?
Speaker 2: What?  The poetry?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Both of them.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  Well, Oscar Griffin was a local writer, is a local writer.  He's still with us.  The poetry was whatever; was pretty much on national, national poetry, you know.  Lynn Logan [ph.], [HM] Douglas Alan-Mann, and the late Don X. Williams.  Those were my two performers, well, my three performers that--and, you know.
Story_ID: 98979
Speaker 1: But, you know, and X-BAG [Experimental Black Actors Guild in Chicago, Illinois], X-BAG took us, took me, you know, it really gave me a, a foundation of all the other African American groups that were around those days like Kuumba [Theatre], what were some of the others, it was--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) eta [Creative Arts Foundation], and Black Ensemble Company--
Speaker 1: eta was, yeah, eta was black was Ebony Talent Association in those days.  Black Uns--[HM] Jackie Taylor's Black Ensemble [Theater] was coming up.  But there was a lot, there was a few--
Speaker 2: Lamont Zeno Theater with a better voice, you know.
Speaker 1: Lamont Zeno, yeah, that's the main, that was the main one I, that I wanted to bring up, Lemont Zeno and Pemon Rami and [HM] Useni [Eugene Perkins] over there, I mean, they were strong.  Really strong stuff was what's happening there.  And, that was the genesis of the Black Theater Alliance.  Clarence [Taylor] never liked to attend meetings so he always sent me as the representative of X-BAG.
Speaker 2: Now, X-BAG stood for, Experimental--
Speaker 1: Experimental Black Actors Guild, you know.  Wonderful name.  Fabulous name, you know.  And X-BAG was, was the tag, you know.
Speaker 2: There other theaters too, now--
Speaker 1: There were so many.
Speaker 2: Some of these names, I can't--there's a lot of there.
Speaker 1: I know, I know, it was, it was, there all in my book, you know, I got a book--
Speaker 2: Just Us Theater Company.
Speaker 1: Just Us.
Speaker 2: Who's that Marcus--
Speaker 1: Useni--
Speaker 2: Marcus--
Speaker 1: Marcus Nelson New Concept.
Speaker 2: Nelson, yeah.  New Concept Theater.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  But, it was a, it was a rich environment, you know.  So, it wasn't just one company doing everything, you know.  There were a lot of companies.  And, everybody was a member of the, was the--with the Black Theater Alliance when it first started meeting.  It first started meetings--Alliances meetings at, at Ebony Talent Association when they were at the YWCA before eta moved into their new space.
Speaker 2: Yeah, at the Harris Y.
Speaker 1: At the Harris Y, right, yeah.  So, that was--those are some very exciting days.  Now, I didn't realize it at the time, they were exciting.  But, as I look back, I, you know, I realize that that was the genesis of a whole lot of stuff.  And, I still say that the Black Theater Alliance of the '70s [1970s] was the genesis of what is now known as the League of Chicago Theatres.
Speaker 2: So, there was no league--
Speaker 1: There was no league then.  There was no league, you see.  But, we--
Speaker 2: That's interesting (laughter).
Speaker 1: We formed the league and it worked.  And, years later, the League of Chicago Theater came into, came, and it was the same thing.  It was, but it was all the theaters in the City of Chicago [Illinois] affiliated with it, you know.  But, we did it first.  We actually did it first, and it worked, yeah.
Speaker 2: It's a movement started in New York [New York City, New York], I think, Hazel Joan Bryant started the Black Theater Alliance in New York and it spread around the country and the concept spread.  And, then there was a Midwest Black Theater Alliance and it was a regional organization (simultaneously).
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, a lot of--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And, we used to make those regional meetings, especially when they were held in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], you know.  The Midwest Black Theater Alliance, we would all truck up to Milwaukee and meet.  Yeah those, and again, those are some, you know, pretty, pretty exciting days, you know.  Again, when you're young and you're in it, you don't--you have no idea that you're making, that you're making history, you know.  But, we did, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There was some, a lot of exciting theater
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: In Chicago.
Story_ID: 98980
Speaker 1: But, yeah, X-BAG [Experimental Black Actors Guild in Chicago, Illinois], X-BAG ground-- really sort of grounded me in the African, in African American theater.  This is what it's about.  This is pretty much how it's done.  And, when I went to New York [New York City, New York] and saw a play by the Negro Ensemble Company, I wasn't, I was there--Yes, I like it a everything, but I--it wasn't like I was awed, I was in awe of it because I didn't see too much there that they were doing that we weren't doing in Chicago [Illinois].  But, the world knew about what the Negro Ensemble Company was doing but nobody had any idea what we were doing here in Chicago, you know.  And, I would, I would imagine because of the New York Times, you know.  But, we were--I'm not saying we were just as good.  Naw, we didn't have the--I couldn't say, I couldn't say that actor for actor we could, we could match up with what was for--the talent that was in New York, okay.  But, the energy and the knowledge in terms of how to put a show together, yeah, I mean, some of the stuff I, some of the sets that Clarence Taylor built on his own; he was a wonderful set designer.  He was art instructor at a public school.  And, some of the, some of the sets that he put up, I'd match up with any set, with any set design that's out here today, you know.  You saw first rate stuff when you came down to X-BAG, I mean, first rate.  And, I went to New York and I saw plays and I say, "Oh, this set isn't as good as some of the stuff--Clarence Taylor should've did this set.  Clarence could've laid this sucker out.  That's what I'd be thinking, you know.  You know, but so, you know, and not to take anything from New York.  That's not what, that's not what I'm about.  I'm about making sure that people know that we've been doing this stuff here a long time.  And, the people who were in charge knew what they were doing, you know.  It wasn't just a community theater thing, or it wasn't just a play thing, these were professionals, they knew what they were doing.  They weren't making a living at it, no.  But, they knew what they were doing and they made sure that anybody who came through there, did it right, you know.  And, that's how I was trained, you know.
Story_ID: 98981
Speaker 1: Okay.  I remember, well, Oscar Brown, Jr., one of his plays--I know of maybe even a couple were produced at X-BAG [Experimental Black Actors Guild in Chicago, Illinois].  I saw Ed Douglas, Saturday, who played God in--what's the one where he's God in the Garden of Eden?
Speaker 2: God, yeah.  That was a--we did that at the Chicago Theatre Company too.  I can't think of the name of that piece.  I know what you're talking about though.  (unclear) Adam and Eve, and--
Speaker 1: Yes, Oscar Brown, Jr.
Speaker 2: Oscar Brown, Jr.'s piece, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It's so much.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, we, I mean, we did a full season.  And, we did, we did--and again, there was so much, so much going on.  Kuumba [Theatre] was the main, and Kuumba was the, was the company, I think, in those days.  Pemon Rami was the director.  Everybody wanted to work for Kuumba and everybody wanted to work for Pemon, work--do a show with Pemon.  Every black actor in town, you know.  You just wanted to work with these guys.  And, Pemon and Useni [HM Useni Eugene Perkins], they did some wonderful, wonderful stuff over at Lamont Zeno [Thatre] in the children's theater.  You know, "The Black Fairy," you know, and then there was a couple others that I--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Tina Farina, the something of Tina Farina [ph.], it was once--some wonderful, you know, theater for young that, you know, tops anything that I've seen today, you know.  Real meaningful, well done stuff, you know.  And, it was just, again, it was, it was a very exciting time.
Story_ID: 98982
Speaker 1: What was the play that X-BAG [Experimental Black Actors Guild in Chicago, Illinois] did about--based on a J. A. Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers] novel "From 'Superman' to Man" about a Pullman porter on a train.  Do you remember that one?
Speaker 2: I was, that was, I had just left because I had to, I had decided that I really had to finish and get my degree because I was at a, I was at a place where without a degree, I couldn't go anywhere.  So, in 19--like about '76 [1976], January of '76' [1976], I more or less resigned from X-BAG and said, "Look, I gotta go back to school."  And so, for two years, I just sorta dropped out and got my degree from Governors State University [University Park, Illinois] in 1977.  'Cause, you know, I just couldn't do it all."
Speaker 1: So, they offer a degree in theater?
Speaker 2: Actually, it was--I got what, what was called, it's a general studies what amounts to a General Studies Degree.  It was under a special program called the Board of Governors Degree where, your life experience, you know, you get some credits for that.  And, I had tons of life, fortunately I had tons of life, life experience that I could take to them.  And so, I got that, you know, plus my work at Public Aid [Illinois Department of Public Aid, now the Illinois Department of Healthcare and Family Services], and Data Processing.  All that combined, I was able enough to get enough credits for a Disco--Board of Governors Degree, which is basically a Liberal Arts Degree, you know.  And, that was in, that was in 1977 when I got that, you know.
Story_ID: 98983
Speaker 1: And, right after, right after getting the degree, I was asked to direct a show at Governors State University [in University Park, Illinois].  And, I directed a--in 1978, February, 1978, I directed "My Sweet Charlie" out there, and I, and the lead I used [HM] Douglas Alan-Mann from X-BAG [Experimental Black Actors Guild in Chicago, Illinois].  And, it was, it was a un--it was a real wonderful play and well-received.  And, the thing that we did was, we did the whole play behind the scrim.  The whole set was behind the scrim that way I could just light up things, thing are popping up all over the place, you know.  And, then you take the lights out, you couldn't see anything and you pop, then the scene would take over here and you focus--I--your focus would go over there.  It was a wonderful concept.  I don't think I could ever do another play completely behind the scrim.  But, I also incorporated a lot of what's in the book.  There's a book, "My Sweet Charlie," also, you know.  That's--and a lot of the, lot of the--there's some wonderful speeches in the book that I would incorporate in the play, that I incorporate in the play during scene changes.  Which, you know, it made it quite interesting, a very interesting concept.  And, that play and--that was at Governors State and then I was asked to do "Eden," a play by Steve Carter at Loop College.  Actually, I took "Eden" to Loop College [now Harold Washington College, City Colleges of Chicago, Illinois] 'cause I had, I saw "Eden" when I was in New York [New York City, New York] at the Negro Ensemble Company and feel in love with it as a play.  I said, "This play would be a really, really, good piece for Chicago," you know.  Because it deals, it deals with class, classes of African, of African Americans, you know.  And, this which is the whole--at the time, and this is, I'm talking late '70s [1970s].  If you were outside of the black community, you know that the black community does have a ridged class structure.  And, most people out, most people outside of the community think all black people are the same, you know.  So, this play really pinpoints and make sure that you deal with the fact that, no, they are not all the same.  So, I wanted to, I really wanted to do "Eden" in Chicago.  And, took me like a whole year to get the rights.  But finally, I got the rights to do it.  First, I took it to Loop College and Loop said--finally Loop said, "Let's do it."  So, we did--I did a student production at Loop and right about that time I went and saw a production at Victory Gardens [Theater] that they had just did.  They did, they did a production of "Ceremonies in Dark Old Men" [by Lonne Elder III].  This is like in 1977.  And, in their mission statement, it states that they all, they--every season they're gonna do a play by, you know, about the--that comes from the minority community, you know, which to me it means the black community, right.  So, right away I went to Dennis, and said, "Dennis, look I got"--Dennis Zacek, he didn't know me at the time, but I had directed these two plays, "My Sweet Charlie" and "Eden."  And, so I took, I got an appointment with him, took both, you know, the reviews, what little notices I had from both productions, what visuals I had from both productions and finally he got back to me and asked if I, you know, would I be willing to direct "Eden" in his, what's that, in the '78 [1978], '79 [1979] season.  And, of course, I said, "Yes."  And that, that's what really started my professional directing career.  That "Eden" in 1978.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, I was real, real happy to have the very first preview, sitting in the audience was Ted Ward [James Theodore Ward], you know.
Speaker 2: Now, he wouldn't be around much longer, would he?
Speaker 1: Naw, he passed on like about two years after that.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: I thought about 1980, '81' [1981] [sic, 1983].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Not too long after that.  But, he did--he was there, he was there in the audience.  Yeah.  I was very proud to have him there, yeah.
Speaker 2: But, what did he think?  Did you he give you some kind of review?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well he, yeah, he--
Speaker 2: I know he was going, he was going to.
Speaker 1: Well, the, I--his, the comment that he made that I, that sticks out in my head was, "that man can write," you know.  He, well he's a writer himself.  So, naturally the think that he zeros in on was the, was the writing.  Course I'm looking for pats on the back for, you know, how wonderful I directed the play.  But, I never got one of those.  I didn't get any, any of that.  But, he did, he was very impressed with the writing.
Story_ID: 98984
Speaker 1: So, you're one of the first members of the black theater community [in Chicago, Illinois] to make some kind of alliance with one of the, one of our north side (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: According to the [Chicago] Tribune I was the first, I was the first African American to direct on Chicago's Off-Loop theater scene.  That was according to the Tribune writer at the time called Linda Winer.  She made that comment.  I didn't know.  I mean, I really didn't know.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a considerable theater scene we're talking about.  We're talking about over a hundred theaters in Chicago [Illinois], you know, which are Off-Loop Theaters (unclear).  At least, at one time there was.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, right now--
Speaker 1: Quite a few (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Right now there's in the league, I'm on the board, I'm on the league board and we have like about a hundred and, 160 members now.  Now, at the time, in the '70s [1970s], I would say, it might not have been a hundred, you know, but it was, it was quite vast.
Speaker 1: I'm pushing it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's pushing it.
Speaker 1: It was a, you know, if you pick up the [Chicago] Reader in those days--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was much--Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And look through the Organic Theater [Company], Victory Gardens [Theater] all these different--
Speaker 2: It was starting, it was starting to pick up.
Speaker 1: Bailiwick, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, things were really starting to, just starting to click.  It was, it was right there.  It was right then and there.  "Grease," "Grease" had sorta, in my opinion, you know, from my point of view, it was, it was "Grease" that really started things clicking on Lincoln Avenue.  They did it in an old CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] barn, you know, and it--there were--it was--the company was called the Kingston Mines Theater Company.  Which is transferred eventually to the Kingston Mines Blues--
Speaker 1: Bar, Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But they did, they did blues in the cabaret and they did theater in the back, okay.  And, one of the early shows that they did in the back, and this is like, we're talking like about 1971, was "Grease."  The original "Grease," you know.
Speaker 1: Now, that's before it got big--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, nobody (laughter), it was, yeah, yeah, outside of Chicago, nobody knew what "Grease"--about "Grease," you know. But, the original "Grease" started right there.  And, I was in the show at Kingston Mines that followed "Grease."  So, I'm rehearsing upstairs in the loft and watching "Grease" either being performed or watching "Grease" actors being, replacement actors being put in all the time "Grease" is running.  And, down the, down the street where the Victory Gardens Theater is located right now was the Body Politic [Theater].  And, the Body Politic had just invited a group from Madison, Wisconsin to come down because they were, they were taking over two spaces; the upstairs and the downstairs, and they needed somebody down, to take over the downstairs space.  That group was the Organic Theater Company, you know.
Speaker 1: Stu Gordon.
Speaker 2: Stuart Gordon's Organic Theater Company featuring a black actor by the name of Andre De Shields, you know.  And, between the Organic and "Grease," Lincoln Avenue was a--customers all over the place.  That was sort of the genesis, what I think is the genesis of what we know as--well, no it was a part of it.  I'm sure Bob Sickinger and his, his--the [Jane Addams] Hull House Association on 3012 Belmont, the Leo Lerner [Theatre] where [HM] Jackie Taylor is right now, the Beacon Street [Hull House] Theater, and Parkway [Community House] at the time, that had a lot to do with it.  But, you--I--you know, I wasn't a part of that.  I was a part of the Lincoln Avenue scene, you know.  I was, I was, and I saw the, I saw the people standing in line to get in to see "Grease."  I saw the people standing in line to see Stuart--The Organic pieces.  I saw 'em, I was there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he had something called, "Warp" at one time.
Speaker 2: "Warp," yes.  The comic book.
Speaker 1: I don't know how I remember that but it was a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  "Warp," yeah.  Because it was, it was one of his most famous works.  It went to Broadway [New York City, New York], but didn't make it.  But, it was a big hit here in the, in the City of Chicago.  Transferred, went to the Apollo [Theater Chicago], here, our Apollo, and ran for, forever.  You could see all three of 'em in one day, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Year after the three parts of trilogy, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, three part.  Yeah.  Yeah.  It was fabulous.  It was just, it was just, it was a lot of fun going on.  It was a lot--
Story_ID: 98985
Speaker 1: And this, now this was my introduction into the, you know, this was back in the '70s [1970s], this is early '70s [1970s], even before I got the, you know, 'cause I didn't do Victory Garden [Victory Gardens Theater in Chicago, Illinois] 'til '78 [1978].  But, I was, you know, I knew what was going on, you know.  I was, you know, and when Clarence [Taylor] was telling me that, you know, "you gotta do it here, you gotta do it here."  Half--I'm thinking, "wait a minute, what about all that other stuff that's out there," you know.  'Cause I had,--the first, the first job I was ever paid for in theater where somebody gave me money to do a theater piece, was the Goodman Theatre [Chicago, Illinois].  I was an understudy in a play called, "The Night Thoreau Spent in Jail." [by Robert Edwin Lee and Jerome Lawrence] And, Thoreau--this was during the '70 [1970]/ '71 [1971] season.  Could've been '70 [1970], '70 [1970], '71 [1971] season and Christopher Walken played the role of [Henry David] Thoreau.  And--
Speaker 2: I would have loved to have seen that (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Christopher Walken play the role Thoreau.  And, I was an understudy for a brother named Ira Rogers, who hated the role.
Speaker 2: I know Ira Roger.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It was the role of a runaway slave, and Ira, Ira hated playing this runaway slave.  So, any excuse he could find not, not to go on, he would find it.  And there, and here I am, young Chuck want-"Hey, I'll go on, let me go on, let me go on, let me go on."  But, it all--I'd play, I'd played most, I did most of the matinees and at least one or two shows during the week, you know.
Story_ID: 98986
Speaker 1: You were gonna tell an Ira Rogers story.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ira Rogers.  Yeah.  "The Night Thoreau Spent in Jail," Christopher Walken playing the lead, Ira Rogers playing the runaway slave, the play being--the play was directed by Patrick Henry, founder of the Free Street Theater, okay.  Great.  And, the play was written by Jerome Lawrence and Robert E. [Edwin] Lee; same people who wrote "Inherit the Wind," okay.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And, in the play, this runaway slave makes it up north, runs into [Henry David] Thoreau at Walden Pond and is so impressed with Thoreau he says, "I'll be your salve," okay.  Ira Rogers went to the writers and said, "Look, there ain't no way a brother gonna escape slavery, make it up the free--make it up North and then give his, his freedom away, just give it away."  The writers heard this.  They heard it and changed the text.  That impressed me with Ira Rogers right there, you know.  'Cause he--he says, "Now, this is not good.  This wouldn't happen."  But, then they listened to him, you know.  And, they changed it.  I said, "Woah," you know.  Now, I'm a novice.  I mean, this is 19--, this is the winter of 1970.  I've just been in this business, you know, first time at something like on this level at the Goodman [Theatre in Chicago, Illinois], you know, never, you know, been in, in this environment at all, you know.  I'm just used to Loop College [now Harold Washington College, City Colleges of Chicago, Illinois] at the time and also--this even before X-BAG [Experimental Black Actors Guild], I'm used to Dramatic Art Guild, you know.  So, when this happened, I just, I fell in love with Ira Rogers, you know.  Because, he knew, you know, and, you know, I agree with him.  I said, "Yeah," I be--but, I wasn't gonna say nothing.  I'm not gonna lose this job.  That's what I'm thinking.  But anyway,--
Speaker 1: Now, that's a good story, that's a good story, 'cause Ira, yeah, he's a character (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), yeah.  But, Ira, Ira hated the role, he hated the role.  So, I went on a lot.  But, that was, that was my first paid professional job, "The Night Thoreau Spent in Jail" at the Goodman.  And, right after the Goodman, I heard about Kingston Mines [Theater Company in Chicago, Illinois] so I sent them my, my stuff and the Kingston Mines asked me to come over and be in their next show.  Which is the show that was gonna follow "Grease."  And, that's when I became involved in that and that whole Lincoln Avenue environment, you know.  And, Andre De Shields, I mean, he was, he was dynamite then, you know.  He's, you know, he's a regular Broadway actor now.  Everybody knows--he originated the role of the "Wiz."  But, and many other roles, Broadway roles.  But, back then, he was just a, he was a, he was an actor with the Organic Theater [Company in Chicago, Illinois].  But, that was the sort of the genesis of what, one of the genesis of what we know now as the Off-Loop Theater Movement, you know.  I went back, went back to Dramatic Art Guild, got hooked up with X-BAG, the [James Theodore] Ted Ward, the Ted Ward situation.  And, then went back in the '70s [1970s], went back to school.  And then, and after, after directing the pieces at Governors State University [in University Park, Illinois], and at Loop College, got the job at, at Victory Gardens [Theater], the director's job at Victory Gardens.  "Eden" was nominated.  My production of "Eden" at Victory Gardens was nominated for four [Joseph] Jefferson Awards.  The Jefferson are the Chicago Tony's.  Best Production, Best Director, and two nom--and two of my actors were nominated, okay.  And, we didn't win anything.  But, it was, it was an impressive beginning, you know, if I say so myself.  I was impressed.  I hadn't--it took me years to get another nomination.  But, you know, I still think back on those days, you know, our first time out in professional theater.  When I say professional, I mean, Union, Equity Theater.  I used, there were union actors in my production.  And, that was my beginning.
Story_ID: 98987
Speaker 1: Now, that's a difference in, I mean, we talk about the black theatre scene in Chicago [Illinois], there--most of our most well-known community theaters are not union.
Speaker 2: Are not union.  Right.
Speaker 1: And they, and they are not (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: There--they switch back and forth.  Let's say eta [Creative Arts Foundation], today eta is not union.  Chicago Theatre Company is.  I'm a founding member of Chicago Theatre and we started as a union company, which is one of the reasons why we started.  We started as a union company.  We used act--we use union, using actors.  [HM] Jackie Taylor [Black Ensemble Theater], sometimes she does, sometimes she doesn't, okay.  Usually, if she's in it, it's union because she's in the union, you know.  The other companies that are on the Chicago Theater scene right now, Congo Square [Theatre Company], sometimes they do, some--they break, they have brought in guess artist from--and that makes 'em union, okay.  When they bring in a union artist, okay.
Speaker 1: Kuumba [Theatre] one--at one--
Speaker 2: Kuumba at the time--
Speaker 1: Time they had, they were all union at one time when they did "The Bessie Smith Show."
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  Again--
Speaker 1: But, normally they're not.
Speaker 2: They flip flops.  Kuumba was a flipper.  The rest of the companies, no, they were not union actors.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an opinion on this?  'Cause--
Speaker 2: No.  Because--my opinion is it doesn't matter in Chicago.  And fortunately, everyone else agrees with me, including the reviewers on--in today's theater's scene.  And, I'm not saying it was like this all the time, even--I can't say it was exactly like this back in the days of X-BAG [Experimental Black Actors Guild].  But, today the reviewers will go and see a show in the black community regard--they don't care whether it's union or non-union.  They don't care.  MPAACT [Ma'at Production Association of Afrikan Centered Theatre] gets reviewed.  Congo Square gets reviewed.  Jackie Taylor gets reviewed.  eta gets reviewed.  Chicago Theater Company gets reviewed.  They get reviewed, period, you know.  By the [Chicago] Tribune and the [Chicago] Sun-Times, it has nothing to do with whether they're union or non-union, okay.  In Chicago it doesn't matter, you know.  It matters when you leave Chicago for an actor.  If you're gonna, if you're gonna go, if you're gonna work, you don't need a union card to work here in the City of Chicago.  Even if you're working a union show.  A non-union actor can work in a union show and depending on what the contract is.  Chicago Theatre Company, has long as they have on their stage, one union actor, and one stage manager, they rest of the cast can be non-equity, you see.  Doesn't matter.  So, but, if you're gonna leave Chicago, if you're an actor and you're gonna work outside of Chicago, you best hav--you best get your union card before you go.  'Cause, this is the place you can get.  You can't--it's very, very difficult to get it in New York or out on the west coast or anywhere else.  It's a lot easier to get it here because, because of all the activity we have here.
Story_ID: 98988
Speaker 1: Do a lot of actors take advantage of Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes, they do.
Speaker 1: I mean, the access?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah.  Which is what makes Chicago so strong, a theater town right now is not only the fact that we do have all these theater companies, but the realization what these theater companies are birth out of the colleges programs that we have in the City of Chicago.  Before, back say 20, 25 years ago, the major organization college that you heard about was Northwestern [University in Evanston, Illinois] bringing up actors.  Northwestern and maybe the Goodman School of Drama [now the Theatre School at DePaul University in Chicago, Illinois], okay.  But now, you've got programs at Chicag--Columbia College [Chicago, Illinois]; good programs now, strong programs.  You got DePaul, which is grad--which is from the Goodman School of Drama.  It was the Goodman School of Drama, then it was The Goodman DePaul School of Drama, then the DePaul Goodman, now it's just DePaul, okay.  They're bringing out a host of good talent.  Columbia College that I mentioned, and now also Roosevelt, add Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] to that, to that mix.  Strong, strong people coming out of these program, okay.  So, every, every year, we got a whole host of new talent, good well-trained talent for the directors to pick from, to choose from, you see, and it's ongoing.  That one of--that's the foundation of why the Chicago theater scene is so strong now.  And, we're talking--I'm not talking just black or whites, I'm talking about black and white, you know.  A lot of good people that come out of these programs, you know.
Speaker 1: Are the prospects for actors better these days than they had been in the past?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  Again, in Chicago.  And, I say in Chicago because I don't know, I really don't know what it's really like other places.  I'm a Chicagoan through and through.  I know what's happening here.  I have a vague idea--I go out and talk to other people outside the City.  I go to New York [New York City, New York] a lot.  I go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], Los Angeles [California], and get a feeling of what's happening there, but everybody would rather be here.  Most people would rather be here, except for New Yorkers.  New Yorkers wanna stay in New York, and I could understand that.  But, everyone else, would rather be here because there's so much going on here, you know.  The activity is so strong here, and the quality of our work is good, you know.  We match up now with, we do match up with New York.  Articles are being written about Chicago being the best theater city in the country.  And, I agree.  You can see it on, you can see all kinds of different things here in Chicago.  Especially, African American theater.  We have six companies doing plays, full seasons.  Six!  One of 'em is, one of 'em is a theater for the young that does a full season, and five other companies, professional theatre companies that do full seasons.  You're not gonna find that activity anywhere else.
Speaker 1: What are the six today?
Speaker 2: The six today:  Black Ensemble [Theater], eta [Creative Arts Foundation], Chicago Theatre Company, MPAACT [Ma'at Production Association of Afrikan Centered Theatre], Congo Square [Theatre Company], and Chocolate Chips [Theatre Company].  They do, and they--theater year round.  You, you can't come in Chicago, wanna see a black play and not see one.  If you wanna see a black play, you can see it, you know.  You can see--most times you can see more than one, you know.  We're in the summer right now.  I think eta is running and so is, eta is running and so is Jackie [HM Jackie Taylor], Black Ensemble.  You could at least see two.  The rest of 'em are sorta, you know, waiting for the seasons to start in February before they kick off again.  But, you can see something.  And, if you come here in October, Woo!  And, of course, February forget it (laughter).  But, yeah, you know, it's a very strong--I love it, I mean, naturally, I mean, I get work.
Story_ID: 98989
Speaker 1: Now, there more film opportunities here in Chicago [Illinois] too, right?  (Simultaneously).
Speaker 2: I would say, film opportunities, it's getting better.  But, the governor [Rod Blagojevich] just announced recently that he's sorta trying to lighten up whatever has to be lighten up in terms of tax relief so that film companies will be more welcome to come and work in the City of Chicago.  'Cause, I mean, there's so much talent here.  The talent is here.  The location--it's all--lot of the stuff here is new that--to the viewer, to the national viewer 'cause they haven't seen a lot of this stuff, you know.  So yeah, it's a good environment.  So, it's a good place to start.  You do reach a, you reach a point where--what you call a salary cap, okay.  You can only make so much.  Goodman is--the Goodman Theatre proba--Goodman and Steppenwolf [Theatre Company] pays the best, and everybody can't work at the Goodman or Steppenwolf, okay.  And, you know, Court Theatre, Victory Gardens [Theater] is down there.  Northlight [Theatre], Lookingglass [Theatre Company], they're all there, but they don't pay as much, okay.  And, then you got the, then you got the host of smaller companies that pay very little.  But, you get, you get work.  It's a wonderful place to start.  You couldn't find a better place to start.  But, then eventually, you're gonna have to move on.  Especially, if you wanna do movies, you're gonna have to go to California.  If you wanna go to Broadway, you're gonna have to go to New York [New York City, New York], you know.  Unless, you get, unless you luck up and get a show that gets picked up by a Broadway company and go--but then that's, I mean, that's hitting the lottery.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it doesn't happen very often.
Speaker 2: Naw, naw, it doesn't happen.  It's rare, you know.
Story_ID: 98990
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how did you become like--you were associated with Columbia [College Chicago, Illinois] for quite a few years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  What happened with Columbia is in the early '80s [1980s], I was asked to direct a production of "Ceremonies in Dark Old Men" [by Lonne Elder III].  This was like '81 [1981], '82 [1982], and the show went up.  It was a good show.  Sheldon Patinkin, then brand new head of the department, asked if I would like to come on as a staff member.  I told him I wasn't a teacher.  And, his response was, "None of us are," you know.  That Columbia College was basically an organization--the theater.  Well, actually, the college itself at the time was basically professionals teaching the craft to students.  And so, that--I fit that bill, you know, and I had a degree.  So, I was on at Columbia College.  That's when I started at Columbia College and I've been there ever since.
Story_ID: 98991
Speaker 1: And, in the, what was it, it was in, it was in the '80s [1980s], 1988, my daughter who was had just finished beauty school, she was living with me for--since she was, well, my daughter, we've always been together.  But, we were actually sort of officially living together ever since she was like about 14, 15.  She graduated from high school.  Went--decided she didn't wanna go to college, she wanted to go to beauty school.  So, she went to beauty school and then when she finished that, I set her up in the basement.  This little beauty parlor down in the basement.  So, she's working out of the basement.  And, doing that year, that first year down there, she never asked me for a penny.  So, I said, "Wait, what's up?"  You know, "You didn't ask, you don't need, you didn't ask me for no money or nothing."  She said, "Oh, naw, as long as I'm in the basement, as long as I got--I'm fine."  I say, "Well, are you sure?"  She say, "Yes."  'Cause if you're okay, I'ma quite my job."  'Cause the only reason why I got this job is because I wanna make sure you're alright.  She say, "Oh, yeah.  As long as I can do hair in the basement, I'm fine."  So, this was in 19--late 1987, and I submitted my resignation and I, I left that job and I left Public Aid [Illinois Department of Public Aid, now the Illinois Department of Healthcare and Family Services] after like about twenty years.  I say, "I'm gone."  They said--
Speaker 2: Now, how did--
Speaker 1: I was crazy (laughter), you know.  (Laughter) I said, "Hey," you know.  I'm, you know--they say if you stay here another ten years, you could get you're, you know, you get a pension on us.  You know another ten years I might not be here, how knows, you know.  I gonna leave now and do what I wanna do.  I left Public Aid in 1988 and I haven't looked back.  Never once have I regretted the decision to leave.
Speaker 2: So, all the things you've done prior to this time, I mean, almost like mind boggling, you were still working with--
Speaker 1: I was still working, yes.
Speaker 2: Public Aid?
Speaker 1: I was working with Public Aid, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, now that you mention, I vaguely remember that.  I, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: I was working.  But, that, I mean, and that's, believe it or not, that's the life of the Chicago artist, the basic Chicago artist, is that they're either working a full-time job, and doing his art on the side, you know.  That's, that's typically.
Speaker 2: It's amazing the energy that people bring to--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: To theater in Chicago after doing--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: A full day's work.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I don't know what's going on at the job, but--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: They show up for rehearsals at Kuumba [Theatre]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well--
Speaker 2: eta [Creative Arts Foundation], or Black Ensemble [Theater].
Speaker 1: This is, this is 1988 and I had started a theatre company, The Chicago Theatre Company.  We started that in 198-8- [1980], during the '84 [1984], '85 [1984] season, you know.  All this--myself, Michael Perkins, Charles Finnieston [ph.], [HM] Douglas Alan-Mann, all of us--well, Doug was the only one who worked in the business because he was working voice overs.  Michael Perkins and myself, both worked at Public Aid, you know.  And, when things really got bad, it was the Public Aid money that kept us afloat, you know.  It was that Public Aid money that kept us afloat those first two seasons.
Story_ID: 98992
Speaker 1: So, '88 [1988], you're out there?  You know, as a--yeah--
Speaker 2: Eighty-eight [1988] I was out there.  The only thing I had to back me up was Columbia College [Chicago, Illinois], you know.  And, which was, which was, you know, it was, it was a comfort to know I had some money coming in, you know.  I had, when I left Public Aid [Illinois Department of Public Aid, now the Illinois Department of Healthcare and Family Services], I had two jobs lined up.  One, was a Court Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] production of "Playboy the West Indies" [by Mustapha Matura].  I was in that cast.  And, then right after "Playboy the West Indies," I had a TV job lined up, a directing job.  I did a piece called, "Crime of Innocence," it's based on the Emmett Till murder, you know.  So, I directed that for television.  That turned out to be highly successful.  Won me a Chicago Emmy as a matter of fact.  And, after that, you know, jobs just, you know, I was able to grab--I did one acting job.  I did and acting job for Victory Gardens [Theater].  I forget the name of the play.  It was, I--you know, it wasn't--the play was good.  I was--I didn't feel--after directing, I just didn't feel comfortable on stage anymore, you know.  I just didn't feel it, you know.  And, I haven't been back on stage since.
Speaker 1: Did you kinda feel like you wanted to tell the other actors what to do?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I wanted, I actually wanted to tell the director what to do (laughter).  That was the main problem.  I wanted to tell the director.  And, the director knew what he was doing.  So, it's--I say, this is just not me, you know.  Because I'm, I'm not into this character.  I'm thinking about how it could be better, if something, if this person was over there and this person over there and--there was too many things going in my head that were, that you can't, that an actor can't think about, you know.  So, that was, that was basically my last acting job, you know.
Story_ID: 98993
Speaker 1: So your relationship with the Goodman Theatre [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Okay.  My--the Goodman Theatre, well, again, I mean, it started off years ago when I was--what happened was that during that production of "The Night Thoreau Spent in Jail" [by Robert Edwin Lee and Jerome Lawrence] that I did in the early '70s [1970s], it was right then and there that I sort of decided I'd really like to work at the Goodman.  Because I really liked the staff and they treated every--they treated all the actors so well.  They made me feel at home.  I felt not like I was an outsider coming in to do a job.  I felt I was one of them.  And, every, I didn't know this, but they do at the time, they have what they call--you know you hear about the opening night party.  But, I had never heard of a closing night party.  They have a closing night party where all the members of the staff would come out and say, "Well, thanks for coming and working on the show here" da, da, da, da.  I thought that was so cool, you know.  And, I was--right then I said, "Dang, I wish I could be one of the staff and saying good-bye to people."  They go, I stay, you know.  And, I've al--that's always sort of been in the back of my mind.  And, the next time I had a connection with the Goodman was when after we had started at the Chicago Theatre Company, we, we did a play called, "The Meeting."  About a fictitious meeting between Malcolm X and [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr.  And, [Robert] Bob Falls, the new artistic director came down to see it, and said, you know, "Hey, I'd like to put this on as part of our studio season."  And so, this was in like the late '80s [1980s], like '89' [1989].  And, it went up and it sorta rekindled my desire to work at the Goodman.  Because, again, everybody was so cool.  It was a really, really, wonderful experience.  Years later, not too, no, not too many years later, this was '89 [1989], and, because in '92 [1992] after I'd done a, I had did a fellowship with the Arts Midwest on--it was a program called, The Minority Arts Administration--Administrative Program.  A wonderful program, 'cause what it did it would take an artist who was at a certain point in their career and it would actually show you, show them or give them tools to make the next step, okay.  Now, there were two things that I needed to know, 'cause I had been working X-BAG [Experimental Black Actors Guild], [Jane Addams Hull House Association's] Parkway Community House, Chicago Theatre Company, Parkway Community House.  That's pretty much in terms of running and operating a theater, that's all I knew.  I wanted to learn how to take shows and take them on the road.  I mean, outside of Chicago.  Not just around Chicago.  Just take it--what it would take.  How do you set that up, to take shows out on a road, and, take shows on the road and also how to program for a larger space?  Something larger; like the Goodman, okay.  If someone had given me a theater back in those days, back in the early '80s [1980s], I wouldn't have known what to do with it, you know.  But,--
Speaker 1: You're used to that small--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The Chicago Theatre Company is in that, I should have mentioned that before, the Hull House Theater, and there several of 'em in Chicago, right, that are the same mold?  It's almost like--
Speaker 2: Right.  The one on 3212 Broadway--
Speaker 1: and a semi-round with a--yeah--
Speaker 2: At Jane Addams.  The one that [HM] Jackie Taylor run, is out of right now; the Leo Lerner called, also called the Beacon Street Theater, and the Parkway Community House.
Speaker 1: They're all the same theater, basically?
Speaker 2: They're all pretty much the same.  The format is the same, and none of 'em, I think that largest one, Jackie's probably got the largest one.  I think it holds maybe, close to 200, if 200, but no more, okay.  Parkway, at the time, we took some of the seats out so they could expand the stage, was only holding about eighty people, okay.  So, I--that's all I knew.  That's the environment that I was familiar with.  That was the environment I was, you know, use to working in and used to programming in.  And, I wanted to, I wanted to move on to bigger and better things.  I wanted to know what, you know, if I came across a Victory Gardens [Theater] or something, you know, what would I do?  How would I handle that?  So anyway, this fellowship came along and I applied for it and I got it, you know.  So, I worked with two companies.  One, was the Cornerstone Theater Company, they were--all they did at that time was tour.  They took shows all over the place.  All over the country.  And, I worked with them for six months.  In--during the '90 [1990]--from the fall of '90 [1990] to the winter of '91 [1991] and setting up their national tour.  So, I got the feeling of how do you do--how you put a tour together.  And then, the second organization I worked with was the History Theatre in Saint Paul, Minnesota.  They have like about a 600 seat house.  And, from February through June, I worked with them on programming, and budgets, and how to program a larger space, okay.  When I came back to Chicago, I was ready. The first thing I did was put a proposal together and submit it to the Goodman Theatre; the very first thing.
Story_ID: 98994
Speaker 1: I had resigned from the Chicago Theatre Company [Chicago, Illinois], you know.  The Chicago Theatre Company is a wonderful organization, but they wanna to stay at [Jane Addams Hull House Association's] Parkway [Community House] because of [HM] Douglas Alan-Mann has been indoctrinated by Clarence Taylor.  That's where he belongs.  That's where the company belongs.  I didn't agree.  I wanted to move on the bigger and better things.  The board wanted to stay there.  Doug wanted to stay there.  And, I said, "Then you guys stay here, let me go."  So, I resigned quietly while I was away on my fellowship.  So, it wouldn't be any, you know, ruckus on the news, you know, media.  When--I just came back, I was no longer with the Chicago Theatre Company.  The first thing I did was put in a proposal to the Goodman Theatre.  They brought me in for an interview and I got the job.  Simple as that.  You know, I've been them ever since.  This was 1992, you know.  But, I started off at the Goodman working under Michael Maggio, the late Michael Maggio.  And, he taught me everything I needed to know about working at the Goodman Theatre, you know.  Not--directing plays is given.  You're su--I'm supposed to know how to direct a play.  If I'm gonna work at the Goodman, I'd better know how to direct a play.  Everybody knows I know how to direct a play.  First assignment was, working with, directing assignment was working with Steve Scott in "A Christmas Carol."  That was the 1992 production.  The 1993, '94 [1994], '95 [1995] production, I did on my own.  And, then the following season it was, it was brought to our attention that, we have done everything by August Wilson to date except one play.  And, that was "Ma Rainey's Black Bottom."  And, Ma Rainey's--all of August--if anyone know anything about August Wilson's plays, they all take place in his home town of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  All, except one, which is Ma Rainey, which takes place in Chicago [Illinois].  Hey, I was supposed to direct that (laughter).  Anyway, that's the way I felt about it anyway.  So, anyway, I did.  I directed Ma Rainey and it was a huge success; set a box office record in 1997, so--in the summer of 1997.  And, that, after that, it was "Blues from an Alabama Sky," Pearl Cleage, "Blues form an Alabama Sky," and then I did "Raisin in the Sun" [by Lorraine Hansberry], which was--all these, all these were well-received.  You know, all these, what they call hits at the Goodman, you know.  They was calling me the "hit man" for a while, you know.  And, then "Amen Corner" [by James Baldwin], you know.
Story_ID: 98995
Speaker 1: Like I say, you're supposed to know how to direct a play.  That's a given, you know.
Speaker 2: You were saying off camera, I think was important, you were saying that Goodman [Theatre] is a director's theater.
Speaker 1: It's a director's theater.  Let me point out, that Chicago [Illinois] has three Tony Award winning theater companies, okay.  Goodman has won a Tony, a Regional--, what they call a Regional Tony's.  And, Goodman is a director's theater.  Steppenwolf [Theatre Company] has won a Tony, a Regional Tony.  Steppenwolf is known as an actor's theater.  Victory Gardens [Theater] has won a Tony.  Victory Gardens is known as a playwright's theater company, okay.  Mean that each one of these company's--their ideas for productions come from that company's specialty, okay.  Victory Gardens, the playwrights, pretty much everything you see at Victory Gardens come out of their playwriting ensemble, okay.  They have a stable of playwrights, okay.  Steppenwolf, everybody knows Steppenwolf has a great acting company.  They have fabulous actors coming out of that company, you know; always have been, since the inception.  It's the actors that run that company.  Goodman is the directors.  There's a host of directors on staff.  Like myself, Mary Zimmerman, Henry Godinez, Regina Taylor.  We're the nucleus of what [Robert] Bob Falls realizes on to put a season together, you see.  And, each--what makes, one of the things that makes Chicago such a strong the--company is because three Tony Award winning companies, you know, in each one of these fields.
Story_ID: 98996
Speaker 1: And, at Goodman [Theatre in Chicago, Illinois], when I, when I wanted to do the "Ma Rainey's Black Bottom" [by August Wilson] it was like, it was almost like a given because nobody--we hadn't done it.  We hadn't done it.  It was the only one at the time that hadn't been done.  And, right now, we've done 'em all except his brand new piece "Radio Golf" which is open.  I mean, which recently just was completed his ten year, his whole cycle of plays for each generation of the 20th Century [The Pittsburgh Cycle].  It's all--the cycle is complete now.  "Radio Golf" completed the cycle.
Speaker 2: That's Golf?
Speaker 1: "Radio Golf," Golf, like Golf.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And, Goodman has done the world premiere of two of those shows.  We did the world premiere of--
Speaker 2: "The Piano Lesson?"  Or--
Speaker 1: Naw.  Naw.  The one that takes place in the backyard.  Congo Square [Theatre Company] just did a--"Seven Guitars."  We did the world premiere of "Seven Guitars," and we did the world premiere of "Gem of the Ocean," okay.  The rest of 'em were done, the world premiere, we've done 'em all except "Radio Golf," and "Radio Golf" will be done in the--in 2006 in February, January, February, 2006.  And, we are planning, at this point, on an August Wilson Festival, where all of his plays will be done in some form or fashion somewhere in the Chicago area, okay.  That's what we're planning, soon as we get the okay from the August Wilson people.  Then we'll, then we'll move on it.  And, this is gonna involved theater companies and the schools.  And, it'll be either--all of his plays will be done during, during this period somewhere in the Chicago area.
Story_ID: 98997
Speaker 1: Is there something that you're really looking forward to doing that you haven't done yet?  I mean, that you--I mean, a dream play to direct, a dream project?
Speaker 2: No.  Right now I'm, I'm sorta, now wrapped up in pushing the plays that come out of the contest that I have at Columbia College [Chicago, Illinois].  The Theodore Ward Prize for African American Playwrights, now in its twentieth year and the book that we have out, "Seven Black Plays," I'm pushing that.  And, a new, a new volume of the, of winning plays that come out every three years with three more plays included.  I'm working on the second volume of that.  Also, working on--I'm about to sign a contract with Northwestern University Press [Evanston, Illinois] to publish a book called, "The History of Black Theater in Chicago."  And, that's, that should be out in a couple of years, you know.  So, it's not that, you know, I've turned from the stage to literature, you know, to books.  It's just that, you know, the opportunity is there.  Not, not to say that someone else couldn't do it better, but I know I can do it.
Speaker 1: And nobody else has done it, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No one else has done it.  And, I think the "History of Black Theater in Chicago"--because Chicago does have a rich black history in black theatre.  Start, I mean, back in--started off, the first company back in 190--1905, 1906, the Pekin Theatre, you know.  This is before the New Lafayette [Theatre] in New York [New York City, New York].
Speaker 1: That's the Pek--Pekin.
Speaker 2: Pekin.
Speaker 1: Spelled?
Speaker 2: P-I-K-I-N or P-E-K-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  P-E-K-I-N.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's just for the transcriber (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  Yeah, but I'm just saying that, you know, it started back then.  I mean, this was, this was a theater company owned and operated by an, by a black man, okay, doing black shows, you know.  But, nobody knows about this.  They know about the Lafayette in New York that started in 1916 [sic, 1912].  But, nobody knows about what happened here in Chicago in 1904.  I think somebody should, you know.  And then, you know, I'm here today from that legacy.  As part of that whole legacy from 1904, you know.  I mean, I didn't just, just pop up, you know.  I was nurtured and trained to do what I do, you know, by black people, you know.
Story_ID: 98998
Speaker 1: Chicago [Illinois] seems to have a supportive theater community.  It's not that they don't disagree from time to time on things.  But, the black community, the people in theater generally support each other.
Speaker 2: We--yeah.  Yeah.  That's another one of the wonderful things about--actually the theater community at large here in Chicago.  But, you're absolutely right.  Starting, starting with the Black Theatre Alliance in the '70s [1970s], which is when I realized that there was, not just X-BAG [Experimental Black Actors Guild] out here but a lot of these other companies out here.  And, everybody was willing to, to lend a helping hand.  If you needed something, hey, we got it, take it.  Just bring it back, and bring it back in good shape.
Speaker 1: Equipment, or?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah.  Whatever.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Whatever.  You got any old scripts that you know--yeah, (unclear) go through that.  See if there's anything there that you, that you might be interested in.  It's always been like that.  That's same environ--that same atmosphere is with the League of Chicago Theatres today, you know.  Where anything--even a company like the Goodman [Theatre in Chicago, Illinois], with all its resources, a small company, if they really need something and the Goodman's got it, and it's not being used; "take it, go ahead.  Just make sure it gets back in good shape," you know.  And, that's--now I don't know it that's, if it's like that in other cities, I don't know.  But, I know it's like that here and that's a good thing.
Speaker 1: I've heard they're some places where it's not like that (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: But it's good that it is like that here.
Speaker 2: It's like that here, you know.  And, like I say, I know this, I know Chicago--this--I'm not--I could tell you about what's going on outside of the City of Chicago.  But, I don't know the structure.  I don't know, I don't know who to go to for, for this thing if I want something done.  But, I know, I know how to do it here.
Story_ID: 98999
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a philosophy of directing?  I mean, what's your philos--what makes what you do distinct and different?
Speaker 2: I don't think, I don't think what I do is any more distinct than what any other director does.  All I know, is what I what I learned at Loop College [now Harold Washington College, City Colleges of Chicago, Illinois] under a brother name Sydney Daniels, okay.  And, the first thing that he does is that he puts, he puts a show on its feet.  He, you know, the first couple of days or, you just get a sense of what the play is about, okay.  You really, you get a good strong sense of what the play is about at what we call the table.  You sit around a table and you read it, and you discuss the characters, make sure everybody understands who each one of these characters is and their relationship in the piece.  The very next thing he does, as soon as, as soon as this is out the way, we get the play up on its feet.  We start moving the actors around, you know.  "When you say this line, you're over there.  Then you cross over here, and you pick up your glass of water, you take a drink, da, da.  Then you go off, bump."  All that, movement.  What we call blocking.  You block the play, okay.  I find that when I was an actor, it was a lot easier for me to learn my lines, if I knew what I was doing when I said the line, you know.  There was a connection there, it was something I could identify with it.  I think it works.  So I, I continued that.  I block a play right away.  As soon as I can, soon as I can be a play on its feet, I block it.  And, as soon as I can go from beginning to end, I'd do it.  It gives an actor and myself, the director, a really better sense of the arc of the play.  Once the play is blocked, you zero in on specific scenes, just zero--target 'em.    What's going on with the scene, and you stick with that, you stick with the scene work--all the time keeping the whole play in mind always.  Once every two or three days, do a run through whether you're off book or on book.  Just do a run through to get a sense of beginning to end and how you fit in this whole process.  And, then you just go on like that until everybody's off script, everybody's comfortable with each scene.  Everybody knows exactly what their character's about.  And, it's much to me, it's much easier to answer actors' questions if I look at it in relationship to the whole event.  Not--I'm not saying--this the way I was, this the say I was taught.  And, it works for me.  And, I do--I haven't changed not one bit since my days at Loop College in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s].  This is how I work.  And, the actors seem to like it, you know.  Again, an actor who--actors right away wanna get the book out of their hands.  They wanna get these words flowing out of their mouths.  And, so they don't have to think about it.  And, the best way that they can--if they know what they're doing when they say the line, it's much easier for them to remember that line.  And, once they got the line up there, then you could make the adjustments quite easily.  And, actors, I listen to my actors.  I don't have all the answers and I don't--I never profess to have all the answers.  I'll listen to my actors.  I wanna--"what do you think?"  And, I listen, and I wanna know what they think.  "Well, you know it would be a lot easier if I was over here some kinda way instead of saying that line from over here.  Because if I was--because da, da, da, da," sometimes they got a point.  Let's see if we could make that happen, you see.  It's an open environment and I want everybody, I want everyone's input.  And, doing my run throughs, I have my designers there so they can see exactly, especially your lighting designer.  The movement pattern of these actors, early.  So, they can start figuring out what lights they're gonna use, what effects they can use to bring out whatever it is you wanna bring out in the scene, you see.  And, you listen to designers too.  I listen to, I listen to my designers.  If they have suggestions on, "Maybe if we could just get this scene down stage a little bit then I could really do something nice with this scene, okay."  But, they have an idea of where I'm going whether than waiting 'til tech week to see what the, what--how the movement is when all they're doing is catching up.  I wanna involve everybody in the process as we're going along.  And, they way to do that is get it on its feet as soon as possible so that everyone, everyone can bring in ideas.  A collaboration of ideas.  Again, the mission.  Making sure that everybody's on the job doing what they do best, you see.  And, bingo at the end you got a really nice, usually have a nice-
Story_ID: 99000
Speaker 1: Even if, you know, even if the, if the play, you know, isn't up to par, it looks good, you know.  So, someone could walk--an audience member could say, well you know, I didn't like that play but it was well done.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You--
Speaker 1: That' what I like.
Speaker 2: That's a comment you hear sometimes too.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: If, even if a play is not what it should be or doesn't seem to be what it, what we'd hope it would be.  There are time you're say, well that wasn't (unclear), but that sure was done well (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I mean, the Goodman [Theatre in Chicago, Illinois] is famous for doing a play well, whether the play is any good or not.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Usually, it's usually done well.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Well, you know, that's, that's, I mean, that's my philosophy, you know.  It's gonna be done as best as it could.  And, it--and that's regardless of whether I do a show at the Goodman or Congo Square [Theatre Company], MPAACT [Ma'at Production Association of Afrikan Centered Theatre] where ever I direct, you know.  I'm gonna do it as best, as best as I can.  And, I don't change my process, you know.  I don't, I don't--just because I'm doing a show with Congo Square and they don't have all the, all the facilities and all the resources that the Goodman have, that doesn't mean that I cut my, my expectation down.  Not one iota, you know.  It's still gonna be done the best as, the best I can make it, you know, in--under my process, you know.  If that's what it, if that's the way you'll call a process, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah, that's a great description of how, the process.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 99001
Speaker 1: Tell me, we always ask this question.  What is some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: The African American community?  I tell you one of my major concerns about the African American community.  That, about ten years ago, a little over ten years ago when I was just really getting started with the, with the play writing contest, I was invited by a friend of my up in Canada.  I was--she says, "Why don't you come up?"  I say, "Naw, I got all these plays I gotta read now.  I'm really busy."  She says, "Look, I got this cabin up here.  You can come up here and you can read forever, and nobody'll even know you're here."  So, for, ever since 19--you know, like about, actually starting--I've been going to Canada a lot anyway.  But, on an annual basis if I can get up to Canada, and it's usually around the Fourth of July, if I can get up there and spend a week reading plays, it's wonderful.  I find it's wonderful.  The same friend bought a farm in a place called Priceville up there.  It's in Grey County in Ontario.  And, one day she, she pointed out to me, says, "This is one of the places where, you know, that African American's settled, this area."  And, it just occurred to me, it was a place called Priceville and there was this plaque, you know, on the middle of a field and it said that African Americans settled this--slaves, runaway slaves came here and settled this part of the country.  And, I thought about that.  I says, "Dag, this is part of the thing, this is part of the Underground Railroad that we haven't really dealt with.  We know the beginning of the Underground Railroad.  We know where you got on the Underground Railroad.  We know the passages how you got from one spot to the next spot.  We've heard about that.  We know that sometimes they came north and were sent back because of the fugitive slave laws.  So, you weren't safe north.  So, really the end of the Underground Railroad is up in Canada.  I don't think African Americans deal with that.  The knowledge and the understanding that freedom was in Canada.  I mean, we're here, you know, well I going to Canada.  That's where the slaves wanna go.  They wanna go to Canada.  But, has the African community ever thanked the Canadian people.  The African American community at large, have they every said, "Thank you very much for being a, being a nation where our ancestors could go and be free."  I'm not saying they were treated royally when they, when they got there.  But, they were no longer slaves.  As a community, that kind of bothers me.
Story_ID: 99002
Speaker 1: And, it came to light.  I mean it really, it really hit me this year.  I'm in the airport on the, on the, on June 30th getting ready to go to Canada, and on the news there's this controversy that Mexico was using these derogatory, derogative stamps; Sambo Stamps, and the community went and talked to the President of Mexico and he refuses to apologize.  Says, "Aww, it's no big deal."  Now, think about all the, all the money people--African American's--I'm going to Mexico, we're going to this place.  We're going to Mexico.  We're--and spending their money.  How often do you go to Canada and spend money?  Have you ever thought about going up to Canada and just spending some time?  Spending a couple of dollars up there.  Because, they did, they were friends to the African American community.  And, I don't think, to me it just, it just doesn't, it just doesn't click why we haven't, as a community, thanked those people; as a community, you know.  Their birthday is July, July 1, Canada, like our Fourth of July here.
Speaker 2: Independence Day.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Same thing.  They celebrated on a Friday and I was there, I was there, you know.  And, I'm usually there and I'm usually celebrating our birthday on--when I'm there, you know.  But, this year because of that stamp incident, it's just something else really started digging in my craw.  And, it just brought back to mind the Frederick Douglass Fourth of July Address that he made I think in 1858 [sic, 1852] about what is the Fourth of July to the African, you know.  I think we should all as a community revisit that speech and also take notice that the end of the Underground Railroad was in Canada and those people should be thanked, officially, by the community, some kind of way, you know.  Even if it's going up there and saying thanks, on the Fourth of July, you know.  That's something that bother--one of the things that bothers me about the African American community that I think should be done.
Speaker 2: Seems like a project, maybe for you (laughter).
Speaker 1: Maybe (laughter).  Maybe.  Maybe.
Story_ID: 99003
Speaker 1: Okay.  And we always ask this question, too.  If you--when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing you would do differently?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  No.  I--If I have to--it's been such a good, it's been such a fun ride from start to finish.  From--I guess, if I have anything to do ag--if--I would, I would get it--I would've somehow figure out a way to get in theatre sooner, you know.  If I could've joined the drama club in school, you know.  Of course, the [U.S.] Marine Corps might--Marine Corp experience is a lot, has a lot to do with my character and my own personal self today.  I wouldn't want that to change.  But, I think, I would've loved to have done theater before I stumbled into it, you know.  But, as far as the process and as far as doing it another way, going to New York [New York City, New York], going to LA [Los Angeles, California] or whatever, now, I think right here in Chicago [Illinois] was the best thing and the best route for me to do, to take my career.  The only thing I want for myself is I want to own my own theater someplace.  I think I would like, believe or not, even Chicago, Chicago, Chicago is going at its own pace right now and things are gonna happen as they happen and it's all gonna be positive.  But, I kinda feel, I got a feeling that I would love--I think the next thing that has to happen for black theater nationally is that we need our own theater that can operate as a commercial venue, a money making venue, not not-for-profit.  Someplace where August Wilson can take "Gem of the Ocean" and let it sit there and run until it runs out.  Just like a Broadway house.  We need the equivalent of a Broadway house.  And, that would probably be have to be in New York.  And, I say, right now at the top of head, I say it should be in Harlem [New York].  And, I'm not talking about the Apollo.  I'm talking about someplace else; a theater, strong, space, that does commercial theatre.  Think of the idea of a theater building that we have in Chicago.  How many of those, we got three different, three different spaces, in the theater building on Belmont.  What if you had one theater space like about the size of the Goodman, and then two other spaces?  You could keep that sucker running all the time.
Speaker 1: That's remarkable when you think about, that with [HM] Woodie King [Jr.] there--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And all these other people that we don't have one yet.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Don't have one.
Speaker 1: Not that's--I'm not blaming them, but I'm just saying.
Speaker 2: Naw.  No. No.  I'm not either.  But, I'm just telling what, what the black theater community needs, you know.  "Gem of the Ocean" was running on Broadway; had broke--had made that little curve going through that rough part of winter getting ready to go into Black History Month and they closed it, so they could get ready for another show that they were sure it was gonna make some money, you see.  Now, that show should be able to go somewhere, you know, and sit so the people could see it, you know.  So that, the comm--plus, let face it, the black community can't afford Broadway prices, period.  Cost you almost a hundred bucks to see a Broadway play.  Who, I mean, who can, I mean, the black community at large, no, they ain't got that kind of, ain't got, don't have that kind of bucks, you know.  Take that--take, get it out of Broadway.  Take it and put it in, put it in Harlem and you can charge them sixty bucks.  Sixty bucks you can go.  You can get somebody in there for sixty bucks, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That what's gotta happen.
Story_ID: 99004
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you--what did you--did your parents [Amanda Booker Smith and Charles Peterson Smith] get a chance to see you get involved in theater?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  My mother was, my mother, she passed in '92 [1992].  She died of Alzheimer's.  I had to put her, I had to put her in a nursery home right after I started the Chicago Theatre Company.  But, she was able to participate--see me on stage during my days at the, during my X-BAG [Experimental Black Actors Guild] days, during my Dramatic Art Guild days, and she saw my early shows at Victory Gardens [Theater], you know.  She was very proud.  She was very, she was extremely proud of me.  And, my aunt, who I saw in my very first show, the show I say at the Skyloft Players, she's my fav--my best fan.  She's the only one in that--out of the group who's still alive.  And so, you know, she comes to see my shows.
Speaker 1: Does she ever, has acted since those days?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  She hasn't acted since those days, you know.  But, she, no, she, she always says, "I'm the cause."  You know, she loves to say, "I started him."  Yeah, (laughter).  I started him, you know.  And, in a sense she did, you know.  'Cause I, you know, I was--the fascination was always there, you know, ever since I saw her on stage.
Story_ID: 99005
Speaker 1: Now, what would you see at this point as being, as being your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think my legacy was--is that I was able to open some doors, and show people who had never experienced working with an African American, that it's okay.  And, I, I credit that a lot to my experiences were (laughter), you know, going back to my high school days, my grade school days of working outside of my community.  That I am not intimidated by any other culture and I don't consider myself above any other culture.  I consider myself an equal with whoever I speak with, you know.  And, that's how I treat all people and that's how I expect to be treated.  That's how I demand to be treated, you know, as an equal.  I'm not better, but I'm certainly not less than.  I might not know as much, but I can learn, and that's clear.  And, that's always worked, you know.  But I, it's not like I'm going, if I--me walking into a white theater and there's no black people around, I'm gonna be intimidated.  I kinda expect it in most places, you know.  And, it doesn't mean--it don't bother me one bit, you know.  'Cause I find myself the only African American, the only, the only dark spot on the cloth in most of the situations I deal with in this business now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 99006
Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked you, you think you want to address, that we haven't dealt with?
Speaker 2: No.  Other than, I think, one of the things that I've been able to, one of the reasons I've been able to accomplish a lot of the things I've been able to accomplish 'cause I haven't had to worry about, about family issues.  I have a daughter [Michele Smith] who's never given me an ounce of trouble; who's been nothing but assistance to me.  Yes.  Yeah, nothing but assistance, and it's been a blessing.  I couldn't've done that without her.
Story_ID: 99007
Speaker 1: The--We're talking about the African American, the Black Theater Alliance [Chicago, Illinois] that became The African American Arts Alliance and it's experiencing a rebirth now.
Speaker 2: Right.  [HM] Jackie Taylor is the president.  Jackie Taylor is of Black Ensemble [Theater].  Runako is the vice president, Runako of eta [Creative Arts Foundation].  I'm the treasurer.
Speaker 1: Runako Jahi.
Speaker 2: Runako Jahi is the artistic director of eta, he's the vice president, and I'm the treasurer.  And, we have other members on the board.  Muntu [Dance Theatre], [HM] Joan Gray, is on the board.  Nora Brooks--
Speaker 1: Blakely.
Speaker 2: Blakely, on the board, from Chocolate Chips Theatre Company.  And, we have a few other members whose names escapes me unfortunately.  But, not just theatre artist, visual artist, right.  So, you know, we've incorporated our--and we're trying, I mean, it's, it's fine, it's gonna work.  It's gonna, it's gonna do exactly what's it's supposed to do.  Bring all the artist in, all the black artist in the City of Chicago to know where to go if you need some help.  And, that's all it's about, you know.  Where do go for auditions?  Where do you go to get set designers?  Where do you go--where's the next gallery opening?  When is the next dance thing?  When is the next whatever, you know.  In the arts community, if you wanna know, anything that's going on with the arts community, the African American Arts Alliance is a resource.  And, it's gonna, it's, again right now, the only thing that's being bogged down is the fact (laughter) that I think that from my standpoint is some many of us old fogey's are at the top. And, I want to get some new blood in there so that the young people can come in there and take it over and start--and finished up what we started here.
Speaker 1: Are the new theatre groups involved?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah.  They are.
Speaker 1: Like, Congo Square [Theatre Company]?
Speaker 2: Cong Square is involved and so is MPAACT [Ma'at Production Association of Afrikan Centered Theatre], you know.  But again, we're on, we're the executive board, you know.  And, I wanna get more, I just wanna get more people involved in that, you know.  But, it's, it's--we got back together in the late '90s [1990s], and we've been meeting monthly ever since.  And, it's, it's really--we finally hired an executive, I think you were an exec--you were an executive--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Director at one time.  Well, we hired an executive director now, and she's been on like about six months and starting to, starting to catch on.  So, yeah I think, it's gonna work fine.  It's gonna work just fine.
Speaker 1: That's a good thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 99008
Speaker 1: Was there anything else we needed to touch upon before I ask my last questions?
Speaker 2: Naw.  I tal--telling you about my daughter [Michele Smith], you know, and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  That's right.
Speaker 2: But, you know, and, but, my daughter has been an inspiration to me, but so has my whole family, you know.  I've always--the only time they ever looked at me askew was in 1988 when I left, when I decided to leave Public Aid [Illinois Department of Public Aid, now the Illinois Department of Healthcare and Family Services].  I mean, I got many a phone calls saying, "Chuck, are you sure you're doing the right thing here?"  You know, because, I mean I had twenty years there, you know.  And, I said, "Yeah.  I really feel that this is what I, what I should be doing.  Michele's okay and I think can, I think I can make this thing work."  And, once, once they were assured that I was, I was clear, clear minded on it, I never got a neg--nothing but help, you know.  And, when I say help, if I, if I need, if I needed a meal someplace, you know, or whatever, I had--I never had to worry about it, you know.  Or, just some support, you know.  So, I've--I appreciate my family on both, when I say both sides, on my daughter's side and, and my side, you know, my--which is my mother's [Amanda Booker Smith]--I'm not too, I've never been real close with my father's [Charles Peterson Smith] peo--the Smith's.  I've been acquainted with the Smith's, but the Smith's aren't in the audience to see my shows, you know.  But, my, my family is there whenever they can be and so is when my daughter's family comes in town, they want to know if I got anything going, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 99009
Speaker 1: The last questions is similar to legacy, but it's a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  I guess as, I like the idea of, of saying I was somebody who was able to open the door and let other people in, you know.  Not just open the door, walk in and do my own thing and--but, also someone who walked, walked in, did my thing and kept that door opened so somebody else could follow.  That to me is important.  That somebody else was able to walk in and follow, and be accepted and feel--and was able to do their work comfortably without hassle because Chuck Smith showed that it could happen, you know.  I like, I like, I kinda like that, you know.  Like I say, I'm not--the [Chicago] Tribune said I was the first director on the Off-Loop Theater scene [Chicago, Illinois], you know.  I had no idea, you know.  But, if they said I was, then fine.  Now there's a lot of black directors.  Now, if I had something to do with the fact that there are a lot of black directors out here now, directing on the professional theater scene in Chicago, if I had something to do with that, that's a good thing.  If I had something to do with that, I'm proud of that then, you know.  But, it wasn't like, I'ma set out to do it this way.  I was out to do my thing, you know.  But, if by me doing my thing, if it allowed others to follow than that's cool.  I feel good about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, that's cool.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 99010
Speaker 1: That's PFC [Private First Class] Chuck Smith in the United States Marine Corps, Subic Bay, Philippines, 19--, 1957.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next photo, please.  And, how about this one?
Speaker 1: That's, well, that's Chuck Smith high school graduation photo, graduated from Parker High School [now Paul Robeson High School in Chicago, Illinois] in 1956.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next photo, please.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is Chuck Smith.  This is taken downtown Chicago, 1955.  The lady with me is Brenda Webb [ph.].  She was my first really, what you could call girlfriend, in high school.  And, that's us going to see a movie downtown in 1955.  Brenda Webb, Chuck Smith, 1955 downtown Chicago.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: Actually, this is, this is my daughter, this is my daughter, Michele Smith on the day she was baptized in 1969.  One, close to one years old, Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  Next, please.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is, again, this is Chuck Smith, 1984, right, summer of 1984 right before we were getting ready to do an opening night, an opening celebration announcing a new theater company, the Chicago Theater Company, which we were getting to present our first season.  Parkway Community House, 1984, 67th and Eberhart, downtown, I mean, not downtown, but on the South Side of Chicago.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Good.  Next.
Speaker 2: Cast party, looks like Chuck Smith, Donald Harper, that's Ernest Perry in the back.  I'm not quite sure what show it is, but it is, looks like a '70s [1970s] piece 19--, no not '70s [1970s], this is probably '80's [1980s], 1985 I'd say; cast party.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Wonderful.  Next.
Speaker 2: This is another cast party.  On the left is Millie McMannis.  That's myself, Lee Atkins and Lynn Logan.  All of these are original Dramatic Art Guild members.  Dramatic Art Guild was the group down at Michael Reese Hospital.  This production, this productions--this photo was taken like about 1975.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great.  Next.
Speaker 2: These are--this is of three of the founders of the Chicago Theater Company; Charles Finnister [ph.], myself in the middle, and Michael Perkins.  Again, this is right before we, this is 1984 right before we announced our opening night party.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: This is the original cast of, and writers of a production called "Poe," which was the very first production of the Chicago Theater Company.  I can't remember everybody's name on this photograph so I won't try.  But, just know that down at the very center, the gentleman with the white hat, that's Michael Perkins.  And, he is one of the founders of the Chicago Theater Company.  And, he was in the original production of "Poe" that we did as a, as a equity showcase on Chicago, Chicago and Peoria in a loft.  And, it was a very, it was well-received, and so well-received that we decided when we opened the Chicago Theater Company, we would open it with "Poe."  And, two of these cast members are E.J. who was the lady seated on the left and the gentleman right next to her, they were two of the--they were in the original, they were in the production of the show we did at Parkway.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: E.J.  I forgot E.J., what's her name?
Speaker 1: "Cookie."
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We call her Cookie.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right, Cookie.
Speaker 1: E.J. "Cookie" Murray.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  E.J. Murray, right.
Speaker 1: This is another production, this is--production--this is another shot.  This is actually at that party that announced our first season at the Chicago Theater Company.  Mike Perkins is on the left.  I can't identify the gentleman behind him, and myself in the dashiki; 1984, summer.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: Same party; summer of 1984 right before announcing the opening of the Chicago Theater Company.  Bob Curry on the left; radio personality, Bonnie DeShong in the middle, who was at one time an actress, myself and, I can't think of the woman's name on the right, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: This is Chuck Smith in-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Chuck Smith with, Chuck Smith with hair on--in 1972 right after I moved into South Commons.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great.  Next.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is my Aunt Willa, high school graduation.  I have no idea what year it is, but you can tell it's a rather old photo.  But, Aunt Willa was who I first saw in--on the stage.  She was in the production of "A Monkey's Paw" at the Parkway Community House in 19--in the early 1950s which was the first play I ever remember seeing, and that was my Aunt Willa.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Now, Chuck, that way you're saying that, is that Willa as in Willa Cather, or?
Speaker 2: Willa, W-I-L-L-A.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  As in Willa Cather
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next one.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is myself and my grandfather [Abraham Booker, Sr.] at 32nd and Vernon before we moved to Hyde Park.  My grandfather was a--he worked at the stockyards and that's me.  I was his beloved--I was his first grandchild.  The year is like 1948.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great.  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my grandfather's first son.  That's Abraham Booker.  Now, the thing about my Uncle Abe was uncle Abe after--he was a Merchant Marine, and after the war, he moved to New York City, and decided to make a life in New York City which is why I have a family in New York City because my Uncle Abe.  I've been going to New York City all of my adult life on Thanksgiving.  And, it's because Uncle Abe started a family in New York City.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great.  Okay.
Speaker 1: And this is, this is my mother, Amanda Booker [Smith] on, on her graduating from high school.  Long before, well not to long before I came along, but I can't tell you the exact year.  But, I was born in 1938.  I would imagine this photo was taken in 1935 or 1936, in Chicago.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is my introduction to Off-Loop Theatre, 1971.  This is a production of a play called "Terminal" produced by the Kingston Mines Theater Company.  This is the show that was being rehearsed during the run of the original production of "Grease" on North Lincoln.  But, this is the foll--the show "Terminal" that followed "Grease," and that's me standing up there on the left.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next photo please, Mr. Crowe.
Speaker 2: That's Chuck Smith.  This is from an article in a newspaper production of, 1978 production of "My Sweet Charlie" at Governors State University [University Park, Illinois] probably what I would consider my very first directing job for pay.  It was at Governors States University 1978, the production of "My Sweet Charlie."
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next, please.
Speaker 2: This is, this is myself, Chuck Smith; my mother, Amanda Smith; and my daughter, Michele Smith.  This was 1985, one of the first year that--and my mother had just, we had to put my mom in a nursing home because she has--she had Alzheimer's, and this is probably the first photo of her in the nursing home, 1985.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Thank you.  Next.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is, this is the production of "My Sweet Charlie."  This is the flyer from "My Sweet Charlie" that again, was probably the first job that I was, that I was offered as a director for pay in 1978, Governors State University in Park Forest South [sic, University Park, Illinois].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: This is at an awards ceremony at Loop, Loop College [now Harold Washington College, City Colleges of Chicago, Illinois] in 1972.  The young lady is Lynn Logan, a wonderful friend of mine who encouraged me to come to X-BAG [Experimental Black Actors Guild] in 1972.  And, we also were in shows together at Loop College and this is at an award ceremony at, at Loop College.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great.  Next slide.  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is one of my favorite pictures, my--this is one of the few pictures that have my mother and father together.  This is--my dad's on the left and my mother's there right next to him.  That's Charles Smith and Amanda Smith, my mother and father.  One night in, I think it's like about 1940, 1941.  I don't know the couple that they were with, but it was at the club, as you could see, it's at Club DeLisa.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.  Go ahead, please.
Speaker 1: "Seven Black Plays," this is an anthology of seven plays that have, that have won the Theodore Ward Prize for African American Playwrights, conduct, sponsored by Columbia College in Chicago [Columbia College Chicago]. This prize is now in its 20th, 20th year and this is the first volume of Seven Plays.  This next volume will would be--every three years, we'll come out with three more.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next, please.  Okay. Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is Charles, this is me.  A baby picture.  I think I was like about one year old which would make this like about 1939.  That's Charles Smith in--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: Chicago, 1939.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Here's another high school shot of Charles Smith, 1950--well, actually I graduated in '56 [1956] so this was taken in 19--, late of 19--, late 1955 in Chicago, Parker High School.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next photo.
Speaker 1: This is the first production that I was--worked, worked on as a director at X-BAG.  I co-directed this play with Clarence Taylor who was the, was the executive director of the organization, 1973 at Parkway Community House, "Professor J.B."
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is a photo of a group of lady--all raised by my grandmother.  That's Cherry [ph.] my cousin on the left; my Aunt Willa, who was the actress that I, that I spoke of earlier who was in the very first play I saw.  Next to her is my mother; seated is my Aunt Carolyn; and my Aunt Dorothy; and also my cousin Evelyn.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: I'm seated at the bottom.  This, this is a photo of what they call some of the heavyweights in theatre in 1984, and I was considered one.  I'm the one, on the floor next to one of the, I can't think of those--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I think we can tell which one is you (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  Maybe you can, you know.  But, on that photo is also Sheldon Patinkin who hired me at Columbia College.  And, also Sheldon is right behind me and up standing third to the, to the left is Roche Schulfer of the Goodman Theatre.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: Is Sheldon related to Mandy Patinkin?
Speaker 1: Yes, he is.
Speaker 2: I thought so.  I live right--they used to live across the street from me, I've been told.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's a happy Chuck Smith in 1976, right before I, I had realized, I knew I was gonna graduate, if--grad--my college plan together, and--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is Michele Smith and Chuck Smith, 19--, is it 19--, 19--, actually 2000; Chuck Smith and Charles Smith--Chuck Smith and Michele Smith; Michele Smith and Chuck Smith in the year 2000 at an opening of a show at Victory Gardens Theater.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Go ahead with the large photo.
Speaker 2: And, the large photo is again, Michele Smith and Chuck Smith in 1971.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: So, she was born around 1970.
Speaker 1: Michele was born 1968.
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968].  Okay.  Oh, she's, yeah she's a little older there.
