Story_ID: 94157
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Deborah Sawyer, S-A-W-Y-E-R.
Speaker 1: No middle name?
Speaker 2: Mabel.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: 5-11-56 [1956], Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm owner and founder of Environmental Design International which is a professional engineering firm.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: What is today's date?
Speaker 1: November 23, 2008.
Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: We're in Chicago, Illinois at my home, 5009 S. Ellis.
Story_ID: 94158
Speaker 1: Okay.  And before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that management requires me to ask of everyone.  And they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I absolutely do.  In general, Mexican food, specifically, fajitas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Lavender.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Christmas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, I was asking the five questions, and I think I got to, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I love all of the holidays, but I really go all out at Christmastime.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Greece.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite, the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: What do I say every day?  When people say, how are you?  I always say, I can't think of what I say (buzzer noise).  Favorite phrase?
Speaker 1: That's it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Wait a second.  I can't think.  Help.  Well, my favorite quote is my mom's [Betty Pride Sawyer] who said, don't let other, who says, "Don't let other people's perceptions of you become your reality".
Story_ID: 94159
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history, your mother's side of the family and your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's first so we don't get them mixed up.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Betty Pride Sawyer.
Speaker 1: Okay, how do you spell the Betty?
Speaker 2: Betty is B-E-T-T-Y, Pride, P-R-I-D-E, Sawyer, S-A-W-Y-E-R.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: 1-2-22 [1922], and she was also born in Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  Are they from another part of the country or have they always been Columbus as far back as you can go or?
Speaker 2: They're from Virginia.  In fact, there was a book written about the free blacks of Lynchburg, Virginia and my four greats, great, great, great, great grandfather, Amistead [sic, Armistead] Pride was a barber, a free black barber in Lynchburg, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Lynchburg.
Speaker 2: And that was antebellum so it was, the book was from 1805 to 1865, covered that era.
Speaker 1: So you had a great grandfather--?
Speaker 2: Four greats.
Speaker 1: Great, great, great grandfather called Armistead Pride?
Speaker 2: Amistead Pride.
Speaker 1: Now, there's got to be a story behind that name?
Speaker 2: There is.  I don't know the full story, but what is amazing to me is that going back four greats and you still have a free black man who was the barber to all the white people in town.
Speaker 1: Okay, so clearly named after the ship Amistad, I would guess?
Speaker 2: It's spelled the same.  I believe A-M-I-S- maybe not, -T-E-A-D [sic, A-R-M-I-S-T-E-A-D].  So it's Amistead.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so maybe not.
Speaker 2: Maybe not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that takes us back to--do you know the year of his birth or circa where he was--
Speaker 2: Do not.
Speaker 1: 1820s, 1830s?
Speaker 2: I do not.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So he was a barber in Lynchburg, Virginia--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and, okay.  Are there any stories passed down from that side of the family about, is there any story about how they got the name Pride?
Speaker 2: No, and it continues this day because my mother obviously still has the same name, Pride.  But no, I have no idea of the history of the name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So do you have any stories that are passed down from those days in Virginia?
Speaker 2: The--Amistead had a son, William, who had a daughter, Laura, who had like twenty children.  She had several sets of twins, which was amazing.  And she still adopted a couple of children.  But just the twenty children got me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she was a very beautiful woman, you know, long blonde hair, big blue eyes, black woman, but very unusual looking.  And like I said, to produce twenty children I think is quite a feat, produce and raise.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there a story about how the family came to Columbus [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: I'm sure there is, but I don't know that story.  The historian in my family is actually my sister.  And she's the one that has done the family tree.  My favorite story about my family is about my grandmother who I'm named after, Mabel King.
Speaker 1: Mabel--?
Speaker 2: Mabel King.
Speaker 1: King, okay.
Speaker 2: She was actually a Weaver, but Mabel King.  She would be 108.  She was born at the turn of the century.  And I am truly her granddaughter because she owned three Shell gas stations.  She drove a big red, Buick, very, very fast.  And she drank Stroh's beer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's there in Columbus, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, that was in Columbus.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this would have been the height of her, I guess, activities would have been, what the '70s [1970s] or what? When is she?
Speaker 2: Early '70s, late '60s [1960s], early '70s, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 94160
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did your mother [Betty Pride Sawyer] talk about growing up in Columbus [Ohio]?  Did she grow up on the East side or where?
Speaker 2: She grew up on the East side.  She went to East High School which is still in existence today, believe it or not.  And I remember, one of my favorite stories that she tells is she grew up across the street from a large Italian family.  And they ate, she said she loved going over there to eat.  And they had some kind of pasta, spaghetti almost every day.  And she just--and my grandma was a great cook too.  But she used to love going over and eating with the Italian family, you know, the, she said the food was flowing, the wine was flowing and they just had big boisterous dinners every single night.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In her later years, my grandmother, the one who drove the big, red Buick very, very fast, was blind.  She was diabetic and blind, but she would still make pies, a dozen at a time.  And I love to cook to this day as well.  And how she could do it blind, was amazing to me.  She would get all of her ingredients out and set them in bowls and twelve pies later still know what she was pinching from.  And I'm like, well, where do you have all this written down cause she would make, you know, strawberry rhubarb pies and apple pies and mince meat pies and like I said, all at the same time, cherry pies.  And she'd go, it's not written down.  I know I just need a pinch of this and cup of that.  And she wouldn't use a cup, a measuring cup.  She would get a cup like for a cup of coffee and just stick it in the big bowl of flour and just do it with her hand, and she made the best pies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother work in your grandmother's businesses when she was growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, we all did.  I used to get a silver dollar every time I went and pumped gas for a day.  So that was great.  Did she really work in the business?  No, my mom worked for the federal government.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did she go to college (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.  She went to Bennett College which is an HBCU [Historically Black College or University].
Speaker 1: Okay, now Bennett, is that the one in South Carolina [sic, Greensboro, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, South Carolina, okay.  All right, and she worked for the federal government, you say?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She also went to graduate school.  She went to Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was her occupation, I mean--?
Speaker 2: I believe her degree back in the day--most black women were either nurses or teachers, I believe her degrees were in education.  She was supposed to be a teacher.  She ended up working for the federal government.  And what she actually did was kind of fascinating.  She auctioned off all their surplus goods.  And the most interesting auction I think she ever did was, she auctioned off all this gold.
Speaker 1: Really?  Surplus gold?
Speaker 2: Yeah, don't ask me what that means, surplus gold because usually the, she did old army jeeps and things like that.  But one time she had to deal with gold.  I'll never forget that.
Speaker 1: And since it's surplus gold, that would be a story just trying to figure out what in the world surplus gold could be, you know, at any time.
Speaker 2: Or maybe when they go into countries and they find stuff they can't keep it.  But they have to sell it.  So, who knows?
Story_ID: 94161
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, well, let me go to your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Wesley, W-E-S-L-E-Y, Sawyer, S-A-W-Y-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 5, 1922.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was he born?
Speaker 2: Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about your father's side of the family?  How far back can and where can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: Goodness, let's see.  Well, let's start with my grandparents.  That will be, my grandmother has an amazing name for such a tiny woman, Flora Geneva, I think it's Fitzgerald Pine Dickerson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my grandfather was Carroll, C-A-R-R-O-L-L, Sawyer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He just had one name?
Speaker 2: How about that?
Speaker 1: Carroll?
Speaker 2: Carroll.  And don't know their dates of birth, but they were also approximately turn of the century.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  And, you know, well, did they, are they from Columbus too?  Were they born in Columbus or did they come from some other place?
Speaker 2: Let's see, I know my mom, oh, we've left my mom's side.  No, I don't know where they came from.  My mom's side, I know came from Washington Courthouse and before that, obviously, Virginia.  The Sawyers, don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother's side came from Washington Court House, Ohio?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: First, yeah.  Okay.  I'll write it down later, but that's, yeah (unclear).  I always see the sign for Washington Court House, and I've been there once.  I interviewed somebody there a long time ago.
Speaker 2: And my father's brother, both of his brothers actually went to Tuskegee [Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama].  He went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  My dad went to Morehouse.  My one uncle, Harold Sawyer, was a Tuskegee Airman in the famous, what was it, 99th Air Squadron [sic, Sawyer was in the 301st Fighter Squadron].  And he was the first black ace of World War II [sic, Lee Archer was the only black ace of World War II] and won the Distinguished Flying Cross.
Speaker 1: Okay, Harold Sawyer, okay.  So he was, won the Distinguished Flying Cross.  Is he still living?
Speaker 2: No, he died a few years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he have any stories he shared with you all about his adventures in the Tuskegee Airmen?
Speaker 2: He was actually a very, very quiet, humble man.  The only thing that he shared with me was that when he came back from the War, he loved flying so much, and, of course, he was unable to get a job as a pilot and how disheartening that was.  What amazed me that he wasn't, the pride he took in basically being a human shield for others.  And these days and times, it doesn't play as well knowing that the Tuskegee Airmen were just human shields.  That was their sole function.
Speaker 1: Well, they escorted bombers to--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --on missions into Germany, I guess so--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Flew--?
Speaker 2: They were human shields basically.  So, I mean you can say "escorted", but it's the same thing.  But he did.  He took tremendous pride.  He was just happy to be able to serve his country.  What else did he say?  The hours were long, but mainly he just shared the joy of flying.  And it was a joy that was lost once he came home.
Story_ID: 94162
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [William Sawyer] serve in the War [World War II]?
Speaker 2: Yes, but he was a medic.  He went to, like I said, Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] for undergrad and Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] for two years of medical school before he was drafted.  So he ended up being a medic.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he finish his medical degree?
Speaker 2: When he came back, he did not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What happened?  Is there a story about what happened when he came back?
Speaker 2: I think he got married and started a family.
Speaker 1: Okay. So what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was assistant director of public housing for the City of Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Hah.  The funny story is that she was actually dating someone else, and while they were at, everybody was at war, she was getting letters from a man named Avery.  But they had known each other I believe even in high school.  And then they all went off, they went off to separate colleges.  But they grew up, well, actually not relatively close to each other because my dad grew up on the North side.  Do you know where Grandview [Heights] is in Columbus?  Grew up on the North side.  So Grandview, and my mom grew up on the East side.  And I know I've heard the story of how they met, but I'm having brain freeze today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But they did meet in Columbus?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  This is right after the War?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, they knew, I think they knew of each other even in high school, even though he went to Central High, and she went to East High.
Speaker 1: Okay, they knew of each other, but they didn't get together until after the War?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 94163
Speaker 1: All right.  So will you describe your parents' personalities and talents and dispositions and tell us who you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My dad [William Sawyer] was fun loving, even tempered.  My mother [Betty Pride Sawyer] was organized and a disciplinarian.  I'm a math person and I definitely get that from my mom.  She's a math whiz.  Even to this day, she can go to the grocery store and when she checks out, she'll know the amount of her bill without writing it down.  I think that's a pretty amazing talent.  I can't do that, but I love math.  My mom was strict.  We still to this day call her the General.  So she was the disciplinarian, but my dad wanted to talk about things.  You know, now, you know you shouldn't do that because if you do, let's think about this or, you know.  Our house was the hangout for the whole neighborhood.  And unlike kids today that would flee from parents, the kids used to love to come down and hang out in our basement and listen to my dad talk which, you know, that would never happen today.  So,--
Speaker 1: What would he talk about that would interest kids?
Speaker 2: Life and the things they should be doing versus the things that we were probably doing and he could talk about almost anything, but mainly life.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was good with people, I guess?
Speaker 2: Very good with people.  My mom is too.  They were, he was the funny one, very laid back.  (Laughter) He would love to sit around in his boxer shorts and he had a big red velvet comfy chair.  And that was his chair.  And you could often find him curled up in that chair with either a kid or a pet, a cat.  So.
Speaker 1: So, now, so who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, neither one of my parents.  I'm like my grandmother [Mabel King].
Speaker 1: All right, more entrepreneurial in that sense or?
Speaker 2: Entrepreneurial, I drive fast, I drink beer.  I'm a straight shooter.  She used to like to buy nice clothes and dress up to the nines every now and then.  I'm just truly her, I--like I said, I love to cook.  I'm truly her granddaughter.  She spoke plainly, very to the point.  I'm like that.
Story_ID: 94164
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, describe, you know, the neighborhood you grew up in and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Let's see, one through ten, I grew up on a little street called Dunbridge in Columbus, Ohio.  And it was truly an old-fashioned neighborhood in every sense of the word.  You knew all your neighbors.  Nobody locked their doors.  One of my, my best friend growing up, her mom got MS [multiple sclerosis], and she ended up spending a lot of time at my house.  I mean it really, all the neighbors raised each other.  One, one time my brother ran away, and he got complete with the pole, with the bandana and the, you know, was probably a peanut sandwich and whatever.  He got down to the end of the street and the Duncans lived there.  Judge [Robert] Duncan is actually a famous person.  He desegregated the Columbus public schools.  And his wife, Shirley Duncan was a kindergarten teacher.  She was all of our kindergarten teachers, mine, my sister's and my brother's kindergarten teacher.  By the time she got, he got down to her house, she's on the phone to my mother, Betty [Pride Sawyer], William's down here.  Should I, he's walking past with his knapsack.  Should I invite him in for some chocolate, hot chocolate?  So.  It's, I mean everybody knew everybody knew everybody and everybody's business.  But it was a great way to grow up with the kickball, you know, in the streets or baseball in the middle of the street.  Pets could wander freely.  Nobody had to worry about anybody stealing kids or pets or anything in the summer.  People didn't have to have babysitters.  In the summer, the older kids held kind of you, quasi-summer school for the younger kids.  They would line up the picnic benches and, you know, we'd all sit there and kind of go to school or play or whatever.  But, you know, it was just a whole different era.  I grew up, I was born in '56 [1956] so those were different times.  At ten, I moved to Nelson Road, different flavor.  You know, it was on a busy street, across from a park, you know.  And the creek that it was across from was the big geographical border between, you know, the very rich white part of town and the black part of town.  But both houses were in a neighborhood called Eastgate.
Speaker 1: Was the, I know I've been to the Paul Laurence Dunbar Center on Nelson Road, and it looks like a recreation center.  It had tennis courts in the back and that sort of thing.  Was that there in those days?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, that might have been Academy School back in the day.  And Academy has now moved to Cherry Bottom Road in, I forget, New Albany, I think.  But, yes, if it's on Nelson Road and it's got tennis courts, that would have to have been--
Speaker 1: Yeah, nice trees around it, and it looks like sort of a recreation, a former recreation center or something.
Speaker 2: I think it was a school, and I think it was a former academy school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you moved to Nelson Road when you were ten.  So was it a bigger house or something or a better neighborhood?
Speaker 2: It was a, yeah, bigger house on a hill, swimming pool, you know, that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 94165
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So where did you start school?
Speaker 2: Actually, I went to, was this kindergarten, no.  Pre-K, I went to, to school at Poindexter.  My father [William Sawyer] at that time was head of an actual housing development for the housing authority called Poindexter Village.  And they had nursery school as part of public housing.  I don't think they do that anymore.  So I went to Pre-K at Poindexter Village.  First through fifth grade, I went to Eastgate Elementary, and back in those days you walked the two blocks to school.  And then sixth through twelfth grade, I went to Columbus School for Girls.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, you said, sixth through--?
Speaker 2: Twelfth.
Speaker 1: Twelfth, okay.  Well, tell us about grade school.  Did you like school when you started?
Speaker 2: I always loved school.  I was in a, I always made really good grades, but I would often be done ahead of my classmates and then get into trouble.  So I would often have straight A's and then, you know, that other side of your report card with "talks too much" and all that other stuff, well, sometimes I had a lot of checks on that other side of the grade card.  But I had a third grade teacher, this big German woman named Ruth Stucke (ph.).  And she told my mom [Betty Pride Sawyer], don't worry that I got all those bad check marks.  She said I was gonna be a future leader.  She goes, what else did she say?  And in order to keep me from disturbing the other kids, she bought me an abacus so that I could amuse, she would give me problems to work out on the abacus while the other children were doing regular, their regular studies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you had math skills similar to your mother's in some ways then?
Speaker 2: Still do.
Story_ID: 94166
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yep, went to church, Sunday school every Sunday of the world, went to Second Baptist.  It's still in existence today.  And back in the day, you carpooled.  You know, we had three families, the Williams, the Whites and the Sawyers would all go to Sunday school together.  And I still know all those people today.
Speaker 1: All right, so church was a, I mean would you go once a day, I mean a Sunday or twice or did you go several times a week or?
Speaker 2: We always did Sundays.  There were different points in life where you would get involved in different activities like choir, and that would take you there more than once a week.  Or they had like bible study and fun stuff like that in the summer, but no, I wasn't to go every day of the week.  We were, Sundays and any other special activities that, you know, we would have pageants and then you'd be going regular, quite frequently for a while and stuff like that.
Story_ID: 94167
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about Columbus School for Girls.
Speaker 2: A really small school, had like 400 girls, two years of preschool through twelfth grade.  So each class would have twenty or thirty girls in it.  It was a great, great place to go to school.  It was, the small class size was wonderful and just what you learned.  I mean in seventh grade, we had like ancient Greek and Roman history.  Well, you took, you took a language every year.  So I took French from sixth grade to twelfth grade.  But in seventh grade, with ancient Roman history, Latin, mythology, of course, English, some sort of math.  But it was amazing, and you changed classrooms just like you do for college, so you weren't in the same room all day every day which was fun.  The other thing I loved about the school is that they had yearly trips.  And I believe it was in January and you'd be gone for a couple of weeks.  And I got to go to Saint Simons Island [Georgia] and do some island research.  And I got to go to Paris, well, to France, we went to more than just Paris.  And that was wonderful.  I mean I got to ski on the, in the French Alps at, when did I do that in, maybe eighth or ninth grade.  So it was a, I got to see a whole lot of the world before I was very old which was a wonderful thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what part of the year would they go on the trips?
Speaker 2: Usually in January.
Speaker 1: And what did you do at St. Simons?  I mean it was a school trip to St. Simon's?
Speaker 2: We did research.  There happened to be an Ohio State professor that was going there to do research on, mainly on night ocean creatures.  But we got to scuba dive all day, every day.  So in preparation for this trip, we all had to get license to be scuba divers.  And we would literally go out with this professor every day and even, most evening, and dive and help him collect specimens of coral and other things, fish.  It was great.
Story_ID: 94168
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about St. Simons Island. A trip to St. Simons. Now, St. Simons, Sea Island, Jekyll Island, some other islands there off the Georgia coast have described as the most African part of the United States, the Gullah country, and that sort of thing.  Did you notice any of that when you were or did they keep you kind of--
Speaker 2: At that time, yes.  St. Simons was still very natural.  We slept in tents.  There weren't the hotels and stuff that exist today 'cause this would have been back in the late, middle '60s [1960s] maybe.  So it was still very natural then.  Recently, though I've been back to Sea Island, and it looks nothing like what I remember. It looks very commercial and very overbuilt now.  But back thirty, forty years ago, it was still very natural, people walking around looking very natural.  The roads were dirt roads and we slept in tents for the project.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, any other stories about St. Simons?
Speaker 2: It was, it was just gorgeous.  And the one thing I never knew existed were blue holes.  So right in the middle of the island, there was this hole that went down over a hundred feet that had non-saltwater in it.  And it was an amazing thing, blue holes.
Speaker 1: So these are holes that are filled with fresh water?
Speaker 2: They were, it was fresh water or, it wasn't salt water.  There's something in between salt and fresh too, but that was an amazing thing, a blue hole.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I've never heard of that before.
Speaker 2: When I got back though from scuba diving every day, all day, ski or scuba diving all day, every day, when I came back I was pitch black, hair was an afro this big that was so blonde my mother drove right past me at the airport and had no idea who I was.  So it was a great time.  It was a lot of fun.  I learned a lot too, but mainly, I had a great time.
Story_ID: 94169
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, you went to France too.  Was this your first trip out of the country?
Speaker 2: That was my first trip out of the country.
Speaker 1: And you were about, how old were you then?
Speaker 2: I think I might have been in ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were about fourteen, I guess?
Speaker 2: Fourteen or fifteen.  I know I wasn't driving.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So where in France did you go?
Speaker 2: We went to Chamonix which is part of the French Alps.  It's a village in the French Alps.  We went to, I spent some time in Paris and we went to (unclear), we went to the village where the, not village, the town where the king and everybody lives.  Help me.
Speaker 1: Versailles?
Speaker 2: Versailles, thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay, I guessed (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, it was Versailles.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was a general tour of France, I guess.
Speaker 2: Those were the only three places where we went.  But it was wonderful.  One of my favorite memories of being there besides the night we snuck out and went to a club in France.  And young girls aren't out on the streets in France.  So it was very unusual.  But we managed to sneak out away from our chaperons and go to a club, huh.  But anyway, my favorite memory, I love drawing and sketching, and I spent an entire afternoon sketching in The Louvre and that was a wonderful experience for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was a good memory.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 94170
Speaker 1: Now, I take it that the girls school, Columbus Girls-- School for Girls was a mixed school in terms of the population?
Speaker 2: If you mean as far as race, no, not really.  My sister actually integrated the school.  So it was, if you can call it mixed.  Yes, there was probably one black, African American student per class.  And in my class, they had one Chinese girl also.  If they would have described themselves as diverse, they would have said, yes, we have Jewish kids also.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I get the picture.  So, this is 1960, in the '60s [1960s], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Mid-sixties [1960s] I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 94171
Speaker 1: Yeah, or even late '60s [1960s].  You would have been fourteen in '70 [1970], I guess, right, yeah, 1970.  Okay, now, did you parents talk about The Civil Rights Movement when you were coming along?  And how did it affect your father [William Sawyer]'s work in the housing department?
Speaker 2: Well, in very amazing ways.  Part of the time when he was coming up through the system, I'm not sure if it happened when he was director, but there was the philosophy about sterilizing poor women so that they would stop producing, you know, so many children that had to be housed.  So I remember him talking to us about that and how that wasn't right.  And, you know, all individuals have rights regardless of what their economic status is.  So that was an interesting lesson.  You know, some of these lessons I'm learning when I'm really young so I'm only getting only bits and pieces of the lesson.
Speaker 1: I think that was the age of the birth control pill, the emergence of the birth control pill around 1968, '69 [1969], '70 [1970].  And people were discussing, let's make poor women take birth control so they'd stop having these children.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a discussion.
Speaker 2: But they actually went a step further.  But, you know, the pill seemed like a much gentler conversation than the one I actually kind of recall hearing.  Another thing that was happening in the housing movement which really took hold here [Chicago, Illinois] and not so much in Columbus [Ohio] was how to house poor people to give them dignity, etc.  Chicago went a whole other route and did the warehousing and the high rising.  Columbus did not go that route.  They went with a more row houses that looked more like other housing in the neighborhood so everybody got a patch of land that they could garden and a structure that they could have some way of feeling pride for which was a whole different way of dealing with people who didn't have the means to provide their own housing, a much more, I think, socially responsible means of dealing with people who couldn't provide their own for housing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 94172
Speaker 1: Also, like I said, when my father [William Sawyer] worked at Poindexter [Village], I actually attended school with the kids from the public housing and didn't know any difference.  But boy, when I went to Columbus School for Girls, I really knew there was a difference.  I actually got sent home from school one day because I had hair oil in my hair that offended the white girls.
Speaker 2: Now, tell that story.  How did this take place, how did this unfold?
Speaker 1: And I can, probably something even smellier like sulfur 8 or something, you know, that we did because we wanted to make our hair grow or make it straight or whatever.
Speaker 2: At the time, did you have your hair in an Afro--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --or was it straightened out?
Speaker 1: No, nope, I had, always had my hair straight.  I have relatively curly hair anyway, but I had it straight in braid, pigtails or something.  But I had hair oil in it.  You know, my mom had probably brushed it out and braided it or whatever.  And the, it didn't have to make any sense.  There was a discussion and it--
Speaker 2: Amongst the teacher, did the teachers initiate the discussion or--?
Speaker 1: No, the girls did.
Speaker 2: The girls did.  All right, all right.  That's what I'm trying to--
Speaker 1: The girls initiated the discussion.  And I almost got sent home over that.  And then it was always the--
Speaker 2: You mean, so they got in an argument with you about it or what?
Speaker 1: Well, they were offended--.
Speaker 2: Did they bring a teacher in--?
Speaker 1: They didn't know what it was.  And they didn't know how to, the fact was they had no idea how to deal with or appreciate the differences.  So it was an interesting day.  Another time, I mean we had a swimming pool at the school.  So then there were always lively discussions around what was my hair going to do when it got wet.  And people tried to take sneak peeps at me as I'm dressing and undressing to see if I had the same parts that they had.
Speaker 2: That's very strange.  So did you have many friends?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  It was the greatest experience of my life.  I was just as curious about them as they were about me, really.  But I mean I had been around white people before so I mean, and while black people come in all colors of the rainbow, the girls had my school had not been exposed to anybody but the people that were their servants.  So they weren't used to thinking of them as people.  I mean they were part, like parts of the furniture, I mean.  You know, but I was there moving among them as an equal and smarter than most of them actually, I mean grade-wise anyway.  So this was a whole different kind of experience for them.  But I mean I had the typical little kid experience.  I threw a slumber party in sixth grade and only two girls came, two or three, I mean, you know.  So.
Speaker 2: Well, did--
Speaker 1: It was, integration is always tough.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And I was wondering if the school affected your social life and, you know, and if you had like a different social life in the black community than at school or?
Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely.  I mean, well, thank goodness it was just a day school and not a boarding school because I got to go home at night back to Eastgate which was a predominantly black neighborhood.  And then I went to Second Baptist Church on Sunday which was a predominantly black church.  But no, the boy's part, half of our girl's school, the academy, it was about as integrated as we were.  So that was really hard, yes, very hard.
Speaker 2: So in the entire school, would you say, how many black girls were there?
Speaker 1: Well, one or two per class.  So the most there were, were twenty because not all classes had a black girl.  So I'd say fifteen maybe.
Speaker 2: Out of--?
Speaker 1: Four hundred.
Speaker 2: Four hundred, okay.  Yeah, so it's a real minority population.
Speaker 1: And then there was the time we tried to start, what was the name of that club?  Well, it was a club to really explore all ethnicities and just to be a place where people could talk.  And boy, they called all of us black girls in and threatened to kick us out of school because they thought we were trying to start some terrorist organization.
Speaker 2: Oh, the, so the black girls formed the group?
Speaker 1: It wasn't just black girls.  We invited other girls to join, but the only people called into the headmaster's office were the black girls.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we nearly got kicked out of school that day, but--.
Speaker 2: What specifically did they accuse you all of doing?
Speaker 1: They really thought that we were trying to do something subversive.  Like I don't know if they thought we were trying to overthrow the school or what, but they really didn't want us having a organization that discussed ethnicity and things like that.  That was very, that was scary.
Story_ID: 94173
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so were there any teachers or role models or mentors in school when you were there?
Speaker 2: There were no African American teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay, any white teachers take an interest in you that were helpful, that you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh, many teachers took an interest.  One of my favorite teachers was my algebra teacher, Charles Wong.  And I liked math.  He was, he was actually a college professor who came to teach at our school for a while.  He was hard.  He was really smart.  I really liked his class.  And he used to love giving me challenging math problems to solve and I really enjoyed them.  I had an art teacher, Ms. Clark, and I ended up having to spend a lot of time with Ms. Clark because my mother [Betty Pride Sawyer] was one, probably was the only parent in the school who actually worked, I mean mother in the school who worked.  And they didn't have busing back then.  So I had to always wait till my mom got off work to get home from school.  And so Ms. Clark would let me do art projects in her area, in her work area.
Story_ID: 94174
Speaker 1: Yeah, you said you spent a day drawing at The Louvre--?
Speaker 2: Louvre, um-hum.
Speaker 1: I mean have you always been an artist?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, your senior year you get to plan your May program.  And I worked under a famous potter in Columbus [Ohio] which means, and, which meant I mainly made a lot of clay and a lot of glazes which was hard work, but I also got to attend for free.  It was like a whole artist colony kind of thing.  And I got to attend for free, drawing classes and I had never sketched a nude body before, so I got to do the nude drawing class.  And I actually got to take some pottery classes as well.  So it was great.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, Columbus had a strong arts program, I mean--
Speaker 2: Always has.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right.  So do you still draw or do you still do art work?
Speaker 2: I do more photography and scrapbooking rather than drawing.  I don't draw as much anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay, thought I'd ask.  Now, were you involved in high school clubs, and, you know, and activities?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The main club I was in was called Service Club.  And we provided volunteer opportunities for the girls, largely doing things like tutoring.  We had organizations that we worked with throughout the inner city, I guess, and we would go in one night a week, I guess, and tutor in math and reading and maybe science too.  And then we did other special projects.  I remember at one point there was a clinic.  And I don't know how we got hooked up with this clinic, but we literally washed and painted the entire inside of the clinic, a bunch of girls.  The main thing, and I was actually a co-founder, we created the scholarship walk, a 25-mile walk to create money for scholarship students.  And our first year, I think we raised $25,000 but now they raise big money for the school through this scholarship walk which thirty years later, they still have it.
Speaker 1: Twenty-five thousand [$25,000] sounds pretty big to me, but, you know, I don't know.  So they raise even more now?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, the tuition's probably sky high too so I, it was probably 2,000 or 3,000 [dollars] a year back then, and I can't even imagine what it is a year today.
Story_ID: 94175
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So when you were on the verge of graduation, what were your career goals?
Speaker 2: I thought I was gonna go to med school.  I went to Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia.  I also got a four-year, full ride to Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland], both schools very well known for their med schools.
Speaker 1: But you wanted to be a doctor?
Speaker 2: Wanted to be a doctor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ended up getting a sociology professor for my major professor.
Speaker 1: How did you choose Emory, because they offered a scholarship?
Speaker 2: No intelligent way.  Parents should never let eighteen-year-olds choose where they go to college.  It was warm.
Speaker 1: Atlanta was a warm place.
Speaker 2: Atlanta was warm versus going to Johns Hopkins in Baltimore which is not warm at all.  Not only that, but I did, I college visited throughout the Eastern seaboard.  I, you know, went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], Connecticut, Wesleyan [University, Middletown, Connecticut], where else?  And there was so much racial unrest at those schools at that time, which would be, you know, mid '70s [1970s].  And the black students and white students weren't talking to each other, you know, a lot of anger, you know, black power.  And after having gone to an all-white school for six years, I don't know, I wasn't, didn't feel ready for that level of angst or whatever.  I mean there was, there was turmoil in those schools.  And it was visible.  The South is very different.  The turmoil was there, and I was too young to really see it.  It's just done very differently in the South, you know, they smile and say, "Hi y'all", but they still, there was still unrest on campus.  Like I said, I was just too young to just understand the difference that, that loud discourse is healthy, is sometimes healthier than no discourse or pretending that it's not there when it really, when the problems really are there.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, yes, I really chose Emory because it was warm.  It was beautiful.  I went down senior weekend and the magnolia trees were in bloom.  And Emory's always had a gorgeous campus cause they're endowed by Coca-Cola, so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's one of the--
Speaker 2: Best endowed schools in the whole country.
Speaker 1: --best in the country, right, yeah.  So, now, you graduated from high school in what, in '73 [1973]?
Speaker 2: 1974.
Speaker 1: Seventy-four [1974], okay.
Speaker 2: And college, 1978.
Story_ID: 94176
Speaker 1: All right.  So you started Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia] in '74 [1974] and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you were taking, you were attending, you were taking pre-med type courses?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So what happened?  I read on this sheet we have that you graduated in political science?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: So it seems like quite a jump from, you know, but what happened?
Speaker 2: Actually, I misspoke.  I said they gave me a sociology professor.  They actually gave me a political science major professor so that's how that happened.  I still completed the pre-med curriculum though.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The philosophy back in those days was you needed to have a well-rounded education.  They had so many applicants for med schools.  You had to have a well-rounded.  So it was common that people would have two majors or they would major in English or French and still have completed the whole pre-med curriculum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because there wasn't a pre-med major.  There was a pre-med curriculum, but your major was usually either biology, chemistry or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, what attracted you to political science, really?
Speaker 2: I liked to write.  I liked to read and actually I was really attracted to the criminal justice aspect of political science.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I loved reading about the cases, you know, the people's lives before they got in trouble, the cases, what they went through, the outcome of the cases, which seemed very unpredictable to me, but, and that was fascinating to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did, were there any mentors or teachers at Emory that really stand out?
Speaker 2: No.  It was, my grad school experience was a wonderful experience.  Emory was a very difficult school.  It was difficult because it hadn't been integrated very long.  When I say integrated, I mean with women.  It had been a Presbyterian seminary.  Not only that, but it's how they chose their black people.  They chose all black people like me that had gone to school with all white people.  So they had a bunch of Alpha dogs in there.  You know, there were no, no regular students.  They had all straight-A, black students from predominantly white schools.  It was a very interesting and difficult population.
Speaker 1: Was there a black student union at Emory?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And we had a black house where everybody would go play cards and all that.  It, the black student union was not strong though.  These were not people used to being around other black people, socializing with other black people.  And yet, there was no socializing with white people.  So it was a very interesting, I would say, bizarre experience.
Speaker 1: Give us an example, for example?
Speaker 2: I mean the only thing we did well together was play cards on a Saturday night.  But it was just a very, very, very disjointed group of people.  Can you imagine putting ten Alpha dogs, literally, four-legged dogs in a room and what would happen?  Everybody was always trying to be number one.  The socializing was just very awkward, and the reason there wasn't a black student union was because nobody felt their blackness strongly.
Speaker 1: You said there wasn't one?
Speaker 2: There was one, but it wasn't strong.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean they had meetings, you know, people wouldn't really come.  The only successful thing we did was a play one year.  We had a guy that was interested in theater, and his sister also went to the school.  And we did a big production.  That was like the only successful thing that we, as black students ever did.  It was a very different experience.  My sister went to Lake Forest [College, Lake Forest], which is in Illinois.  And they had a very different philosophy about how they selected their African American students at a very small, liberal arts college.  And they had a very strong black presence.  The black kids did everything together, you know.  They studied together.  They had a black choir that actually toured, and, you know, it just was not like that at Emory.
Speaker 1: What play did you all do that it was so successful?
Speaker 2: I think it was "A Raisin in the Sun".
Story_ID: 94177
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  So did you get into the Atlanta [Georgia] community, I mean the black community of Atlanta any?
Speaker 2: I was lucky enough to have a car so went across town a little bit to the complex, you know, Morehouse [College] and Morris Brown [College]--
Speaker 1: Atlanta U [Atlanta University, now Clark Atlanta University]?
Speaker 2: Atlanta U, so did a little of that.  I didn't get into the community as much as I would have because I ended up with a boyfriend almost like on day one, and we, we were together the entire college experience.  So we would do stuff together a lot and then some of his friends would drag along.  So we did a lot of sports things like go watch the Braves or the Hawks or whatever season it was, we were doing it.  And I remember once the whole group of us once went to see a Muhammad Ali fight.  I don't know if it was Thrilla in Manila or what, but downtown at the big stadium, you know, with the big, you know, big screens.  It was, that was fun.  And we would go to a lot of concerts.  So downtown, hanging out, more than anything.
Speaker 1: You know, that was a boom time for Atlanta.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: It was starting to boom as a city.  The Atlanta Underground was a big deal.
Speaker 2: It was a big deal back then.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) and all the different things in Atlanta.
Speaker 2: And we had, the mayor was Maynard Jackson.  And so those were great times.  You're right.
Speaker 1: Just thinking back on your story, your father [William Sawyer] went to Morehouse and he intended to be a doctor--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and here you are in Atlanta intending to be a doctor.  So, you know, it's not--
Speaker 2: That is interesting.  I never thought about that before, yep.
Speaker 1: So I just wondered if he influenced you any in terms of Atlanta, talking about the school in Atlanta and things in Atlanta to do?
Speaker 2: It might have been a subliminal kind of thing because I never made that connection until you just said it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I chose Atlanta for one reason and one reason only.  It was warm and the campus was beautiful.
Story_ID: 94178
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you were there for, from '74 [1974] to '78 [1978] and, now, so what happened?  You wanted to go directly to medical, right, after you graduated?
Speaker 2: Right.  I got wait-listed, didn't get in, went to Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] and took anatomy, which was fascinating.  That's what I would have taken my first year of med school anyway.
Speaker 1: So you went back home to Columbus--
Speaker 2: I went back home to Columbus.
Speaker 1: --after you got wait-listed?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Why, how do you, why do you suppose you were wait-listed?  Is there a, you think--did they have a quota or anything of how many folks they were gonna take or was that, I know in the old days they used to do that.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, and at that time, you know, what careers are popular, you know, go, you know, change.  And back then, boy, they had way more applications for med school than they had spots.  So you really had to be special, and yes, they only had a couple spots for people that looked like me.  So you had to be super special, and I guess I just wasn't special enough that year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I later, I got a lot of interviews, and, you know, it's been so long now, I can't remember if I even, if I got in or not.  I know I got some call backs, but at that point I was already in school.  And, you know, when you're wait-listed, that's tough because you get your call and it's sometimes a month into school.  So I wasn't about to think about going to school a month or two late.  That, that seemed like a real handicap.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that does seem like--
Speaker 2: But sometimes they don't know because people accept at more than one school.  They make their decision, and they don't, you know, they don't inform the school until school's already started, you know.  So that's how that happens.
Story_ID: 94179
Speaker 1: Alright. So you went back to Columbus [Ohio], we had you in Columbus, you know, taking courses at Ohio State [University], graduate courses at Ohio State?
Speaker 2: Yes, and the next year my brother was in graduate school in New Mexico.  And he said, why don't you come out here while you're, you know, waiting to hear.  So I must have applied at med school again.  And he said, why don't you come out here and go to school while you're waiting to hear, and you can take even more classes.  So I took like histology which is the study of cells.  I took biochemistry, cellular biology, so, immunology.  So I was really taking a medical school-like curriculum because I guess I still wanted to go.  And then I got a project under a major professor and the project was under Tony Guerrero--so I have several heroes from graduate school, Tony Guerrero and it was trapping small mammals and catching fish close to areas where they had stored low-level radioactive waste to see how the radioactive materials had impacted the fish for several generations.  So I did that project over a couple year period.  And it was sponsored by the National Institutes of Health [NIH].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this project was the study of the effects of radioactivity in small animals and fish, you said?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, New Mexico, does that have anything to do with--?
Speaker 2: White Sands and waste.
Speaker 1: Yeah, nuclear testing in New Mexico.
Speaker 2: I think in general our country produces a lot of mixed, low-level radioactive wastes from all kinds of industries.  And--
Speaker 1: So it wasn't just specifically because it was--
Speaker 2: Correct, it was not specifically because of that.  Munitions, everything creates wastes and it happens all over the country.  And there was no--
Speaker 1: Radioactive wastes?
Speaker 2: Low-level, mixed radioactive wastes, yes.  And so it was nowhere to store it or get, dispose of it.  So they were trying to figure out if putting them in these salt mines would keep them from impacting the environment.  So that's what I studied.  When I got out of graduate school three years later, I got a job like the day I applied at Ohio EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] because that study was kind of the forerunner for the hazardous waste regulations that, they were enacted by Congress I think in the, the law was enacted like in the early, well, maybe 1980.  But the states just began promulgating their regulations in '82 [1982] when I got out of graduate school, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, just go back a minute.  Now, the school you attended was Eastern New Mexico University [Portales, New Mexico]?
Speaker 2: Eastern New Mexico University.
Speaker 1: Right.  And your degree was in?
Speaker 2: In microbiology, but, or petroleum microbiology (unclear).
Speaker 1: Petroleum microbiology.  So this would be a master's degree in--?
Speaker 2: Master of science degree in microbiology, but my specific degree was petroleum microbiology.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so you came out in 1982?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 94180
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, we're in Columbus [Columbus], and you--
Speaker 2: Now, we're back in Columbus.
Speaker 1: --get hired immediately by the Ohio Environmental Protection--
Speaker 2: Protection Agency, because that was the big new thing, the hazardous waste rules 'cause before 1980, there was no such thing as hazardous waste.  Everything was garbage or it wasn't garbage.
Speaker 1: How did it come that people discovered hazardous wastes, rather than garbage?
Speaker 2: Well, there were lots of things that happened.  I mean you've heard of Love Canal and Valley of the Drums where industry dumped waste for years and people started getting cancer at really outrageous rates.
Speaker 1: Right, big lawsuit, Love Canal was a community that was built over a former industrial site and I think they, the levels of cancer were unbelievable in terms, they were much greater than the general population.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, and that's not the only one.  There's Valley of the Drums in Cincinnati [sic, Bullitt County, Kentucky], similar thing.  A guy was supposed to be taking waste and disposing of it properly.  Instead he took all these drums of waste and they sat there forever and ever.  He stacked them up a bazillion high and, you know, people got sick and blah, blah, blah.  But there's so many instances of that.  Another story that went on for years, and this even was true in the '80s [1980s], the Cuyahoga River would catch, would catch fire every summer--
Speaker 1: And that's one of the shames of Cleveland [Ohio]--
Speaker 2: --from all--
Speaker 1: --the mistake, yeah, the lake that caught on fire, right.
Speaker 2: So, not just once.  I mean it would catch on fire.  And I actually worked for EPA at one point where, yeah, the refineries were actually finally made to, you know, stop disposing of their solvents by pumping them into the Cuyahoga River.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then that would dump into Lake Erie and then, yeah, create more problems.
Speaker 2: But dilution is not the solution to pollution.
Speaker 1: Okay. Is that one of the sayings (laughter)?
Speaker 2: That was an EPA saying, "Dilution is not the solution to pollution" because all the industries thought that dilution was the solution.
Story_ID: 94181
Speaker 1: So had you been concerned about these issues at all before you went to New Mexico to school?
Speaker 2: Not at all.  And so it was a fascinating project, although as a grad student, I just got to do the beginning and the middle.  I didn't know anything about the end result.  You know, I would trap the animals or sane the fish, and we'd go into these small creeks and streams with these big nets to catch, because we had to do large volumes of fish.  And I had the lovely job, as a graduate student, of dissecting the animals and sending off their reproductive systems to one lab and their digestive systems to another lab.  So I didn't actually ever get to know the end of the research, although, you know, after a while, you could kind of see that, wow, these squirrels don't, these cute little ground squirrels, they don't have tails anymore, ground squirrels, kangaroo rats, you know.  They would have visible abnormalities.  So I can't imagine what was going on genetically.  It must have been just fascinating.
Speaker 1: Did they have like visible tumors or things like that?
Speaker 2: Not tumors so much, but for sure, some other abnormalities.  Like I said, like a partial foot or, is one thing I remember.  The fish, I couldn't really tell.  I mean--.
Speaker 1: Like with the little animals, they should have like visible problems?
Speaker 2: Not, not, every once in a while you would see it.  So I didn't know if it was just something unusual for that one pet, if the foot got hurt or what.  But I saw a couple things that kind of make you go, hum?
Speaker 1: Okay, did your experience in pre-med give you a different perspective on looking for disease in the animals and, you know, because you have on the bio-focus, I guess, that maybe somebody else might--
Speaker 2: It made it a lot more tolerable because having been, well, in grad school, I was in the sciences.  I mean, you know, I have a biology degree, but so I was used to doing the gross work that had to be done, it made it a lot more palatable, I guess, knowing that there was going to be a good result from the things that we were doing 'cause they didn't seem so humane necessarily at the time.  But I was actually more interested, to tell you the truth in the more preventative aspect.  In other words, what was happening with this waste now was very bad.  So I was more interested in the fact that they were trying to find a solution for ultimate disposal/storage of this stuff so that there would be no bad results in the future.  That's what was most fascinating to me.  The pre-med stuff, I was gonna be a scientist one way or the other, whether it was a researcher or an inventor or a consultant like I am now.  You know, that's, I've always been into sciences.  And actually, I'm still doing today what I was doing in grad school cause that's what I do a whole lot of now, is clean up hazardous waste sites.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And actually, the stuff that we worked on, a different research project, but we worked on using, this was with Dr. Gilbert Sanchez, and this was my actual thesis project, was using microorganisms to break down oil, break down tar samples and oil so you could make oil out of it.  And there's oil in rock and oil in soil.  So back when the oil companies had a whole lot of money, they put money into re-alter, researching alternative forms of fuel.  So, our school got some money to do some of this research.  And I still, the use of microorganisms to break down oil is a huge way that sites are remediated today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So certain kinds of bacteria or something or--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --are used to break oil down.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The (unclear), all different kinds of organisms are used.  And there are actually companies that have grown up for this industry that actually harvest and create tubes of these bugs so that you can sell them.  They use them for cleaning up oil spills.  They use them for land farming.  Petro chemical companies and big oil companies have a lot of waste that needs to be disposed of.  Well, they figured out early on that with a little help, you get land farming.  In other words, pour these old product, by-products onto the earth, churn them into the earth, pour some bugs in it, and oh, my gosh, you end up with the most rich dirt on the planet 'cause the bugs will eat the oil.
Speaker 1: And these bugs aren't dangerous to humans?
Speaker 2: I know, everybody always thinks we're gonna end up with the, you know, the bug that ate New York, but in all reality, when the food source dies, so do the bugs-
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: --microorganisms.
Speaker 1: Yes, right, right.  Okay.
Story_ID: 94182
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Well, so, well, Ohio Environmental Protection Agency [EPA], you were there from '86 [1986] to '89 [1989], am I right?
Speaker 2: Boy, I'd even have to check my own dates, but that sounds about, no--
Speaker 1: Or '82 [1982] to eighty--
Speaker 2: It'd have to be '83 [1983], let's say to '86 [1986], '85 [1985].  And then I went from there to working for URS [Corporation].
Speaker 1: Now, what is URS?
Speaker 2: It doesn't stand for anything, but URS is one of the largest architectural engineering consulting firms in the country.  When I worked there, they were ENR 18, I believe, Engineering News-Record is ENR.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you worked for URS from '86 [1986] to--
Speaker 2: Probably '88 [1988].  It was about two and a half or three years.  And then I followed my boss from URS to the Quad Cities area, Moline, Illinois to a firm called Beling.  He went, he was recruited through a national search to be their president.  And he brought me along as a senior vice president.
Speaker 1: Okay, it was calling Beling--?
Speaker 2: Beling Engineering Consultants or Beling Consultants, B-E-L-I-N-G, Beling.  Moline, Illinois, the farm implement capital of the universe--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 2: --home of John Deere and Caterpillar.
Speaker 1: Right.  That was 1988 to--?
Speaker 2: To '90 [1990].
Speaker 1: To '90 [1990], okay.  So what, so you're doing basically the same type of thing or what (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: At both URS and Beling I started divisions, solid, toxic and hazardous waste management divisions 'cause those were the new laws.  When I left EPA, I knew more about hazardous waste than anybody else in Ohio for sure.  So they hired me to run the division, to start the division.  They had a division on the East coast and the West coast, but nothing in the Midwest.  So I started the Midwest division of the solid hazardous waste division for URS.
Speaker 1: So you're in on the ground floor of all this?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: As laws are passed to--
Speaker 2: Are promulgated, yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, to mandate that these sites be cleaned up and this waste be disposed of properly, and you're one of the few people in the country that knows anything about how to do it. Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Story_ID: 94183
Speaker 1: So that's-- Did any other black people engaged in that line of work in those days as you?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  There were a few, but there aren't many black in engineering period.  Whether I'm doing, designing a runway at an airport or doing construction inspection on a quarter billion dollar piece of the Dan Ryan [Expressway], we can count on one hand or one finger the number of black folks, other black people you'll see in the room.  So, and that's true throughout the sciences, except for maybe the field of medicine and nursing.  But in engineering, research, the sciences, you won't see many black people.
Story_ID: 94184
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.  So you're in Moline [Illinois], and so you really organized a, how--
Speaker 2: Started a new division for them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Made 'em a lot of money.
Speaker 1: All right, for Beling [Engineering Consultants]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories that come out of this kind of work that you can tell us that are interesting?
Speaker 2: Well, my favorite story was a URS [Corporation] story.  I had been marketing the City of Toledo [Ohio].  They had a, I knew from my EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] days that they had a lot of landfills.  That was the other beautiful thing about going from EPA into consulting.  I knew where all the bad sites were.  I had a lot of knowledge just based on the previous work that had been going on at the site.  So I knew the City of Toledo had a landfill that needed to be cleaned up.  And it sat right at the confluence of Sibley, of the Ottawa River and Sibley Creek.  And I knew the Ottawa River was terribly contaminated.  So I went to see the city several times and I knew they were going out for, with a request for a proposal to hire a consultant, and had been up to see the guy several times.  And he said to me, "now, you know, Deborah, if you want to win this contract, when you come up here to interview for the project, you got to bring somebody old, white and preferably bald 'cause we're probably not gonna give the project to somebody who looks like you."  And I went, wow, okay.  I mean I was grateful that he was honest enough to tell me the truth 'cause he wanted me to win.  And he knew that his city, whoever, whatever board was gonna, you know, meet and interview and select would not have hired somebody who looks like me, so.
Speaker 1: So, did you go out and find one and bring one in?
Speaker 2: We actually did.  The head of one of our New York branches, I always called him Dr. Jay, he flew in to do the interview with me.  So, I mean we had our string of technical people, but he was definitely in the foreground even though I was the one who knew the client and knew the project forwards, backwards and inside out, but he came in town and did the interview.  And I just kind of sat off to the sidelines, and we won the job.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Did you tell him what to say and how--?
Speaker 2: Well, he knew, he and I were close.  We talked all the time.  He was my counterpart on the East Coast.  So that was a, that was funny.  I mean that was, you know, we've come so far, but we have so far to go.
Story_ID: 94185
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, any other stories from this--did this happen often or this is like one time you had to do this?
Speaker 2: It could happen, well, what I learned to do, what I learned from that experience was, I started going around to all the what I call "chocolate cities" and marketing that.  And then the chocolate city was any city with a black mayor, black city manager, whatever.  I made it my business to know where those cities were.  And then, it worked in my favor; went to Springfield, Ohio.  They had a black city manager, Gerald Seals.  Black and Veatch, another big international engineering firm, had done their waste water engineering since 1956.  I remember that because that's the year I was born.  Anyway, went down there and marketed, marketed, marketed, marketed, and ended up winning a lot of work for URS [Corporation] down there because they felt very comfortable working with me.  They trusted me.  And so that, you know, for as much as I didn't win because of how I looked, I learned to go seek out work with people that would want to work with me because I would make them, I could aspire trust quickly, and they would wanna work with me.  We all wanna work with people we like and that we feel comfortable with and that we trust.  So it took me a minute to really make that work to my advantage.
Speaker 1: Okay, so once you sorted it out, you knew where to go and, you know, you have to be able to get the job to be able to (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, and then when I needed to take somebody with me.  I mean I can't tell you how many times I was sitting in a waiting room waiting for a client to come usher me into the inner sanctum and I'd be the only one out there.  And he would, the guy would say to whoever the receptionist was, oh, I thought you said "Ms. Sawyer was here."  And I would say, Dude, I am here.  And he'd be like, and you know what they're thinking, ooh, but you didn't sound black.  I mean that could be the only answer because I'm sitting right there, and he was expecting me, and he knew I was sitting out there waiting for him.  But yet it couldn't possibly be, I couldn't possibly be the person that the person was waiting to see.  That's happened way more than once.  And a much more recent story was with, because I got a million of 'em, was with a facilities manager for a national airline who shall remain nameless, it may be one your sponsors, and the guy said to me, I was trying to, you know, set up a meeting, and was trying to tell him what I did to make sure I was actually with the right manager for the, you know, right services.  And I usually give pretty good phone.  I mean that's why I get, I get almost every meeting I try to get.  So I'm talking to this guy, and told him that we were a minority and female owned company, blah, blah, blah.  And he basically said, you know what, I don't hire people like you for complicated services like this.  And what do you say to a line like that?  And I just said, well, what kind of services do you hire people like me for?  He said, you know, basically, you can clean my toilet--
Speaker 1: That's what he actually said?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, he said janitorial services were his exact words.  He said janitorial services, and he said, and I would let a firm like yours reply to a spec for some widgets, but that would be about it.  And all I could say is like, you know, thank you very much.  Have a nice day because what do you say to somebody who is, who is that okay with his racism that he can actually voice it.  And this was in the '90s [1990s].  That could have been 1995 or 1997.  So, like I said, we've come so far; we've got so far to go.
Story_ID: 94186
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you were with Beling [Engineering Consultants] until 1990 and then what happened?  Where did you go from there?
Speaker 2: Well, Beling were doing way too many new things at once.  You know, that was like how not to run a business 101.  First, they were paying the old president that they had promoted to chairman, and the new president.  So they got these two huge salaries.  Then they started a hazardous waste division.  Then they started an Ohio office 'cause we're both from Ohio so we had Ohio connections.  Then they opened up a Wisconsin office.  Then they started a laboratory as part of my division.  So they did too many new things at once and they were losing money like a sieve and the final straw was, they took this huge development project, The Lakes of Carillon.  And it was gonna be in this, close to Joliet, Plainfield, Joliet, Bolingbrook area [Illinois].  And the developer went bankrupt owing them like $5 million.  So that was the end.  You know, but even during that process, even before Beling ended up being distressed and selling, getting sold, they were spending so much money on this Carillon project and when you, whenever anybody is that much of your revenue and they're not paying their bills, it's a problem.  So paychecks were getting a little bit more irregular.  And the rest of the management team, as I looked around the room in these tough times, they were all, with the exception of the president, who was probably forty-five to my thirty-five, old, white, seventy.  You know, one guy had terminal cancer, literally.  One guy had had two quadruple bypasses.  So one day we were, you know, the president wanted us to all sign this loan for $5 million with joint and several liability.  And I was kind of, as I looked around the room, wondering, who besides me was gonna be left when this note was due.  So they, what problem would they have signing it.  They're sixty, seventy-some years old, ill.  So I basically knew that if I didn't sign it, I couldn't stay.  So I left.
Story_ID: 94187
Speaker 1: Okay, so is this the time when you started your own?
Speaker 2: I had a false start and went into business with a young white guy, engineer, gave him $50,000.  It took me five years to get my $50,000 back.  And we actually started, I was in his business for a while.  That didn't work out.  He was a very short man and he definitely had that little Napoleon thing going on.  So first we separated, and he was environmental Se, and I was environmental Se: services.  He did a traditional civil engineering and I did all the solid, toxic and hazardous waste stuff.  But after a while, even that couldn't even co-exist side-by-side 'cause we had a lot of the same clients from having started as one company.  But after a while, it just became intolerable, changed the name, moved, the whole nine yards.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so--
Speaker 2: And that was, that was just for six months.  Let's say mid-90 [1990], let's say like October of '90 [1990] and by or whatever, March of '90 [1990] to the end of '90 [1990] because by February of '91 [1991] my doors were open.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's the name of your business?
Speaker 2: Environmental Design International.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you opened in February of 1991?
Speaker 2: Yes, February 22.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you opened, where did you start?  Where were you located first?
Speaker 2: We were in Glen Ellyn [Illinois].  Then we were in Hillside, no, Glen Ellyn, Downers Grove, Hillside [Illinois], moving east each time, and then the city, moved to the City of Chicago [Illinois] in about '98 [1998] maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay, so is this one of the better places to be for that kind of business?
Speaker 2: For an African American-owned business, the City of Chicago is a great place to be.  When I decided to open my own business, I, my college roommate works for the Census Bureau and I actually had her do a little, informal data search, like where, where do black people in this country, what cities are they approaching 50 percent of the population?  Where is there a black mayor?  Where is there a black city manager?  Where is the median income for blacks approaching the median income for whites?  Where is the, where do blacks have blah, blah?  Anyway, we crafted this whole little study that she was able to just like do a quick data search.  And ten cities came up and Chicago was in the top two, I think.  A surprising city might have been some place like Seattle [Washington] and in '91 [1991], I had never even, Seattle wasn't even on my map.  But anyway, and several other, there were a couple other surprises.  But anyway, Chicago was in the top two, and, you know, I already had clients in and around the Chicago area because we had a Chicago office, Beling [Engineering Consultants].  I was located in Moline [Illinois], but we had a Chicago office so I was in the city regularly, knew my way around.  So Chicago was the obvious choice.
Story_ID: 94188
Speaker 1: All right.  You started in 1991, started your business [Environmental Design International] here, and located it here.  And we were talking about why you located it here before we changed tape.  So what have been some of the projects you've worked on in Chicago [Illinois] since you established here?
Speaker 2: There've been a lot of fascinating projects, but one--
Speaker 1: Oh, wait a minute.  One thing I did not ask you which I should have asked you is how did you finance your business?  Was it hard to get financial backing or did you need financial backing or how did you--?
Speaker 2: You always do.  I had, my mom [Betty Pride Sawyer] gave me $20,000, and I had $30,000 from the sale of my home in the Quad Cities.  So even though I had only lived in it a few years, I still managed to get money out of it which was a beautiful thing.  Anyway, so I had $50,000 which was basically just one month working capital, one or two months' working capital.  And by, I started going to visit banks Day One, but by Day 60, I had enough invoice, enough revenue slash invoices to go see a bank.  But that's a whole 'nother story cause I had to go see twenty-four banks before anybody would ask me to sit down.  Back in those days, there really were no women-owned businesses.  The women-owned business regulations are much newer.  And banks weren't really into financing receivables.  They liked financing buildings and widgets, things they could lay inventory.  You know, my assets walk out the door at 5:00 o'clock.  So this was a whole new thing.  And it was very difficult, but once again, I listened to what people were and were not saying to me.  They were saying things to me like, you're not stable because you've had, you know, three jobs in six years or eight years.  I'm like, yeah, but every single job I've had has been to make more and more and more money and bigger and bigger positions.  You haven't lived in the same town for twenty-five years.  No, cause I'm thirty-five.  Twenty years ago, I was fifteen so I would have had to go away to college and grad school and, but anyway, it was just that real different way of thinking.  I always thought of myself as very successful, moving from job to job, moving up the ladder.  When I got my first loan, they wanted my husband to co-sign.  I said, well, I'm not married.  We want your father to co-sign.  Well, that'll be hard because he's been dead since I was ten.  Well, who do you have that can cosign this loan?  I said, well, my mother.  But at the time, my mother was seventy, and no offense to her, but she, I earned more at my first job than she did when she retired.  But she lived in the same home for thirty years.  She had the same job for thirty years.  And that's all they cared about, stability, sameness, no change.  Anyway, that was a side story, sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay, that--
Speaker 2: I did get my loan.  I did my homework.  I found a female banker because I was never meeting with anybody that looked like me; didn't meet one black person when I was looking at commercial lenders, and I had to really call and call and call until I could find a woman to sit down with.  I remember one, her name was Laura Pode (ph.).  I got my loan that day.  She approved it that day because I went in with a business plan.
Speaker 1: What bank was it?
Speaker 2: Harris, Harris Bank.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We always like to know these things, you know, because people watching this in the future will want to know how did she get started or how did, well, where did she find help and what were the circumstances?
Speaker 2: It was tough, but I tell you, you have to have a business plan.  You know, if you can't write down that, you know, what you're gonna do, who you're gonna do it for, who you need to do it for the people you're gonna do it for, and where you're gonna do it, then you don't even need to be trying to go see a bank.  And the "A" number one thing they want to know is how you're gonna pay 'em back.
Story_ID: 94189
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  So, okay, well what were the projects that first-- what was your first big project that, that, you know?
Speaker 2: Oh, there've been so many, but we have four or five big ones right now that I think I'd like to talk about.  Our first, our biggest project ever, I guess, has been the Dan Ryan [Expressway].
Speaker 1: I was talking about the first one, I was talking about the first one because I guess you had to have like one to get going where, or was that ever an issue with you--?
Speaker 2: Probably the first, the first big, big project we ever had was probably ten years ago, and it was back in the Quad Cities.  I made a lot of friends when I was there, and one of my friends was [Robert] Bob Schaeffer who worked for Montgomery Elevator.  And he was a big client of mine while I was at Beling [Engineering Consultants].  When I went out on my own, he literally called my boss and said, what did you do to her?  Where did she go?  I need to talk to her, and my boss reluctantly gave up my information.  And he was actually my first client, Montgomery Elevator, first client.  He would fly me all over, Deborah, do you know how to do air modeling for blah, blah, blah?  No.  Do you wanna learn?  Yes.  Be at the airport.  We'll pick you up at.  So he was a great client, great client.  So the first big, big project he gave me, Montgomery Elevator was buying a lot of property around their world headquarters to, I don't know, make green space, if you will.  So they wanted to buy this foundry, Frank's Foundry.  And, oh, my God, I think the fee--we were relatively young then.  Ten years ago, we were then eight years old.  And that was a half a million and fee project for us.  We did borings, we did wells, we sampled ash.  Oh, my gosh, it was a wonderful project.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was my first client, and I stayed with them until they were sold to KONE Elevator.  And then the legacy goes on because the lawyer on the other side for KONE ended up hiring me too because he liked me better than he liked his own consultant, liked my firm, excuse me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was my first big, you know, half million fee project.
Story_ID: 94190
Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's talk about some of the big, we had like five or six big projects we wanna talk about.
Speaker 2: They aren't gonna be in any order necessarily, but we were awarded construction inspection on a five-mile piece of the Dan Ryan [Expressway] from 71st Street to 31st Street, Northbound.  That was amazing being part of that project.  And it was actually the first time in the history IDOT, the Illinois Department of Transportation, that they had hired a black firm to do a project of that magnitude.  Like I said, it was a quarter billion in construction costs, and my fee was about $10 million.  So that was a huge project.
Speaker 1: Now, this is huge in Chicago [Illinois] because you, I think you were a former member of, or you still be a member of the Black United Contractors--?
Speaker 2: Black Contractors United.
Speaker 1: --Contractors United.  I mean black contractors in the city had a protracted struggle with the city to get hired for major projects.  And this is one where, this is the only, and I mean the discussion in the past had been about, you know, we don't see any black people out there pouring tar or (laughter) doing that kind of thing, I mean doing work on the site, you know, the physical, actual work on the site
Speaker 2: Well, they actually had a--
Speaker 1: --(Unclear).
Speaker 2: --they actually had a training program, an apprentice program on this project where we had to keep fifteen trainees on the engineering side and they had to have fifteen or more trainees on the construction side.  So there were a lot of people of color out there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, so this project of yours, the first time they've hired a contractor--
Speaker 2: Black engineering firm.
Speaker 1: --engineering firm to do this and, well, this is like a big, this is a big deal.
Speaker 2: Big deal.
Speaker 1: This is a contract that, in the past, you know, were you the first black firm to get this kind of a contract?
Speaker 2: Yes, and it's so interesting.  We wanted to have a majority on, a white firm on the team, just because we were afraid that, you know, the people selecting wouldn't think we had the capacity to do the work, blah, blah, blah.  You know, capacity is one of those words.  So we put a white firm on the team.  And the first white firm that we asked to be on the team said, no, because they said that we didn't have a snowball's chance in hell of winning the project.  But actually what we did was, we put together an all-black, not all black, a black joint venture.  We had four black firms on the team.  And that was very attractive to IDOT.  It was very attractive to the Black Caucus, and we ended up being successful.
Speaker 1: Now, there's a strip of the Dan Ryan that runs right through the black community--.
Speaker 2: Most of it runs through the black community.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, Yeah, as I said, yeah, it does.  It runs right through our community on the South Side.
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes.
Story_ID: 94191
Speaker 1: And it's, the Dan Ryan, I hope--well, discuss this, mean, just, I know anybody watches this would want to know.  The Dan Ryan Expressway has been called the Dangerous Dan Ryan or the Damned Ryan--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --you know, for many years because of the way the ramps are structured and so many accidents take place within that little stretch there.
Speaker 2: That has all changed, in fact, dramatically reconfigured so that if you're coming from downtown now, you don't have to move over eight lanes of traffic to get onto I-90, the toll way going to Indiana.  That, it was one of the, that one area on the Dan Ryan had the most accidents of any site and freeway in the U.S. which was the main reason why they had the billion dollars to do the reconfiguring and the construction.  They took out many ramps.  There is no new freeway that's built that has as many ramps as the Dan Ryan has.  You know, now you can't have a ramp but every three or more miles.  Think about the freeways that you travel and how few ramps, exit ramps there are.  But, of course, that was just a public nightmare, trying to get ramps taken out.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sure.
Speaker 2: I think they originally wanted to have "x" out and I think they ended up putting five back in.  So I don't remember what the exact number that everybody ended up agreeing on, but it was, there are more ramps than there were supposed to be just because the public just could not get past losing a ramp every few feet.  But it was a huge undertaking for the exact reason that you stated.  It was a very dangerous, dangerous configuration.  Also, the excess number of ramps also causes accidents.  You have people entering and exiting way too close together.
Speaker 1: Right, that's always been the concern of drivers on the Dan Ryan.
Speaker 2: People, you know, entering into traffic going slowly because people are--
Speaker 1: Somebody else trying to get over and get off of the same strip, the little, the same strip that, it's the ramp that goes down onto and goes up out of.
Speaker 2: That doesn't exist anymore and the main troublemaker though was having to cross over all those lanes of traffic to get onto I-90 going to Indiana, and that no longer exists.  It's in the center from downtown all the way to, you know, to the exit at six, what is it?  At 61st Street, 63rd Street, 61st Street.
Speaker 1: Just another little editorial comment here that it seems as though the city has gone through some sort of an engineering revolution in the sense that Lake Shore Drive's recent renovation, I guess about five years ago was done with the kind of building materials they built, they paved highways with rather than asphalt which is the traditional pavement material.  And asphalt, I might add, that would crumble within the first two or three months (laughter) of them putting it down.  It seemed like it would start coming back up again.  They'd patch it up.  Then they'd have another major project to repave it again.  And then, you know, but now, it's got a, it's covered with--
Speaker 2: It's concrete.  There's still asphalt there, but BAM, bitumen asphalt material is now the lowest layer where you have some rock and then BAM and then you have your rebar and then your concrete.  So there's asphalt material, but it's way, it's the bottom layer--
Speaker 1: That used to be (unclear), right.
Speaker 2: --but you're right, asphalt, for the amount of road traffic that we have on the Dan Ryan, it never should have been asphalt.  I mean--
Speaker 1: Well, Lake Shore Drive is what I was referring to.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Lake Shore Drive had been asphalt for so many years and then they finally resurfaced it with concrete.
Speaker 2: With concrete as well.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But we learn more and more about materials every day.  I mean the science of materials and materials testing, I mean they have new advances all the time.  I mean when I saw what they did to the concrete on those days when it was, it felt like it was 120 [degrees] down there on the pavement, to still be pouring was amazing.  You know, they used to just put, they used to put antifreeze in it or stuff like that.  Now, they just put very, very cold water in it.  But it's just a delicate balance between how much water you can put in it and not have slump, where it would still hold its form.  So, it's interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was, one day you'll have to go down there and be on the pavement when they're pouring.  It's a phenomenal thing to watch.
Speaker 1: Well, it would be a pleasure to be inconvenience if your firm is the engineers on the project (laughter), so I don't know.  I mean--(laughter).
Speaker 2: So we did that one.  And, so that's done, the Dan Ryan's done.
Story_ID: 94192
Speaker 1: Now, we're doing I-294 from Dempster [Street] to Willow [Road].  That's another five-mile project.  This time it's for the tollway, another first ever.  We also were part of the design team for Runway 10L at O'Hare Airport.  And that's one of the, you know, 30 largest hubs in the U.S.  It's the second largest airport, I believe, in the U.S. or second worst traffic--
Speaker 2: Now, is that the award-winning--?
Speaker 1: We've won awards for the runway project and for a project we haven't talked about yet which is, on the Dan Ryan [Expressway], we not only did the construction inspections, but we also did a corridor wide environmental air monitoring study.  We monitored vibration noise and different air quality parameters like total particulates or respirable particulates, volatile organics, which would be the emissions from the trucks and stuff.  The particulates are the dust and the respirable dusts are particles of dusts of "x" micron which are actually able to be absorbed by the lung, the alveoli in the lungs and vibration and noise.  As we've said before, the Dan Ryan runs through African American neighborhoods from the beginning pretty much to the end.  Not only is it African American, but it's largely of a lower socio-economic status.  And in the African American community, there are certain diseases that are prevalent, asthma, heart diseases, etc., etc.  And there has been long known to be a correlation between these diseases and--not a correlation, a correlation between construction, heavy construction and, or maybe it's a synergistic (unclear) whatever, big construction projects impact populations with these diseases.  So IDOT [Illinois Department of Transportation] was very proactive.  They had us monitoring it, but they had also done things in a spec to make sure that they had optimal conditions.  They had all low sulfur diesel vehicles.  They limited the amount of times that these big trucks were allowed to idle.  They had four watering trucks to keep the particulates down because the ramps that they build to go in on the construction zone, those are all dirt roads, dirt ramps.  And, boy, those trucks move up and down those ramps, and they're bringing in fill, and it is pretty much just a rusty-dusty mess down there.  So, you know, to have big watering trucks going constantly up and down, keeping it wet, dramatically kept down the amount of particulates.  And we had some exceedances and what we would do when we had exceedances were, we looked at what types of construction activities caused these standards to be exceeded and tried to do those kinds of things at night or off peak so they wouldn't, you wouldn't have high VOCs [volatile organic compounds] and stuff from regular traffic at a time when our construction activities were also causing higher VOCs or high dust.  So, the whole process was fascinating.  We had a focus group put together of community activists, the American Lung Association, the American Cancer Association, of course, IDOT, Illinois Department of Public Health, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, La Rabida, University of Chicago Hospital, University of Chicago [Illinois], a whole group of people because no standards existed for ambient air quality for these perimeters.  So the focus group established the standards, and then we measured, we took data, measured data against the standards and finally, our data was in QA/QC by the Department of Public Health, Terry Schweitzer (ph.), the air division.  So it was great.  So our data was impeccable.  No one could argue with our data.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it was just wonderful because IDOT did not have that money in their budget.  We did two years of benchmarking or background and then three full years of samplings.  So it was a five-year project.  We won an award for that project too.
Story_ID: 94193
Speaker 1: Another first ever, we have designed the largest storm water slash permeable pavement project in the country.  We did a six-acre permeable pavement parking lot at White Sox Park [U.S. Cellular Field].
Speaker 2: Now, explain to us what is a permeable pavement? It sounds like it, you know, we might be able to figure that out, but it's something--
Speaker 1: Well, you know what paving stones are.  Well, not only are the stones themselves permeable, but just think about all the area in between the pavement.  It provides wonderful airy, it provides an opportunity for storm water to drain slowly through the earth instead of running off and creating problems.  So it's quite a revolutionary way of dealing with storm water.  And in Chicago, we have so much asphalt, so much concrete that when you have opportunities like a large parking lot, that is a wonderful and creative engineering way to deal with your storm water.
Speaker 2: So the water won't pool up and, you know, and ruin the parking lot or drain off into some other--?
Speaker 1: Or drain off and then become part of the city's storm water management issue.  You know, it can go straight down to where it's supposed to.  You know, you don't really have to talk about big storm water projects out in the country where (laughter) there are fields.  But when you have large urban areas like Chicago where there isn't much green space; there is so much concrete, you have to have come with creative ways to deal with storm water cause you don't want to have to treat it if you don't have to.  But the moment it runs off and down to the street or, you know, and now it's collecting oil, and it's collecting all kind of stuff, now it's got to be treated.  It just can't be pumped out to Lake Erie once it's attracted all this other stuff.
Story_ID: 94194
Speaker 1: Okay, now, those are the projects we said we were gonna talk about, but are there any others you wanna discuss before--?
Speaker 2: Well, one of my favorite projects of all-time, we were the engineer of record for the demolition of Cook County Hospital, which is actually still standing.  But it was amazing when they opened the new Stroger Hospital, they literally, one day all the patients were here and the next day, all the patients were across the street.  They literally left the beds, all the equipment, all the needles were still in the boxes on the walls.  And they were gonna have to pay to get rid of all that stuff.  Well, our project manager, Rudy Angelucci who was from Brazil, came up with a wonderful idea.  And he did this all, did all the research on his own.  We didn't get paid for it, but he found two African third-world countries and one South American third-world country that came in and took away a lot of the equipment.  So (a), the county didn't have to pay to dispose of it, and these countries felt that they were getting manna from heaven.  I mean this was wonderful equipment to them.  So, you know, the saying that some people's trash is other people's treasure, they were so grateful to come and take this equipment away.  And it ended up saving the county millions of dollars that they would have had to pay in disposal.
Speaker 1: Let me ask this question, and I'm trying to guess as to why this would be an issue, but was it that the design of the new hospital precluded the use of the old equipment or what?  Why would they have to get new equipment, you know, as well as a new facility?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, but, you know, equipments have different sizes and blah, blah, blah and sometimes it's easier just to start from scratch.
Speaker 1: It would seem like some equipment, like syringes and stuff you mentioned, I mean those could be used anywhere.  I mean I don't know.
Speaker 2: No, no, the syringes hadn't actually been used, but my point was literally, it was almost like, it was not like.  One day it was here and the next day, everything was there.  And I won't begin to say what the philosophy is, but I know that you can't give equipment away though because a lot of the equipment had hazardous material and they have mercury in them.  They have radioactive sources, blah, blah, blah.  So you can't give that stuff away or you maintain a liability.  But by them coming to get it, like we could not have shipped it to them.  We would have maintained liability for it forever.  When they come and get it and take it away, we sever our liability or the County severed its liability at the point where they signed on the dotted line.  So I understand why it had to happen that way.  Why they didn't take any of the old equipment across the street?  I guess they had a brand, spanking new hospital and didn't want any old equipment there.  It's easy to, equipment can be damaged in moving.  Would what they have saved, the equipment has "x" shelf life.  The cost of the move, to move it across the street would have been "x".  So at what point is it a point of diminishing returns.  I don't know.  I'm sure they made all those calculations when they decided to leave it.
Story_ID: 94195
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, well, I'll just ask you, how well are you doing now in terms of your company?
Speaker 2: We have a big backlog of work.  But the thing that's troubling is a lot of the people that we have these big backlogs of work with are people that we know are in trouble themselves, whether it's the city or the state or the feds.  So a lot of the contracts that we get are called indefinite delivery, indefinite quantity.  So you will be awarded, let's say, a $5 million contract, but really the contract's only as good as the last task order you got.  So we have this big $20 million backlog, but we're all--we're cautiously optimistic.  I mean we're still turning a profit, but we're worried.  And we're doing things way skinnier this year than we did last year.  You know, the receptionist quit.  You don't fill that position right away cause that's an overhead position.  It's a position that's not making me money.  You know, we're not gonna do the big Christmas party at Morton's Steakhouse this year.  You know, we're gonna do potluck at the office.  But I've got a staff like that.  I mean, you know, you have to vary your routine no matter what.  You do those fancy steak dinners often enough and the employees don't wanna do those either.  So they were actually, didn't have a problem at all.  We have quite an international staff.  So we used to do something called "Taste of EDI" and once a quarter, everybody would cook a dish and bring it in and do potluck.  So that's what we're gonna do for Christmas this year.  So, yes, we're trying to, we're trying to do things as economically as possible because we don't really know whether that $20 million is $20 million or whether that $20 million is $2 million.
Speaker 1: So you are feeling the economic pinch that now, the falling stock markets and all that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: We're actually still hiring people, but we're not hiring anybody that's not revenue producing.  And, yes, we, we have to be cautious because we know the people that are our main clients are hurting too.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, when, what's your next step?  Are you satisfied with growing your business or do you have other aspirations or ambitions?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, well, we have an office in Columbus, Ohio, one in the St. Louis metro area.  We, the St. Louis metro area office was an acquisition.  So we are looking to do other acquisitions.  You know, I don't want to be a $10 million firm.  I mean I want to be a $100 million firm.  And I've figured out the hard way with our Columbus office that, organic growth is painful, acquisition is the way to go.  A couple of years ago, which is maybe one of the reasons we're not hurting, we started doing private-sector work.  And we should have started even a little sooner because, boy, it takes the big boys a long time to decide they really want to work with a firm like ours.  It's amazing the amount of scrutiny and pre-qualification that you have to go through.  But we've made it through.  We're working for several energy companies, you know, ComEd, Alliant Energy.  Wisconsin Energy just pre-qualified us, and we'll be getting a master contract with them, BP.  So, we've been very lucky.  We are, we are one of the very few black designers for Wal-Mart.  So we are cautiously optimistic that things will continue.  We won't see the big growth that we've seen in other years, but we just hope to maintain.  We hope that this $20 million backlog remain intact and that they actually do issue projects with those contracts.
Story_ID: 94196
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Remember that false start I had with a partner?  Well, I was dumb enough to do that again with another partner, somebody I brought into the business to give me some additional capital.  Those were the two worst mistakes I've ever made.  You should never go into business with somebody that you wouldn't marry basically.  I mean it's really got to be somebody that you share many things in common with, and especially your philosophy of life, how people should be treated and how they feel about money.  Because if you differ on those big things, you'll never make it through a partnership.  So I would never have another partner, and I wish I hadn't had the two that I had.
Story_ID: 94197
Speaker 1: Okay, likewise, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today--and you're still young by our standards, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Wow, well, I think that in Chicago [Illinois] I'm known as a pioneer.  I've done a lot of firsts.  It's tough being a pioneer though 'cause, you know, I also hear all the time, well, I'm so aggressive, hard to work with.  Yeah, it's hard when you're, you know, running that race with a twenty-five pound rock in your pocket.  But anyway, I'm glad to be known as not just a black engineering firm, but a good engineering firm.  You know, people--I'll never forget [Cook County Board] President [John] Stroger [Jr., HM] said to me one time, "You know, Deborah, you've never embarrassed me."  And I thought, boy, that's really saying something.  But, you know, I want to be somebody that people can recommend to people for work and know that I will do a good quality work, do a good job for clients.
Speaker 1: Well, that's important, just what you said about Stroger, who I'm sure would love to see a lot of black folks get more contracts, but a lot of people do embarrass folks in power some times.  They're not necessarily ready.  And what he said was really important.
Speaker 2: One time, Emil, Senator President Emil Jones [HM] spoke at a Women in Transportation Awards dinner.  I was receiving an award, and he was the speaker.  And you never know how other people really think about you, but he said in front of this room of probably five [500] or 600 people and goes, "You know, I'm so proud.  When I drive down the Dan Ryan [Expressway] and see all Deborah's trucks out there", and he said, "the first time I saw it, I had to call her on her cell phone and say, I see your trucks."  He goes, "I have never been more proud."  So that's a kind of thing that's wonderful to be known for and just to know the people that you respect that much find reason to feel pride in me and my work, it's, it's a wonderful thing.
Story_ID: 94198
Speaker 1: I just thought about, I would be remiss if I didn't ask this.  Is that, with you getting that kind of contract in the City of Chicago [Illinois], I mean have there been attempts by folks to stab you in the back or take the contract from your or any political intrigue around you getting these contracts?  I mean this is Chicago.  So I'm asking?
Speaker 2: Actually, it's an Illinois contract, a State of Illinois contract, but no, you know.  The state had been in the paper a lot for not having had a lot of visible blackness on this black project.  So people were surprised, people probably talked about me like a dog behind my back, but nobody was really going to say anything because, you know what, it was about time, and it was a black project.  So, it was okay.  Now, there was a whole lot more controversy when I won I-294 from Dempster [Street] to Willow [Road] cause it's the exact opposite kind of neighborhoods and suburbs that were running through, as when you talk about the Dan Ryan [Expressway].  So a little bit more controversy over that one.  But, no, everything's good.  Most of it I don't get to hear.  I'm sure there's a lot of storm behind me.
Speaker 1: No sabotage stories or stories like that?
Speaker 2: A little bit, but you know what?  That has been the story of my life.  I mean if you're a black person, going to good schools and making good grades, there's always somebody who's going say something about you.  You're only here because of affirmative action.  You're only here because of this.  This only happened because of that, and my answer is, I don't care how I get in the door, just so I stay in the door.  (Unclear) I can stay in the room, you know what I mean?  Just so I have what it takes to stay in the room
Speaker 1: True business philosophy (laughter).
Speaker 2: So anyway, I don't pay attention.  You have to have a pretty thick skin to do what I do.
Speaker 1: All right, and you take after your grandmother [Mabel King], so you're--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Story_ID: 94199
Speaker 1: So tell me this, I guess what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, my other full-time job is I chair the board of a charter school, Young Women's Leadership Charter School [YWLCS, Chicago, Illinois], which is at 26th and Calumet.  Oprah [Winfrey] patterned her schools off of, I call it "Y-Dub" [YW].  And Oprah has been a big benefactor to our school.  She's given us a lot of money.  I've learned through the school, we've been open for twelve, been in business for twelve years, open for ten.  And we have small class size.  It's all girls.  Our girls come from thirty-five zip codes.  They are largely poor.  They are largely African American, I mean to the tune of 85 percent African American, and almost every kid in our school gets a free breakfast and free lunch so that tells you what their socio-economic status is.  But we graduate 90 percent of our girls and almost that same percentage goes off to college.  We had our first graduating class last year from college and 30-some percent graduated on time in the four years.  The valedictorian of that first class actually was the valedictorian graduating summa cum laude from IIT in Engineering 'cause these are girls largely interested in the math and science and technology, science and technology.  So what I will say is I know that education is the cure for poverty because we in one generation interrupted their cycle of poverty.
Speaker 1: And what's the name of your school again?
Speaker 2: Young Women's Leadership Charter School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's at 26th and Calumet.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Again, so you--
Speaker 2: And I, actually, I don't just chair the board.  I also teach reading every day to seventh graders from 8:30 to 9:30.  So I actually teach a class.  I'm a teacher there and chair the board.  And it's different, boy, it's different, chairing the board and actually being involved in the students' and the teachers' lives every day, all day.  It's so rewarding.  I had, the day after the election I asked the girls why they were excited to have an African American president [Barack Obama].  And the youngest girl in the class, 'cause my seventh grader go from eleven to fifteen years of age.  So some looked like babies and some look like they're twenty-five.  And there's one little girl, she's eleven, she, and they, she just wrote this off the top of her head.  And it was actually quite long but she said, she's so proud to live in a country where they finally elected someone who wasn't an arrogant, egotistical brut.  And then she went on to say that she was happy that there was going to be change, and she was so excited that there might be a time when people didn't look at her as if she was nothing.  This is an eleven-year-old.  And she said, we have changed changes here, you know, congratulations, President-elect Barack Obama, an eleven-year-old.  And she, they didn't have time to think about this.  They just all went up to the board and wrote their thoughts.  Some of them wrote typical eleven-year-old stuff like now, we gon' have a black house, and you know, funny stuff like that.  But this was so amazing I actually, what do you call it, scanned it and sent it to the Obama campaign people.  So we'll see if they do anything with it, see if she gets invited to the swearing in.  She's an amazing little girl.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you manage to get the support of Oprah Winfrey on this project?
Speaker 2: That actually happened before my time as chair of the board.  But education's always been a big thing for Oprah and we got a lot of press when we first opened the school because we are the first all-female charter school because we are a Chicago public school.  So we are an all-girl's Chicago public charter school.
Story_ID: 94200
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask about family.  Now, who, are your parents still, well, your father passed.
Speaker 2: My father [William Sawyer] passed away when I was ten.  He was forty-four.  My mom [Betty Sawyer] is eighty-six, soon to be eighty-seven.  She lives in Columbus, Ohio.  She still lives on her own.  She just stopped driving a couple years ago, much to my relief actually.  But my sister lives with her husband in Columbus.  My brother, my sister's in education also.  She works for the State of Ohio, Board of Regents.  My brother's vice president and dean of students at California State [University] Channel Island[s], I think that's the name of the campus.  And he and his wife life in Simi Valley, California.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, well, now you have a number of cats here and dogs (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, I have four-legged children, four-legged fur children, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, is there anything I haven't asked you that you think we need to cover before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, I'm good.
Story_ID: 94201
Speaker 1: All right, well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a pioneer, somebody who is tough, but always fair and somebody who gave back to the community as much as she received from the community.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, thank you very much for sharing with us.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Alright.
